CHAPTER IX

THE SECOND STORY--BABY OYSTERS AND FISH


=The story of baby oysters.=--Before telling this story to my little girls
I reviewed the story of the plants. This refreshed in their minds
certain very important laws that they had learned in the first talk.
This talk was given when they were about six and eight years old.

In studying the story of life among the plants, you will remember that
we learned that in most plants the male and female organs of sex were in
the same flower. Among the lower forms of animal life, we find both the
male and female natures in the same animal. The oyster furnishes a good
example. These little animals are surrounded with and fastened to a very
hard and heavy shell. These animals live in great masses and their
shells are cemented together. Growing in this way they cannot move
about, or mix and mingle with each other. The mother parts of the oyster
produce little eggs which are fertilized by a substance formed by other
organs containing the father nature. The fertilized egg, when laid,
floats off and becomes attached to the shell of some oyster on a nearby
rock. Later, it hatches and the little baby oyster forms about its body
a hard shell that is made larger as the little animal grows. In this way
the little oysters come into the world. Among the oysters, we find the
same laws that we found in the plants, _i. e._, each baby oyster must
have a father and mother and the father and mother natures must unite.
In the plants the father and mother natures unite in a little seed; in
the oyster this union takes place in a little egg.

When God made the fish, lizards, snakes, birds and higher animals, he
gave to one a papa or male nature, with suitable sexual organs; to
another animal of the same kind he gave a mamma or female nature, with
suitable female or sexual organs. In the plants we find that the female
sexual organs, the ovaries, produced little seed. We found that the male
sexual organs, the stamens, produced a fine powdery substance called
pollen. Among the animals, the sexual organs of the mother produces
little eggs and the sexual organs of the father produces a fluid called
semen.

=The story of baby fish.=--Now we will study the fish. In the spring
season of the year thousands of tiny eggs are formed in the ovaries of
the mother fish. When these eggs are matured, the mother fishes swim in
large crowds, called “schools,” from the deep water of a stream, river
or sea to some shallow place that seems to them to be suitable for a
nest or home for their young. The mother fishes lay their eggs in a
mass of albuminous substance, like the white of an egg, that spreads out
in a very thin sheet holding the little eggs one in a place and close
together. The father fishes swim along sometimes a foot, a yard or more
behind the mothers and expel from their bodies the semen that unites
with and fertilizes the eggs. This special fluid of the male fish is
formed by his sexual glands, called testes. In this way the father
nature unites with the mother nature to produce every little fish that
comes into this world.

=Why the mother fish lays so many eggs.=--The female fish forms thousands
of these little eggs in her body each year. The female codfish has been
known to lay as many as 6,000,000 eggs in one season. You could not
count as many in a lifetime. The reason why the mother fish produces so
many eggs is, that not one fish egg in twenty-five, on an average, will
ever hatch and not more than one out of twenty-five little fishes ever
grow to be an inch long. They have little, or no, protection, and they
have so many enemies. There are hogs, turtles, crocodiles and
alligators; the ducks, geese and other water fowls; as well as most of
the fish that feed upon fish eggs and small fish. That the streams,
rivers and seas may be kept supplied with an abundance of fish, God has
planned for the mother fish to lay thousands of eggs.

=All baby fish are orphans.=--Most kinds of fish leave their eggs as soon
as they are laid and fertilized and never see or know their young. There
are a few male fish, known as game fish, which swim over and around the
eggs until they are hatched to keep other kinds of fish from eating the
eggs. As soon as the eggs are hatched, he leaves. In this way all little
fish grow up as orphans. They never know or enjoy the presence of their
parents. The parent fish do not labor or sacrifice for their young, and,
for this reason, they have no love for them. Should they ever meet their
young in the river or sea they would have no way of knowing them or of
feeling any sense of joy.

=Fish do not pair off.=--We found in the study of the plants that the seed
were fertilized while in the pod or ovary. In the fish we found that the
eggs are fertilized outside of the mother’s body. In nearly all the
animals above the fish the eggs or ova are fertilized while in the
mother’s body. There is no love between the male and the female fish.
They do not pair off and live in families. Among all the spiders,
lizards, serpents, many of the insects, crawfish, frogs and toads there
is a tendency, at certain seasons, for the male to choose a female with
a view to a home and family. But among all the animals we have named,
many of the male and female animals part or leave each other as soon as
the eggs are fertilized, and all the others leave each other as soon as
the eggs are hatched. The love of the male for the female lasts but for
a little time; while there is no love for their young after they are
hatched. Before the young are hatched some of their parents show
interest in their eggs and make some provisions for their young when
hatched. But this is all done before the young are hatched. The young
all grow up as little orphans.




CHAPTER X

THE THIRD STORY--BABY BIRDS


When our little girls were seven and nine this talk was given. The
previous stories were reviewed bringing out the resemblances and
differences. They were permitted to ask questions. In this talk they
were very alert to see and apply all the lessons learned from previous
stories.

=The beginning of love.=--In this review of the story of life, among the
plants and fish, we found no love or personal feeling between the male
and female. Among the insects and reptiles we found that the males and
females choose each other, when led by instinct to bring their young
into the world. From the fish to the birds we find the simplest form of
love and interest on the part of the parents in their young. This is
shown by the care the parents take in the protection and care of the
eggs and the food prepared for the young before they are hatched. The
male crawfish picks up the fertilized eggs with his feelers, that are
arranged in a double row underneath his tail, and, by means of these
feelers, he carries the eggs close to his body until they are nearly
ready to hatch. The frogs and toads show great tenderness for their
eggs. A great many books have been written about all these animals and
when you are older you will be greatly interested in learning more of
the detail of reproduction among these curious animals. Among all the
animals we have studied the male and female separate as soon as the eggs
are fertilized and laid, in other cases as soon as the eggs begin to
hatch. The parent animals show no interest in their young after they are
hatched and their children never know their parents or love them.

=The ant and the bee.=--Two exceptions should be made to the above
statement, the bee and the ant. They do not pair off and mate, as do
other insects, but they live in colonies, or societies. They do not seem
to have any special interest in their offspring or even a mate, but in
the whole community of bees or ants. The perfect social organizations
they form and the homes they build rival the skill and intelligence of
man. There are some interesting books written about the bee and ant by
persons who have spent years in studying them. When you are older you
may be interested in reading such books.

=Baby birds.=--We will study God’s plan among the birds. In studying the
family life of the birds we find a higher form of instinct, more love
and care for each other and their young than among the animals we have
studied.

We often feel disgusted at the ugly, slimy toads, lizards and serpents
living in swamps and pools. But not so with the birds. Most of them are
very interesting and beautiful and some are fine musicians. Among most
of the wild birds of the fields and forests, in the spring time the male
chooses among the females the one that most suits his fancy and they are
mated or married. When they decide to raise them a family they build
them a nest. This is their home. The partridge and lark build their
nests on the ground, the swallow in chimneys, the pigeons in barns, the
woodcocks and woodpeckers in hollow limbs, the wild ducks and geese on
the ledges of rocky cliffs, or in the high grass and weeds on the edge
of a lake, but most birds build their homes in bushes and trees. The
cuckoo does not build a nest, but lays her eggs in the nest of other
birds, to get rid of all labor and trouble of hatching, feeding and
rearing her young. We feel a natural contempt for the cuckoo. In every
female bird there are organs called ovaries where at certain seasons
little eggs are formed. While small or soft they are fertilized by the
male bird. As the egg grows in the body of the mother bird a hard thin
shell is formed around them. When the eggs are fully formed and the nest
is completed, the mother bird lays the eggs in the nest, usually one
egg a day. For several days these eggs must have some extra heat or they
will not hatch. Among most birds, the mother sits on her eggs so that
the warmth of her body will cause the fertilized cell in each egg to
form the little bird. While she sits on the eggs the father bird gathers
fresh berries and worms and brings them to the mother bird to eat. When
not bringing her water or food, he is usually found perched upon a
nearby limb cheering his wife by talking and singing to her. When her
little legs become tired, he will take her place, while she goes and
finds fresh food or water. When the little birds are hatched, from
sunrise to sunset the parents are busy catching worms and insects and
feeding their young. As their children grow older and larger, in some
mysterious way, they teach them the danger of men and guns, cats and
snakes. When they are about grown they are taught to fly. From this time
until the next spring they will live in flocks, when they will again
mate and raise a family. In this way all the beautiful feathery
songsters are brought into this world.




