CHAPTER IV

WATER


As has been already pointed out, air is the most indispensable to our
subsistence, while water comes next in order. Man cannot live for more
than a few minutes without air, but he can live for a few days without
water. And in the absence of other food, he can subsist on water alone
for many days. There is more than 70% of water in the composition of our
food-stuffs, as in that of the human body.

Even though water is so indispensable, we take hardly any pains to keep
it pure. Epidemics are as much the outcome of our indifference to the
quality of the water we drink, as of the air we breathe. The drinking of
dirty water very often produces also the disease of the stone.

Water may be impure in either of two ways,--by issuing from dirty places,
or by being defiled by us. Where the water issues from dirty places, we
should not drink it at all; nor do we generally drink it. But we do not
shrink from drinking the water which has been defiled by ourselves.
River-water, for instance, is regarded as quite good for drinking,
although we throw into it all sorts of rubbish, and also use it for
washing purposes. We should make it a rule never to drink the water in
which people bathe. The upper portion of a river should be set apart for
drinking water, the lower being reserved for bathing and washing
purposes. Where there is no such arrangement, it is a good practice to
dig in the sand, and take drinking water therefrom. This water is very
pure, since it has been filtered by passage through the sand. It is
generally risky to drink well-water, for unless it is well protected,
the dirty water at the top would trickle down into the well, and render
the water impure. Further, birds and insects often fall into the water
and die; sometimes birds build their nests inside the wells; and the
dirt from the feet of those who draw water from the well is also washed
down into the water. For all these reasons, we should be particularly
careful in drinking well-water. Water kept in tubs is also very often
impure. If it should be pure, the tubs should be washed clean at
frequent intervals, and should be kept covered; we should also see that
the tank or well from which the water is taken is kept in good
condition. Very few people, however, take such precautions to keep the
water pure. Hence the best way of removing the impurities of the water
is to boil it well, and, after cooling it, filter it carefully into
another vessel through a thick and clean piece of cloth. Our duty,
however, does not end with this. We should realise that we owe a duty to
our fellowmen in this matter. We should see to it that we do absolutely
nothing to defile the water which is used for drinking by the public. We
should scrupulously refrain from bathing or washing in the water which
is reserved for drinking; we should never answer the calls of nature
near the banks of a river, nor cremate the dead bodies there and throw
the ashes after cremation into the water.

In spite of all the care that we may take, we find it so difficult to
keep water perfectly pure. It may have, for instance, salt dissolved in
it, or bits of grass and other decaying matter. Rain water is, of
course, the purest, but, before it reaches us, it generally becomes
impure by the absorption of the floating matter in the atmosphere.
Perfectly pure water has a most beneficial effect on the system; hence
doctors administer distilled water to their patients. Those who are
suffering from constipation are appreciably benefitted by the use of
distilled water.

Many people do not know that water is of two kinds, _soft_ and _hard_.
Hard water is water in which some kind of salt has been dissolved.
Hence, soap does not readily lather in it, and food cannot be easily
boiled in it. Its taste is brackish, while soft water tastes sweet. It
is much safer to drink soft water, although some people hold that hard
water is better by virtue of the presence of nutritious matter dissolved
therein. Rain water is the best kind of soft water, and is therefore,
the best for drinking purposes. Hard water, if boiled and kept over the
fire for some half an hour, is rendered soft. Then it may be filtered
and drunk.

The question is often asked, "When should one drink water, and how
much?" The only safe answer to this is this: one should drink water only
when one feels thirsty, and even then only just enough to quench the
thirst. There is no harm in drinking water during the meals or
immediately afterwards. Of course, we should not wash the food down with
water. If the food refuses to go down of itself, it means that either it
has not been well prepared or the stomach is not in need of it.

Ordinarily, there is no need to drink water; and indeed, there _should_
be none. As already mentioned, there is a large percentage of water in
our ordinary articles of food, and we also add water in cooking them.
Why then should we feel thirsty? Those people whose diet is free from
such articles as chillies and onions which create an artificial thirst,
have rarely any need to drink water. Those who feel unaccountably
thirsty must be suffering from some disease or other.

We may be tempted to drink any kind of water that we come across, simply
because we see some people doing it with impunity. The reply to this has
already been given in connection with air. Our blood has in itself the
power of destroying many of the poisonous elements that enter into it,
but it has to be renewed and purified, just as the sharp edge of a sword
has to be mended when it has been once employed in action. Hence, if we
go on drinking impure water, we should not be surprised to find our
blood thoroughly poisoned in the end.




