CHAPTER VI

HOW MUCH AND HOW MANY TIMES SHOULD WE EAT?


There is a great divergence of opinion among doctors as to the quantity
of food that we should take. One doctor holds that we should eat to the
utmost of our capacity, and he has calculated the quantities of
different kinds of food that we can take. Another holds the view that
the food of labourers should differ in quantity as well as in quality
from that of persons engaged in mental work, while a third doctor
contends that the prince and the peasant should eat exactly the same
quantity of food. This much, however, will be generally admitted, that
the weak cannot eat just as much as the strong. In the same way, a woman
eats less than a man, and children and old men eat less than young men.
One writer goes so far as to say that, if only we would masticate our
food thoroughly well, so that every particle of it is mixed with the
saliva, then we should not have to eat more than five or ten tolas of
food. This he says on the basis of numberless experiments, and his book
has been sold in thousands. All this shows that it is futile to think of
prescribing the quantity of food for men.

Most doctors admit that 99% of human beings eat more than is needed.
Indeed, this is a fact of everyday experience, and does not require to
be proclaimed by any doctor. There is no fear at all of men ruining
their health by eating _too little_; and the great need is for a
reduction in the quantity of food that we generally take.

As said above, it is of the utmost importance to masticate the food
thoroughly well. By so doing, we shall be able to extract the maximum of
nutriment from the minimum of food. Experienced persons point out that
the fæces of a man whose food is wholesome, and who does not eat too
much, will be small in quantity, quite solid and smooth, dark in colour,
and free from all foul smell. The man who does not have such fæces
should understand that he has eaten too much of unwholesome food, and
has failed to masticate it well. Also, if a man does not get sleep at
night, or if his sleep be troubled by dreams, and if his tongue be dirty
in the morning, he should know that he has been guilty of excessive
eating. And if he has to get up several times at night to make water, it
means that he has taken too much liquid food at night. By these and
other tests, every man can arrive at the exact quantity of food that is
needed for him. Many men suffer from foul breath, which shows that their
food has not been well digested. In many cases, again, too much eating
gives rise to pimples on the face, and in the nose; and many people
suffer from wind in the stomach. The root of all these troubles is, to
put it plainly, that we have converted our stomach into a latrine, and
we carry this latrine about with us. When we consider the matter in a
sober light, we cannot help feeling an unmixed contempt for ourselves.
If we want to avoid the sin of over-eating, we should take a vow never
to have anything to do with feasts of all kinds. Of course, we should
feed those who come to us as guests, but only so as not to violate the
laws of health. Do we ever think of inviting our friends to clean their
teeth with us, or to take a glass of water? Is not eating as strictly a
matter of health as these things? Why, then, should we make so much fuss
about it? We have become such gluttons by habit that our tongues are
ever craving for abnormal sensations. Hence we think it a sacred duty to
cram our guests with rich food, and we cherish the hope that they will
do likewise for us, when their turn comes! If, an hour after eating, we
ask a clean-bodied friend to smell our mouth, and if he should tell us
his exact feelings, we should have to hide our heads in utter shame! But
some people are so shameless that they take purgatives soon after
eating, that they might be able to eat still more or they even vomit out
what they have eaten in order to sit down again to the feast at once!

Since even the best of us are more or less guilty of over-eating, our
wise forefathers have prescribed frequent fasts as a religious duty.
Indeed, merely from the point of view of health, it will be highly
beneficial to fast at least once a fortnight. Many pious Hindus take
only one meal a day during the rainy season. This is a practice based
upon the soundest hygienic principles. For, when the air is damp and the
sky cloudy, the digestive organs are weaker than usual, and hence there
should be a reduction in the quantity of food.

And now we will consider how may meals we may take in the day.
Numberless people in India are content with only two meals. Those who do
hard labour take three meals, but a system of four meals has arisen
after the invention of English medicines! Of late, several societies
have been formed in England and in America in order to exhort the people
to take only two meals a day. They say that we should not take a
breakfast early in the morning, since our sleep itself serves the
purpose of the breakfast. As soon as we get up in the morning we should
prepare to work rather than to eat. We should take our meal only after
working for three hours. Those who hold these views take only two meals
a day, and do not even take tea in the interval. An experienced doctor
by name Deway has written an excellent book on Fasting, in which he has
shown the benefits of dispensing with the breakfast. I can also say from
my experience that there is absolutely no need to eat more than twice,
for a man who has passed the period of youth, and whose body has
attained its fullest growth.




CHAPTER VII

EXERCISE


Exercise is as much of a vital necessity for man as air, water and food,
in the sense that no man who does not take exercise regularly, can be
perfectly healthy. By "exercise" we do not mean merely walking, or games
like hockey, football, and cricket; we include under the term all
physical and mental activity. Exercise, even as food, is as essential to
the mind as to the body. The mind is much weakened by want of exercise
as the body, and a feeble mind is, indeed, a form of disease. An
athlete, for instance, who is an expert in wrestling, cannot be regarded
as a really _healthy_ man, unless his mind is equally efficient. As
already explained, "a sound mind in a sound body" alone constitutes true
health.

Which, then, are those exercises which keep the body and the mind
equally efficient? Indeed, Nature has so arranged it that we can be
engaged in physical as well as mental work at the same time. The vast
majority of men on earth live by field-labour. The farmer has to do
strenuous bodily exercise at any cost, for he has to work for 8 or 10
hours, or sometimes even more, in order to earn his bread and clothing.
And efficient labour is impossible unless the mind is also in good
condition. He has to attend to all the many details of cultivation; he
must have a good knowledge of soils and seasons, and perhaps also of the
movements of the sun, the moon, and the stars. Even the ablest men will
be beaten by the farmer in these matters. He knows the state of his
immediate surroundings thoroughly well, he can find the directions by
looking at the stars in the night, and tell a great many things from the
ways of birds and beasts. He knows, for instance, that rain is about to
fall when a particular class of birds gather together, and begin to make
noise. He knows as much of the earth and the sky as is necessary for his
work. As he has to bring up his children, he must know something of
_Dharma Sastra_. Since he lives under the broad open sky, he easily
realises the greatness of God.

Of course, all men cannot be farmers, nor is this book written for them.
We have however, described the life of the farmer, as we are convinced
that it is the _natural life_ for man. To the extent to which we
deviate from these natural conditions must we suffer in health. From the
farmer's life we learn that we should work for at least 8 hours a day,
and it should involve mental work as well.

Merchants and others leading a sedentary life have indeed, to do some
mental work, but their work is too one-sided and too inadequate to be
called _exercise_.

For such people the wise men of the West have devised games like cricket
and football, and such minor games as are played at parties and festive
gatherings. As for mental work the reading of such books as involve no
mental strain is prescribed. No doubt these games do give exercise to
the body, but it is a question if they are equally beneficial to the
mind. How many of the best players of football and cricket are men of
superior mental powers? What have we seen of the mental equipment of
those Indian Princes who have earned a distinction as players? On the
other hand, how many of the ablest men care to play these games? We can
affirm from our experience that there are very few players among those
who are gifted with great mental powers. The people of England are
extremely fond of games, but their own poet, Kipling, speaks very
disparagingly of the mental capacity of the players.

Here in India, however, we have chosen quite a different path! Our men
do arduous mental work, but give little or no exercise to the body.
Their bodies are enfeebled by excessive mental strain, and they fall a
prey to serious diseases; and just when the world expects to benefit by
their work, they bid it eternal farewell! Our work should be neither
exclusively physical nor exclusively mental, nor such as ministers
merely to the pleasure of the moment. The ideal kind of exercise is that
which gives vigour to the body as well as to the mind; only such
exercise can keep a man truly healthy, and such a man is the farmer.

But what shall he do who is no farmer? The exercise which games like the
cricket give is too inadequate, and something else has to be devised.
The best thing for ordinary men would be to keep a small garden near the
house, and work in it for a few hours every day. Some may ask, "What can
we do if the house we live in be not our own?" This is a foolish
question to ask, for, whoever may be the owner of the house, he cannot
object to his ground being improved by digging and cultivation. And we
shall have the satisfaction of feeling that we have helped to keep
somebody else's ground neat and clean. Those who do not find time for
such exercise or who may not like it, may resort to walking, which is
the next best exercise. Truly has this been described as the Queen of
all exercises. The main reason why our _Sadhus_ and _Fakirs_ are strong
as a class is that they go about from one end of the country to the
other only on foot. Thoreau, the great American writer, has said many
remarkable things on walking as an exercise. He says that the writings
of those who keep indoors and never go out into the open air, will be as
weak as their bodies. Referring to his own experience, he says that all
his best works were written when he was walking the most. He was such an
inveterate walker that four or five hours a day was quite an ordinary
thing with him! Our passion for exercise should become so strong that we
cannot bring ourselves to dispense with it on any account. We hardly
realise how weak and futile is our mental work when unaccompanied by
hard physical exercise. Walking gives movement to every portion of the
body, and ensures vigorous circulation of the blood; for, when we walk
fast, fresh air is inhaled into the lungs. Then there is the inestimable
joy that natural objects give us, the joy that comes from a
contemplation of the beauties of nature. It is, of course, useless to
walk along lanes and streets, or to take the same path every day. We
should go out into the fields and forests where we can have a taste of
Nature. Walking a mile or two is no walking at all; at least ten or
twelve miles are necessary for exercise. Those who cannot walk so much
every day can at least do so on Sundays. Once a man who was suffering
from indigestion went to the doctor to take medicine. He was advised to
walk a little every day, but he pleaded that he was too weak to walk at
all. Then the doctor took him into his carriage for a drive. On the way
he deliberately dropped his whip, and the sick man, out of courtesy, got
down to take it. The doctor, however, drove on without waiting for him,
and the poor man had to trudge behind the carriage. When the doctor was
satisfied that he had walked long enough, he took him into the carriage
again, and explained that it was a device adopted to make him walk. As
the man had begun to feel hungry by this time, he realised the value of
the doctor's advice, and forgot the affair of the whip. He then went
home and had a hearty meal. Let those who are suffering from indigestion
and kindred diseases try for themselves, and they will at once realise
the value of walking as an exercise.




