
   A GUIDE TO HEALTH

   BY

   MAHATMA GANDHI

   _Translated from the Hindi_

   BY

   A. RAMA IYER, M.A.

   [Illustration]

   1921

   S. GANESAN., PUBLISHER,
   TRIPLICANE ... MADRAS, S.E.




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE

  TRANSLATOR'S NOTE                                       vii

  INTRODUCTION                                              1

  PART I: GENERAL

    Chap. I. The Meaning of Health                          9

    Chap. II. The Human Body                               11

    Chap. III. Air                                         14

    Chap. IV. Water                                        25

    Chap. V. Food                                          29

    Chap. VI. How much and how many times should we eat?   55

    Chap. VII. Exercise                                    59

    Chap. VIII. Dress                                      64

    Chap. IX. Sexual Relations                             69

  PART II: SOME SIMPLE TREATMENTS

    Chap. I. Air Treatment                                 83

    Chap. II. Water Cure                                   86

    Chap. III. The Use of Earth                            95

    Chap. IV. Fever and its Cures                          98

    Chap. V. Constipation, Dysentery, etc.                101

    Chap. VI. Contagious Diseases Small-pox               104

    Chap. VII. Other Contagious Diseases                  112

    Chap. VIII. Maternity and Child-Birth                 117

    Chap. IX. Care of Child                               121

    Chap. X. Accidents--Drowning                          127

    Chap. XI.   Do    --Burns and Scalds                  130

    Chap. XII.  Do    --Snake Bite                        132

    Chap. XIII. Do    --Scorpion-sting, etc.              140

    Chap. XIV. Conclusion                                 142




TRANSLATOR'S NOTE


In these days when the name of Mahatma Gandhi is identified with the
momentous question of Non-Co-operation, it may come with a shock of
surprise to most readers to be told that he is something of an authority
on matters of Health and Disease as well. Very few of us perhaps are
aware that he is the author of quite an original little Health-book in
Gujarati. Those who think of him as a dreamy idealist or an unpractical
visionary, with his head always in the clouds, will certainly be
undeceived when they read this book replete from cover to cover with
_practical_ observations on the most _practical_ question of Health. His
views are of course radically different from the ordinary views that
find expression in the pages of such books; in many cases, indeed, his
doctrines must be pronounced revolutionary, and will doubtless be
regarded by a certain class of readers as wholly impracticable. Even the
most revolutionary of his doctrines, however, are based, not on the
shifting quicksands of mere theory, but on the solid foundation of deep
study, backed up by personal experience of nearly thirty years. He
himself recognises that many of his views will hardly be accepted by the
ordinary reader, but he has felt himself impelled by a stern sense of
duty to give publicity to his convictions formed after so much of study
and experience. Some at least however, of those who read his book cannot
help being profoundly influenced by it. Such, at any rate, has been the
case with me; and I have ventured to translate the book into English in
the hope that others may also be benefitted likewise.

I should perhaps explain that I am not a student of Gujarati, the
language of the original. I have used instead one of the two Hindi
versions of the book. I should also point out that I have not attempted
a literal or close translation, but only _a very free rendering_ into
English. In some cases, whole passages have been omitted; and
occasionally only the general sense of a passage has been given. It is
hoped, however, that, in no single instance has there been a
_misinterpretation_ of the original words.

I am aware that many errors might have crept in, as the translation had
to be done in a hurry, and there was hardly anytime for revision. I hope
to make a thorough revision of the book, in case a second edition is
called for.

   NATIONAL COLLEGE,  }
     TRICHINOPOLY,    }  A. RAMA IYER.
      JULY 1921.      }




INTRODUCTION


For more than twenty years past I have been paying special attention to
the question of Health. While in England, I had to make my own
arrangements for food and drink, and I can say, therefore, that my
experience is quite reliable. I have arrived at certain definite
conclusions from that experience, and I now set them down for the
benefit of my readers.

As the familiar saying goes, 'Prevention is better than cure.' It is far
easier and safer to prevent illness by the observance of the laws of
health than to set about curing the illness which has been brought on by
our own ignorance and carelessness. Hence it is the duty of all
thoughtful men to understand aright the laws of health, and the object
of the following pages is to give an account of these laws. We shall
also consider the best methods of cure for some of the most common
diseases.

As Milton says, the mind can make a hell of heaven or a heaven of hell.
So heaven is not somewhere above the clouds, and hell somewhere
underneath the earth! We have this same idea expressed in the Sanskrit
saying, _Mana êva Manushayanâm Kâranam Bandha Mokshayoh_--man's captivity
or freedom is dependant on the state of his mind. From this it follows
that whether a man is healthy or unhealthy depends on himself. Illness
is the result not only of our actions but also of our thoughts. As has
been said by a famous doctor, more people die for fear of diseases like
small-pox, cholera and plague than out of those diseases themselves.

Ignorance is one of the root-causes of disease. Very often we get
bewildered at the most ordinary diseases out of sheer ignorance, and in
our anxiety to get better, we simply make matters worse. Our ignorance
of the most elementary laws of health leads us to adopt wrong remedies
or drives us into the hands of the veriest quacks. How strange (and yet
how true) it is that we know much less about things near at hand than
things at a distance. We know hardly anything of our own village, but we
can give by rote the names of the rivers and mountains of England! We
take so much trouble to learn the names of the stars in the sky, while
we hardly think it worth while to know the things that are in our own
homes! We never care a jot for the splendid pageantry of Nature before
our very eyes, while we are so anxious to witness the puerile mummeries
of the theatre! And in the same way, we are not ashamed to be ignorant
of the structure of our body, of the way in which the bones and muscles,
grow, how the blood circulates and is rendered impure, how we are
affected by evil thoughts and passions, how our mind travels over
illimitable spaces and times while the body is at rest, and so on. There
is nothing so closely connected with us as our body, but there is also
nothing perhaps of which our ignorance is so profound, or our
indifference so complete.

It is the duty of every one of us to get over this indifference.
Everyone should regard it as his bounden duty to know something of the
fundamental facts concerning his body. This kind of instruction should
indeed be made compulsory in our schools. At present, we know not how to
deal with the most ordinary scalds and wounds; we are helpless if a
thorn runs into our foot; we are beside ourselves with fright and dismay
if we are bitten by an ordinary snake! Indeed, if we consider the depth
of our ignorance in such matters, we shall have to hang down our heads
in shame. To assert that the average man cannot be expected to know
these things is simply absurd. The following pages are intended for such
as are willing to learn.

I do not pretend that the facts mentioned by me have not been said
before. But my readers will find here in a nutshell the substance of
several books on the subject. I have arrived at my conclusions after
studying these books, and after a series of careful experiments.
Moreover, those who are new to this subject will also be saved the risk
of being confounded by the conflicting views held by writers of such
books. One writer says for instance, that hot water is to be used under
certain circumstances, while another writer says that, exactly under the
same circumstances, cold water is to be used. Conflicting views of this
kind have been carefully considered by me, so that my readers may rest
assured of the reliability of my own views.

We have got into the habit of calling in a doctor for the most trivial
diseases. Where there is no regular doctor available, we take the advice
of mere quacks. We labour under the fatal delusion that no disease can
be cured without medicine. This has been responsible for more mischief
to mankind than any other evil. It is of course, necessary that our
diseases should be cured, but they cannot be cured _by medicines_. Not
only are medicines merely useless, but at times even positively harmful.
For a diseased man to take drugs and medicines would be as foolish as to
try to cover up the filth that has accumulated in the inside of the
house. The more we cover up the filth, the more rapidly does
putrefaction go on. The same is the case with the human body. Illness or
disease is only Nature's warning that filth has accumulated in some
portion or other of the body; and it would surely be the part of wisdom
to allow Nature to remove the filth, instead of covering it up by the
help of medicines. Those who take medicines are really rendering the
task of Nature doubly difficult. It is, on the other hand, quite easy
for us to help Nature in her task by remembering certain elementary
principles,--by fasting, for instance, so that the filth may not
accumulate all the more, and by vigorous exercise in the open air, so
that some of the filth may escape in the form of perspiration. And the
one thing that is supremely necessary is to keep our minds strictly
under control.

We find from experience that, when once a bottle of medicine gets itself
introduced into a home, it never thinks of going out, but only goes on
drawing other bottles in its train. We come across numberless human
beings who are afflicted by some disease or other all through their
lives in spite of their pathetic devotion to medicines. They are to-day
under the treatment of this doctor, to-morrow of that. They spend all
their life in a futile search after a doctor who will cure them for
good. As the late Justice Stephen (who was for some time in India)
said, it is really astonishing that drugs of which so little is known
should be applied by doctors to bodies of which they know still less!
Some of the greatest doctors of the West themselves have now come to
hold this view. Sir Astley Cooper, for instance, admits that the
'science' of medicine is mostly mere guess-work; Dr. Baker and Dr. Frank
hold that more people die of medicines than of diseases; and Dr.
Masongood even goes to the extent of saying that more men have fallen
victims to medicine than to war, famine and pestilence combined!

It is also a matter of experience that diseases increase in proportion
to the increase in the number of doctors in a place. The demand for
drugs has become so widespread that even the meanest papers are sure of
getting advertisements of quack medicines, if of nothing else. In a
recent book on the Patent Medicines we are told that the Fruit-salts
and syrups, for which we pay from Rs. 2 to Rs. 5, cost to their
manufacturers only from a quarter of an anna to one anna! No wonder,
then, that their compositions should be so scrupulously kept a secret.

We will, therefore, assure our readers that there is absolutely no
necessity for them to seek the aid of doctors. To those, however, who
may not be willing to boycott doctors and medicines altogether, we will
say, "As far as possible, possess your souls in patience, and do not
trouble the doctors. In case you are forced at length to call in the aid
of a doctor, be sure to get a good man; then, follow his directions
strictly, and do not call in another doctor, unless by his own advice.
But remember, above all, that the curing of your disease does not rest
ultimately in the hands of any doctor."

   M. K. GANDHI.




A GUIDE TO HEALTH




CHAPTER I

THE MEANING OF HEALTH


Ordinarily that man is considered healthy who eats well and moves about,
and does not resort to a doctor. But a little thought will convince us
that this idea is wrong. There are many cases of men being diseased, in
spite of their eating well and freely moving about. They are under the
delusion that they are healthy, simply because they are too indifferent
to _think_ about the matter.

In fact, perfectly healthy men hardly exist anywhere over this wide
world.

As has been well said, only that man can be said to be really healthy,
who has a sound mind in a sound body. The relation between the body and
the mind is so intimate that, if either of them got out of order, the
whole system would suffer. Let us take the analogy of the rose-flower.
Its colour stands to its fragrance in the same way as the body to the
mind or the soul. No one regards an artificial paper-flower as a
sufficient substitute for the natural flower, for the obvious reason
that the fragrance, which forms the essence of the flower, cannot be
reproduced. So too, we instinctively honour the man of a pure mind and a
noble character in preference to the man who is merely physically
strong. Of course, the body and the soul are both essential, but the
latter is far more important than the former. No man whose character is
not pure can be said to be really healthy. The body which contains a
diseased mind can never be anything but diseased. Hence it follows that
a pure character is the foundation of health in the real sense of the
term; and we may say that all evil thoughts and evil passions are but
different forms of disease.

Thus considered, we may conclude that that man alone is perfectly
healthy whose body is well formed, whose teeth as well as eyes and ears
are in good condition, whose nose is free from dirty matter, whose skin
exudes perspiration freely and without any bad smell, whose mouth is
also free from bad smells, whose hands and legs perform their duty
properly, who is neither too fat nor too thin, and whose mind and senses
are constantly under his control. As has already been said, it is very
hard to gain such health, but it is harder still to retain it, when
once it has been acquired. The chief reason why we are not truly healthy
is that our parents were not. An eminent writer has said that, if the
parents are _in perfectly good condition_ their children would certainly
be superior to them in all respects. A _perfectly healthy_ man has no
reason to fear death; our terrible fear of death shows that we are far
from being so healthy. It is, however, the clear duty of all of us to
strive for perfect health. We will, therefore, proceed to consider in
the following pages how such health can be attained, and how, when once
attained, it can also be retained for ever.




