CHAPTER III

THE USE OF EARTH


We will now proceed to describe the curative properties of earth, which
are, in some cases, even more remarkable than those of water. That earth
should have such properties need not cause us any surprise, for our own
body is compounded of the earthly element. Indeed, we do make use of
earth as a purifying agent. We wash the ground with earth to remove bad
smells, we put it over decaying matter to prevent the pollution of the
air, we wash our hands with it, and even employ it to clean the private
parts. Yogis besmear their bodies with it; some people use it as a cure
for boils and ulcers; and dead bodies are buried in the earth so that
they may not vitiate the atmosphere. All this shows that earth has many
valuable properties as a purifying and curative agent.

Just as Dr. Kuhne has devoted special attention to the subject of
water-cure, another German doctor has made a special study of earth and
its properties. He goes so far as to say that it can be used with
success in the treatment of even the most complicated diseases. He says
that once in a case of snake-bite, where everybody else had given up
the man for dead, he restored him to life by causing him to be covered
up with earth for some time. There is no reason to doubt the veracity of
this report. It is well known that great heat is generated in the body
by burying it in the earth; and although we cannot explain how exactly
the effect is produced, it is undeniable that earth does possess the
property of absorbing the poison. Indeed, every case of snake-bite may
not be cured in this way; but it should certainly be tried in every
case. And I can say from my own experience that, in cases of
scorpion-sting and the like, the use of mud is particularly beneficial.

I have myself tried with success the following forms of earth-cure.
Constipation, dysentery, and chronic stomach-ache have been cured by the
use of a mud-poultice over the abdomen for two or three days. Instant
relief has been obtained in cases of headache by applying a mud-bandage
round the head. Sore eye has also been cured by the same method; hurts
of all kinds, whether accompanied by inflammation or not, have been
healed likewise. In the old days I could not keep well without a regular
use of Eno's Fruit-salt and the like. But, since 1904, when I learnt the
value of earth-cure, I have had not a single occasion to use them. A
mud-poultice over the abdomen and the head, gives distinct relief in a
state of high fever. Skin-diseases like the itch, the ringworm, and
boils, have been cured with the use of mud, though no doubt ulcers from
which pus issues are not so easily cured. Burns and scalds are likewise
healed by mud, which also prevents inflammation. Piles, too, are cured
by the same treatment. When the hands and feet become red and swollen
owing to frost, mud is an unfailing remedy, and pain in the joints is
also relieved by it. From these and other experiments in mud-cure, I
have come to the conclusion that earth is an invaluable element in the
domestic treatment of diseases.

All kinds of earth are not, of course, equally beneficial. Dry earth dug
out from a clean spot has been found the most effective. It should not
be too sticky. Mud which is midway between sand and clay is the best. It
should, of course, be free from cow-dung and other rubbish. It should be
well sifted in a fine sieve, and then soaked in cold water to the
consistency of well-kneaded dough before use. Then it should be tied up
in a piece of clean, unstarched cloth, and used in the form of a thick
poultice. The poultice should be removed before the mud begins to dry
up; ordinarily it will last from two to three hours. Mud once used
should never be used again, but a cloth once used can be used again,
after being well washed, provided it is free from blood and other dirty
matter. If the poultice has to be applied to the abdomen, it should
first be covered over with a warm cloth. Everybody should keep a tinful
of earth ready for use, so as not to have to hunt for it whenever an
occasion arises for its use. Otherwise, much precious time may be wasted
in cases (as of scorpion-sting) where delay would be dangerous.




CHAPTER IV

FEVER AND ITS CURE


We now pass on to consider some particular diseases and the means of
curing them. And first, fever.

We generally apply the term "fever" to a condition of heat in the body,
but English doctors have distinguished many varieties of this disease,
each with its own system of treatment. But, following the common
practice and the principles elaborated in these chapters, we may say
that all fevers can be cured in one and the same manner. I have tried
this single treatment for all varieties from simple fever up to Bubonic
Plague, with invariably satisfactory results. In 1904, there was a
severe outbreak of plague among the Indians in South Africa. It was so
severe that, out of 23 persons that were affected, as many as 21 died
within the space of 24 hours; and of the remaining two, who were removed
to the hospital, only one survived, and that one was the man to whom was
applied the mud-poultice. We cannot, of course, conclude from this that
it was the mud-poultice that saved him, but, in any case, it is
undeniable that it did him no harm. They were both suffering from high
fever brought on by inflammation of the lungs, and had been rendered
unconscious. The man on whom was tried the mud-poultice was so bad that
he was spitting blood, and I afterwards learnt from the doctor that he
had been insufficiently fed on milk alone.

As most fevers are caused by disorders of the bowels, the very first
thing to do is to starve the patient. It is a mere superstition that a
weak man will get weaker by starving. As we have already seen, only that
portion of our food is really useful which is assimilated into the
blood, and the remainder only clogs the bowels. In fever the digestive
organs are very weak, the tongue gets coated, and the lips are hard and
dry. If any food is given to the patient in this condition, it will
remain undigested and aid the fever. Starving the patient gives his
digestive organs time to perform their work; hence the need to starve
him for a day or two. At the same time, he should take at least two
baths every day according to the Kuhne's system. If he is too weak or
ill to bathe, a mud-poultice should be applied to his abdomen. If the
head aches or feels too hot, a poultice should also be applied to the
head. The patient should, as far as possible, be placed in the open air,
and should be well covered. At meal-time, he should be given the juice
of lime, well filtered and mixed with cold or boiling water, and if
possible, without any sugar. This has a very beneficial effect, and
should alone be given if the patient's teeth can bear its sourness.
Afterwards, he may be given a half or the whole of a plantain, well
mixed with a spoon of olive oil, mixed with a spoon of lime juice. If he
feels thirsty, he should be given water boiled and cooled, or the juice
of lime,--never unboiled water. His clothes should be as few as possible,
and should be frequently changed. Even persons suffering from typhoid
and the like diseases have been completely cured by this simple
treatment, and are enjoying perfect health at present. A seeming cure
may also be effected by quinine, but it really brings other diseases in
its train. Even in malarial fever, in which quinine is supposed to be
most effective, I have rarely seen it bring permanent relief; on the
other hand, I have actually seen several cases of malarial patients
being permanently cured by the treatment described above.

Many people subsist on milk alone during fever, but my experience is
that it really does harm in the initial stages, as it is hard to digest.
If milk has to be given, it is best given in the form of
"wheat-coffee",[1] or with a small quantity of rice-flour well boiled in
water; but in extreme forms of fever, it ought not to be given at all.
In such a condition, the juice of lime may always be given with great
success. As soon as the tongue gets clean, plantain may be included in
the diet, and given in the form described above. If there be
constipation, a hot-water enema with borax should be applied in
preference to purgatives, after which a diet of olive oil will serve to
keep the bowels free.

  [1] Part II, chap. IV




