CHAPTER IX

SEXUAL RELATIONS


I would specially request those who have carefully read through the book
so far to read through this chapter with even greater care, and ponder
well over its subject-matter. There are still several more chapters to
be written, and they will, of course, be found useful in their own way.
But not one of them is nearly as important as this. As I have already
said, there is not a single matter mentioned in this book which is not
based on my personal experience, or which I do not believe to be
strictly true.

Many are the keys to health, and they are all quite essential; but the
one thing needful, above all others, is _Brahmacharya_. Of course, pure
air, pure water, and wholesome food do contribute to health. But how can
we be healthy if we expend all the health that we acquire? How can we
help being paupers if we spend all the money that we earn? There can be
no doubt that men and women can never be virile or strong unless they
observe true _Brahmacharya_.

What do we mean by _Brahmacharya_? We mean by it that men and women
should refrain from enjoying each other. That is to say, they should not
touch each other with a carnal thought, they should not think of it even
in their dreams. Their mutual glances should be free from all suggestion
of carnality. The hidden strength that God has given us should be
conserved by rigid self-discipline, and transmitted into energy and
power,--not merely of body, but also of mind and soul.

But what is the spectacle that we actually see around us? Men and
women, old and young, without exception, are seen entangled in the coils
of sensuality. Blinded by lust, they lose all sense of right and wrong.
I have myself seen even boys and girls behaving like mad men under its
fatal influence. I too have behaved likewise under similar influences,
and it could not well be otherwise. For the sake of a momentary
pleasure, we sacrifice in an instant all the stock of vitality that we
have accumulated. The infatuation over, we find ourselves in a miserable
condition. The next morning, we feel hopelessly weak and tired, and the
mind refuses to do its work. Then, we try to remedy the mischief by
taking all sorts of 'nervine tonics' and put ourselves under the
doctor's mercy for repairing the waste, and for recovering the capacity
for enjoyment. So the days pass and the years, until at length old age
comes upon us, and finds us utterly emasculated in body and in mind.

But the law of Nature is just the reverse of this. The older we grow,
the keener should grow our intellect also; the longer we live, the
greater should be our capacity to transmit the fruits of our accumulated
experience to our fellowmen. And such is indeed the case with those who
have been true _Brahmacharies_. They know no fear of death, and they do
not forget good even in the hour of death; nor do they indulge in vain
complaints. They die with a smile on their lips, and boldly face the day
of judgment. They are the true men and women; and of them alone can it
be said that they have conserved their health.

We hardly realise the fact that incontinence is the root-cause of all
the vanity, anger, fear and jealousy in the world. If our mind is not
under our control, if we behave once or more every day more foolishly
than even little children, what sins may we not commit consciously or
unconsciously? How can we pause to think of the consequences of our
actions, however vile or sinful they may be?

But you may ask, "Who has ever seen a true _Brahmachary_ in this sense?
If all men should turn _Brahmacharies_, would not humanity be extinct,
and the whole world go to rack and ruin?" We will leave aside the
religious aspect of this question, and discuss it simply from the
secular point of view. To my mind, these questions only bespeak our
weakness and our cowardliness. We have not the strength of will to
observe _Brahmacharya_, and, therefore, set about finding pretexts for
evading our duty. The race of true _Brahmacharies_ is by no means
extinct; but, if they were to be had merely for the asking, of what
value would _Brahmacharya_ be? Thousands of hardy labourers have to go
and dig deep into the bowels of the earth in search of diamonds, and at
length they get perhaps merely a handful of them out of heaps and heaps
of rock. How much greater, then, should be the labour involved in the
discovery of the infinitely more precious diamond of a _Brahmachary_? If
the observance of _Brahmacharya_ should mean the ruin of the world, why
should we regret it? Are we God that we should be so anxious about its
future? He who created it will surely see to its preservation. It is
none of our business to enquire if other people practise _Brahmacharya_
or not. When we turn merchant or lawyer or doctor, do we ever pause to
consider what the fate of the world would be if all men were to do
likewise? The true _Brahmachary_ will, in the long run, discover for
himself answers to such questions.

But how can men engrossed by the cares of the material world put these
ideas into practice? What shall the married people do? What shall they
do who have children? And what shall be done by those people who cannot
control their lust? The best solution for all such difficulties has
already been given. We should keep this ideal constantly before us, and
try to approximate to it more and more to the utmost of our capacity.
When little children are taught to write the letters of the alphabet, we
show them the perfect shapes of the letters, and they try to reproduce
them as best they can. Just in the same way, if we steadily work up to
the ideal of _Brahmacharya_, we may ultimately succeed in realising it.
What if we have married already? The law of Nature is that
_Brahmacharya_ may be broken only when the husband and wife feel a
strong desire for a child. Those who, remembering this law, violate
_Brahmacharya_ once in four or five years cannot be said to be slaves to
lust, nor can they appreciably lose their stock of vitality. But, alas,
how rare are those men and women who yield to the sexual craving merely
for the sake of an offspring! The vast majority, who may be numbered in
thousands, turn to sexual enjoyment merely to satisfy their carnal
passion, with the result that children are born to them quite against
their will. In the madness of sexual passion, we give no thought to the
consequences of our acts. In this respect, men are even more to blame
than women. The man is blinded so much by his lust that he never cares
to remember that his wife is weak and incapable of rearing a child. In
the West indeed, people have trespassed even against the claims of
common decency. They indulge in sexual pleasures, and devise measures in
order to evade the responsibilities of parenthood. Many books have been
written on this subject, and a regular trade is being carried on in
providing the means of preventing conception. We are as yet free from
this sin, but we do not shrink from imposing the heavy burden of
maternity on our women, and we are not concerned even to find that our
children are weak, impotent and imbecile. Every time we get children, we
bless Providence, and so seek to hide from ourselves the wickedness of
our acts. Should we not rather deem it a sign of God's anger to have
children who are weak, sensual, crippled and impotent? Is it a matter
for joy that mere boys and girls should have children? Is it not rather
a curse of God? We all know that the premature fruit of a too young
plant weakens the parent, and so we try all means of delaying the
appearance of fruit. But we sing hymns of praise and thanks-giving to
God when a child is born of a boy-father and a girl-mother! Could
anything be more dreadful? Do we think that the world is going to be
saved by the countless swarms of such impotent children endlessly
multiplying in India or elsewhere in the world? Verily we are, in this
respect, far worse than even the lower animals; for, the bull and the
cow are brought together solely with the object of having a calf. Man
and woman should regard it as sacred duty to keep apart from the moment
of conception up to the time when the child has ceased to suck its
mother's breast. But we go on in our merry fashion blissfully forgetful
of this sacred obligation. This incurable disease enfeebles our mind and
leads us to an early grave, after making us drag a miserable existence
for a short while. Married people should understand the true function of
marriage, and should not violate the law of _Brahmacharya_ except with a
view to having a child for the continuation of the race.

But this is so difficult under our present conditions of life. Our diet,
our ways of life, our common talk, and our environments are all equally
calculated to rouse and keep alive our sensual appetite; and sensuality
is like a poison, eating into our vitals. Some people may doubt the
possibility of our being able to free ourselves from this bondage. This
book is written not for those who go about with such doubtings of heart,
but only for those who are really in earnest, and who have the courage
to take active steps for their improvement. Those who are quite content
with their present abject condition may even be offended to read all
this; but I hope this will be of some service to those who are heartily
disgusted with their own miserable existence.

From all that has been said, it follows that those who are still
unmarried should try to remain so; but, if they cannot help marrying,
they should do so as late as possible. Young men, for instance, should
take a vow to remain unmarried till the age of 25 or 30. We shall not
explain here all the benefits other than physical that result from this;
but those who want to enjoy them can do so for themselves.

My request to those parents who may read these pages is that they should
not tie a mill-stone round the necks of their sons by marrying them in
their teens. They should look also to the welfare of their sons, and not
only to their own interests. They should throw aside all silly notions
of caste-pride or 'respectability', and cease to indulge in such
heartless practices. Let them, rather, if they are true well-wishers of
their children, look to their physical, mental and moral improvements.
What greater disservice can they do to their sons than compelling them
to enter upon a married life, with all its tremendous responsibilities
and cares, even while they are mere boys?

Then again, the true laws of health demand that the man that loses his
wife, as well as the woman that loses her husband, should remain single
ever after. There is a difference of opinion among doctors as to whether
young men and women need ever let their vital fluid escape, some
answering the question in the affirmative, others in the negative. But
this cannot justify our taking advantage of it for sensual enjoyment. I
can affirm, without the slightest hesitation, from my own experience as
well as that of others, that sexual enjoyment is not only not necessary
for the preservation of health, but is positively detrimental to it. All
the strength of body and mind that has taken long to acquire, is lost
altogether by the escape of the vital fluid, and it takes a long time to
regain this lost strength, and even then there is no saying that it can
be thoroughly recovered. A broken vessel may be made to do its work
after mending, but it can never be anything but a broken vessel.

As has already been pointed out, the preservation of our vitality is
impossible without pure air, pure water, pure and wholesome food, as
well as pure thoughts. So vital indeed is the relation between our
health and the life that we lead that we can never be perfectly healthy
unless we lead a clean life. The earnest man who, forgetting the errors
of the past, begins to live a life of purity will be able to reap the
fruit of it straightway. Those who have practised true _Brahmacharya_
even for a short period will have seen how their body and mind improve
steadily in strength and power, and they will not, at any cost, be
willing to part with this treasure. I have myself been guilty of lapses
even after having fully understood the value of _Brahmacharya_, and
have, of course, paid dearly for it. I am filled with shame and remorse
when I think of the terrible contrast between my condition before and
after these lapses. But from the errors of the past I have now learnt to
preserve this treasure in tact, and I fully hope, with God's grace, to
continue to preserve it in the future; for I have in my own person,
witnessed the inestimable benefits of _Brahmacharya_. I was married
early in life, and had become the father of children as a mere youth.
When, at length, I awoke to the reality of my situation, I found myself
sunk in the lowest depths of degradation. I shall consider myself amply
rewarded for writing these pages if at least a single reader is able to
take warning from my failings and experiences, and to profit thereby.
Many people have told me (and I also believe it) that I am full of
energy and enthusiasm, and that my mind is by so means weak; some even
accuse me of rashness. There is disease in my body as well as in my
mind; nevertheless, when compared with my friends, I may call myself
perfectly healthy and strong. If even after twenty years of sensual
enjoyment, I have been able to reach this state, how much better should
I have been if only I had kept myself pure during those twenty years as
well? It is my full conviction that, if only I had lived a life of
_Brahmacharya_ all through, my energy and enthusiasm would have been a
thousandfold greater and I should have been able to devote them all to
the furtherance of my country's cause as of my own. If this can be
affirmed of an ordinary man like myself, how much more wonderful must be
the gain in power,--physical, mental, as well as moral--that unbroken
_Brahmacharya_ can bring to us!

When so strict is the law of _Brahmacharya_, what shall we say of those
guilty of the unpardonable sin of illegitimate sexual enjoyment? The
evil that arises from adultery and prostitution is a vital question of
religion and morality and cannot be fully dealt with in a treatise on
health. Here we are only concerned to point out how thousands who are
guilty of these sins are afflicted by syphilis and other unmentionable
diseases. The inflexible decree of Providence happily condemns these
wretches to a life of unmitigated suffering. Their short span of life is
spent in abject bondage to quacks in a futile quest after a remedy that
will rid them of their suffering. If there were no adultery at all,
there would be no work for at least 50% of doctors. So inextricably
indeed has venereal disease caught mankind in its clutches that even the
best doctors have been forced to admit that, so long as adultery and
prostitution continue, there is no hope for the human race. The
medicines for these diseases are so poisonous that, although they may
appear to have done some good for the time being, they give rise to
other and still more terrible diseases which are handed down from
generation to generation.

In concluding this chapter, we will briefly point out how married people
can preserve their _Brahmacharya_ intact. It is not enough to observe
the laws of health as regards air, water and food. The man should
altogether cease to sleep in privacy with his wife. Little reflection is
needed to show that the only possible motive for privacy between man and
wife is the desire for sexual enjoyment. They should sleep apart at
night, and be incessantly engaged in good works during the day. They
should read such books as fill them with noble thoughts and meditate
over the lives of great men, and live in the constant realisation of the
fact that sensual enjoyment is the root of all disease. Whenever they
feel a prompting for enjoyment, they should bathe in cold water, so that
the heat of passion may be cooled down, and be refined into the energy
of virtuous activity. This is a hard thing to do, but we have been born
into this world that we might wrestle with difficulties and temptations,
and conquer them; and he who has not the will to do it can never enjoy
the supreme blessing of true health.




