CHAPTER VIII

MATERNITY AND CHILD-BIRTH


Our object in the foregoing chapters has been to point out the unity of
origin and treatment of some of the more common diseases. We are,
indeed, fully aware that those who are the constant victims of disease,
and who are constantly oppressed by the fear of death, will still
continue to put themselves at the mercy of doctors, in spite of all that
we might say against it. We venture to think, however, that there would
be at least a few who are willing to cure themselves of their diseases
by purely natural processes, so as to save themselves from all further
attacks; and such persons would surely find it worth while to follow the
simple directions we have given. Before concluding this book, we will
also give a few hints on maternity and the care of the child, as well as
some common accidents.

In the lower orders of the animal creation, the pangs of child-birth are
altogether unknown. The same should really be the case with perfectly
healthy women. In fact, most women in the country regard child-birth as
quite an ordinary matter; they continue to do their normal work till
almost the last moment, and experience hardly any pain at the time of
delivery. Women employed in labour have also been known to be able very
often to return to work almost immediately after child-birth.

How comes it, then, that women in towns and cities have to endure so
much pain and suffering at the time of child-birth? And why is it that
they have to receive special treatment before and after the delivery?

The answer is simple and obvious. The women in towns have to lead an
unnatural life. Their food, their costume, their mode of life, in
general, offend against the natural laws of healthy living. Further,
besides becoming pregnant at a premature age, they are the sad victims
of men's lust even after pregnancy, as well as immediately after
child-birth, so that conception again takes place at too short an
interval. This is the state of utter misery and wretchedness in which
lakhs of our young girls and women find themselves in our country
to-day. To my mind, life under such conditions is little removed from
the tortures of hell. So long as men continue to behave so monstrously,
there can be no hope of happiness for our women. Many men put the blame
on the women's shoulders; but it is none of our business here to weigh
the relative guilt of man and woman in this matter. We are only
concerned to recognise the existence of the evil, and to point out its
cure. Let all married people realise, once for all, that, so long as
sexual enjoyment at a premature age, as well as during pregnancy and
soon after child-birth, does not cease to exist in our land, an easy and
painless child-birth must remain a wild dream. Women silently endure the
pangs of child-birth, as well as the subsequent period of confinement,
under the wrong notion that they are inevitable, but they fail to see
how their own ignorance and weakness of will make their children grow
weaker and droop from day to day. It is the clear duty of every man and
woman to try to avert this calamity at any cost. If even a single man
and woman should do their duty in this matter, to that extent it would
mean the elevation of the world. And this is clearly a matter in which
no man need or should wait for another's example.

It follows, then, that the very first duty of the husband is wholly to
abstain from all sexual intercourse with the wife from the moment of
conception. And great is the responsibility that rests on the wife
during the nine months that follow. She should be made to realise that
the character of the child to be born will depend entirely on her life
and conduct during this sacred period. If she fills her mind with love
for all things that are good and noble, the child will also manifest the
same disposition; if, on the other hand, she gives way to anger and
other evil passions, her child will necessarily inherit the same. Hence
in these nine months, she should engage herself constantly in good
works, free her mind from all fear and worry, give no room for any evil
thoughts or feelings, keep out all untruth from her life, and waste not
a moment in idle talk or deed. The child that is born of such a
mother,--how can it help being noble and strong?

The pregnant woman should, of course, keep her body as pure as her mind.
She should breathe plenty of fresh air, and eat only so much of plain
and wholesome food as she can easily digest. If she attends to all the
directions already given in the matter of diet etc., she would have no
need at all to seek the aid of doctors. If she suffers from
constipation, the proportion of olive oil in the diet should be
increased; and in cases of nausea or vomitting, she should take juice of
lime in water without sugar. All spices and condiments should be
scrupulously avoided.

The yearning for various new things that attends a woman in pregnancy
may be restrained by the use of "Kuhne Baths". This is also useful in
increasing her strength and vitality, and in easing the pangs of
child-birth. It is also necessary to steel her mind against such
yearnings by nipping in the bud each desire as it comes. The parents
should be constantly mindful of the welfare of the child in the womb.

It is also the husband's duty during this period to refrain from all
wranglings with his wife, and to conduct himself in such a way as to
make her cheerful and happy. She should be relieved of the heavier
duties of household management, and made to walk for some time every day
in fresh air. And on no account should she be given any drugs or
medicines during the period.




CHAPTER IX

CARE OF THE CHILD


We do not propose in this chapter to describe the duties of a midwife or
wet nurse, but only to point out how the child should be cared for after
birth. Those who have read the foregoing chapters need not be told how
injurious it is to keep the mother during the period of confinement in a
dark and ill-ventilated closet and to make her lie on a dirty bed with a
fire underneath. These practices, however time-honoured they may be, are
nevertheless fraught with dangerous consequences. No doubt, during the
cold season, the mother should be kept warm, but this is best done by
using good blankets. If the apartment is too cold and a fire has to be
kept, it must be lighted outside and only brought in when all the smoke
has disappeared, and even then it should not be kept under the cot on
which she lies. Warmth may also be given by keeping bottles of hot water
on the bed. All the clothes and sheets should be thoroughly cleansed
after child-birth, and before being used again.

As the health of the child will depend entirely on that of the mother,
special attention must be paid to her diet and mode of living. If she is
fed on wheat, with plenty of good fruits like the plantain, and olive
oil she would feel warm and strong, and have plenty of milk. Olive oil
gives aperient properties to the mother's milk, and thus serves to keep
the child free from constipation. If the child is unwell, attention must
be turned to the state of the mother's health. Administering drugs to
the child is as good as murdering it, for the child with its delicate
constitution, easily succumbs to their poisonous effects. Hence the
medicine should be administered to the mother, so that its beneficial
properties may be transmitted to the child through her milk. If the
child suffers, as it often does, from cough or loose bowels, there is no
cause for alarm; we should wait for a day or so, and try to get at the
root of the trouble, and then remove it. Making fuss over it and falling
into a panic only makes matters worse.

The child should invariably be bathed in tepid water. Its clothing
should be as little as possible; for a few months it is best to have
none at all. The child should be laid on a thin soft white sheet and
covered with a warm cloth. This will obviate the need for the use of
shirts, prevent the clothes from getting dirty, and make the child hardy
and strong. A fine piece of cloth folded into four should be placed over
the navel-string, and kept in position by a band over it. The practice
of tying a thread to the navel-string and hanging it round the neck is
highly injurious. The navel-band should be kept loose. If the part round
the navel be moist, fine well-sifted flour may be gently applied over
it.

As long as the supply of the mother's milk is sufficient, the child
should be fed exclusively on it; but, when it gets insufficient, fried
wheat well powdered, and mixed with hot water and a little of jaggery,
may be used as a substitute with quite good results. Half a plantain
well mashed and mixed with half a spoonful of olive oil is also
particularly beneficial. If cow's milk has to be given, it should at
first be mixed with water in the proportion of three to one, and then
heated until it just begins to boil, when a little of pure jaggery
should also be added. The use of sugar instead of jaggery is harmful.
The child should gradually be accustomed to a fruit-diet, so that its
blood may be kept pure from the very beginning, and it may grow manly
and bright. Those mothers who begin to feed their children on things
like rice, vegetables and _dhall_, as soon as or even before its teeth
have appeared, are doing them infinite harm. Needless to say, coffee and
tea should be strictly eschewed.

When the child has grown big enough to walk, it may be clothed with
_kurta_ and the like, but its feet should still be kept bare, so that it
may be free to roam about at will. The use of shoes prevents the free
circulation of blood and the development of hardy feet and legs.
Dressing the child in silk or lace cloths, with cap and coat, and
ornaments, is a barbarous practice. Our attempt to enhance by such
ridiculous means the beauty that Nature has given, only bespeaks our
vanity and ignorance. We should always remember that the education of
the child really begins from its very birth, and is best given by the
parents themselves. The use of threats and punishments, and the practice
of gorging the children with food, are an outrage on the principles of
true education. As the old saying has it, "like parent, like child";
hence the example and practice of the parents necessarily shape the
conduct and character of the children. If they are weaklings, their
children also grow up weak and delicate; if they talk clearly and
distinctly, so too will the children; but if they talk with a lisp, the
children will also learn to do so. If they use foul language, or are
addicted to bad habits, the children necessarily imitate them, and
develop into bad characters. In fact, there is no field of human
activity in which the child does not imitate the example of its parents.

We see, then, how heavy is the responsibility that rests on the
shoulders of parents. The very first duty of a man is to give such
education to his children as will make them honest and truthful, and an
ornament to the society in which they live. In the animal and vegetable
kingdoms, the offspring invariably takes after the parent. Man alone has
violated this law of Nature. It is only among men that we see such
incongruities as vicious children being born to virtuous parents, or
sickly ones to the healthy. This is due to the fact that we
thoughtlessly become parents when we are not mature enough to assume the
responsibilities of that position. It is the solemn duty of all virtuous
parents to train their children in noble ways. This requires that both
the father and the mother should themselves have received a sound
education. Where the parents lack such education and are aware of their
imperfections, it is their duty to entrust their children to the care of
proper guardians. It is foolish to expect that a high character can be
developed in the children by merely sending them to school. Where the
training given at school is inconsistent with that given at home, there
can be no hope of improvement for the child.

As already pointed out, the true education of the child begins from the
very moment of its birth. The rudiments of knowledge are imbibed almost
in the course of play. This, indeed, was the ancient tradition; the
practice of sending children to school is a growth of yesterday. If only
the parents would do their duty by their children, there would be no
limit to the possibilities of their advancement. But, in fact, we make
playthings of our children. We deck their persons with fine clothes and
jewels, we gorge them with sweetmeats, and spoil them from their very
infancy by fondlings and caresses. We let them go unchecked on their way
in our false affection for them. Being ourselves miserly, sensuous,
dishonest, slothful and uncleanly, is it to be wondered at that our
children should follow in our foot steps, and turn out weak and vicious,
selfish and slothful, sensuous and immoral? Let all thoughtful parents
ponder well over these matters; for on them depends the future of our
land.




