CHAPTER VIII

DRESS


Dress is also a matter of health to a certain extent. European ladies,
for instance, have such queer notions of beauty that their dress is
contrived with a view to straitening the waist and the feet, which, in
its turn, leads to several diseases. The feet of Chinese women are
deliberately straitened to such an extent that they are smaller even
than the feet of our little children, and, as a result, their health is
injured. These two instances show how the health may be affected by the
nature of the dress. But the choice of our dress does not rest always in
our hands, for we have perforce to adopt the manners of our elders. The
chief object of dress has been forgotten, and it has come to be regarded
as indicative of a man's religion, country, race and profession. In this
state of things, it is very difficult to discuss the question of dress
strictly from the point of view of health, but such a discussion must
necessarily do us good. Under the term dress, we include all such things
as boots and shoes, as well as jewellery and the like.

What is the chief object of dress? Man in his primitive state had no
dress at all; he went about naked, and exposing almost the whole body.
His skin was firm and strong, he was able to stand sun and shower, and
never once suffered from cold and kindred ailments. As has already been
explained, we inhale the air not only through the nostrils, but also
through the numberless pores of the skin. So when we cover the body with
clothing, we are preventing this natural function of the skin. But when
the people of the colder countries grew more and more indolent, they
began to feel the need to cover their bodies. They were no longer able
to stand the cold, and the use of dress came into being, until at length
it came to be looked upon not merely as a necessity, but as an ornament.
Subsequently it has also come to be regarded as an indication of
country, race etc.

In fact, Nature herself has provided an excellent covering for us in our
skin. The idea that the body looks unseemly in undress is absurd, for
the very best pictures are those that display the naked body. When we
cover up the most ordinary parts of our body, it is as though we felt
ashamed of them in their natural condition, and as though we found fault
with Nature's own arrangement. We think it a duty to go on multiplying
the trappings and ornaments for our body, as we grow richer and richer.
We 'adorn' our body in all sorts of hideous ways, and pride ourselves on
our handsomeness! If our eyes were not blinded by foolish habit, we
should see that the body looks most handsome only in its nakedness, as
it enjoys its best health only in that condition. Dress, indeed,
detracts from the natural beauty of the body. But, not content with
dress alone, man began to wear jewels also. This is mere madness, for
it is hard to understand how these jewels can add an iota to the body's
natural beauty. But women have gone beyond all bounds of sense or
decency in this matter. They are not ashamed to wear anklets which are
so heavy that they can hardly lift their feet, or to pierce their nose
and ears hideously for putting on rings, or to stud their wrists and
fingers with rings and bracelets of several kinds. These ornaments only
serve to help the accumulation of dirt in the body; there is indeed no
limit to the dirt on the nose and ears. We mistake this filthiness for
beauty, and throw money away to secure it; and we do not even shrink
from putting our lives at the mercy of thieves. There is no limit to the
pains we take to satisfy the silly notions of vanity that we have so
sedulously cultivated. Women, indeed, have become so infatuated that
they are not prepared to remove the ear-ring even if the ears are
diseased; even if the hand is swollen and suffering from frightful pain,
they would not remove the bracelets; and they are unwilling to remove
the ring from a swollen finger, since they imagine that their beauty
would suffer by so doing!

A thorough reform in dress is by no means an easy matter, but it is
surely possible for all of us to renounce our jewels and all superfluous
clothing. We may keep some few things for the sake of convention, and
throw off all the rest. Those who are free from the superstition that
dress is an ornament can surely effect many changes in their dress, and
keep themselves in good health.

Now-a-days the notion has gained ground that European dress is necessary
for maintaining our decency and prestige! This is not the place to
discuss this question in detail. Here it will be enough to point out
that, although the dress of Europeans might be good enough for the cold
countries of Europe, it is hopelessly unsuited to India. Indian dress,
alone, can be good for Indians, whether they be Hindu or Musalman. Our
dress being loose and open, air is not shut out; and being white for the
most part, it does not absorb the heat. Black dress feels hot, since all
the sun's rays are absorbed into it, and, in its turn, into the body.

The practice of covering the head with the turban has become quite
common with us. Nevertheless we should try to keep the head bare as
far as possible. To grow the hair, and to dress it by combing and
brushing, parting in the middle and so on, is nothing short of
barbarous. Dust and dirt, as well as nits and lice, accumulate in the
hair, and if a boil were to arise on the head, it cannot be properly
treated. Especially for those who use a turban, it would be stupid to
grow the hair.

The feet also are common agents of disease. The feet of those who wear
boots and shoes grow dirty, and begin to exude a lot of stinking
perspiration. So great is the stink that those who are sensitive to
smells will hardly be able to stand by the side of one who is removing
his shoes and socks. Our common names for the shoe speak of it as the
"protector of the feet" and the "enemy of the thorn" showing that shoes
should be worn only when we have to walk along a thorny path, or over
very cold or hot ground, and that only the soles should be covered, and
not the entire feet. And this purpose is served excellently well by the
_sandal_. Some people who are accustomed to the use of shoes often
suffer from headaches, of pain in the feet, or weakness of the body. Let
them try the experiment of walking with bare feet, and then they will at
once find out the benefit of keeping the feet bare, and free from sweat
by exposure to the air.




