X.

A SERMON OF THE MORAL CONDITION OF BOSTON.--PREACHED AT THE MELODEON, ON
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1849.

1 SAMUEL VII. 12.

    Hitherto hath the Lord helped us.


A man who has only the spirit of his age can easily be a popular man; if
he have it in an eminent degree, he must be a popular man in it: he has
its hopes and its fears; his trumpet gives a certain and well-known
sound; his counsel is readily appreciated; the majority is on his side.
But he cannot be a wise magistrate, a just judge, a competent critic, or
a profitable preacher. A man who has only the spirit of a former age can
be none of these four things; and not even a popular man. He remembers
when he ought to forecast, and compares when he ought to act; he cannot
appreciate the age he lives in, nor have a fellow-feeling with it. He
may easily obtain the pity of his age, not its sympathy or its
confidence. The man who has the spirit of his own, and also that of
some future age, is alone capable of becoming a wise magistrate, a just
judge, a competent critic, and a profitable preacher. Such a man looks
on passing events somewhat as the future historian will do, and sees
them in their proportions, not distorted; sees them in their connection
with great general laws, and judges of the falling rain not merely by
the bonnets it may spoil and the pastime it disturbs, but by the grass
and corn it shall cause to grow. He has hopes and fears of his own, but
they are not the hopes and fears of men about him; his trumpet cannot
give a welcome or well-known sound, nor his counsel be presently heeded.
Majorities are not on his side, nor can he be a popular man.

To understand our present moral condition, to be able to give good
counsel thereon, you must understand the former generation, and have
potentially the spirit of the future generation; must appreciate the
past, and yet belong to the future. Who is there that can do this? No
man will say, "I can." Conscious of the difficulty, and aware of my own
deficiencies in all these respects, I will yet endeavor to speak of the
moral condition of Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

First, I will speak of the actual moral condition of Boston, as
indicated by the morals of Trade. In a city like Rome, you must first
feel the pulse of the church, in St. Petersburg that of the court, to
determine the moral condition of those cities. Now trade is to Boston
what the church is to Rome and the imperial court to St. Petersburg: it
is the pendulum which regulates all the common and authorized machinery
of the place; it is an organization of the public conscience. We care
little for any Pius the Ninth, or Nicholas the First; the dollar is our
emperor and pope, above all the parties in the State, all sects in the
church, lord paramount over both, its spiritual and temporal power not
likely to be called in question; revolt from what else we may, we are
loyal still to that.

A little while ago, in a sermon of riches, speaking of the character of
trade in Boston, I suggested that men were better than their reputation
oftener than worse; that there were a hundred honest bargains to one
that was dishonest. I have heard severe strictures from friendly
tongues, on that statement, which gave me more pain than any criticism I
have received before. The criticism was, that I overrated the honesty of
men in trade. Now, it is a small thing to be convicted of an error--a
just thing and a profitable to have it detected and exposed; but it is a
painful thing to find you have overrated the moral character of your
townsmen. However, if what I said be not true as history, I hope it will
become so as prophecy; I doubt not my critics will help that work.

Love of money is out of proportion to love of better things--to love of
justice, of truth, of a manly character developing itself in a manly
life. Wealth is often made the end to live for; not the means to live
by, and attain a manly character. The young man of good abilities does
not commonly propose it to himself to be a noble man, equipped with all
the intellectual and moral qualities which belong to that, and capable
of the duties which come thereof. He is satisfied if he can become a
rich man. It is the highest ambition of many a youth in this town to
become one of the rich men of Boston; to have the social position which
wealth always gives, and nothing else in this country can commonly
bestow. Accordingly, our young men that are now poor, will sacrifice
every thing to this one object; will make wealth the end, and will
become rich without becoming noble. But wealth without nobleness of
character is always vulgar. I have seen a clown staring at himself in
the gorgeous mirror of a French palace, and thought him no bad emblem of
many an ignoble man at home, surrounded by material riches which only
reflected back the vulgarity of their owner.

Other young men inherit wealth, but seldom regard it as a means of power
for high and noble ends, only as the means of selfish indulgence;
unneeded means to elevate yet more their self-esteem. Now and then you
find a man who values wealth only as an instrument to serve mankind
withal. I know some such men; their money is a blessing akin to genius,
a blessing to mankind, a means of philanthropic power. But such men are
rare in all countries, perhaps a little less so in Boston than in most
other large trading towns; still, exceeding rare. They are sure to meet
with neglect, abuse, and perhaps with scorn; if they are men of eminent
ability, superior culture, and most elevated moral aims, set off, too,
with a noble and heroic life, they are sure of meeting with eminent
hatred. I fear the man most hated in this town would be found to be some
one who had only sought to do mankind some great good, and stepped
before his age too far for its sympathy. Truth, Justice, Humanity, are
not thought in Boston to have come of good family; their followers are
not respectable. I am not speaking to blame men, only to show the fact;
we may meddle with things too high for us, but not understand nor
appreciate.

Now this disproportionate love of money appears in various ways. You see
it in the advantage that is taken of the feeblest, the most ignorant,
and the most exposed classes in the community. It is notorious that they
pay the highest prices, the dearest rents, and are imposed upon in their
dealings oftener than any other class of men; so the raven and the
hooded crow, it is said, seek out the sickliest sheep to pounce upon.
The fact that a man is ignorant, poor, and desperate, furnishes to many
men an argument for defrauding the man. It is bad enough to injure any
man; but to wrong an ignorant man, a poor and friendless man; to take
advantage of his poverty or his ignorance, and to get his services or
his money for less than a fair return--that is petty baseness under
aggravated circumstances, and as cowardly as it is mean. You are now and
then shocked at rich men telling of the arts by which they got their
gold--sometimes of their fraud at home, sometimes abroad, and a good man
almost thinks there must be a curse on money meanly got at first, though
it falls to him by honest inheritance.

This same disproportionate love of money appears in the fact that men,
not driven by necessity, engage in the manufacture, the importation, and
the sale of an article which corrupts and ruins men by hundreds; which
has done more to increase poverty, misery, and crime than any other one
cause whatever; and, as some think, more than all other causes whatever.
I am not speaking of men who aid in any just and proper use of that
article, but in its ruinous use. Yet such men, by such a traffic, never
lose their standing in society, their reputation in trade, their
character in the church. A good many men will think worse of you for
being an Abolitionist; men have lost their place in society by that
name; even Dr. Channing "hurt his usefulness" and "injured his
reputation" by daring to speak against that sin of the nation; but no
man loses caste in Boston by making, importing, and selling the cause
of ruin to hundreds of families--though he does it with his eyes open,
knowing that he ministers to crime and to ruin! I am told that large
quantities of New England rum have already been sent from this city to
California; it is notorious that much of it is sent to the nations of
Africa--if not from Boston, at least from New England--as an auxiliary
in the slave-trade. You know with what feelings of grief and indignation
a clergyman of this city saw that characteristic manufacture of his town
on the wharves of a Mahometan city. I suppose there are not ten
ministers in Boston who would not "get into trouble," as the phrase is,
if they were to preach against intemperance, and the causes that produce
intemperance, with half so much zeal as they innocently preach
"regeneration" and a "form of piety" which will never touch a single
corner of the earth. As the minister came down, the Spirit of Trade
would meet him on the pulpit stairs to warn him: "Business is business;
religion is religion; business is ours, religion yours; but if you make
or even allow religion to interfere with our business, then it will be
the worse for you--that is all!" You know it is not a great while since
we drove out of Boston the one Unitarian minister who was a fearless
apostle of temperance.[36] His presence here was a grief to that "form
of piety;" a disturbance to trade. Since then the peace of the churches
has not been much disturbed by the preaching of temperance. The effect
has been salutary; no Unitarian minister has risen up to fill that
place!

This same disproportionate love of money appears in the fact, that the
merchants of Boston still allow colored seamen to be taken from their
ships and shut up in the jails of another State. If they cared as much
for the rights of man as for money, as much for the men who sail the
ship as for the cargo it carries, I cannot think there would be brass
enough in South Carolina, or all the South, to hold another freeman of
Massachusetts in bondage, merely for the color of his skin. No doubt, a
merchant would lose his reputation in this city by engaging directly in
the slave-trade, for it is made piracy by the law of the land.[37] But
did any one ever lose his reputation by taking a mortgage on slaves as
security for a debt; by becoming, in that way or by inheritance, the
owner of slaves, and still keeping them in bondage?

You shall take the whole trading community of Boston, rich and poor,
good and bad, study the phenomena of trade as astronomers the phenomena
of the heavens, and from the observed facts, by the inductive method of
philosophy, construct the ethics of trade, and you will find one great
maxim to underlie the whole: Money must be made. Money-making is to the
ethics of trade what attraction is to the material world; what truth is
to the intellect, and justice in morals. Other things must yield to
that; that to nothing. In the effort to comply with this universal law
of trade, many a character gives way; many a virtue gets pushed aside;
the higher, nobler qualities of a man are held in small esteem.

This characteristic of the trading class appears in the thought of the
people as well as their actions. You see it in the secular literature of
our times; in the laws, even in the sermons; nobler things give way to
love of gold. So in an ill-tended garden, in some bed where violets
sought to open their fragrant bosoms to the sun, have I seen a cabbage
come up and grow apace, with thick and vulgar stalk, with coarse and
vulgar leaves, with rank unsavory look; it thrust aside the little
violet, which, underneath that impenetrable leaf, lacking the morning
sunshine and the dew of night, faded and gave up its tender life; but
above the grave of the violet there stood the cabbage, green,
expanding, triumphant, and all fearless of the frost. Yet the cabbage
also had its value and its use.

There are men in Boston, some rich, some poor, old and young, who are
free from this reproach; men that have a well-proportioned love of
money, and make the pursuit thereof an effort for all the noble
qualities of a man. I know some such men, not very numerous anywhere,
men who show that the common business of life is the place to mature
great virtues in; that the pursuit of wealth, successful or not, need
hinder the growth of no excellence, but may promote all manly life. Such
men stand here as violets among the cabbages, making a fragrance and a
loveliness all their own; attractive anywhere, but marvellous in such a
neighborhood as that.

       *       *       *       *       *

Look next on the morals of Boston, as indicated by the Newspapers, the
daily and the weekly press. Take the whole newspaper literature of
Boston, cheap and costly, good and bad, study it all as a whole, and by
the inductive method construct the ethics of the press, and here you
find no signs of a higher morality in general than you found in trade.
It is the same centre about which all things gravitate here as there.
But in the newspapers the want of great principles is more obvious, and
more severely felt than in trade--the want of justice, of truth, of
humanity, of sympathy with man. In trade you meet with signs of great
power; the highway of commerce bears marks of giant feet. Our newspapers
seem chiefly in the hands of little men, whose cunning is in a large
ratio to their wisdom or their justice. You find here little ability,
little sound learning, little wise political economy; of lofty morals
almost nothing at all. Here, also, the dollar is both Pope and King;
right and truth are vassals, not much esteemed, nor over-often called to
pay service to their Lord, who has other soldiers with more pliant neck
and knee.

A newspaper is an instrument of great importance; all men read it; many
read nothing else; some it serves as reason and conscience too: in lack
of better, why not? It speaks to thousands every day on matters of great
moment--on matters of morals, of politics, of finance. It relates daily
the occurrences of our land, and of all the world. All men are affected
by it; hindered or helped. To many a man his morning paper represents
more reality than his morning prayer. There are many in a community like
this who do not know what to say--I do not mean what to think,
thoughtful men know what to think--about any thing till somebody tells
them; yet they must talk, for "the mouth goes always." To such a man a
newspaper is invaluable; as the idolater in the Judges had "a Levite to
his priest," so he has a newspaper to his reason or his conscience, and
can talk to the day's end. An able and humane newspaper would get this
class of persons into good habits of speech, and do them a service,
inasmuch as good habits of speech are better than bad.

One portion of this literature is degrading; it seems purposely so, as
if written by base men, for base readers, to serve base ends. I know not
which is most depraved thereby, the taste or the conscience. Obscene
advertisements are there, meant for the licentious eye; there are
loathsome details of vice, of crime, of depravity, related with the
design to attract, yet so disgusting that any but a corrupt man must
revolt from them; there are accounts of the appearance of culprits in
the lower courts, of their crime, of their punishment; these are related
with an impudent flippancy, and a desire to make sport of human
wretchedness and perhaps depravity, which amaze a man of only the
average humanity. We read of Judge Jeffreys and the bloody assizes in
England, one hundred and sixty years ago, but never think there are in
the midst of us men who, like that monster, can make sport of human
misery; but for a cent you can find proof that the race of such is not
extinct. If a penny-a-liner were to go into a military hospital, and
make merry at the sights he saw there, at the groans he heard, and the
keen smart his eye witnessed, could he publish his fiendish joy at that
spectacle--you would not say he was a man. If one mock at the crimes of
men, perhaps at their sins, at the infamous punishments they
suffer--what can you say of him?

It is a significant fact that the commercial newspapers, which of course
in such a town are the controlling newspapers, in reporting the European
news, relate first the state of the markets abroad, the price of cotton,
of consols, and of corn; then the health of the English queen, and the
movements of the nations. This is loyal and consistent; at Rome, the
journal used to announce first some tidings of the Pope, then of the
lesser dignitaries of the church, then of the discovery of new antiques,
and other matters of great pith and moment; at St. Petersburg, it was
first of the Emperor that the journal spoke; at Boston, it is legitimate
that the health of the dollar should be reported first of all.

The political newspapers are a melancholy proof of the low morality of
this town. You know what they will say of any party movement; that
measures and men are judged on purely party grounds. The country is
commonly put before mankind, and the party before the country. Which of
them in political matters pursues a course that is fair and just; how
many of them have ever advanced a great idea, or been constantly true to
a great principle of natural justice; how many resolutely oppose a great
wrong; how many can be trusted to expose the most notorious blunders of
their party; how many of them aim to promote the higher interests of
mankind? What servility is there in some of these journals, a cringing
to the public opinion of the party; a desire that "our efforts may be
appreciated!" In our politics every thing which relates to money is
pretty carefully looked after, though not always well looked after; but
what relates to the moral part of politics is commonly passed over with
much less heed. Men would compliment a senator who understood finance in
all its mysteries, and sneer at one who had studied as faithfully the
mysteries of war, or of slavery. The Mexican War tested the morality of
Boston, as it appears both in the newspapers and in trade, and showed
its true value.

There are some few exceptions to this statement; here and there is a
journal which does set forth the great ideas of this age, and is
animated by the spirit of humanity. But such exceptions only remind one
of the general rule.

In the sectarian journals the same general morality appears, but in a
worse form. What would have been political hatred in the secular prints,
becomes theological odium in the sectarian journals; not a mere hatred
in the name of party, but hatred in the name of God and Christ. Here is
less fairness, less openness, and less ability than there, but more
malice; the form, too, is less manly. What is there a strut or a
swagger, is here only a snivel. They are the last places in which you
need look for the spirit of true morality. Which of the sectarian
journals of Boston advocates any of the great reforms of the day? nay,
which is not an obstacle in the path of all manly reform? But let us not
dwell upon this, only look and pass by.

I am not about to censure the conductors of these journals, commercial,
political, or theological. I am no judge of any man's conscience. No
doubt they write as they can or must. This literature is as honest and
as able as "the circumstances will admit of." I look on it as an index
of our moral condition, for a newspaper literature always represents the
general morals of its readers. Grocers and butchers purchase only such
articles as their customers will buy; the editors of newspapers reveal
the moral character of their subscribers as well as their
correspondents. The transient literature of any age is always a good
index of the moral taste of the age. These two witnesses attest the
moral condition of the better part of the city; but there are men a good
deal lower than the general morals of trade and the press. Other
witnesses testify to their moral character.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let me now speak of your moral condition as indicated by the Poverty in
this city. I have so recently spoken on the subject of poverty in
Boston, and printed the sermon, that I will not now mention the misery
it brings. I will only speak of the moral condition which it indicates,
and the moral effect it has upon us.

In this age, poverty tends to barbarize men; it shuts them out from the
educational influences of our times. The sons of the miserable class
cannot obtain the intellectual, moral, and religious education which is
the birthright of the comfortable and the rich. There is a great gulf
between them and the culture of our times. How hard it must be to climb
up from a cellar in Cove Place to wisdom, to honesty, to piety. I know
how comfortable pharisaic self-righteousness can say, "I thank thee I am
not wicked like one of these," and God knows which is the best before
His eyes, the scorner, or the man he loathes and leaves to dirt and
destruction. I know this poverty belongs to the state of transition we
are now in, and can only be ended by our passing through this into a
better. I see the medicinal effect of poverty, that with cantharidian
sting it drives some men to work, to frugality and thrift; that the
Irish has driven the American beggar out of the streets, and will shame
him out of the almshouse ere long. But there are men who have not force
enough to obey this stimulus; they only cringe and smart under its
sting. Such men are made barbarians by poverty, barbarians in body, in
mind and conscience, in heart and soul. There is a great amount of this
barbarism in Boston; it lowers the moral character of the place, as
icebergs in your harbor next June would chill the air all day.

The fact that such poverty is here, that so little is done by public
authority, or by the ablest men in the land, to remove the evil tree and
dig up its evil root; that amid all the wealth of Boston and all its
charity, there are not even comfortable tenements for the poor to be had
at any but a ruinous rent--that is a sad fact, and bears a sad testimony
to our moral state! Sometimes the spectacle of misery does good,
quickening the moral sense and touching the electric tie which binds all
human hearts into one great family; but when it does not lead to this
result, then it debases the looker-on. To know of want, of misery, of
all the complicated and far-extended ill they bring; to hear of this,
and to see it in the streets; to have the money to alleviate, and yet
not to alleviate; the wisdom to devise a cure therefor, and yet make no
effort towards it--that is to be yourself debased and barbarized. I have
often thought, in seeing the poverty of London, that the daily spectacle
of such misery did more in a year to debauch the British heart than all
the slaughter at Waterloo. I know that misery has called out heroic
virtue in some men and women, and made philanthropists of such as
otherwise had been only getters and keepers of gain. We have noble
examples of that in the midst of us; but how many men has poverty trod
down into the mire; how many has this sight of misery hardened into cold
worldliness, the man frozen into mere respectability, its thin smile on
his lips, its ungodly contempt in his heart!

       *       *       *       *       *

Out of this barbarism of poverty there come three other forms of evil
which indicate the moral condition of Boston; of that portion named just
now as below the morals of trade and the press. These also I will call
up to testify.

       *       *       *       *       *

One is Intemperance. This is a crime against the body; it is felony
against your own frame. It makes a schism amongst your own members. The
amount of it is fearfully great in this town. Some of our most wealthy
citizens, who rent their buildings for the unlawful sale of rum to be
applied to an intemperate abuse, are directly concerned in promoting
this intemperance; others, rich but less wealthy, have sucked their
abundance out of the bones of the poor, and are actual manufacturers of
the drunkard and the criminal. Here are numerous distilleries owned, and
some of them conducted, I am told, by men of wealth. The fire thereof is
not quenched at all by day, and there is no night there; the worm dieth
not. There out of the sweetest plant which God has made to grow under a
tropic sun, men distil a poison the most baneful to mankind which the
world has ever known. The poison of the Borgias was celebrated once;
cold-hearted courtiers shivered at its name. It never killed many; those
with merciful swiftness. The poison of rum is yet worse; it yearly
murders thousands; kills them by inches, body and soul. Here are
respectable and wealthy men, men who this day sit down in a Christian
church and thank God for his goodness, with contrite hearts praise him
for that Son of Man who gave his life for mankind, and would gladly give
it to mankind; yet these men have ships on the sea to bring the poor
man's poison here, or bear it hence to other men as poor; have
distilleries on the land to make still yet more for the ruin of their
fellow Christians; have warehouses full of this plague, which "outvenoms
all the worms of Nile;" have shops which they rent for the illegal and
murderous sale of this terrible scourge. Do they not know the ruin which
they work; are they the only men in the land who have not heard of the
effects of intemperance? I judge them not, great God! I only judge
myself. I wish I could say, "They know not what they do;" but at this
day who does not know the effect of intemperance in Boston?

I speak not of the sale of ardent spirits to be used in the arts, to be
used for medicine, but of the needless use thereof; of their use to
damage the body and injure the soul of man. The chief of your police
informs me there are twelve hundred places in Boston, where this article
is sold to be drunk on the spot; illegally sold. The Charitable
Association of Mechanics, in this city, have taken the accumulated
savings of more than fifty years, and therewith built a costly
establishment, where intoxicating drink is needlessly but abundantly
sold! Low as the moral standard of Boston is, low as are the morals of
the press and trade, I had hoped better things of these men, who live in
the midst of hard-working laborers, and see the miseries of intemperance
all about them. But the dollar was too powerful for their temperance.

Here are splendid houses, where the rich man or the thrifty needlessly
drinks. Let me leave them; the evil Demon of Intemperance appears not
there; he is there, but under well-made garments, amongst educated men,
who are respected and still respect themselves. Amid merriment and song
the Demon appears not. He is there, gaunt, bony, and destructive, but so
elegantly clad, with manners so unoffending, you do not mark his face,
nor fear his steps. But go down to that miserable lane, where men
mothered by Misery and sired by Crime, where the sons of Poverty and the
daughters of Wretchedness, are huddled thick together, and you see this
Demon of Intemperance in all his ugliness. Let me speak soberly:
exaggeration is a figure of speech I would always banish from my
rhetoric, here, above all, where the fact is more appalling than any
fiction I could devise. In the low parts of Boston, where want abounds,
where misery abounds, intemperance abounds yet more, to multiply want,
to aggravate misery, to make savage what poverty has only made
barbarian; to stimulate passion into crime. Here it is not music and the
song which crown the bowl; it is crowned by obscenity, by oaths, by
curses, by violence, sometimes by murder. These twine the ivy round the
poor man's bowl; no, it is the Upas that they twine. Think of the
sufferings of the drunkard himself, of his poverty, his hunger and his
nakedness, his cold; think of his battered body; of his mind and
conscience, how they are gone. But is that all? Far from it. These
curses shall become blows upon his wife; that savage violence shall be
expended on his child. In his senses this man was a barbarian; there are
centuries of civilization betwixt him and cultivated men. But the man of
wealth, adorned with respectability and armed with science, harbors a
Demon in the street, a profitable Demon to the rich man who rents his
houses for such a use. The Demon enters our barbarian, who straightway
becomes a savage. In his fury he tears his wife and child. The law,
heedless of the greater culprits, the Demon, and the demon-breeder,
seizes our savage man and shuts him in the jail. Now he is out of the
tempter's reach; let us leave him; let us go to his home. His wife and
children still are there, freed from their old tormentor. Enter: look
upon the squalor, the filth, the want, the misery still left behind.
Respectability halts at the door with folded arms, and can no further
go. But charity, the love of man which never fails, enters even there;
enters to lift up the fallen, to cheer the despairing, to comfort and to
bless. Let us leave her there, loving the unlovely, and turn to other
sights.

In the streets, there are about nine hundred needy boys, and about two
hundred needy girls, the sons and daughters mainly of the intemperate;
too idle or too thriftless to work; too low and naked for the public
school. They roam about--the nomadic tribes of this town, the gipsies of
Boston--doing some chance work for a moment, committing some petty
theft. The temptations of a great city are before them.[38] Soon they
will be impressed into the regular army of crime, to be stationed in
your jails, perhaps to die on your gallows. Such is the fate of the sons
of intemperance; but the daughters! their fate--let me not tell of that.

In your Legislature they have just been discussing a law against dogs,
for now and then a man is bitten and dies of hydrophobia. Perhaps there
are ten mad dogs in the State at this moment, and it may be that one man
in a year dies from the bite of such. Do the legislators know how many
shops there are in this town, in this State, which all the day and all
the year sell to intemperate men a poison that maddens with a
hydrophobia still worse? If there were a thousand mad dogs in the land,
if wealthy men had embarked a large capital in the importation or the
production of mad dogs, and if they bit and maddened and slew ten
thousand men in a year, do you believe your Legislature would discuss
that evil with such fearless speech? Then you are very young, and know
little of the tyranny of public opinion, and the power of money to
silence speech, while justice still comes in, with feet of wool, but
iron hands.[39]

There is yet another witness to the moral condition of Boston. I mean
Crime. Where there is such poverty and intemperance, crime may be
expected to follow. I will not now dwell upon this theme, only let me
say, that in 1848, three thousand four hundred and thirty-five grown
persons, and six hundred and seventy-one minors were lawfully sentenced
to your jail and House of Correction; in all, four thousand one hundred
and six; three thousand four hundred and forty-four persons were
arrested by the night police, and eleven thousand one hundred and
seventy-eight were taken into custody by the watch; at one time there
were one hundred and forty-four in the common jail. I have already
mentioned that more than a thousand boys and girls, between six and
sixteen, wander as vagrants about your streets; two hundred and
thirty-eight of these are children of widows, fifty-four have neither
parent living. It is a fact known to your police, that about one
thousand two hundred shops are unlawfully open for retailing the means
of intemperance. These are most thickly strown in the haunts of poverty.
On a single Sunday the police found three hundred and thirteen shops in
the full experiment of unblushing and successful crime. These rum-shops
are the factories of crime; the raw material is furnished by poverty; it
passes into the hands of the rum-seller, and is soon ready for delivery
at the mouth of the jail, or the foot of the gallows. It is notorious
that intemperance is the proximate cause of three fourths of the crime
in Boston; yet it is very respectable to own houses and rent them for
the purpose of making men intemperate; nobody loses his standing by
that. I am not surprised to hear of women armed with knives, and boys
with six-barrelled revolvers in their pockets; not surprised at the
increase of capital trials.

       *       *       *       *       *

One other matter let me name--I call it the Crime against Woman. Let us
see the evil in its type, its most significant form. Look at that thing
of corruption and of shame, almost without shame, whom the judge, with
brief words, despatches to the jail. That was a woman once. No! At
least, she was once a girl. She had a mother; perhaps, beyond the hills,
a mother, in her evening prayer, remembers still this one child more
tenderly than all the folded flowers that slept the sleep of infancy
beneath her roof; remembers, with a prayer, her child, whom the world
curses after it has made corrupt! Perhaps she had no such mother, but
was born in the filth of some reeking cellar, and turned into the mire
of the streets, in her undefended innocence, to mingle with the
coarseness, the intemperance, and the crime of a corrupt metropolis. In
either case, her blood is on our hands. The crime which is so terribly
avenged on woman--think you that God will hold men innocent of that? But
on this sign of our moral state, I will not long delay.

       *       *       *       *       *

Put all these things together: the character of trade, of the press;
take the evidence of poverty, intemperance, and crime--it all reveals a
sad state of things. I call your attention to these facts. We are all
affected by them more or less; all more or less accountable for them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hitherto I have only stated facts, without making comparisons. Let me
now compare the present condition of Boston with that in former times.
Every man has an ideal, which is better than the actual facts about him.
Some men amongst us put that ideal in times past, and maintain it was
then an historical fact; they are commonly men who have little knowledge
of the past, and less hope for the future; a good deal of reverence for
old precedents, little for justice, truth, humanity; little confidence
in mankind, and a great deal of fear of new things. Such men love to
look back and do homage to the past, but it is only a past of fancy, not
of fact, they do homage to. They tell us we have fallen; that the golden
age is behind us, and the garden of Eden; ours are degenerate days; the
men are inferior, the women less winning, less witty, and less wise, and
the children are an untoward generation, a disgrace, not so much to
their fathers, but certainly to their grandsires. Sometimes this is the
complaint of men who have grown old; sometimes of such as seem to be old
without growing so, who seem born to the gift of age, without the grace
of youth.

Other men have a similar ideal, commonly a higher one, but they place
it in the future, not as an historical reality, which has been, and is
therefore to be worshipped, but one which is to be made real by dint of
thought, of work. I have known old persons who stoutly maintained that
the pears and the plums and the peaches, are not half so luscious as
they were many years ago; so they bewailed the existing race of fruits,
complaining of "the general decay" of sweetness, and brought over to
their way of speech some aged juveniles. Meanwhile, men born young, set
themselves to productive work, and, instead of bewailing an old fancy,
realized a new ideal in new fruits, bigger, fairer, and better than the
old. It is to men of this latter stamp, that we must look for criticism
and for counsel. The others can afford us a warning, if not by their
speech, at least by their example.

It is very plain, that the people of New England are advancing in
wealth, in intelligence, and in morality; but in this general march,
there are little apparent pauses, slight waverings from side to side;
some virtues seem to straggle from the troop; some to lag behind, for it
is not always the same virtue that leads the van. It is with the flock
of virtues, as with wild fowl--the leaders alternate. It is probable
that the morals of New England in general, and of Boston in special, did
decline somewhat from 1775 to 1790; there were peculiar but well-known
causes, which no longer exist, to work that result. In the previous
fifteen years, it seems probable that there had been a rapid increase of
morality, through the agency of causes equally peculiar and transient.
To estimate the moral growth or decline of this town, we must not take
either period as a standard. But take the history of Boston, from 1650
to 1700, from 1700 to 1750, thence to 1800, and you will see a gradual,
but a decided progress in morality in each of these periods. It is not
easy to prove this in a short sermon; I can only indicate the points of
comparison, and state the general fact. From 1800 to 1849, this progress
is well marked, indisputable, and very great. Let us look at this a
little in detail, pursuing the same order of thought as before.

It is generally conceded that the moral character of trade has improved
a good deal within fifty or sixty years. It was formerly a common
saying, that "If a Yankee merchant were to sell salt water at high-tide,
he would yet cheat in the measure." The saying was founded on the
conduct of American traders abroad, in the West Indies and elsewhere.
Now things have changed for the better. I have been told by competent
authority, that two of the most eminent merchants of Boston, fifty or
sixty years ago, who conducted each a large business, and left very
large fortunes, were notoriously guilty of such dishonesty in trade, as
would now drive any man from the Exchange. The facility with which notes
are collected by the banks, compared to the former method of
collection, is itself a proof of an increase of practical honesty; the
law for settling the affairs of a bankrupt tells the same thing. Now
this change has not come from any special effort, made to produce this
particular effect, and, accordingly, it indicates the general moral
progress of the community.

The general character of the press, since the end of the last century,
has decidedly improved, as any one may convince himself of, by comparing
the newspapers of that period, with the present; yet a publicity is
now-a-days given to certain things which were formerly kept more closely
from the public eye and ear. This circumstance sometimes produces an
apparent increase of wrong-doing, while it is only an increased
publicity thereof. Political servility, and political rancor, are
certainly bad enough, and base enough, at this day, but not long ago
both were baser and worse; to show this, I need only appeal to the
memories of men before me, who can recollect the beginning of the
present century. Political controversies are conducted with less
bitterness than before; honesty is more esteemed; private worth is more
respected. It is not many years since the Federal party, composed of men
who certainly were an honor to their age, supported Aaron Burr, for the
office of President of the United States; a man whose character, both
public and private, was notoriously marked with the deepest infamy.
Political parties are not very puritanical in their virtue at this day;
but I think no party would now for a moment accept such a man as Mr.
Burr, for such a post.[40] There is another pleasant sign of this
improvement in political parties: last autumn the victorious party, in
two wards of this city, made a beautiful demonstration of joy, at their
success in the Presidential election, and on Thanksgiving day, and on
Christmas, gave a substantial dinner to each poor person in their
section of the town. It was a trifle, but one pleasant to remember.

Even the theological journals have improved within a few years. I know
it has been said that some of them are not only behind their times,
which is true, "but behind all times." It is not so. Compared with the
sectarian writings--tracts, pamphlets, and hard-bound volumes of an
earlier day--they are human, enlightened, and even liberal.

In respect to poverty, there has been a great change for the better.
However, it may be said in general, that a good deal of the poverty,
intemperance, and crime, is of foreign origin; we are to deal with it,
to be blamed if we allow it to continue; not at all to be blamed for its
origin. I know it is often said, "The poor are getting poorer, and soon
will become the mere vassals of the rich;" that "The past is full of
discouragement; the future full of fear." I cannot think so. I feel
neither the discouragement nor the fear. It should be remembered that
many of the Fathers of New England owned the bodies of their laborers
and domestics! The condition of the working man has improved, relatively
to the wealth of the land, ever since. The wages of any kind of labor,
at this day, bear a higher proportion to the things needed for comfort
and convenience, than ever before for two hundred years.

If you go back one hundred years, I think you will find that, in
proportion to the population and wealth of this town or this State,
there was considerably more suffering from native poverty then than now.
I have not, however, before me the means of absolute proof of this
statement; but this is plain, that now public charity is more extended,
more complete, works in a wiser mode, and with far more beneficial
effect; and that pains are now taken to uproot the causes of
poverty--pains which our fathers never thought of. In proof of this
increase of charity, and even of the existence of justice, I need only
refer to the numerous benevolent societies of modern origin, and to the
establishment of the ministry at large, in this city--the latter the
work of Unitarian philanthropy. Some other churches have done a little
in this good work. But none have done much. I am told the Catholic
clergy of this city do little to remove the great mass of poverty,
intemperance, and crime among their followers. I know there are some few
honorable exceptions, and how easy it is for Protestant hostility to
exaggerate matters; still, I fear the reproach is but too well founded,
that the Catholic clergy are not vigilant shepherds, who guard their
sacred flock against the terrible wolves which prowl about the fold. I
wish to find myself mistaken here.

Some of you remember the "Old Almshouse" in Park-street; the condition
and character of its inmates; the effect of the treatment they there
received. I do not say that our present attention to the subject of
poverty is any thing to boast of--certainly we have done little in
comparison with what common sense demands; very little in comparison
with what Christianity enjoins; still it is something; in comparison
with "the good old times," it is much that we are doing.

There has been a great change for the better in the matter of
intemperance in drinking. Within thirty years, the progress towards
sobriety is surprising, and so well marked and obvious that to name it
is enough. Probably there is not a "respectable" man in Boston who would
not be ashamed to have been seen drunk yesterday; even to have been
drunk in ever so private a manner; not one who would willingly get a
friend or a guest in that condition to-day! Go back a few years, and it
brought no public reproach, and, I fear, no private shame. A few years
further back, it was not a rare thing, on great occasions, for the
fathers of the town to reel and stagger from their intemperance--the
magistrates of the land voluntarily furnishing the warning which a
romantic historian says the Spartans forced upon their slaves.

It is easy to praise the Fathers of New England; easier to praise them
for virtues they did not possess, than to discriminate, and fairly judge
those remarkable men. I admire and venerate their characters, but they
were rather hard drinkers; certainly a love of cold water was not one of
their loves. Let me mention a fact or two: it is recorded in the Probate
office, that in 1678, at the funeral of Mrs. Mary Norton, widow of the
celebrated John Norton, one of the ministers of the first church in
Boston, fifty-one gallons and a half of the best Malaga wine were
consumed by the "mourners;" in 1685, at the funeral of the Rev. Thomas
Cobbett, minister at Ipswich, there were consumed one barrel of wine and
two barrels of cider--"and as it was cold," there was "some spice and
ginger for the cider." You may easily judge of the drunkenness and riot
on occasions less solemn than the funeral of an old and beloved
minister. Towns provided intoxicating drink at the funeral of their
paupers; in Salem, in 1728, at the funeral of a pauper, a gallon of wine
and another of cider are charged as "incidental;" the next year, six
gallons of rum on a similar occasion; in Lynn, in 1711, the town
furnished "half a barrel of cider for the Widow Dispaw's funeral."
Affairs had come to such a pass, that in 1742, the General Court forbade
the use of wine and rum at funerals. In 1673, Increase Mather published
his "Wo unto Drunkards." Governor Winthrop complains, in 1630, that "The
young folk gave themselves to drink hot waters very immoderately."[41]

But I need not go back so far. Who that is fifty years of age, does not
remember the aspect of Boston on public days; on the evening of such
days? Compare the "Election day," or the Fourth of July, as they were
kept thirty or forty years ago, with such days in our time. Some of you
remember the celebration of Peace, in 1783; many of you can recollect
the similar celebration in 1815. On each of those days the inhabitants
from the country towns came here to rejoice with the citizens of this
town. Compare the riot, the confusion, the drunkenness then, with the
order, decorum, and sobriety of the celebration at the introduction of
water last autumn, and you see what has been done in sixty or seventy
years for temperance.

A great deal of the crime in Boston is of foreign origin: of the one
thousand and sixty-six children vagrant in your streets, only one
hundred and three had American parents; of the nine hundred and
thirty-three persons in the House of Correction here, six hundred and
sixteen were natives of other countries; I know not how many were the
children of Irishmen, who had not enjoyed the advantages of our
institutions. I cannot tell how many rum-shops are kept by
foreigners.[42] Now in Ireland no pains have been taken with the
education of the people by the Government; very little by the Catholic
church; indeed, the British government for a long time rendered it
impossible for the church to do any thing in this way. For more than
seventy years, in that Catholic country, none but a Protestant could
keep a school or even be a tutor in a private family. A Catholic
schoolmaster was to be transported, and, if he returned, adjudged guilty
of high treason, barbarously put to death, drawn and quartered. A
Protestant schoolmaster is as repulsive to a Catholic, as a Mahometan
schoolmaster or an Atheist would be to you. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the Irish are ignorant, and, as a consequence thereof,
are idle, thriftless, poor, intemperate, and barbarian; not to be
wondered at if they conduct like wild beasts when they are set loose in
a land where we think the individual must be left free to the greatest
extent. Of course they will violate our laws, those wild bisons leaping
over the fences which easily restrain the civilized domestic cattle;
will commit the great crimes of violence, even capital offences, which
certainly have increased rapidly of late. This increase of foreigners is
prodigious: more than half the children in your public schools are
children of foreigners; there are more Catholic than Protestant children
born in Boston.

With the general and unquestionable advance of morality, some offences
are regarded as crimes which were not noticed a few years ago.
Drunkenness is an example of this. An Irishman in his native country
thinks little of beating another or being beaten; he brings his habits
of violence with him, and does not at once learn to conform to our laws.
Then, too, a good deal of crime which was once concealed is now brought
to light by the press, by the superior activity of the police; and yet,
after all that is said, it seems quite clear that what is legally called
crime and committed by Americans, has diminished a good deal in fifty
years. Such crime, I think, never bore so small a proportion to the
population, wealth, and activity of Boston, as now. Even if we take all
the offences committed by these strangers who have come amongst us, it
does not compare so very unfavorably as some allege with the "good old
times." I know men often look on the fathers of this colony as saints;
but in 1635, at a time when the whole State contained less than one
tenth of the present population of Boston, and they were scattered from
Weymouth Fore-River to the Merrimack, the first grand jury ever
impanelled at Boston "found" a hundred bills of indictment at their
first coming together.

If you consider the circumstances of the class who commit the greater
part of the crimes which get punished, you will not wonder at the
amount. The criminal court is their school of morals; the constable and
judge are their teachers; but under this rude tuition I am told that the
Irish improve and actually become better. The children who receive the
instruction of our public schools, imperfect as they are, will be better
than their fathers; and their grandchildren will have lost all trace of
their barbarian descent.

I have often spoken of our penal law as wrong in its principle, taking
it for granted that the ignorant and miserable men who commit crime do
it always from wickedness, and not from the pressure of circumstances
which have brutalized the man; wrong in its aim, which is to take
vengeance on the offender, and not to do him a good in return for the
evil he has done; wrong in its method, which is to inflict a punishment
that is wholly arbitrary, and then to send the punished man, overwhelmed
with new disgrace, back to society, often made worse than before,--not
to keep him till we can correct, cure, and send him back a reformed man.
I would retract nothing of what I have often said of that; but not long
ago all this was worse; the particular statutes were often terribly
unjust; the forms of trial afforded the accused but little chance of
justice; the punishments were barbarous and terrible. The plebeian
tyranny of the Lord Brethren in New England was not much lighter than
the patrician despotism of the Lord Bishops in the old world, and was
more insulting. Let me mention a few facts, to refresh the memories of
those who think we are going to ruin, and can only save ourselves by
holding to the customs of our fathers, and of the "good old times." In
1631, a man was fined forty pounds, whipped on the naked back, both his
ears cut off, and then banished this colony, for uttering hard speeches
against the government and the church at Salem. In the first century of
the existence of this town, the magistrates could banish a woman because
she did not like the preaching, nor all the ministers, and told the
people why; they could whip women naked in the streets, because they
spoke reproachfully of the magistrates; they could fine men twenty
pounds, and then banish them, for comforting a man in jail before his
trial; they could pull down, with legal formality, the house of a man
they did not like; they could whip women at a cart's tail from Salem to
Rhode Island, for fidelity to their conscience; they could beat,
imprison, and banish men out of the land, simply for baptizing one
another in a stream of water, instead of sprinkling them from a dish;
they could crop the ears, and scourge the backs, and bore the tongues of
men, for being Quakers; yes, they could shut them in jails, could banish
them out of the colony, could sell them as slaves, could hang them on a
gallows, solely for worshipping God after their own conscience; they
could convulse the whole land, and hang some thirty or forty men for
witchcraft, and do all this in the name of God, and then sing psalms,
with most nasal twang, and pray by the hour, and preach--I will not say
how long, nor what, nor how! It is not yet one hundred years since two
slaves were judicially burnt alive, on Boston Neck, for poisoning their
master.

But why talk of days so old? Some of you remember when the pillory and
the whipping-post were a part of the public furniture of the law, and
occupied a prominent place in the busiest street in town. Some of you
have seen men and women scourged, naked, and bleeding, in State street;
have seen men judicially branded in the forehead with a hot iron, their
ears clipped off by the sheriff, and held up to teach humanity to the
gaping crowd of idle boys and vulgar men. A magistrate was once brought
into odium in Boston, for humanely giving back to his victim a part of
the ear he had officially shorn off, that the mutilated member might be
restored and made whole. How long is it since men sent their servants to
the "Workhouse," to be beaten "for disobedience," at the discretion of
the master? It is not long since the gallows was a public spectacle here
in the midst of us, and a hanging made a holiday for the rabble of this
city and the neighboring towns; even women came to see the
death-struggle of a fellow-creature, and formed the larger part of the
mob; many of you remember the procession of the condemned man sitting on
his coffin, a procession from the jail to the gallows, from one end of
the city to the other. I remember a public execution some fourteen or
fifteen years ago, and some of the students of theology at Cambridge, of
undoubted soundness in the Unitarian faith, came here to see men kill a
fellow-man!

Who can think of these things, and not see that a great progress has
been made in no long time. But if these things be not proof enough, then
consider what has been done here in this century for the reformation of
juvenile offenders; for the discharged convict; for the blind, the deaf,
and the dumb; for the insane, and now even for the idiot. Think of the
numerous Societies for the widows and orphans; for the seamen; the
Temperance Societies; the Peace Societies; the Prison Discipline
Society; the mighty movement against slavery, which, beginning with a
few heroic men who took the roaring lion of public opinion by the beard,
fearless of his roar, has gone on now, till neither the hardest nor the
softest courage in the State dares openly defend the unholy
institution. A philanthropic female physician delivers gratuitous
lectures on physiology to the poor of this city, to enable them to take
better care of their houses and their bodies; an unpretending man, for
years past, responsible to none but God, has devoted all his time and
his toil to the most despised class of men, and has saved hundreds from
the jail, from crime and ruin at the last. Here are many men and women
not known to the public, but known to the poor, who are daily
ministering to the wants of the body and the mind. Consider all these
things, and who can doubt that a great moral progress has been made? It
is not many years since we had white slaves, and a Scotch boy was
invoiced at fourteen pounds lawful money, in the inventory of an estate
in Boston. In 1630, Governor Dudley complains that some of the founders
of New England, in consequence of a famine, were obliged to set free one
hundred and eighty servants, "to our extreme loss," for they had cost
sixteen or twenty pounds apiece. Seventy years since, negro slavery
prevailed in Massachusetts, and men did not blush at the institution.
Think of the treatment which the leaders of the anti-slavery reform met
with but a few years ago, and you see what a progress has been made![43]

I have extenuated nothing of our condition; I have said the morals of
trade are low morals, and the morals of the press are low; that poverty
is a terrible evil to deal with, and we do not deal with it manfully;
that intemperance is a mournful curse, all the more melancholy when rich
men purposely encourage it; that here is an amount of crime which makes
us shudder to think of; that the voice of human blood cries out of the
ground against us. I disguise nothing of all this; let us confess the
fact, and, ugly as it is, look it fairly in the face. Still, our moral
condition is better than ever before. I know there are men who seem born
with their eyes behind, their hopes all running into memory; some who
wish they had been born long ago: they might as well; sure it is no
fault of theirs that they were not. I hear what they have to tell us.
Still, on the whole, the aspect of things is most decidedly encouraging;
for if so much has been done when men understood the matter less than
we, both cause and cure, how much more can be done for the future?

       *       *       *       *       *

What can we do to make things better?

I have so recently spoken of poverty that I shall say little now. A
great change will doubtless take place before many years in the
relations between capital and labor; a great change in the spirit of
society. I do not believe the disparity now existing between the wealth
of men has its origin in human nature, and therefore is to last for
ever; I do not believe it is just and right that less than one
twentieth of the people in the nation should own more than ten
twentieths of the property of the nation, unless by their own head, or
hands, or heart, they do actually create and earn that amount. I am not
now blaming any class of men; only stating a fact. There is a profound
conviction in the hearts of many good men, rich as well as poor, that
things are wrong; that there is an ideal right for the actual wrong; but
I think no man yet has risen up with ability to point out for us the
remedy of these evils, and deliver us from what has not badly been named
the Feudalism of Capital. Still, without waiting for the great man to
arise, we can do something with our littleness even now; the truant
children may be snatched from vagrancy, beggary, and ruin; tenements can
be built for the poor, and rented at a reasonable rate. It seems to me
that something more can be done in the way of providing employment for
the poor, or helping them to employment.

In regard to intemperance, I will not say we can end it by direct
efforts. So long as there is misery there will be continued provocation
to that vice, if the means thereof are within reach. I do not believe
there will be much more intemperance amongst well-bred men; among the
poor and wretched it will doubtless long continue. But if we cannot end,
we can diminish it, fast as we will. If rich men did not manufacture,
nor import, nor sell; if they would not rent their buildings for the
sale of intoxicating liquor for improper uses; if they did not by their
example favor the improper use thereof, how long do you think your
police would arrest and punish one thousand drunkards in the year? how
long would twelve hundred rum-shops disgrace your town? Boston is far
more sober, at least in appearance, than other large cities of America,
but it is still the headquarters of intemperance for the State of
Massachusetts. In arresting intemperance, two thirds of the poverty,
three fourths of the crime of this city would end at once, and an amount
of misery and sin which I have not the skill to calculate. Do you say we
cannot diminish intemperance, neither by law, nor by righteous efforts
without law? Oh, fie upon such talk. Come, let us be honest, and say we
do not wish to, not that we cannot. It is plain that in sixteen years we
can build seven great railroads radiating out of Boston, three or four
hundred miles long; that we can conquer the Connecticut and the
Merrimack, and all the lesser streams of New England; can build up
Lowell, and Chicopee, and Lawrence; why, in four years Massachusetts can
invest eight and fifty millions of dollars in railroads and
manufactures, and cannot prevent intemperance; cannot diminish it in
Boston! So there are no able men in this town! I am amazed at such talk,
in such a place, full of such men, surrounded by such trophies of their
work! When the churches preach and men believe that Mammon is not the
only God we are practically to serve; that it is more reputable to keep
men sober, temperate, comfortable, intelligent, and thriving, than it is
to make money out of other men's misery; more Christian, than to sell
and manufacture rum, to rent houses for the making of drunkards and
criminals, then we shall set about this business with the energy that
shows we are in earnest, and by a method which will do the work.

In the matter of crime, something can be done to give efficiency to the
laws. No doubt a thorough change must be made in the idea of criminal
legislation; vengeance must give way to justice, policemen become moral
missionaries, and jails moral hospitals, that discharge no criminal
until he is cured. It will take long to get the idea into men's minds.
You must encounter many a doubt, many a sneer, and expect many a
failure, too. Men who think they "know the world," because they know
that most men are selfish, will not believe you. We must wait for new
facts to convince such men. After the idea is established, it will take
long to organize it fittingly.

Much can be done for juvenile offenders, much for discharged convicts,
even now. We can pull down the gallows, and with it that loathsome
theological idea on which it rests,--the idea of a vindictive God. A
remorseless court, and careful police, can do much to hinder crime;[44]
but they cannot remove the causes thereof.

Last year, a good man, to whom the State was deeply indebted before,
suggested that a moral police should be appointed to look after
offenders; to see why they committed their crime; and if only necessity
compelled them, to seek out for them some employment, and so remove the
causes of crime in detail. The thought was worthy of the age, and of the
man. In the hands of a practical man, this thought might lead to good
results. A beginning has already been made in the right direction, by
establishing the State Reform School for Boys. It will be easy to
improve on this experiment, and conduct prisons for men on the same
scheme of correction and cure, not merely of punishment, in the name of
vengeance. But, after all, so long as poverty, misery, intemperance, and
ignorance continue, no civil police, no moral police, can keep such
causes from creating crime. What keeps you from a course of crime? Your
morality, your religion? Is it? Take away your property, your home, your
friends, the respect of respectable men; take away what you have
received from education, intellectual, moral, and religious, and how
much better would the best of us be than the men who will to-morrow be
huddled off to jail, for crimes committed in a dram-shop to-day? The
circumstances which have kept you temperate, industrious, respectable,
would have made nine tenths of the men in jail as good men as you are.

It is not pleasant to think that there are no amusements which lie level
to the poor, in this country. In Paris, Naples, Rome, Vienna, Berlin,
there are cheap pleasures for poor men, which yet are not low pleasures.
Here there are amusements for the comfortable and the rich, not too
numerous, rather too rare, perhaps, but none for the poor, save only the
vice of drunkenness; that is hideously cheap; the inward temptation
powerful; the outward occasion always at hand. Last summer, some
benevolent men treated the poor children of the city to a day of
sunshine, fresh air, and frolic in the fields. Once a year the children,
gathered together by another benevolent man, have a floral procession in
the streets; some of them have charitably been taught to dance. These
things are beautiful to think of; signs of our progress, from "The good
old times," and omens of a brighter day, when Christianity shall bear
more abundantly flowers and fruit even yet more fair.

The morals of the current literature, of the daily press--you can change
when you will. If there is not in us a demand for low morals, there
will be no supply. The morals of trade, and of politics, the handmaid
thereof, we can make better soon as we wish.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been my aim to give suggestions, rather than propose distinct
plans of action; I do not know that I am capable of that. But some of
you are rich men, some able men; many of you, I think, are good men. I
appeal to you to do something to raise the moral character of this town.
All that has been done in fifty years, or a hundred and fifty, seems
very little, while so much still remains to do; only a hint and an
encouragement. You cannot do much, nor I much: that is true. But, after
all, every thing must begin with individual men and women. You can at
least give the example of what a good man ought to be and to do, to-day;
to-morrow you will yourself be the better man for it. So far as that
goes, you will have done something to mend the morals of Boston. You can
tell of actual evils, and tell of your remedy for them; can keep clear
from committing the evils yourself: that also is something.

Here are two things that are certain: We are all brothers, rich and
poor, American and foreign; put here by the same God, for the same end,
and journeying towards the same heaven, owing mutual help. Then, too,
the wise men and good men are the natural guardians of society, and God
will not hold them guiltless, if they leave their brothers to perish. I
know our moral condition is a reproach to us; I will not deny that, nor
try to abate the shame and grief we should feel. When I think of the
poverty and misery in the midst of us, and all the consequences thereof,
I hardly dare feel grateful for the princely fortunes some men have
gathered together. Certainly it is not a Christian society, where such
extremes exist; we are only in the process of conversion; proselytes of
the gate, and not much more. There are noble men in this city, who have
been made philanthropic, by the sight of wrong, of intemperance, and
poverty, and crime. Let mankind honor great conquerors, who only rout
armies, and "plant fresh laurels where they kill;" I honor most the men
who contend against misery, against crime and sin; men that are the
soldiers of humanity, and in a low age, amidst the mean and sordid
spirits of a great trading town, lift up their serene foreheads, and
tell us of the right, the true, first good, first perfect, and first
fair. From such men I hear the prophecy of the better time to come. In
their example I see proofs of the final triumph of good over evil.
Angels are they, who keep the tree of life, not with flaming sword,
repelling men, but, with friendly hand, plucking therefrom, and giving
unto all the leaves, the flower, and the fruit of life, for the healing
of the nations. A single good man, kindling his early flame, wakens the
neighbors with his words of cheer; they, at his lamp, shall light their
torch and household fire, anticipating the beamy warmth of day. Soon it
will be morning, warm and light; we shall be up and a-doing, and the
lighted lamp, which seemed at first too much for eyes to bear, will look
ridiculous, and cast no shadow in the noonday sun. A hundred years
hence, men will stand here as I do now, and speak of the evils of these
times as things past and gone, and wonder that able men could ever be
appalled by our difficulties, and think them not to be surpassed. Still,
all depends on the faithfulness of men--your faithfulness and mine.

The last election has shown us what resolute men can do on a trifling
occasion, if they will. You know the efforts of the three parties--what
meetings they held, what money they raised, what talent was employed,
what speeches made, what ideas set forth: not a town was left
unattempted; scarce a man who had wit to throw a vote, but his vote was
solicited. You see the revolution which was wrought by that vigorous
style of work. When such men set about reforming the evils of society,
with such a determined soul, what evil can stand against mankind? We can
leave nothing to the next generation worth so much as ideas of truth,
justice, and religion, organized into fitting institutions; such we can
leave, and, if true men, such we shall.

FOOTNOTES:

[36] Rev. John Pierpont

[37] This statement was made in 1849; subsequent events have shown that
I was mistaken. It is now thought respectable and patriotic not only to
engage in the slave-trade, but to kidnap men and women in Boston. Most
of the prominent newspapers, and several of the most prominent clergy,
defend the kidnapping. Attempts have repeatedly been made to kidnap my
own parishioners. Kidnapping is not even a matter of church discipline
in Boston in 1851.

[38] The conduct of public magistrates who are paid for serving the
people, is not what it should be in respect to temperance. The city
authorities allow the laws touching the sale of the great instrument of
demoralization to be violated continually. There is no serious effort
made to enforce these laws. Nor is this all: the shameless conduct of
conspicuous men at the supper given in this city after the funeral of
John Quincy Adams, and the debauchery on that occasion, are well known
and will long be remembered.

At the next festival (in September, 1851), it is notorious, that the
city authorities, at the expense of the citizens, provided a large
quantity of intoxicating drink for the entertainment of our guests
during the excursion in the harbor. It is also a matter of great
notoriety, that many were drunk on that occasion. I need hardly add,
that on board one of the crowded steamboats, three cheers were given for
the "Fugitive Slave Law," by men who it is hoped will at length become
sober enough to "forget" it. When the magistrates of Boston do such
deeds, and are not even officially friends of temperance, what shall we
expect of the poor and the ignorant and the miserable? "Cain, where is
thy Brother?" may be asked here and now as well as in the Bible story.

[39] The statistics of intemperance are instructive and surprising. Of
the one thousand two hundred houses in Boston where intoxicating drink
is retailed to be drunken on the premises, suppose that two hundred are
too insignificant to be noticed, or else are large hotels to be
considered presently; then there are one thousand common retail
groggeries. Suppose they are in operation three hundred and thirteen
days in the year, twelve hours each day; that they sell one glass in a
little less than ten minutes, or one hundred glasses in the day, and
that five cents is the price of a glass. Then each groggery receives $5
a day, or $1,565 (313 × 5) in a year, and the one thousand groggeries
receive $1,565,000. Let us suppose that each sells drink for really
useful purposes to the amount of $65 per annum, or all to the amount of
$65,000; there still remains the sum of $1,500,000 spent for
intemperance in these one thousand groggeries. This is about twice the
sum raised by taxation for the public education of all the children in
the State of Massachusetts! But this calculation does not equal the cost
of intemperance in these places; the receipts of these retail houses
cannot be less than $2,000 per annum, or in the aggregate, $2,000,000.
This sum in two years would pay for the new Aqueduct. Suppose the amount
paid for the needless, nay, for the injurious use of intoxicating drink
in private families, in boarding houses and hotels, is equal to the
smallest sum above named ($1,500,000), then it appears that the city of
Boston spends ($1,500,000 + $1,500,000 =) $3,000,000 annually for an
article that does no good to any but harm to all, and brings ruin on
thousands each year. But if a school-house or a school costs a little
money, a complaint is soon made.

[40] It must be remembered that this was written, not in 1851, but in
1849.

[41] In 1679, "The Reforming Synod," assembled at Boston, thus
complained of intemperance, amongst other sins of the times: "That
heathenish and idolatrous practice of health-drinking is too frequent.
That shameful iniquity of sinful drinking is become too general a
provocation. Days of training and other public solemnities have been
abused in this respect: and not only English but Indians have been
debauched by those that call themselves Christians.... This is a crying
sin, and the more aggravated in that the first planters of this colony
did ... come into this land with a design to convert the heathen unto
Christ, but if instead of that they be taught wickedness ... the Lord
may well punish by them.... There are more temptations and occasions
unto that sin publicly allowed of, than any necessity doth require. The
proper end of taverns, &c., being for the entertainment of strangers ...
a far less number would suffice," etc.

Cotton Mather says of intemperance in his time: "To see ... a drunken
man become a drowned man, is to see but a most retaliating hand of God.
Why we have seen this very thing more than threescore times in our land.
And I remember the drowning of one drunkard, so oddly circumstanced; it
was in the hold of a vessel that lay full of water near the shore. We
have seen it so often, that I am amazed at you, O ye drunkards of New
England; I am amazed that you can harden your hearts in your sin,
without expecting to be destroyed suddenly and without remedy. Yea, and
we have seen the devil that has possessed the drunkard, throwing him
into fire, and then kept shrieking Fire! Fire! till they have gone down
to the fire that never shall be quenched. Yea, more than one or two
drunken women in this very town, have, while in their drink, fallen into
the fire, and so they have tragically gone roaring out of one fire into
another. O ye daughters of Belial, hear and fear and do wickedly no
more."

The history of the first barrel of rum which was brought to Plymouth has
been carefully traced out to a considerable extent. Nearly forty of the
"Pilgrims" or their descendants were publicly punished for the
drunkenness it occasioned.

[42] Over eight hundred in 1851.

[43] This statement appears somewhat exaggerated in 1851.

[44] In 1847, the amount of goods stolen in Boston, and reported to the
police, beyond what was received, was more than $37,000; in 1848, less
than $11,000. In 1849, the police were twice as numerous as in the
former year, and organized and directed with new and remarkable skill.




APPENDIX


NOTE TO p. 62.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE INSTALLATION OF MR. PARKER.

LETTER OF THE COMMITTEE TO MR. PARKER.

                                        BOSTON, November 28, 1845.

DEAR SIR:--

Among your friends and congregation at the Melodeon, a Society has been
organized according to law; and we have been instructed, as the Standing
Committee, to invite you to become its Minister.

It gives us great pleasure to be the means to forward, in this small
degree, the end proposed, and we cordially extend you the invitation,
with the sincere hope that it will meet a favorable answer.

We are, truly and respectfully,

              Your friends,

              MARK HEALEY,
              JOHN FLINT,
              LEVI B. MERIAM,
              AMOS COOLIDGE,
              JOHN G. KING,
              SIDNEY HOMER,
              HENRY SMITH,
              GEO. W. ROBINSON,
              C. M. ELLIS.

    TO THE REV. THEODORE PARKER,

    _West Roxbury, Mass_.


MR. PARKER'S REPLY.

     TO MARK HEALEY, JOHN FLINT, LEVI B. MERIAM, AMOS COOLIDGE,
     JOHN G. KING, SIDNEY HOMER, HENRY SMITH, GEORGE W. ROBINSON,
     AND C. M. ELLIS, ESQUIRES.

DEAR FRIENDS:--

When I received your communication of the 28th ult. I did not hesitate
in my decision, but I have delayed giving you a formal reply, in order
that I might confer with my friends in this place, whom it becomes my
painful duty to leave. I accept your invitation; but wish it to be
provided that our connection may at any time be dissolved, by either
party giving notice to the other of a desire to that effect, six months
before such a separation is to take place.

It is now nearly a year since I began to preach at the Melodeon. I came
at the request of some of you; but I did not anticipate the present
result. Far from it. I thought but few would come and listen to what was
so widely denounced. But I took counsel of my hopes and not of my fears.
It seems to me now that, if we are faithful to our duty, we shall in a
few years build up a society which shall be not only a joy to our own
hearts, but a blessing also to others, now strangers and perhaps hostile
to us. I feel that we have begun a good work. With earnest desires for
the success of our common enterprise, and a willingness to labor for the
advancement of real Christianity, I am,

        Faithfully, your friend,

           THEODORE PARKER.

        _West Roxbury, 12th Dec., 1845._

       *       *       *       *       *

On Sunday, January 4, 1846, REV. THEODORE PARKER was installed as Pastor
of the Twenty-eighth Congregational Society in Boston. The exercises on
the occasion were as follows:--

    INTRODUCTORY HYMN.

    PRAYER.

    VOLUNTARY ON THE ORGAN.

The Chairman of the Standing Committee then addressed the Congregation
as follows:--

By the instructions of the Society, the Committee have made an
arrangement with Mr. Parker, by which the services of this Society,
under its new organization, should commence with the new year; and this
being our first meeting, it has been set apart for such introductory
services as may seem fitting for our position and prospects.

The circumstances under which this Society has been formed, and its
progress hitherto, are familiar to most of those present. It first began
from certain influences which seemed hostile to the cause of religious
freedom. It was the opinion of many of those now present, that a
minister of the Gospel, truly worthy of that name, was proscribed on
account of his opinions, branded as a heretic, and shut out from the
pulpits of this city.

At a meeting of gentlemen held January 22, 1845, the following
Resolution was passed:--

"_Resolved_, That the Rev. Theodore Parker shall have a chance to be
heard in Boston."

To carry this into effect, this Hall was secured for a place of meeting,
and the numbers who have met here from Sunday to Sunday, have fully
answered our most sanguine expectations. Our meetings have proved that
though our friend was shut out from the temples, yet "the people heard
him gladly." Of the effects of his preaching among us I need not speak.
The warm feelings of gratitude and respect expressed on every side, are
the best evidences of the efficacy of his words, and of his life.

Out of these meetings our Society has naturally sprung. It became
necessary to assume some permanent form--the labor of preaching to two
Societies, would of course be too much for Mr. Parker's health and
strength--the conviction that his settlement in Boston would be not only
important for ourselves, but also for the cause of liberal Christianity
and religious freedom--these were some of the reasons which induced us
to form a Society, and invite him to become its minister. To this he has
consented; with the understanding that the connection may be dissolved
by either party, on giving six months notice to that effect.

At his suggestion, and with the warm approval of the Committee, we have
determined to adopt the old Congregational form of settling our
minister; without the aid of bishop, churches, or ministers.

As to our Choice, we are, upon mature reflection, and after a year's
trial, fully persuaded that we have found our minister, and we ask no
ecclesiastical council to ratify our decision.

As to the Charge usually given on such occasions, we prefer to do
without it, and trust to the conscience of our minister for his
faithfulness.

As to the Right Hand of Fellowship, there are plenty of us ready and
willing to give that, and warm hearts with it.

And for such of the other ceremonies usual on such occasions, as Mr.
Parker chooses to perform, we gladly accept the substitution of his
services for those of any stranger.

The old Puritan form of settling a minister is, for the people to do it
themselves; and this let us now proceed to do.

In adopting this course, we are strongly supported both by principle and
precedent. Congregationalism is the Republicanism of the Church; and it
is fitting that the people themselves should exercise their right of
self-government in that most important particular, the choice and
settlement of a minister. For examples, I need only remind you of the
settlement of the first minister in New England, on which occasion this
form was used, and that it is also used at this day by one of the most
respectable churches in this city.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Society then ratified the proceedings by an unanimous vote; and Mr.
Parker publicly signified that he adhered to his consent to become the
Minister of this Society, and the organization of the Society was thus
completed.

    OCCASIONAL HYMN.

    DISCOURSE, BY MR. PARKER.

    ANTHEM.

    BENEDICTION.








