CHAPTER II

ON THE VARIATION OF ORGANIC BEINGS IN A WILD STATE; ON THE NATURAL MEANS
OF SELECTION; AND ON THE COMPARISON OF DOMESTIC RACES AND TRUE SPECIES


Having treated of variation under domestication, we now come to it in a
_state of nature_.

Most organic beings in a state of nature vary exceedingly little{218}: I
put out of the case variations (as stunted plants &c., and sea-shells in
brackish water{219}) which are directly the effect of external agencies
and which we do not _know are in the breed_{220}, or are _hereditary_.
The amount of hereditary variation is very difficult to ascertain,
because naturalists (partly from the want of knowledge, and partly from
the inherent difficulty of the subject) do not all agree whether certain
forms are species or races{221}. Some strongly marked races of plants,
comparable with the decided sports of horticulturalists, undoubtedly
exist in a state of nature, as is actually known by experiment, for
instance in the primrose and cowslip{222}, in two so-called species of
dandelion, in two of foxglove{223}, and I believe in some pines. Lamarck
has observed that, as long as we confine our attention to one limited
country, there is seldom much difficulty in deciding what forms to call
species and what varieties; and that it is when collections flow in from
all parts of the world that naturalists often feel at a loss to decide
the limit of variation. Undoubtedly so it is, yet amongst British plants
(and I may add land shells), which are probably better known than any in
the world, the best naturalists differ very greatly in the relative
proportions of what they call species and what varieties. In many genera
of insects, and shells, and plants, it seems almost hopeless to
establish which are which. In the higher classes there are less doubts;
though we find considerable difficulty in ascertaining what deserve to
be called species amongst foxes and wolves, and in some birds, for
instance in the case of the white barn-owl. When specimens are brought
from different parts of the world, how often do naturalists dispute this
same question, as I found with respect to the birds brought from the
Galapagos islands. Yarrell has remarked that the individuals of the same
undoubted species of birds, from Europe and N. America, usually present
slight, indefinable though perceptible differences. The recognition
indeed of one animal by another of its kind seems to imply some
difference. The disposition of wild animals undoubtedly differs. The
variation, such as it is, chiefly affects the same parts in wild
organisms as in domestic breeds; for instance, the size, colour, and the
external and less important parts. In many species the variability of
certain organs or qualities is even stated as one of the specific
characters: thus, in plants, colour, size, hairiness, the number of the
stamens and pistils, and even their presence, the form of the leaves;
the size and form of the mandibles of the males of some insects; the
length and curvature of the beak in some birds (as in Opetiorynchus) are
variable characters in some species and quite fixed in others. I do not
perceive that any just distinction can be drawn between this recognised
variability of certain parts in many species and the more general
variability of the whole frame in domestic races.

     {218} In Chapter II of the first edition of the _Origin_ Darwin
     insists rather on the presence of variability in a state of nature;
     see, for instance, p. 45, Ed. vi. p. 53, "I am convinced that the
     most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the
     cases of variability ... which he could collect on good authority,
     as I have collected, during a course of years."

     {219} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 44, vi. p. 52.

     {220} <Note in the original.> Here discuss _what is a species_,
     sterility can most rarely be told when crossed.--Descent from common
     stock.

     {221} <Note in the original.> Give only rule: chain of intermediate
     forms, and _analogy_; this important. Every Naturalist at first when
     he gets hold of new variable type is _quite puzzled_ to know what to
     think species and what variations.

     {222} The author had not at this time the knowledge of the meaning
     of dimorphism.

     {223} <Note in original.> Compare feathered heads in very different
     birds with spines in Echidna and Hedgehog. <In _Variation under
     Domestication_, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 317, Darwin calls attention to
     laced and frizzled breeds occurring in both fowls and pigeons. In
     the same way a peculiar form of covering occurs in Echidna and the
     hedgehog.>

     Plants under very different climate not varying. Digitalis shows
     jumps <?> in variation, like Laburnum and Orchis case--in fact hostile
     cases. Variability of sexual characters alike in domestic and wild.

Although the amount of variation be exceedingly small in most organic
beings in a state of nature, and probably quite wanting (as far as our
senses serve) in the majority of cases; yet considering how many animals
and plants, taken by mankind from different quarters of the world for
the most diverse purposes, have varied under domestication in every
country and in every age, I think we may safely conclude that all
organic beings with few exceptions, if capable of being domesticated and
bred for long periods, would vary. Domestication seems to resolve itself
into a change from the natural conditions of the species [generally
perhaps including an increase of food]; if this be so, organisms in a
state of nature must _occasionally_, in the course of ages, be exposed
to analogous influences; for geology clearly shows that many places
must, in the course of time, become exposed to the widest range of
climatic and other influences; and if such places be isolated, so that
new and better adapted organic beings cannot freely emigrate, the old
inhabitants will be exposed to new influences, probably far more varied,
than man applies under the form of domestication. Although every species
no doubt will soon breed up to the full number which the country will
support, yet it is easy to conceive that, on an average, some species
may receive an increase of food; for the times of dearth may be short,
yet enough to kill, and recurrent only at long intervals. All such
changes of conditions from geological causes would be exceedingly slow;
what effect the slowness might have we are ignorant; under domestication
it appears that the effects of change of conditions accumulate, and then
break out. Whatever might be the result of these slow geological
changes, we may feel sure, from the means of dissemination common in a
lesser or greater degree to every organism taken conjointly with the
changes of geology, which are steadily (and sometimes suddenly, as when
an isthmus at last separates) in progress, that occasionally organisms
must suddenly be introduced into new regions, where, if the conditions
of existence are not so foreign as to cause its extermination, it will
often be propagated under circumstances still more closely analogous to
those of domestication; and therefore we expect will evince a tendency
to vary. It appears to me quite _inexplicable_ if this has never
happened; but it can happen very rarely. Let us then suppose that an
organism by some chance (which might be hardly repeated in 1000 years)
arrives at a modern volcanic island in process of formation and not
fully stocked with the most appropriate organisms; the new organism
might readily gain a footing, although the external conditions were
considerably different from its native ones. The effect of this we might
expect would influence in some small degree the size, colour, nature of
covering &c., and from inexplicable influences even special parts and
organs of the body. But we might further (and <this> is far more important)
expect that the reproductive system would be affected, as under
domesticity, and the structure of the offspring rendered in some degree
plastic. Hence almost every part of the body would tend to vary from the
typical form in slight degrees, and in no determinate way, and therefore
_without selection_ the free crossing of these small variations
(together with the tendency to reversion to the original form) would
constantly be counteracting this unsettling effect of the extraneous
conditions on the reproductive system. Such, I conceive, would be the
unimportant result without selection. And here I must observe that the
foregoing remarks are equally applicable to that small and admitted
amount of variation which has been observed in some organisms in a state
of nature; as well as to the above hypothetical variation consequent on
changes of condition.

Let us now suppose a Being{224} with penetration sufficient to perceive
differences in the outer and innermost organization quite imperceptible
to man, and with forethought extending over future centuries to watch
with unerring care and select for any object the offspring of an
organism produced under the foregoing circumstances; I can see no
conceivable reason why he could not form a new race (or several were he
to separate the stock of the original organism and work on several
islands) adapted to new ends. As we assume his discrimination, and his
forethought, and his steadiness of object, to be incomparably greater
that those qualities in man, so we may suppose the beauty and
complications of the adaptations of the new races and their differences
from the original stock to be greater than in the domestic races
produced by man's agency: the ground-work of his labours we may aid by
supposing that the external conditions of the volcanic island, from its
continued emergence and the occasional introduction of new immigrants,
vary; and thus to act on the reproductive system of the organism, on
which he is at work, and so keep its organization somewhat plastic. With
time enough, such a Being might rationally (without some unknown law
opposed him) aim at almost any result.

     {224} A corresponding passage occurs in _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 83, vi.
     p. 101, where however Nature takes the place of the selecting
     Being.

For instance, let this imaginary Being wish, from seeing a plant growing
on the decaying matter in a forest and choked by other plants, to give
it power of growing on the rotten stems of trees, he would commence
selecting every seedling whose berries were in the smallest degree more
attractive to tree-frequenting birds, so as to cause a proper
dissemination of the seeds, and at the same time he would select those
plants which had in the slightest degree more and more power of drawing
nutriment from rotten wood; and he would destroy all other seedlings
with less of this power. He might thus, in the course of century after
century, hope to make the plant by degrees grow on rotten wood, even
high up on trees, wherever birds dropped the non-digested seeds. He
might then, if the organization of the plant was plastic, attempt by
continued selection of chance seedlings to make it grow on less and less
rotten wood, till it would grow on sound wood{225}. Supposing again,
during these changes the plant failed to seed quite freely from
non-impregnation, he might begin selecting seedlings with a little
sweeter <or> differently tasted honey or pollen, to tempt insects to visit
the flowers regularly: having effected this, he might wish, if it
profited the plant, to render abortive the stamens and pistils in
different flowers, which he could do by continued selection. By such
steps he might aim at making a plant as wonderfully related to other
organic beings as is the mistletoe, whose existence absolutely depends
on certain insects for impregnation, certain birds for transportal, and
certain trees for growth. Furthermore, if the insect which had been
induced regularly to visit this hypothetical plant profited much by it,
our same Being might wish by selection to modify by gradual selection
the insect's structure, so as to facilitate its obtaining the honey or
pollen: in this manner he might adapt the insect (always presupposing
its organization to be in some degree plastic) to the flower, and the
impregnation of the flower to the insect; as is the case with many bees
and many plants.

     {225} The mistletoe is used as an illustration in _Origin_, Ed. i.
     p. 3, vi. p. 3, but with less detail.

Seeing what blind capricious man has actually effected by selection
during the few last years, and what in a ruder state he has probably
effected without any systematic plan during the last few thousand years,
he will be a bold person who will positively put limits to what the
supposed Being could effect during whole geological periods. In
accordance with the plan by which this universe seems governed by the
Creator, let us consider whether there exists any _secondary_ means in
the economy of nature by which the process of selection could go on
adapting, nicely and wonderfully, organisms, if in ever so small a
degree plastic, to diverse ends. I believe such secondary means do
exist{226}.

     {226} <Note in original.> The selection, in cases where adult lives
     only few hours as Ephemera, must fall on larva--curious speculation
     of the effect <which> changes in it would bring in parent.


_Natural means of Selection{227}._

     {227} This section forms part of the joint paper by Darwin and
     Wallace read before the Linnean Society on July 1, 1858.

De Candolle, in an eloquent passage, has declared that all nature is at
war, one organism with another, or with external nature. Seeing the
contented face of nature, this may at first be well doubted; but
reflection will inevitably prove it is too true. The war, however, is
not constant, but only recurrent in a slight degree at short periods and
more severely at occasional more distant periods; and hence its effects
are easily overlooked. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied in most
cases with ten-fold force. As in every climate there are seasons for
each of its inhabitants of greater and less abundance, so all annually
breed; and the moral restraint, which in some small degree checks the
increase of mankind, is entirely lost. Even slow-breeding mankind has
doubled in 25 years{228}, and if he could increase his food with greater
ease, he would double in less time. But for animals, without artificial
means, _on an average_ the amount of food for each species must be
constant; whereas the increase of all organisms tends to be geometrical,
and in a vast majority of cases at an enormous ratio. Suppose in a
certain spot there are eight pairs of [robins] birds, and that _only_
four pairs of them annually (including double hatches) rear only four
young; and that these go on rearing their young at the same rate: then
at the end of seven years (a short life, excluding violent deaths, for
any birds) there will be 2048 robins, instead of the original sixteen;
as this increase is quite impossible, so we must conclude either that
robins do not rear nearly half their young or that the average life of a
robin when reared is from accident not nearly seven years. Both checks
probably concur. The same kind of calculation applied to all vegetables
and animals produces results either more or less striking, but in
scarcely a single instance less striking than in man{229}.

     {228} Occurs in _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 64, vi. p. 79.

     {229} Corresponds approximately with _Origin_, Ed. i. pp. 64-65,
     vi. p. 80.

Many practical illustrations of this rapid tendency to increase are on
record, namely during peculiar seasons, in the extraordinary increase of
certain animals, for instance during the years 1826 to 1828, in La
Plata, when from drought, some millions of cattle perished, the whole
country _swarmed_ with innumerable mice: now I think it cannot be
doubted that during the breeding season all the mice (with the exception
of a few males or females in excess) ordinarily pair; and therefore that
this astounding increase during three years must be attributed to a
greater than usual number surviving the first year, and then breeding,
and so on, till the third year, when their numbers were brought down to
their usual limits on the return of wet weather. Where man has
introduced plants and animals into a new country favourable to them,
there are many accounts in how surprisingly few years the whole country
has become stocked with them. This increase would necessarily stop as
soon as the country was fully stocked; and yet we have every reason to
believe from what is known of wild animals that _all_ would pair in the
spring. In the majority of cases it is most difficult to imagine where
the check falls, generally no doubt on the seeds, eggs, and young; but
when we remember how impossible even in mankind (so much better known
than any other animal) it is to infer from repeated casual observations
what the average of life is, or to discover how different the percentage
of deaths to the births in different countries, we ought to feel no
legitimate surprise at not seeing where the check falls in animals and
plants. It should always be remembered that in most cases the checks are
yearly recurrent in a small regular degree, and in an extreme degree
during occasionally unusually cold, hot, dry, or wet years, according to
the constitution of the being in question. Lighten any check in the
smallest degree, and the geometrical power of increase in every
organism will instantly increase the average numbers of the favoured
species. Nature may be compared to a surface, on which rest ten thousand
sharp wedges touching each other and driven inwards by incessant
blows{230}. Fully to realise these views much reflection is requisite;
Malthus on man should be studied; and all such cases as those of the
mice in La Plata, of the cattle and horses when first turned out in S.
America, of the robins by our calculation, &c., should be well
considered: reflect on the enormous multiplying power _inherent and
annually in action_ in all animals; reflect on the countless seeds
scattered by a hundred ingenious contrivances, year after year, over the
whole face of the land; and yet we have every reason to suppose that the
average percentage of every one of the inhabitants of a country will
_ordinarily_ remain constant. Finally, let it be borne in mind that this
average number of individuals (the external conditions remaining the
same) in each country is kept up by recurrent struggles against other
species or against external nature (as on the borders of the arctic
regions{231}, where the cold checks life); and that ordinarily each
individual of each species holds its place, either by its own struggle
and capacity of acquiring nourishment in some period (from the egg
upwards) of its life, or by the struggle of its parents (in short lived
organisms, when the main check occurs at long intervals) against and
compared with other individuals of the _same_ or _different_ species.

     {230} This simile occurs in _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 67, not in the
     later editions.

     {231} <Note in the original.> In case like mistletoe, it may be
     asked why not more species, no other species interferes; answer
     almost sufficient, same causes which check the multiplication of
     individuals.

But let the external conditions of a country change; if in a small
degree, the relative proportions of the inhabitants will in most cases
simply be slightly changed; but let the number of inhabitants be small,
as in an island{232}, and free access to it from other countries be
circumscribed; and let the change of condition continue progressing
(forming new stations); in such case the original inhabitants must cease
to be so perfectly adapted to the changed conditions as they originally
were. It has been shown that probably such changes of external
conditions would, from acting on the reproductive system, cause the
organization of the beings most affected to become, as under
domestication, plastic. Now can it be doubted from the struggle each
individual (or its parents) has to obtain subsistence that any minute
variation in structure, habits, or instincts, adapting that individual
better to the new conditions, would tell upon its vigour and health? In
the struggle it would have a better _chance_ of surviving, and those of
its offspring which inherited the variation, let it be ever so slight,
would have a better _chance_ to survive. Yearly more are bred than can
survive; the smallest grain in the balance, in the long run, must tell
on which death shall fall, and which shall survive{233}. Let this work
of selection, on the one hand, and death on the other, go on for a
thousand generations; who would pretend to affirm that it would produce
no effect, when we remember what in a few years Bakewell effected in
cattle and Western in sheep, by this identical principle of selection.

     {232} See _Origin_, Ed. i. pp. 104, 292, vi. pp. 127, 429.

     {233} Recognition of the importance of minute differences in the
     struggle occurs in the Essay of 1842, p. 8 note 3.{Note 59}

To give an imaginary example, from changes in progress on an island, let
the organization{234} of a canine animal become slightly plastic, which
animal preyed chiefly on rabbits, but sometimes on hares; let these same
changes cause the number of rabbits very slowly to decrease and the
number of hares to increase; the effect of this would be that the fox or
dog would be driven to try to catch more hares, and his numbers would
tend to decrease; his organization, however, being slightly plastic,
those individuals with the lightest forms, longest limbs, and best
eye-sight (though perhaps with less cunning or scent) would be slightly
favoured, let the difference be ever so small, and would tend to live
longer and to survive during that time of the year when food was
shortest; they would also rear more young, which young would tend to
inherit these slight peculiarities. The less fleet ones would be rigidly
destroyed. I can see no more reason to doubt but that these causes in a
thousand generations would produce a marked effect, and adapt the form
of the fox to catching hares instead of rabbits, than that greyhounds
can be improved by selection and careful breeding. So would it be with
plants under similar circumstances; if the number of individuals of a
species with plumed seeds could be increased by greater powers of
dissemination within its own area (that is if the check to increase fell
chiefly on the seeds), those seeds which were provided with ever so
little more down, or with a plume placed so as to be slightly more acted
on by the winds, would in the long run tend to be most disseminated; and
hence a greater number of seeds thus formed would germinate, and would
tend to produce plants inheriting this slightly better adapted down.

     {234} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 90, vi. p. 110.

Besides this natural means of selection, by which those individuals are
preserved, whether in their egg or seed or in their mature state, which
are best adapted to the place they fill in nature, there is a second
agency at work in most bisexual animals tending to produce the same
effect, namely the struggle of the males for the females. These
struggles are generally decided by the law of battle; but in the case
of birds, apparently, by the charms of their song{235}, by their beauty
or their power of courtship, as in the dancing rock-thrush of Guiana.
Even in the animals which pair there seems to be an excess of males
which would aid in causing a struggle: in the polygamous animals{236},
however, as in deer, oxen, poultry, we might expect there would be
severest struggle: is it not in the polygamous animals that the males
are best formed for mutual war? The most vigorous males, implying
perfect adaptation, must generally gain the victory in their several
contests. This kind of selection, however, is less rigorous than the
other; it does not require the death of the less successful, but gives
to them fewer descendants. This struggle falls, moreover, at a time of
year when food is generally abundant, and perhaps the effect chiefly
produced would be the alteration of sexual characters, and the selection
of individual forms, no way related to their power of obtaining food, or
of defending themselves from their natural enemies, but of fighting one
with another. This natural struggle amongst the males may be compared in
effect, but in a less degree, to that produced by those agriculturalists
who pay less attention to the careful selection of all the young animals
which they breed and more to the occasional use of a choice male{237}.

     {235} These two forms of sexual selection are given in _Origin_,
     Ed. i. p. 87, vi. p. 107. The Guiana rock-thrush is given as an
     example of bloodless competition.

     {236} <Note in original.> Seals? Pennant about battles of seals.

     {237} In the Linnean paper of July 1, 1858 the final word is
     _mate_: but the context shows that it should be _male_; it is
     moreover clearly so written in the MS.


_Differences between "Races" and "Species":--first, in their trueness or
variability._

Races{238} produced by these natural means of selection{239} we may
expect would differ in some respects from those produced by man. Man
selects chiefly by the eye, and is not able to perceive the course of
every vessel and nerve, or the form of the bones, or whether the
internal structure corresponds to the outside shape. He{240} is unable
to select shades of constitutional differences, and by the protection he
affords and his endeavours to keep his property alive, in whatever
country he lives, he checks, as much as lies in his power, the selecting
action of nature, which will, however, go on to a lesser degree with all
living things, even if their length of life is not determined by their
own powers of endurance. He has bad judgment, is capricious, he does
not, or his successors do not, wish to select for the same exact end for
hundreds of generations. He cannot always suit the selected form to the
properest conditions; nor does he keep those conditions uniform: he
selects that which is useful to him, not that best adapted to those
conditions in which each variety is placed by him: he selects a small
dog, but feeds it highly; he selects a long-backed dog, but does not
exercise it in any peculiar manner, at least not during every
generation. He seldom allows the most vigorous males to struggle for
themselves and propagate, but picks out such as he possesses, or such as
he prefers, and not necessarily those best adapted to the existing
conditions. Every agriculturalist and breeder knows how difficult it is
to prevent an occasional cross with another breed. He often grudges to
destroy an individual which departs considerably from the required type.
He often begins his selection by a form or sport considerably departing
from the parent form. Very differently does the natural law of selection
act; the varieties selected differ only slightly from the parent
forms{241}; the conditions are constant for long periods and change
slowly; rarely can there be a cross; the selection is rigid and
unfailing, and continued through many generations; a selection can
_never be made_ without the form be _better_ adapted to the conditions
than the parent form; the selecting power goes on without caprice, and
steadily for thousands of years adapting the form to these conditions.
The selecting power is not deceived by external appearances, it tries
the being during its whole life; and if less well <?> adapted than its
_congeners_, without fail it is destroyed; every part of its structure
is thus scrutinised and proved good towards the place in nature which it
occupies.

     {238} In the _Origin_ the author would here have used the word
     _variety_.

     {239} The whole of p. 94 and 15 lines of p. 95 are, in the MS.,
     marked through in pencil with vertical lines, beginning at "Races
     produced, &c." and ending with "to these conditions."

     {240} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 83, vi. p. 102.

     {241} In the present Essay there is some evidence that the author
     attributed more to _sports_ than was afterwards the case: but the
     above passage points the other way. It must always be remembered
     that many of the minute differences, now considered small
     mutations, are the small variations on which Darwin conceived
     selection to act.

We have every reason to believe that in proportion to the number of
generations that a domestic race is kept free from crosses, and to the
care employed in continued steady selection with one end in view, and to
the care in not placing the variety in conditions unsuited to it; in
such proportion does the new race become "true" or subject to little
variation{242}. How incomparably "truer" then would a race produced by
the above rigid, steady, natural means of selection, excellently trained
and perfectly adapted to its conditions, free from stains of blood or
crosses, and continued during thousands of years, be compared with one
produced by the feeble, capricious, misdirected and ill-adapted
selection of man. Those races of domestic animals produced by savages,
partly by the inevitable conditions of their life, and partly
unintentionally by their greater care of the individuals most valuable
to them, would probably approach closest to the character of a species;
and I believe this is the case. Now the characteristic mark of a
species, next, if not equal in importance to its sterility when crossed
with another species, and indeed almost the only other character
(without we beg the question and affirm the essence of a species, is its
not having descended from a parent common to any other form), is the
similarity of the individuals composing the species, or in the language
of agriculturalists their "trueness."

     {242} See _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 230.


_Difference between "Races" and "Species" in fertility when crossed._

The sterility of species, or of their offspring, when crossed has,
however, received more attention than the uniformity in character of the
individuals composing the species. It is exceedingly natural that such
sterility{243} should have been long thought the certain characteristic
of species. For it is obvious that if the allied different forms which
we meet with in the same country could cross together, instead of
finding a number of distinct species, we should have a confused and
blending series. The fact however of a perfect gradation in the degree
of sterility between species, and the circumstance of some species most
closely allied (for instance many species of crocus and European heaths)
refusing to breed together, whereas other species, widely different,
and even belonging to distinct genera, as the fowl and the peacock,
pheasant and grouse{244}, Azalea and Rhododendron, Thuja and Juniperus,
breeding together ought to have caused a doubt whether the sterility did
not depend on other causes, distinct from a law, coincident with their
creation. I may here remark that the fact whether one species will or
will not breed with another is far less important than the sterility of
the offspring when produced; for even some domestic races differ so
greatly in size (as the great stag-greyhound and lap-dog, or cart-horse
and Burmese ponies) that union is nearly impossible; and what is less
generally known is, that in plants Koelreuter has shown by hundreds of
experiments that the pollen of one species will fecundate the germen of
another species, whereas the pollen of this latter will never act on the
germen of the former; so that the simple fact of mutual impregnation
certainly has no relation whatever to the distinctness in creation of
the two forms. When two species are attempted to be crossed which are so
distantly allied that offspring are never produced, it has been observed
in some cases that the pollen commences its proper action by exserting
its tube, and the germen commences swelling, though soon afterwards it
decays. In the next stage in the series, hybrid offspring are produced
though only rarely and few in number, and these are absolutely sterile:
then we have hybrid offspring more numerous, and occasionally, though
very rarely, breeding with either parent, as is the case with the common
mule. Again, other hybrids, though infertile _inter se_, will breed
_quite_ freely with either parent, or with a third species, and will
yield offspring generally infertile, but sometimes fertile; and these
latter again will breed with either parent, or with a third or fourth
species: thus Koelreuter blended together many forms. Lastly it is now
admitted by those botanists who have longest contended against the
admission, that in certain families the hybrid offspring of many of the
species are sometimes perfectly fertile in the first generation when
bred together: indeed in some few cases Mr Herbert{245} found that the
hybrids were decidedly more fertile than either of their pure parents.
There is no way to escape from the admission that the hybrids from some
species of plants are fertile, except by declaring that no form shall be
considered as a species, if it produces with another species fertile
offspring: but this is begging the question{246}. It has often been
stated that different species of animals have a sexual repugnance
towards each other; I can find no evidence of this; it appears as if
they merely did not excite each others passions. I do not believe that
in this respect there is any essential distinction between animals and
plants; and in the latter there cannot be a feeling of repugnance.

     {243} <Note in the original.> If domestic animals are descended from
     several species and _become_ fertile _inter se_, then one can see
     they gain fertility by becoming adapted to new conditions and
     certainly domestic animals can withstand changes of climate without
     loss of fertility in an astonishing manner.

     {244} See Suchetet, _L'Hybridite dans la Nature_, Bruxelles, 1888,
     p. 67. In _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. hybrids between the
     fowl and the pheasant are mentioned. I can give no information on
     the other cases.

     {245} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 250, vi. p. 370.

     {246} This was the position of Gaertner and of Koelreuter: see
     _Origin_, Ed. i. pp. 246-7, vi. pp. 367-8.


_Causes of Sterility in Hybrids._

The difference in nature between species which causes the greater or
lesser degree of sterility in their offspring appears, according to
Herbert and Koelreuter, to be connected much less with external form,
size, or structure, than with constitutional peculiarities; by which is
meant their adaptation to different climates, food and situation, &c.:
these peculiarities of constitution probably affect the entire frame,
and no one part in particular{247}.

     {247} <Note in the original.> Yet this seems introductory to the
     case of the heaths and crocuses above mentioned. <Herbert observed
     that crocus does not set seed if transplanted before pollination,
     but that such treatment after pollination has no sterilising effect.
     (_Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 148.) On the same page is
     a mention of the Ericaceae being subject to contabescence of the
     anthers. For _Crinum_ see _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 250: for _Rhododenron_
     and _Calceolaria_ see p. 251.>

From the foregoing facts I think we must admit that there exists a
perfect gradation in fertility between species which when crossed are
quite fertile (as in Rhododendron, Calceolaria, &c.), and indeed in an
extraordinary degree fertile (as in Crinum), and those species which
never produce offspring, but which by certain effects (as the exsertion
of the pollen-tube) evince their alliance. Hence, I conceive, we must
give up sterility, although undoubtedly in a lesser or greater degree of
very frequent occurrence, as an unfailing mark by which _species_ can be
distinguished from _races_, _i.e._ from those forms which have descended
from a common stock.


_Infertility from causes distinct from hybridisation._

Let us see whether there are any analogous facts which will throw any
light on this subject, and will tend to explain why the offspring of
certain species, when crossed, should be sterile, and not others,
without requiring a distinct law connected with their creation to that
effect. Great numbers, probably a large majority of animals when caught
by man and removed from their natural conditions, although taken very
young, rendered quite tame, living to a good old age, and apparently
quite healthy, seem incapable under these circumstances of
breeding{248}. I do not refer to animals kept in menageries, such as at
the Zoological Gardens, many of which, however, appear healthy and live
long and unite but do not produce; but to animals caught and left partly
at liberty in their native country. Rengger{249} enumerates several
caught young and rendered tame, which he kept in Paraguay, and which
would not breed: the hunting leopard or cheetah and elephant offer other
instances; as do bears in Europe, and the 25 species of hawks, belonging
to different genera, thousands of which have been kept for hawking and
have lived for long periods in perfect vigour. When the expense and
trouble of procuring a succession of young animals in a wild state be
borne in mind, one may feel sure that no trouble has been spared in
endeavours to make them breed. So clearly marked is this difference in
different kinds of animals, when captured by man, that St Hilaire makes
two great classes of animals useful to man:--the _tame_, which will not
breed, and the _domestic_ which will breed in domestication. From
certain singular facts we might have supposed that the non-breeding of
animals was owing to some perversion of instinct. But we meet with
exactly the same class of facts in plants: I do not refer to the large
number of cases where the climate does not permit the seed or fruit to
ripen, but where the flowers do not "set," owing to some imperfection of
the ovule or pollen. The latter, which alone can be distinctly examined,
is often manifestly imperfect, as any one with a microscope can observe
by comparing the pollen of the Persian and Chinese lilacs{250} with the
common lilac; the two former species (I may add) are equally sterile in
Italy as in this country. Many of the American bog plants here produce
little or no pollen, whilst the Indian species of the same genera freely
produce it. Lindley observes that sterility is the bane of the
horticulturist{251}: Linnaeus has remarked on the sterility of nearly all
alpine flowers when cultivated in a lowland district{252}. Perhaps the
immense class of double flowers chiefly owe their structure to an excess
of food acting on parts rendered slightly sterile and less capable of
performing their true function, and therefore liable to be rendered
monstrous, which monstrosity, like any other disease, is inherited and
rendered common. So far from domestication being in itself unfavourable
to fertility, it is well known that when an organism is once capable of
submission to such conditions <its> fertility is increased{253} beyond the
natural limit. According to agriculturists, slight changes of
conditions, that is of food or habitation, and likewise crosses with
races slightly different, increase the vigour and probably the fertility
of their offspring. It would appear also that even a great change of
condition, for instance, transportal from temperate countries to India,
in many cases does not in the least affect fertility, although it does
health and length of life and the period of maturity. When sterility is
induced by domestication it is of the same kind, and varies in degree,
exactly as with hybrids: for be it remembered that the most sterile
hybrid is no way monstrous; its organs are perfect, but they do not act,
and minute microscopical investigations show that they are in the same
state as those of pure species in the intervals of the breeding season.
The defective pollen in the cases above alluded to precisely resembles
that of hybrids. The occasional breeding of hybrids, as of the common
mule, may be aptly compared to the most rare but occasional reproduction
of elephants in captivity. The cause of many exotic Geraniums producing
(although in vigorous health) imperfect pollen seems to be connected
with the period when water is given them{254}; but in the far greater
majority of cases we cannot form any conjecture on what exact cause the
sterility of organisms taken from their natural conditions depends. Why,
for instance, the cheetah will not breed whilst the common cat and
ferret (the latter generally kept shut up in a small box) do,--why the
elephant will not whilst the pig will abundantly--why the partridge and
grouse in their own country will not, whilst several species of
pheasants, the guinea-fowl from the deserts of Africa and the peacock
from the jungles of India, will. We must, however, feel convinced that
it depends on some constitutional peculiarities in these beings not
suited to their new condition; though not necessarily causing an ill
state of health. Ought we then to wonder much that those hybrids which
have been produced by the crossing of species with different
constitutional tendencies (which tendencies we know to be eminently
inheritable) should be sterile: it does not seem improbable that the
cross from an alpine and lowland plant should have its constitutional
powers deranged, in nearly the same manner as when the parent alpine
plant is brought into a lowland district. Analogy, however, is a
deceitful guide, and it would be rash to affirm, although it may appear
probable, that the sterility of hybrids is due to the constitutional
peculiarities of one parent being disturbed by being blended with those
of the other parent in exactly the same manner as it is caused in some
organic beings when placed by man out of their natural conditions{255}.
Although this would be rash, it would, I think, be still rasher, seeing
that sterility is no more incidental to _all_ cross-bred productions
than it is to all organic beings when captured by man, to assert that
the sterility of certain hybrids proved a distinct creation of their
parents.

     {248} <Note in original.> Animals seem more often made sterile by
     being taken out of their native condition than plants, and so are
     more sterile when crossed.

     We have one broad fact that sterility in hybrids is not closely
     related to external difference, and these are what man alone gets
     by selection.

     {249} See _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 132; for the case
     of the cheetah see _loc cit._ p. 133.

     {250} _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 148.

     {251} Quoted in the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 9.

     {252} See _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 147.

     {253} _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 89.

     {254} See _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 147.

     {255} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 267, vi. p. 392. This is the principle
     experimentally investigated in the author's _Cross-and
     Self-Fertilisation_.

But it may be objected{256} (however little the sterility of certain
hybrids is connected with the distinct creations of species), how comes
it, if species are only races produced by natural selection, that when
crossed they so frequently produce sterile offspring, whereas in the
offspring of those races confessedly produced by the arts of man there
is no one instance of sterility. There is not much difficulty in this,
for the races produced by the natural means above explained will be
slowly but steadily selected; will be adapted to various and diverse
conditions, and to these conditions they will be rigidly confined for
immense periods of time; hence we may suppose that they would acquire
different constitutional peculiarities adapted to the stations they
occupy; and on the constitutional differences between species their
sterility, according to the best authorities, depends. On the other hand
man selects by external appearance{257}; from his ignorance, and from
not having any test at least comparable in delicacy to the natural
struggle for food, continued at intervals through the life of each
individual, he cannot eliminate fine shades of constitution, dependent
on invisible differences in the fluids or solids of the body; again,
from the value which he attaches to each individual, he asserts his
utmost power in contravening the natural tendency of the most vigorous
to survive. Man, moreover, especially in the earlier ages, cannot have
kept his conditions of life constant, and in later ages his stock pure.
Until man selects two varieties from the same stock, adapted to two
climates or to other different external conditions, and confines each
rigidly for one or several thousand years to such conditions, always
selecting the individuals best adapted to them, he cannot be said to
have even commenced the experiment. Moreover, the organic beings which
man has longest had under domestication have been those which were of
the greatest use to him, and one chief element of their usefulness,
especially in the earlier ages, must have been their capacity to undergo
sudden transportals into various climates, and at the same time to
retain their fertility, which in itself implies that in such respects
their constitutional peculiarities were not closely limited. If the
opinion already mentioned be correct, that most of the domestic animals
in their present state have descended from the fertile commixture of
wild races or species, we have indeed little reason now to expect
infertility between any cross of stock thus descended.

     {256} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 268, vi. p. 398.

     {257} <Notes in original.> Mere difference of structure no guide to
     what will or will not cross. First step gained by races keeping
     apart. <It is not clear where these notes were meant to go.>

It is worthy of remark, that as many organic beings, when taken by man
out of their natural conditions, have their reproductive system <so>
affected as to be incapable of propagation, so, we saw in the first
chapter, that although organic beings when taken by man do propagate
freely, their offspring after some generations vary or sport to a degree
which can only be explained by their reproductive system being <in> some way
affected. Again, when species cross, their offspring are generally
sterile; but it was found by Koelreuter that when hybrids are capable of
breeding with either parent, or with other species, that their
offspring are subject after some generations to excessive
variation{258}. Agriculturists, also, affirm that the offspring from
mongrels, after the first generation, vary much. Hence we see that both
sterility and variation in the succeeding generations are consequent
both on the removal of individual species from their natural states and
on species crossing. The connection between these facts may be
accidental, but they certainly appear to elucidate and support each
other,--on the principle of the reproductive system of all organic
beings being eminently sensitive to any disturbance, whether from
removal or commixture, in their constitutional relations to the
conditions to which they are exposed.

     {258} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 272, vi. p. 404.


_Points of Resemblance between "Races" and "Species{259}."_

     {259} This section seems not to correspond closely with any in the
     _Origin_, Ed. i.; in some points it resembles pp. 15, 16, also the
     section on analogous variation in distinct species, _Origin_, Ed.
     i. p. 159, vi. p. 194.

Races and reputed species agree in some respects, although differing
from causes which, we have seen, we can in some degree understand, in
the fertility and "trueness" of their offspring. In the first place,
there is no clear sign by which to distinguish races from species, as is
evident from the great difficulty experienced by naturalists in
attempting to discriminate them. As far as external characters are
concerned, many of the races which are descended from the same stock
differ far more than true species of the same genus; look at the
willow-wrens, some of which skilful ornithologists can hardly
distinguish from each other except by their nests; look at the wild
swans, and compare the distinct species of these genera with the races
of domestic ducks, poultry, and pigeons; and so again with plants,
compare the cabbages, almonds, peaches and nectarines, &c. with the
species of many genera. St Hilaire has even remarked that there is a
greater difference in size between races, as in dogs (for he believes
all have descended from one stock), than between the species of any one
genus; nor is this surprising, considering that amount of food and
consequently of growth is the element of change over which man has most
power. I may refer to a former statement, that breeders believe the
growth of one part or strong action of one function causes a decrease in
other parts; for this seems in some degree analogous to the law of
"organic compensation{260}," which many naturalists believe holds good.
To give an instance of this law of compensation,--those species of
Carnivora which have the canine teeth greatly developed have certain
molar teeth deficient; or again, in that division of the Crustaceans in
which the tail is much developed, the thorax is little so, and the
converse. The points of difference between different races is often
strikingly analogous to that between species of the same genus: trifling
spots or marks of colour{261} (as the bars on pigeons' wings) are often
preserved in races of plants and animals, precisely in the same manner
as similar trifling characters often pervade all the species of a genus,
and even of a family. Flowers in varying their colours often become
veined and spotted and the leaves become divided like true species: it
is known that the varieties of the same plant never have red, blue and
yellow flowers, though the hyacinth makes a very near approach to an
exception{262}; and different species of the same genus seldom, though
sometimes they have flowers of these three colours. Dun-coloured horses
having a dark stripe down their backs, and certain domestic asses having
transverse bars on their legs, afford striking examples of a variation
analogous in character to the distinctive marks of other species of the
same genus.

     {260} The law of compensation is discussed in the _Origin_, Ed. i.
     p. 147, vi. p. 182.

     {261} <Note in original.> Boitard and Corbie on outer edging red in
     tail of bird,--so bars on wing, white or black or brown, or white
     edged with black or <illegible>: analogous to marks running through
     genera but with different colours. Tail coloured in pigeons.

     {262} <Note in original.> Oxalis and Gentian. <In Gentians blue,
     yellow and reddish colours occur. In Oxalis yellow, purple, violet
     and pink.>


_External characters of Hybrids and Mongrels._

There is, however, as it appears to me, a more important method of
comparison between species and races, namely the character of the
offspring{263} when species are crossed and when races are crossed: I
believe, in no one respect, except in sterility, is there any
difference. It would, I think, be a marvellous fact, if species have
been formed by distinct acts of creation, that they should act upon each
other in uniting, like races descended from a common stock. In the first
place, by repeated crossing one species can absorb and wholly obliterate
the characters of another, or of several other species, in the same
manner as one race will absorb by crossing another race. Marvellous,
that one act of creation should absorb another or even several acts of
creation! The offspring of species, that is hybrids, and the offspring
of races, that is mongrels, resemble each other in being either
intermediate in character (as is most frequent in hybrids) or in
resembling sometimes closely one and sometimes the other parent; in both
the offspring produced by the same act of conception sometimes differ in
their degree of resemblance; both hybrids and mongrels sometimes retain
a certain part or organ very like that of either parent, both, as we
have seen, become in succeeding generations variable; and this tendency
to vary can be transmitted by both; in both for many generations there
is a strong tendency to reversion to their ancestral form. In the case
of a hybrid laburnum and of a supposed mongrel vine different parts of
the same plants took after each of their two parents. In the hybrids
from some species, and in the mongrel of some races, the offspring
differ according as which of the two species, or of the two races, is
the father (as in the common mule and hinny) and which the mother. Some
races will breed together, which differ so greatly in size, that the dam
often perishes in labour; so it is with some species when crossed; when
the dam of one species has borne offspring to the male of another
species, her succeeding offspring are sometimes stained (as in Lord
Morton's mare by the quagga, wonderful as the fact{264} is) by this
first cross; so agriculturists positively affirm is the case when a pig
or sheep of one breed has produced offspring by the sire of another
breed.

     {263} This section corresponds roughly to that on _Hybrids and
     Mongrels compared independently of their fertility_, _Origin_, Ed.
     i. p. 272, vi. p. 403. The discussion on Gaertner's views, given in
     the _Origin_, is here wanting. The brief mention of prepotency is
     common to them both.

     {264} See _Animals and Plants_, Ed. ii. vol. I. p. 435. The
     phenomenon of _Telegony_, supposed to be established by this and
     similar cases, is now generally discredited in consequence of
     Ewart's experiments.


_Summary of second chapter_{265}.

     {265} The section on p. 109 is an appendix to the summary.

Let us sum up this second chapter. If slight variations do occur in
organic beings in a state of nature; if changes of condition from
geological causes do produce in the course of ages effects analogous to
those of domestication on any, however few, organisms; and how can we
doubt it,--from what is actually known, and from what may be presumed,
since thousands of organisms taken by man for sundry uses, and placed
in new conditions, have varied. If such variations tend to be
hereditary; and how can we doubt it,--when we see shades of expression,
peculiar manners, monstrosities of the strangest kinds, diseases, and a
multitude of other peculiarities, which characterise and form, being
inherited, the endless races (there are 1200 kinds of cabbages{266}) of
our domestic plants and animals. If we admit that every organism
maintains its place by an almost periodically recurrent struggle; and
how can we doubt it,--when we know that all beings tend to increase in a
geometrical ratio (as is instantly seen when the conditions become for a
time more favourable); whereas on an average the amount of food must
remain constant, if so, there will be a natural means of selection,
tending to preserve those individuals with any slight deviations of
structure more favourable to the then existing conditions, and tending
to destroy any with deviations of an opposite nature. If the above
propositions be correct, and there be no law of nature limiting the
possible amount of variation, new races of beings will,--perhaps only
rarely, and only in some few districts,--be formed.

     {266} I do not know the authority for this statement.


_Limits of Variation._

That a limit to variation does exist in nature is assumed by most
authors, though I am unable to discover a single fact on which this
belief is grounded{267}. One of the commonest statements is that plants
do not become acclimatised; and I have even observed that kinds not
raised by seed, but propagated by cuttings, &c., are instanced. A good
instance has, however, been advanced in the case of kidney beans, which
it is believed are now as tender as when first introduced. Even if we
overlook the frequent introduction of seed from warmer countries, let me
observe that as long as the seeds are gathered promiscuously from the
bed, without continual observation and _careful_ selection of those
plants which have stood the climate best during their whole growth, the
experiment of acclimatisation has hardly been begun. Are not all those
plants and animals, of which we have the greatest number of races, the
oldest domesticated? Considering the quite recent progress{268} of
systematic agriculture and horticulture, is it not opposed to every
fact, that we have exhausted the capacity of variation in our cattle and
in our corn,--even if we have done so in some trivial points, as their
fatness or kind of wool? Will any one say, that if horticulture
continues to flourish during the next few centuries, that we shall not
have numerous new kinds of the potato and Dahlia? But take two varieties
of each of these plants, and adapt them to certain fixed conditions and
prevent any cross for 5000 years, and then again vary their conditions;
try many climates and situations; and who{269} will predict the number
and degrees of difference which might arise from these stocks? I repeat
that we know nothing of any limit to the possible amount of variation,
and therefore to the number and differences of the races, which might be
produced by the natural means of selection, so infinitely more efficient
than the agency of man. Races thus produced would probably be very
"true"; and if from having been adapted to different conditions of
existence, they possessed different constitutions, if suddenly removed
to some new station, they would perhaps be sterile and their offspring
would perhaps be infertile. Such races would be undistinguishable from
species. But is there any evidence that the species, which surround us
on all sides, have been thus produced? This is a question which an
examination of the economy of nature we might expect would answer either
in the affirmative or negative{270}.

     {267} In the _Origin_ no limit is placed to variation as far as I
     know.

     {268} <Note in original.> History of pigeons shows increase of
     peculiarities during last years.

     {269} Compare an obscure passage in the Essay of 1842, p. 14.

     {270} <Note in original.> Certainly <two pages in the MS.> ought to
     be here introduced, viz., difficulty in forming such organ, as eye,
     by selection. <In the _Origin_, Ed. i., a chapter on _Difficulties
     on Theory_ follows that on _Laws of Variation_, and precedes that
     on _Instinct_: this was also the arrangement in the Essay of 1842;
     whereas in the present Essay _Instinct_ follows _Variation_ and
     precedes _Difficulties_.>




