CHAPTER III

ON THE VARIATION OF INSTINCTS AND OTHER MENTAL ATTRIBUTES UNDER
DOMESTICATION AND IN STATE OF NATURE; ON THE DIFFICULTIES IN THIS
SUBJECT; AND ON ANALOGOUS DIFFICULTIES WITH RESPECT TO CORPOREAL
STRUCTURES


_Variation of mental attributes under domestication._

I have as yet only alluded to the mental qualities which differ greatly
in different species. Let me here premise that, as will be seen in the
Second Part, there is no evidence and consequently no attempt to show
that _all_ existing organisms have descended from any one common
parent-stock, but that only those have so descended which, in the
language of naturalists, are clearly related to each other. Hence the
facts and reasoning advanced in this chapter do not apply to the first
origin of the senses{271}, or of the chief mental attributes, such as of
memory, attention, reasoning, &c., &c., by which most or all of the
great related groups are characterised, any more than they apply to the
first origin of life, or growth, or the power of reproduction. The
application of such facts as I have collected is merely to the
differences of the primary mental qualities and of the instincts in the
species{272} of the several great groups. In domestic animals every
observer has remarked in how great a degree, in the individuals of the
same species, the dispositions, namely courage, pertinacity, suspicion,
restlessness, confidence, temper, pugnaciousness, affection, care of
their young, sagacity, &c., &c., vary. It would require a most able
metaphysician to explain how many primary qualities of the mind must be
changed to cause these diversities of complex dispositions. From these
dispositions being inherited, of which the testimony is unanimous,
families and breeds arise, varying in these respects. I may instance the
good and ill temper of different stocks of bees and of horses,--the
pugnacity and courage of game fowls,--the pertinacity of certain dogs,
as bull-dogs, and the sagacity of others,--for restlessness and
suspicion compare a wild rabbit reared with the greatest care from its
earliest age with the extreme tameness of the domestic breed of the same
animal. The offspring of the domestic dogs which have run wild in
Cuba{273}, though caught quite young, are most difficult to tame,
probably nearly as much so as the original parent-stock from which the
domestic dog descended. The habitual "_periods_" of different families
of the same species differ, for instance, in the time of year of
reproduction, and the period of life when the capacity is acquired, and
the hour of roosting (in Malay fowls), &c., &c. These periodical habits
are perhaps essentially corporeal, and may be compared to nearly similar
habits in plants, which are known to vary extremely. Consensual
movements (as called by Mueller) vary and are inherited,--such as the
cantering and ambling paces in horses, the tumbling of pigeons, and
perhaps the handwriting, which is sometimes so similar between father
and sons, may be ranked in this class. _Manners_, and even tricks which
perhaps are only _peculiar_ manners, according to W. Hunter and my
father, are distinctly inherited in cases where children have lost their
parent in early infancy. The inheritance of expression, which often
reveals the finest shades of character, is familiar to everyone.

     {271} A similar proviso occurs in the chapter on instinct in
     _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 207, vi. p. 319.

     {272} The discussion occurs later in Chapter VII of the _Origin_,
     Ed. i. than in the present Essay, where moreover it is fuller in
     some respects.

     {273} In the margin occurs the name of Poeppig. In _Var. under
     Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. I. p. 28, the reference to Poeppig on the Cuban
     dogs contains no mention of the wildness of their offspring.

Again the tastes and pleasures of different breeds vary, thus the
shepherd-dog delights in chasing the sheep, but has no wish to kill
them,--the terrier (see Knight) delights in killing vermin, and the
spaniel in finding game. But it is impossible to separate their mental
peculiarities in the way I have done: the tumbling of pigeons, which I
have instanced as a consensual movement, might be called a trick and is
associated with a taste for flying in a close flock at a great height.
Certain breeds of fowls have a taste for roosting in trees. The
different actions of pointers and setters might have been adduced in the
same class, as might the peculiar _manner_ of hunting of the spaniel.
Even in the same breed of dogs, namely in fox-hounds, it is the fixed
opinion of those best able to judge that the different pups are born
with different tendencies; some are best to find their fox in the cover;
some are apt to run straggling, some are best to make casts and to
recover the lost scent, &c.; and that these peculiarities undoubtedly
are transmitted to their progeny. Or again the tendency to point might
be adduced as a distinct habit which has become inherited,--as might the
tendency of a true sheep dog (as I have been assured is the case) to run
round the flock instead of directly at them, as is the case with other
young dogs when attempted to be taught. The "transandantes" sheep{274}
in Spain, which for some centuries have been yearly taken a journey of
several hundred miles from one province to another, know when the time
comes, and show the greatest restlessness (like migratory birds in
confinement), and are prevented with difficulty from starting by
themselves, which they sometimes do, and find their own way. There is a
case on good evidence{275} of a sheep which, when she lambed, would
return across a mountainous country to her own birth-place, although at
other times of year not of a rambling disposition. Her lambs inherited
this same disposition, and would go to produce their young on the farm
whence their parent came; and so troublesome was this habit that the
whole family was destroyed.

     {274} <Note in original.> Several authors.

     {275} In the margin "Hogg" occurs as authority for this fact. For
     the reference, see p. 17, note 4.

These facts must lead to the conviction, justly wonderful as it is, that
almost infinitely numerous shades of disposition, of tastes, of peculiar
movements, and even of individual actions, can be modified or acquired
by one individual and transmitted to its offspring. One is forced to
admit that mental phenomena (no doubt through their intimate connection
with the brain) can be inherited, like infinitely numerous and fine
differences of corporeal structure. In the same manner as peculiarities
of corporeal structure slowly acquired or lost during mature life
(especially cognisant <?> in disease), as well as congenital peculiarities,
are transmitted; so it appears to be with the mind. The inherited paces
in the horse have no doubt been acquired by compulsion during the lives
of the parents: and temper and tameness may be modified in a breed by
the treatment which the individuals receive. Knowing that a pig has been
taught to point, one would suppose that this quality in pointer-dogs was
the simple result of habit, but some facts, with respect to the
occasional appearance of a similar quality in other dogs, would make one
suspect that it originally appeared in a less perfect degree, "_by
chance_," that is from a congenital tendency{276} in the parent of the
breed of pointers. One cannot believe that the tumbling, and high flight
in a compact body, of one breed of pigeons has been taught; and in the
case of the slight differences in the manner of hunting in young
fox-hounds, they are doubtless congenital. The inheritance of the
foregoing and similar mental phenomena ought perhaps to create less
surprise, from the reflection that in no case do individual acts of
reasoning, or movements, or other phenomena connected with
consciousness, appear to be transmitted. An action, even a very
complicated one, when from long practice it is performed unconsciously
without any effort (and indeed in the case of many peculiarities of
manners opposed to the will) is said, according to a common expression,
to be performed "instinctively." Those cases of languages, and of songs,
learnt in early childhood and _quite_ forgotten, being _perfectly_
repeated during the unconsciousness of illness, appear to me only a few
degrees less wonderful than if they had been transmitted to a second
generation{277}.

     {276} In the _Origin_, Ed. i., he speaks more decidedly against the
     belief that instincts are hereditary habits, see for instance pp.
     209, 214, Ed. vi. pp. 321, 327. He allows, however, something to
     habit (p. 216).

     {277} A suggestion of Hering's and S. Butler's views on memory and
     inheritance. It is not, however, implied that Darwin was inclined
     to accept these opinions.


_Hereditary habits compared with instincts._

The chief characteristics of true instincts appear to be their
invariability and non-improvement during the mature age of the
individual animal: the absence of knowledge of the end, for which the
action is performed, being associated, however, sometimes with a degree
of reason; being subject to mistakes and being associated with certain
states of the body or times of the year or day. In most of these
respects there is a resemblance in the above detailed cases of the
mental qualities acquired or modified during domestication. No doubt the
instincts of wild animals are more uniform than those habits or
qualities modified or recently acquired under domestication, in the same
manner and from the same causes that the corporeal structure in this
state is less uniform than in beings in their natural conditions. I have
seen a young pointer point as fixedly, the first day it was taken out,
as any old dog; Magendie says this was the case with a retriever which
he himself reared: the tumbling of pigeons is not probably improved by
age: we have seen that in the case above given that the young sheep
inherited the migratory tendency to their particular birth-place the
first time they lambed. This last fact offers an instance of a domestic
instinct being associated with a state of body; as do the
"transandantes" sheep with a time of year. Ordinarily the acquired
instincts of domestic animals seem to require a certain degree of
education (as generally in pointers and retrievers) to be perfectly
developed: perhaps this holds good amongst wild animals in rather a
greater degree than is generally supposed; for instance, in the singing
of birds, and in the knowledge of proper herbs in Ruminants. It seems
pretty clear that bees transmit knowledge from generation to generation.
Lord Brougham{278} insists strongly on ignorance of the end proposed
being eminently characteristic of true instincts; and this appears to me
to apply to many acquired hereditary habits; for instance, in the case
of the young pointer alluded to before, which pointed so steadfastly the
first day that we were obliged several times to carry him away{279}.
This puppy not only pointed at sheep, at large white stones, and at
every little bird, but likewise "backed" the other pointers: this young
dog must have been as unconscious for what end he was pointing, namely
to facilitate his master's killing game to eat, as is a butterfly which
lays her eggs on a cabbage, that her caterpillars would eat the leaves.
So a horse that ambles instinctively, manifestly is ignorant that he
performs that peculiar pace for the ease of man; and if man had never
existed, he would never have ambled. The young pointer pointing at white
stones appears to be as much a mistake of its acquired instinct, as in
the case of flesh-flies laying their eggs on certain flowers instead of
putrifying meat. However true the ignorance of the end may generally be,
one sees that instincts are associated with some degree of reason; for
instance, in the case of the tailor-bird, who spins threads with which
to make her nest <yet> will use artificial threads when she can procure
them{280}; so it has been known that an old pointer has broken his point
and gone round a hedge to drive out a bird towards his master{281}.

     {278} Lord Brougham's _Dissertations on Subjects of Science_, etc.,
     1839, p. 27.

     {279} This case is more briefly given in the _Origin_, Ed. i. p.
     213, vi. p. 326. The simile of the butterfly occurs there also.

     {280} "A little dose, as Pierre Huber expresses it, of judgment or
     reason, often comes into play." _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 208, vi. p.
     320.

     {281} In the margin is written "Retriever killing one bird." This
     refers to the cases given in the _Descent of Man_, 2nd Ed. (in 1
     vol.) p. 78, of a retriever being puzzled how to deal with a
     wounded and a dead bird, killed the former and carried both at
     once. This was the only known instance of her wilfully injuring
     game.

There is one other quite distinct method by which the instincts or
habits acquired under domestication may be compared with those given by
nature, by a test of a fundamental kind; I mean the comparison of the
mental powers of mongrels and hybrids. Now the instincts, or habits,
tastes, and dispositions of one _breed_ of animals, when crossed with
another breed, for instance a shepherd-dog with a harrier, are blended
and appear in the same curiously mixed degree, both in the first and
succeeding generations, exactly as happens when one _species_ is crossed
with another{282}. This would hardly be the case if there was any
fundamental difference between the domestic and natural instinct{283};
if the former were, to use a metaphorical expression, merely
superficial.

     {282} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 214, vi. p. 327.

     {283} <Note in original.> Give some definition of instinct, or at
     least give chief attributes. <In _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 207, vi. p.
     319, Darwin refuses to define instinct.> The term instinct is often
     used in <a> sense which implies no more than that the animal does
     the action in question. Faculties and instincts may I think be
     imperfectly separated. The mole has the faculty of scratching
     burrows, and the instinct to apply it. The bird of passage has the
     faculty of finding its way and the instinct to put it in action at
     certain periods. It can hardly be said to have the faculty of
     knowing the time, for it can possess no means, without indeed it be
     some consciousness of passing sensations. Think over all habitual
     actions and see whether faculties and instincts can be separated.
     We have faculty of waking in the night, if an instinct prompted us
     to do something at certain hour of night or day. Savages finding
     their way. Wrangel's account--probably a faculty inexplicable by
     the possessor. There are besides faculties "_means_," as conversion
     of larvae into neuters and queens. I think all this generally
     implied, anyhow useful. <This discussion, which does not occur in
     the _Origin_, is a first draft of that which follows in the text,
     p. 123.>


_Variation in the mental attributes of wild animals._

With respect to the variation{284} of the mental powers of animals in a
wild state, we know that there is a considerable difference in the
disposition of different individuals of the same species, as is
recognised by all those who have had the charge of animals in a
menagerie. With respect to the wildness of animals, that is fear
directed particularly against man, which appears to be as true an
instinct as the dread of a young mouse of a cat, we have excellent
evidence that it is slowly acquired and becomes hereditary. It is also
certain that, in a natural state, individuals of the same species lose
or do not practice their migratory instincts--as woodcocks in Madeira.
With respect to any variation in the more complicated instincts, it is
obviously most difficult to detect, even more so than in the case of
corporeal structure, of which it has been admitted the variation is
exceedingly small, and perhaps scarcely any in the majority of species
at any one period. Yet, to take one excellent case of instinct, namely
the nests of birds, those who have paid most attention to the subject
maintain that not only certain individuals <? species> seem to be able
to build very imperfectly, but that a difference in skill may not
unfrequently be detected between individuals{285}. Certain birds,
moreover, adapt their nests to circumstances; the water-ouzel makes no
vault when she builds under cover of a rock--the sparrow builds very
differently when its nest is in a tree or in a hole, and the
golden-crested wren sometimes suspends its nest below and sometimes
places it _on_ the branches of trees.

     {284} A short discussion of a similar kind occurs in the _Origin_,
     Ed. i. p. 211, vi. p. 324.

     {285} This sentence agrees with the MS., but is clearly in need of
     correction.


_Principles of Selection applicable to instincts._

As the instincts of a species are fully as important to its preservation
and multiplication as its corporeal structure, it is evident that if
there be the slightest congenital differences in the instincts and
habits, or if certain individuals during their lives are induced or
compelled to vary their habits, and if such differences are in the
smallest degree more favourable, under slightly modified external
conditions, to their preservation, such individuals must in the long run
have a better _chance_ of being preserved and of multiplying{286}. If
this be admitted, a series of small changes may, as in the case of
corporeal structure, work great changes in the mental powers, habits and
instincts of any species.

     {286} This corresponds to _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 212, vi. p. 325.


_Difficulties in the acquirement of complex instincts by Selection._

Every one will at first be inclined to explain (as I did for a long
time) that many of the more complicated and wonderful instincts could
not be acquired in the manner here supposed{287}. The Second Part of
this work is devoted to the general consideration of how far the general
economy of nature justifies or opposes the belief that related species
and genera are descended from common stocks; but we may here consider
whether the instincts of animals offer such a _prima facie_ case of
impossibility of gradual acquirement, as to justify the rejection of any
such theory, however strongly it may be supported by other facts. I beg
to repeat that I wish here to consider not the _probability_ but the
_possibility_ of complicated instincts having been acquired by the slow
and long-continued selection of very slight (either congenital or
produced by habit) modifications of foregoing simpler instincts; each
modification being as useful and necessary, to the species practising
it, as the most complicated kind.

     {287} This discussion is interesting in differing from the
     corresponding section of the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 216, vi. p. 330,
     to the end of the chapter. In the present Essay the subjects dealt
     with are nest-making instincts, including the egg-hatching habit of
     the Australian bush-turkey. The power of "shamming death."
     "Faculty" in relation to instinct. The instinct of lapse of time,
     and of direction. Bees' cells very briefly given. Birds feeding
     their young on food differing from their own natural food. In the
     _Origin_, Ed. i., the cases discussed are the instinct of laying
     eggs in other birds' nests; the slave-making instinct in ants; the
     construction of the bee's comb, very fully discussed.

First, to take the case of birds'-nests; of existing species (almost
infinitely few in comparison with the multitude which must have existed,
since the period of the new Red Sandstone of N. America, of whose habits
we must always remain ignorant) a tolerably perfect series could be made
from eggs laid on the bare ground, to others with a few sticks just
laid round them, to a simple nest like the wood-pigeons, to others more
and more complicated: now if, as is asserted, there occasionally exist
slight differences in the building powers of an individual, and if,
which is at least probable, that such differences would tend to be
inherited, then we can see that it is at least _possible_ that the
nidificatory instincts may have been acquired by the gradual selection,
during thousands and thousands of generations, of the eggs and young of
those individuals, whose nests were in some degree better adapted to the
preservation of their young, under the then existing conditions. One of
the most surprising instincts on record is that of the Australian
bush-turkey, whose eggs are hatched by the heat generated from a huge
pile of fermenting materials, which it heaps together; but here the
habits of an allied species show how this instinct _might possibly_ have
been acquired. This second species inhabits a tropical district, where
the heat of the sun is sufficient to hatch its eggs; this bird, burying
its eggs, apparently for concealment, under a lesser heap of rubbish,
but of a dry nature, so as not to ferment. Now suppose this bird to
range slowly into a climate which was cooler, and where leaves were more
abundant, in that case, those individuals, which chanced to have their
collecting instinct strongest developed, would make a somewhat larger
pile, and the eggs, aided during some colder season, under the slightly
cooler climate by the heat of incipient fermentation, would in the long
run be more freely hatched and would probably produce young ones with
the same more highly developed collecting tendencies; of these again,
those with the best developed powers would again tend to rear most
young. Thus this strange instinct might _possibly_ be acquired, every
individual bird being as ignorant of the laws of fermentation, and the
consequent development of heat, as we know they must be.

Secondly, to take the case of animals feigning death (as it is commonly
expressed) to escape danger. In the case of insects, a perfect series
can be shown, from some insects, which momentarily stand still, to
others which for a second slightly contract their legs, to others which
will remain immovably drawn together for a quarter of an hour, and may
be torn asunder or roasted at a slow fire, without evincing the smallest
sign of sensation. No one will doubt that the length of time, during
which each remains immovable, is well adapted to <favour the insect's>
escape <from> the dangers to which it is most exposed, and few will deny
the _possibility_ of the change from one degree to another, by the means
and at the rate already explained. Thinking it, however, wonderful
(though not impossible) that the attitude of death should have been
acquired by methods which imply no imitation, I compared several
species, when feigning, as is said, death, with others of the same
species really dead, and their attitudes were in no one case the same.

Thirdly, in considering many instincts it is useful to _endeavour_ to
separate the faculty{288} by which they perform it, and the mental power
which urges to the performance, which is more properly called an
instinct. We have an instinct to eat, we have jaws &c. to give us the
faculty to do so. These faculties are often unknown to us: bats, with
their eyes destroyed, can avoid strings suspended across a room, we know
not at present by what faculty they do this. Thus also, with migratory
birds, it is a wonderful instinct which urges them at certain times of
the year to direct their course in certain directions, but it is a
faculty by which they know the time and find their way. With respect to
time{289}, man without seeing the sun can judge to a certain extent of
the hour, as must those cattle which come down from the inland mountains
to feed on sea-weed left bare at the changing hour of low-water{290}. A
hawk (D'Orbigny) seems certainly to have acquired a knowledge of a
period of every 21 days. In the cases already given of the sheep which
travelled to their birth-place to cast their lambs, and the sheep in
Spain which know their time of march{291}, we may conjecture that the
tendency to move is associated, we may then call it instinctively, with
some corporeal sensations. With respect to direction we can easily
conceive how a tendency to travel in a certain course may possibly have
been acquired, although we must remain ignorant how birds are able to
preserve any direction whatever in a dark night over the wide ocean. I
may observe that the power of some savage races of mankind to find their
way, although perhaps wholly different from the faculty of birds, is
nearly as unintelligible to us. Bellinghausen, a skilful navigator,
describes with the utmost wonder the manner in which some Esquimaux
guided him to a certain point, by a course never straight, through newly
formed hummocks of ice, on a thick foggy day, when he with a compass
found it impossible, from having no landmarks, and from their course
being so extremely crooked, to preserve any sort of uniform direction:
so it is with Australian savages in thick forests. In North and South
America many birds slowly travel northward and southward, urged on by
the food they find, as the seasons change; let them continue to do this,
till, as in the case of the sheep in Spain, it has become an urgent
instinctive desire, and they will gradually accelerate their journey.
They would cross narrow rivers, and if these were converted by
subsidence into narrow estuaries, and gradually during centuries to arms
of the sea, still we may suppose their restless desire of travelling
onwards would impel them to cross such an arm, even if it had become of
great width beyond their span of vision. How they are able to preserve a
course in any direction, I have said, is a faculty unknown to us. To
give another illustration of the means by which I conceive it _possible_
that the direction of migrations have been determined. Elk and reindeer
in N. America annually cross, as if they could marvellously smell or see
at the distance of a hundred miles, a wide tract of absolute desert, to
arrive at certain islands where there is a scanty supply of food; the
changes of temperature, which geology proclaims, render it probable that
this desert tract formerly supported some vegetation, and thus these
quadrupeds might have been annually led on, till they reached the more
fertile spots, and so acquired, like the sheep of Spain, their migratory
powers.

     {288} The distinction between _faculty_ and _instinct_ corresponds
     in some degree to that between perception of a stimulus and a
     specific reaction. I imagine that the author would have said that
     the sensitiveness to light possessed by a plant is _faculty_, while
     _instinct_ decides whether the plant curves to or from the source
     of illumination.

     {289} <Note in the original in an unknown handwriting.> At the time
     when corn was pitched in the market instead of sold by sample, the
     geese in the town fields of Newcastle <Staffordshire?> used to
     know market day and come in to pick up the corn spilt.

     {290} <Note in original.> Macculloch and others.

     {291} I can find no reference to the _transandantes_ sheep in
     Darwin's published work. He was possibly led to doubt the accuracy
     of the statement on which he relied. For the case of the sheep
     returning to their birth-place see p. 17, note 4.{Note 91}

Fourthly, with respect to the combs of the hive-bee{292}; here again we
must look to some faculty or means by which they make their hexagonal
cells, without indeed we view these instincts as mere machines. At
present such a faculty is quite unknown: Mr Waterhouse supposes that
several bees are led by their instinct to excavate a mass of wax to a
certain thinness, and that the result of this is that hexagons
necessarily remain. Whether this or some other theory be true, some such
means they must possess. They abound, however, with true instincts,
which are the most wonderful that are known. If we examine the little
that is known concerning the habits of other species of bees, we find
much simpler instincts: the humble bee merely fills rude balls of wax
with honey and aggregates them together with little order in a rough
nest of grass. If we knew the instinct of all the bees, which ever had
existed, it is not improbable that we should have instincts of every
degree of complexity, from actions as simple as a bird making a nest,
and rearing her young, to the wonderful architecture and government of
the hive-bee; at least such is _possible_, which is all that I am here
considering.

     {292} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 224, vi. p. 342.

Finally, I will briefly consider under the same point of view one other
class of instincts, which have often been advanced as truly wonderful,
namely parents bringing food to their young which they themselves
neither like nor partake of{293};--for instance, the common sparrow, a
granivorous bird, feeding its young with caterpillars. We might of
course look into the case still earlier, and seek how an instinct in the
parent, of feeding its young at all, was first derived; but it is
useless to waste time in conjectures on a series of gradations from the
young feeding themselves and being slightly and occasionally assisted in
their search, to their entire food being brought to them. With respect
to the parent bringing a different kind of food from its own kind, we
may suppose either that the remote stock, whence the sparrow and other
congenerous birds have descended, was insectivorous, and that its own
habits and structure have been changed, whilst its ancient instincts
with respect to its young have remained unchanged; or we may suppose
that the parents have been induced to vary slightly the food of their
young, by a slight scarcity of the proper kind (or by the instincts of
some individuals not being so truly developed), and in this case those
young which were most capable of surviving were necessarily most often
preserved, and would themselves in time become parents, and would be
similarly compelled to alter their food for their young. In the case of
those animals, the young of which feed themselves, changes in their
instincts for food, and in their structure, might be selected from
slight variations, just as in mature animals. Again, where the food of
the young depends on where the mother places her eggs, as in the case of
the caterpillars of the cabbage-butterfly, we may suppose that the
parent stock of the species deposited her eggs sometimes on one kind and
sometimes on another of congenerous plants (as some species now do), and
if the cabbage suited the caterpillars better than any other plant, the
caterpillars of those butterflies, which had chosen the cabbage, would
be most plentifully reared, and would produce butterflies more apt to
lay their eggs on the cabbage than on the other congenerous plants.

     {293} This is an expansion of an obscure passage in the Essay of
     1842, p. 19.

However vague and unphilosophical these conjectures may appear, they
serve, I think, to show that one's first impulse utterly to reject any
theory whatever, implying a gradual acquirement of these instincts,
which for ages have excited man's admiration, may at least be delayed.
Once grant that dispositions, tastes, actions or habits can be slightly
modified, either by slight congenital differences (we must suppose in
the brain) or by the force of external circumstances, and that such
slight modifications can be rendered inheritable,--a proposition which
no one can reject,--and it will be difficult to put any limit to the
complexity and wonder of the tastes and habits which may _possibly_ be
thus acquired.


_Difficulties in the acquirement by Selection of complex corporeal
structures._

After the past discussion it will perhaps be convenient here to consider
whether any particular corporeal organs, or the entire structure of any
animals, are so wonderful as to justify the rejection _prima facie_ of
our theory{294}. In the case of the eye, as with the more complicated
instincts, no doubt one's first impulse is to utterly reject every such
theory. But if the eye from its most complicated form can be shown to
graduate into an exceedingly simple state,--if selection can produce the
smallest change, and if such a series exists, then it is clear (for in
this work we have nothing to do with the first origin of organs in their
simplest forms{295}) that it may _possibly_ have been acquired by
gradual selection of slight, but in each case, useful deviations{296}.
Every naturalist, when he meets with any new and singular organ, always
expects to find, and looks for, other and simpler modifications of it in
other beings. In the case of the eye, we have a multitude of different
forms, more or less simple, not graduating into each other, but
separated by sudden gaps or intervals; but we must recollect how
incomparably greater would the multitude of visual structures be if we
had the eyes of every fossil which ever existed. We shall discuss the
probable vast proportion of the extinct to the recent in the succeeding
Part. Notwithstanding the large series of existing forms, it is most
difficult even to conjecture by what intermediate stages very many
simple organs could possibly have graduated into complex ones: but it
should be here borne in mind, that a part having originally a wholly
different function, may on the theory of gradual selection be slowly
worked into quite another use; the gradations of forms, from which
naturalists believe in the hypothetical metamorphosis of part of the ear
into the swimming bladder in fishes{297}, and in insects of legs into
jaws, show the manner in which this is possible. As under domestication,
modifications of structure take place, without any continued selection,
which man finds very useful, or valuable for curiosity (as the hooked
calyx of the teazle, or the ruff round some pigeons' necks), so in a
state of nature some small modifications, apparently beautifully adapted
to certain ends, may perhaps be produced from the accidents of the
reproductive system, and be at once propagated without long-continued
selection of small deviations towards that structure{298}. In
conjecturing by what stages any complicated organ in a species may have
arrived at its present state, although we may look to the analogous
organs in other existing species, we should do this merely to aid and
guide our imaginations; for to know the real stages we must look only
through one line of species, to one ancient stock, from which the
species in question has descended. In considering the eye of a
quadruped, for instance, though we may look at the eye of a molluscous
animal or of an insect, as a proof how simple an organ will serve some
of the ends of vision; and at the eye of a fish as a nearer guide of the
manner of simplification; we must remember that it is a mere chance
(assuming for a moment the truth of our theory) if any existing organic
being has preserved any one organ, in exactly the same condition, as it
existed in the ancient species at remote geological periods.

     {294} The difficulties discussed in the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 171,
     vi. p. 207, are the rarity of transitional varieties, the origin of
     the tail of the giraffe; the otter-like polecat (_Mustela vison_);
     the flying habit of the bat; the penguin and the logger-headed
     duck; flying fish; the whale-like habit of the bear; the
     woodpecker; diving petrels; the eye; the swimming bladder;
     Cirripedes; neuter insects; electric organs.

     Of these, the polecat, the bat, the woodpecker, the eye, the
     swimming bladder are discussed in the present Essay, and in
     addition some botanical problems.

     {295} In the _Origin_, Ed. vi. p. 275, the author replies to
     Mivart's criticisms (_Genesis of Species_, 1871), referring
     especially to that writer's objection "that natural selection is
     incompetent to account for the incipient stages of useful
     structures."

     {296} <The following sentence seems to have been intended for
     insertion here> "and that each eye throughout the animal kingdom is
     not only most useful, but _perfect_ for its possessor."

     {297} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 190, vi. p. 230.

     {298} This is one of the most definite statements in the present
     Essay of the possible importance of _sports_ or what would now be
     called _mutations_. As is well known the author afterwards doubted
     whether species could arise in this way. See _Origin_, Ed. v. p.
     103, vi. p. 110, also _Life and Letters_, vol. iii. p. 107.

The nature or condition of certain structures has been thought by some
naturalists to be of no use to the possessor{299}, but to have been
formed wholly for the good of other species; thus certain fruit and
seeds have been thought to have been made nutritious for certain
animals--numbers of insects, especially in their larval state, to exist
for the same end--certain fish to be bright coloured to aid certain
birds of prey in catching them, &c. Now could this be proved (which I am
far from admitting) the theory of natural selection would be quite
overthrown; for it is evident that selection depending on the advantage
over others of one individual with some slight deviation would never
produce a structure or quality profitable only to another species. No
doubt one being takes advantage of qualities in another, and may even
cause its extermination; but this is far from proving that this quality
was produced for such an end. It may be advantageous to a plant to have
its seeds attractive to animals, if one out of a hundred or a thousand
escapes being digested, and thus aids dissemination: the bright colours
of a fish may be of some advantage to it, or more probably may result
from exposure to certain conditions in favourable haunts for food,
_notwithstanding_ it becomes subject to be caught more easily by certain
birds.

     {299} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 210, vi. p. 322, where the question
     is discussed for the case of instincts with a proviso that the same
     argument applies to structure. It is briefly stated in its general
     bearing in _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 87, vi. p. 106.

If instead of looking, as above, at certain individual organs, in order
to speculate on the stages by which their parts have been matured and
selected, we consider an individual animal, we meet with the same or
greater difficulty, but which, I believe, as in the case of single
organs, rests entirely on our ignorance. It may be asked by what
intermediate forms could, for instance, a bat possibly have passed; but
the same question might have been asked with respect to the seal, if we
had not been familiar with the otter and other semi-aquatic carnivorous
quadrupeds. But in the case of the bat, who can say what might have been
the habits of some parent form with less developed wings, when we now
have insectivorous opossums and herbivorous squirrels fitted for merely
gliding through the air{300}. One species of bat is at present partly
aquatic in its habits{301}. Woodpeckers and tree-frogs are especially
adapted, as their names express, for climbing trees; yet we have species
of both inhabiting the open plains of La Plata, where a tree does not
exist{302}. I might argue from this circumstance that a structure
eminently fitted for climbing trees might descend from forms inhabiting
a country where a tree did not exist. Notwithstanding these and a
multitude of other well-known facts, it has been maintained by several
authors that one species, for instance of the carnivorous order, could
not pass into another, for instance into an otter, because in its
transitional state its habits would not be adapted to any proper
conditions of life; but the jaguar{303} is a thoroughly terrestrial
quadruped in its structure, yet it takes freely to the water and catches
many fish; will it be said that it is _impossible_ that the conditions
of its country might become such that the jaguar should be driven to
feed more on fish than they now do; and in that case is it impossible,
is it not probable, that any the slightest deviation in its instincts,
its form of body, in the width of its feet, and in the extension of the
skin (which already unites the base of its toes) would give such
individuals a better _chance_ of surviving and propagating young with
similar, barely perceptible (though thoroughly exercised),
deviations{304}? Who will say what could thus be effected in the course
of ten thousand generations? Who can answer the same question with
respect to instincts? If no one can, the _possibility_ (for we are not
in this chapter considering the _probability_) of simple organs or
organic beings being modified by natural selection and the effects of
external agencies into complicated ones ought not to be absolutely
rejected.

     {300} <Note in original.> No one will dispute that the gliding is
     most useful, probably necessary for the species in question.

     {301} <Note in original.> Is this the Galeopithecus? I forget.
     <_Galeopithecus_ "or the flying Lemur" is mentioned in the
     corresponding discussion in the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 181, vi. p. 217,
     as formerly placed among the bats. I do not know why it is described
      as partly aquatic in its habits.>

     {302} In the _Origin_, Ed. vi. p. 221, the author modified the
     statement that it _never_ climbs trees; he also inserted a sentence
     quoting Mr Hudson to the effect that in other districts this
     woodpecker climbs trees and bores holes. See Mr Darwin's paper,
     _Zoolog. Soc. Proc._, 1870, and _Life and Letters_, iii. p. 153.

     {303} Note by the late Alfred Newton. Richardson in _Fauna
     Boreali-Americana_, i. p. 49.

     {304} <Note in original.> See Richardson a far better case of a
     polecat animal <_Mustela vison_>, which half-year is aquatic.
     <Mentioned in _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 179, vi. p. 216.>




PART II{305}

ON THE EVIDENCE FAVOURABLE AND OPPOSED TO THE VIEW THAT SPECIES ARE
NATURALLY FORMED RACES, DESCENDED FROM COMMON STOCKS

     {305} In the _Origin_ the division of the work into Parts I and II
     is omitted. In the MS. the chapters of Part II are numbered afresh,
     the present being Ch. I of Pt. II. I have thought it best to call
     it Ch. IV and there is evidence that Darwin had some thought of
     doing the same. It corresponds to Ch. IX of _Origin_, Ed. i., Ch. X
     in Ed. vi.




