CHAPTER I

ON THE VARIATION OF ORGANIC BEINGS UNDER DOMESTICATION; AND ON THE
PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION


The most favourable conditions for variation seem to be when organic
beings are bred for many generations under domestication{186}: one may
infer this from the simple fact of the vast number of races and breeds
of almost every plant and animal, which has long been domesticated.
Under certain conditions organic beings even during their individual
lives become slightly altered from their usual form, size, or other
characters: and many of the peculiarities thus acquired are transmitted
to their offspring. Thus in animals, the size and vigour of body,
fatness, period of maturity, habits of body or consensual movements,
habits of mind and temper, are modified or acquired during the life of
the individual{187}, and become inherited. There is reason to believe
that when long exercise has given to certain muscles great development,
or disuse has lessened them, that such development is also inherited.
Food and climate will occasionally produce changes in the colour and
texture of the external coverings of animals; and certain unknown
conditions affect the horns of cattle in parts of Abyssinia; but whether
these peculiarities, thus acquired during individual lives, have been
inherited, I do not know. It appears certain that malconformation and
lameness in horses, produced by too much work on hard roads,--that
affections of the eyes in this animal probably caused by bad
ventilation,--that tendencies towards many diseases in man, such as
gout, caused by the course of life and ultimately producing changes of
structure, and that many other diseases produced by unknown agencies,
such as goitre, and the idiotcy resulting from it, all become
hereditary.

     {186} The cumulative effect of domestication is insisted on in the
     _Origin_, see _e.g. Origin_, Ed. i. p. 7, vi. p. 8.

     {187} This type of variation passes into what he describes as the
     direct effect of conditions. Since they are due to causes acting
     during the adult life of the organism they might be called
     individual variations, but he uses this term for congenital
     variations, _e.g._ the differences discoverable in plants raised
     from seeds of the same pod _(Origin_, Ed. i. p. 45, vi. p. 53).

It is very doubtful whether the flowers and leaf-buds, annually produced
from the same bulb, root, or tree, can properly be considered as parts
of the same individual, though in some respects they certainly seem to
be so. If they are parts of an individual, plants also are subject to
considerable changes during their _individual_ lives. Most
florist-flowers if neglected degenerate, that is, they lose some of
their characters; so common is this, that trueness is often stated, as
greatly enhancing the value of a variety{188}: tulips break their
colours only after some years' culture; some plants become double and
others single, by neglect or care: these characters can be transmitted
by cuttings or grafts, and in some cases by true or seminal propagation.
Occasionally a single bud on a plant assumes at once a new and widely
different character: thus it is certain that nectarines have been
produced on peach trees and moss roses on provence roses; white
currants on red currant bushes; flowers of a different colour from that
of the stock, in Chrysanthemums, Dahlias, sweet-williams, Azaleas, &c.,
&c.; variegated leaf-buds on many trees, and other similar cases. These
new characters appearing in single buds, can, like those lesser changes
affecting the whole plant, be multiplied not only by cuttings and such
means, but often likewise by true seminal generation.

     {188} <It is not clear where the following note is meant to come>:
     Case of Orchis,--most remarkable as not long cultivated by
     seminal propagation. Case of varieties which soon acquire, like
     _AEgilops_ and Carrot (and Maize) _a certain general character_ and
     then go on varying.

The changes thus appearing during the lives of individual animals and
plants are extremely rare compared with those which are congenital or
which appear soon after birth. Slight differences thus arising are
infinitely numerous: the proportions and form of every part of the
frame, inside and outside, appear to vary in very slight degrees:
anatomists dispute what is the "beau ideal" of the bones, the liver and
kidneys, like painters do of the proportions of the face: the proverbial
expression that no two animals or plants are born absolutely alike, is
much truer when applied to those under domestication, than to those in a
state of nature{189}. Besides these slight differences, single
individuals are occasionally born considerably unlike in certain parts
or in their whole structure to their parents: these are called by
horticulturists and breeders "sports"; and are not uncommon except when
very strongly marked. Such sports are known in some cases to have been
parents of some of our domestic races; and such probably have been the
parents of many other races, especially of those which in some senses
may be called hereditary monsters; for instance where there is an
additional limb, or where all the limbs are stunted (as in the Ancon
sheep), or where a part is wanting, as in rumpless fowls and tailless
dogs or cats{190}. The effects of external conditions on the size,
colour and form, which can rarely and obscurely be detected during one
individual life, become apparent after several generations: the slight
differences, often hardly describable, which characterize the stock of
different countries, and even of districts in the same country, seem to
be due to such continued action.

     {189} Here, as in the MS. of 1842, the author is inclined to
     minimise the variation occurring in nature.

     {190} This is more strongly stated than in the _Origin_, Ed. i. p.
     30.


_On the hereditary tendency._

A volume might be filled with facts showing what a strong tendency there
is to inheritance, in almost every case of the most trifling, as well as
of the most remarkable congenital peculiarities{191}. The term
congenital peculiarity, I may remark, is a loose expression and can only
mean a peculiarity apparent when the part affected is nearly or fully
developed: in the Second Part, I shall have to discuss at what period of
the embryonic life connatal peculiarities probably first appear; and I
shall then be able to show from some evidence, that at whatever period
of life a new peculiarity first appears, it tends hereditarily to appear
at a corresponding period{192}. Numerous though slight changes, slowly
supervening in animals during mature life (often, though by no means
always, taking the form of disease), are, as stated in the first
paragraphs, very often hereditary. In plants, again, the buds which
assume a different character from their stock likewise tend to transmit
their new peculiarities. There is not sufficient reason to believe that
either mutilations{193} or changes of form produced by mechanical
pressure, even if continued for hundreds of generations, or that any
changes of structure quickly produced by disease, are inherited; it
would appear as if the tissue of the part affected must slowly and
freely grow into the new form, in order to be inheritable. There is a
very great difference in the hereditary tendency of different
peculiarities, and of the same peculiarity, in different individuals and
species; thus twenty thousand seeds of the weeping ash have been sown
and not one come up true;--out of seventeen seeds of the weeping yew,
nearly all came up true. The ill-formed and almost monstrous "Niata"
cattle of S. America and Ancon sheep, both when bred together and when
crossed with other breeds, seem to transmit their peculiarities to their
offspring as truly as the ordinary breeds. I can throw no light on these
differences in the power of hereditary transmission. Breeders believe,
and apparently with good cause, that a peculiarity generally becomes
more firmly implanted after having passed through several generations;
that is if one offspring out of twenty inherits a peculiarity from its
parents, then its descendants will tend to transmit this peculiarity to
a larger proportion than one in twenty; and so on in succeeding
generations. I have said nothing about mental peculiarities being
inheritable for I reserve this subject for a separate chapter.

     {191} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 13.

     {192} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 86, vi. p. 105.

     {193} It is interesting to find that though the author, like his
     contemporaries, believed in the inheritance of acquired characters,
     he excluded the case of mutilation.


_Causes of Variation._

Attention must here be drawn to an important distinction in the first
origin or appearance of varieties: when we see an animal highly kept
producing offspring with an hereditary tendency to early maturity and
fatness; when we see the wild-duck and Australian dog always becoming,
when bred for one or a few generations in confinement, mottled in their
colours; when we see people living in certain districts or circumstances
becoming subject to an hereditary taint to certain organic diseases, as
consumption or plica polonica,--we naturally attribute such changes to
the direct effect of known or unknown agencies acting for one or more
generations on the parents. It is probable that a multitude of
peculiarities may be thus directly caused by unknown external agencies.
But in breeds, characterized by an extra limb or claw, as in certain
fowls and dogs; by an extra joint in the vertebrae; by the loss of a
part, as the tail; by the substitution of a tuft of feathers for a comb
in certain poultry; and in a multitude of other cases, we can hardly
attribute these peculiarities directly to external influences, but
indirectly to the laws of embryonic growth and of reproduction. When we
see a multitude of varieties (as has often been the case, where a cross
has been carefully guarded against) produced from seeds matured in the
very same capsule{194}, with the male and female principle nourished
from the same roots and necessarily exposed to the same external
influences; we cannot believe that the endless slight differences
between seedling varieties thus produced, can be the effect of any
corresponding difference in their exposure. We are led (as Mueller has
remarked) to the same conclusion, when we see in the same litter,
produced by the same act of conception, animals considerably different.

     {194} This corresponds to _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 10, vi. p. 9.

As variation to the degree here alluded to has been observed only in
organic beings under domestication, and in plants amongst those most
highly and long cultivated, we must attribute, in such cases, the
varieties (although the difference between each variety cannot possibly
be attributed to any corresponding difference of exposure in the
parents) to the indirect effects of domestication on the action of the
reproductive system{195}. It would appear as if the reproductive powers
failed in their ordinary function of producing new organic beings
closely like their parents; and as if the entire organization of the
embryo, under domestication, became in a slight degree plastic{196}. We
shall hereafter have occasion to show, that in organic beings, a
considerable change from the natural conditions of life, affects,
independently of their general state of health, in another and
remarkable manner the reproductive system. I may add, judging from the
vast number of new varieties of plants which have been produced in the
same districts and under nearly the same routine of culture, that
probably the indirect effects of domestication in making the
organization plastic, is a much more efficient source of variation than
any direct effect which external causes may have on the colour, texture,
or form of each part. In the few instances in which, as in the
Dahlia{197}, the course of variation has been recorded, it appears that
domestication produces little effect for several generations in
rendering the organization plastic; but afterwards, as if by an
accumulated effect, the original character of the species suddenly gives
way or breaks.

     {195} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 8, vi. p. 10.

     {196} For _plasticity_ see _Origin_, Ed. i. pp. 12, 132.

     {197} _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. I. p. 393.


_On Selection._

We have hitherto only referred to the first appearance in individuals of
new peculiarities; but to make a race or breed, something more is
generally{198} requisite than such peculiarities (except in the case of
the peculiarities being the direct effect of constantly surrounding
conditions) should be inheritable,--namely the principle of selection,
implying separation. Even in the rare instances of sports, with the
hereditary tendency very strongly implanted, crossing must be prevented
with other breeds, or if not prevented the best characterized of the
half-bred offspring must be carefully selected. Where the external
conditions are constantly tending to give some character, a race
possessing this character will be formed with far greater ease by
selecting and breeding together the individuals most affected. In the
case of the endless slight variations produced by the indirect effects
of domestication on the action of the reproductive system, selection is
indispensable to form races; and when carefully applied, wonderfully
numerous and diverse races can be formed. Selection, though so simple in
theory, is and has been important to a degree which can hardly be
overrated. It requires extreme skill, the results of long practice, in
detecting the slightest difference in the forms of animals, and it
implies some distinct object in view; with these requisites and
patience, the breeder has simply to watch for every the smallest
approach to the desired end, to select such individuals and pair them
with the most suitable forms, and so continue with succeeding
generations. In most cases careful selection and the prevention of
accidental crosses will be necessary for several generations, for in new
breeds there is a strong tendency to vary and especially to revert to
ancestral forms: but in every succeeding generation less care will be
requisite for the breed will become truer; until ultimately only an
occasional individual will require to be separated or destroyed.
Horticulturalists in raising seeds regularly practise this, and call it
"roguing," or destroying the "rogues" or false varieties. There is
another and less efficient means of selection amongst animals: namely
repeatedly procuring males with some desirable qualities, and allowing
them and their offspring to breed freely together; and this in the
course of time will affect the whole lot. These principles of selection
have been _methodically_ followed for scarcely a century; but their
high importance is shown by the practical results, and is admitted
in the writings of the most celebrated agriculturalists and
horticulturalists;--I need only name Anderson, Marshall, Bakewell, Coke,
Western, Sebright and Knight.

     {198} Selection is here used in the sense of isolation, rather than
     as implying the summation of small differences. Professor Henslow
     in his _Heredity of Acquired Characters in Plants_, 1908, p. 2,
     quotes from Darwin's _Var. under Dom._, Ed. i. II. p. 271, a
     passage in which the author, speaking of the direct action of
     conditions, says:--"A new sub-variety would thus be produced
     without the aid of selection." Darwin certainly did not mean to
     imply that such varieties are freed from the action of natural
     selection, but merely that a new form may appear without
     _summation_ of new characters. Professor Henslow is apparently
     unaware that the above passage is omitted in the second edition of
     _Var. under Dom._, II. p. 260.

Even in well-established breeds the individuals of which to an
unpractised eye would appear absolutely similar, which would give, it
might have been thought, no scope to selection, the whole appearance of
the animal has been changed in a few years (as in the case of Lord
Western's sheep), so that practised agriculturalists could scarcely
credit that a change had not been effected by a cross with other breeds.
Breeders both of plants and animals frequently give their means of
selection greater scope, by crossing different breeds and selecting the
offspring; but we shall have to recur to this subject again.

The external conditions will doubtless influence and modify the results
of the most careful selection; it has been found impossible to prevent
certain breeds of cattle from degenerating on mountain pastures; it
would probably be impossible to keep the plumage of the wild-duck in the
domesticated race; in certain soils, no care has been sufficient to
raise cauliflower seed true to its character; and so in many other
cases. But with patience it is wonderful what man has effected. He has
selected and therefore in one sense made one breed of horses to race and
another to pull; he has made sheep with fleeces good for carpets and
other sheep good for broadcloth; he has, in the same sense, made one dog
to find game and give him notice when found, and another dog to fetch
him the game when killed; he has made by selection the fat to lie mixed
with the meat in one breed and in another to accumulate in the bowels
for the tallow-chandler{199}; he has made the legs of one breed of
pigeons long, and the beak of another so short, that it can hardly feed
itself; he has previously determined how the feathers on a bird's body
shall be coloured, and how the petals of many flowers shall be streaked
or fringed, and has given prizes for complete success;--by selection, he
has made the leaves of one variety and the flower-buds of another
variety of the cabbage good to eat, at different seasons of the year;
and thus has he acted on endless varieties. I do not wish to affirm that
the long-and short-wooled sheep, or that the pointer and retriever, or
that the cabbage and cauliflower have certainly descended from one and
the same aboriginal wild stock; if they have not so descended, though it
lessens what man has effected, a large result must be left unquestioned.

     {199} See the Essay of 1842, p. 3.

In saying as I have done that man makes a breed, let it not be
confounded with saying that man makes the individuals, which are given
by nature with certain desirable qualities; man only adds together and
makes a permanent gift of nature's bounties. In several cases, indeed,
for instance in the "Ancon" sheep, valuable from not getting over
fences, and in the turnspit dog, man has probably only prevented
crossing; but in many cases we positively know that he has gone on
selecting, and taking advantage of successive small variations.

Selection{200} has been _methodically_ followed, as I have said, for
barely a century; but it cannot be doubted that occasionally it has been
practised from the remotest ages, in those animals completely under the
dominion of man. In the earliest chapters of the Bible there are rules
given for influencing the colours of breeds, and black and white sheep
are spoken of as separated. In the time of Pliny the barbarians of
Europe and Asia endeavoured by cross-breeding with a wild stock to
improve the races of their dogs and horses. The savages of Guyana now do
so with their dogs: such care shows at least that the characters of
individual animals were attended to. In the rudest times of English
history, there were laws to prevent the exportation of fine animals of
established breeds, and in the case of horses, in Henry VIII's time,
laws for the destruction of all horses under a certain size. In one of
the oldest numbers of the _Phil. Transactions_, there are rules for
selecting and improving the breeds of sheep. Sir H. Bunbury, in 1660,
has given rules for selecting the finest seedling plants, with as much
precision as the best recent horticulturalist could. Even in the most
savage and rude nations, in the wars and famines which so frequently
occur, the most useful of their animals would be preserved: the value
set upon animals by savages is shown by the inhabitants of Tierra del
Fuego devouring their old women before their dogs, which as they
asserted are useful in otter-hunting{201}: who can doubt but that in
every case of famine and war, the best otter-hunters would be preserved,
and therefore in fact selected for breeding. As the offspring so
obviously take after their parents, and as we have seen that savages
take pains in crossing their dogs and horses with wild stocks, we may
even conclude as probable that they would sometimes pair the most useful
of their animals and keep their offspring separate. As different races
of men require and admire different qualities in their domesticated
animals, each would thus slowly, though unconsciously, be selecting a
different breed. As Pallas has remarked, who can doubt but that the
ancient Russian would esteem and endeavour to preserve those sheep in
his flocks which had the thickest coats. This kind of insensible
selection by which new breeds are not selected and kept separate, but a
peculiar character is slowly given to the whole mass of the breed, by
often saving the life of animals with certain characteristics, we may
feel nearly sure, from what we see has been done by the more direct
method of separate selection within the last 50 years in England, would
in the course of some thousand years produce a marked effect.

     {200} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 33, vi. p. 38. The evidence is given
     in the present Essay rather more fully than in the _Origin_.

     {201} _Journal of Researches_, Ed. 1860, p. 214. "Doggies catch
     otters, old women no."


_Crossing Breeds._

When once two or more races are formed, or if more than one race, or
species fertile _inter se_, originally existed in a wild state, their
crossing becomes a most copious source of new races{202}. When two
well-marked races are crossed the offspring in the first generation take
more or less after either parent or are quite intermediate between them,
or rarely assume characters in some degree new. In the second and
several succeeding generations, the offspring are generally found to
vary exceedingly, one compared with another, and many revert nearly to
their ancestral forms. This greater variability in succeeding
generations seems analogous to the breaking or variability of organic
beings after having been bred for some generations under
domestication{203}. So marked is this variability in cross-bred
descendants, that Pallas and some other naturalists have supposed that
all variation is due to an original cross; but I conceive that the
history of the potato, Dahlia, Scotch Rose, the guinea-pig, and of many
trees in this country, where only one species of the genus exists,
clearly shows that a species may vary where there can have been no
crossing. Owing to this variability and tendency to reversion in
cross-bred beings, much careful selection is requisite to make
intermediate or new permanent races: nevertheless crossing has been a
most powerful engine, especially with plants, where means of propagation
exist by which the cross-bred varieties can be secured without incurring
the risk of fresh variation from seminal propagation: with animals the
most skilful agriculturalists now greatly prefer careful selection from
a well-established breed, rather than from uncertain cross-bred stocks.

     {202} The effects of crossing is much more strongly stated here
     than in the _Origin_. See Ed. i. p. 20, vi. p. 23, where indeed the
     opposite point of view is given. His change of opinion may be due
     to his work on pigeons. The whole of the discussion on crossing
     corresponds to Chapter VIII of the _Origin_, Ed. i. rather than to
     anything in the earlier part of the book.

     {203} The parallelism between the effects of a cross and the
     effects of conditions is given from a different point of view in
     the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 266, vi. p. 391. See the experimental
     evidence for this important principle in the author's work on
     _Cross and Self-Fertilisation_. Professor Bateson has suggested
     that the experiments should be repeated with gametically pure
     plants.

Although intermediate and new races may be formed by the mingling of
others, yet if the two races are allowed to mingle quite freely, so that
none of either parent race remain pure, then, especially if the parent
races are not widely different, they will slowly blend together, and the
two races will be destroyed, and one mongrel race left in its place.
This will of course happen in a shorter time, if one of the parent
races exists in greater number than the other. We see the effect of this
mingling, in the manner in which the aboriginal breeds of dogs and pigs
in the Oceanic Islands and the many breeds of our domestic animals
introduced into S. America, have all been lost and absorbed in a mongrel
race. It is probably owing to the freedom of crossing, that, in
uncivilised countries, where inclosures do not exist, we seldom meet
with more than one race of a species: it is only in enclosed countries,
where the inhabitants do not migrate, and have conveniences for
separating the several kinds of domestic animals, that we meet with a
multitude of races. Even in civilised countries, want of care for a few
years has been found to destroy the good results of far longer periods
of selection and separation.

This power of crossing will affect the races of all _terrestrial_
animals; for all terrestrial animals require for their reproduction the
union of two individuals. Amongst plants, races will not cross and blend
together with so much freedom as in terrestrial animals; but this
crossing takes place through various curious contrivances to a
surprising extent. In fact such contrivances exist in so very many
hermaphrodite flowers by which an occasional cross may take place, that
I cannot avoid suspecting (with Mr Knight) that the reproductive action
requires, at _intervals_, the concurrence of distinct individuals{204}.
Most breeders of plants and animals are firmly convinced that benefit is
derived from an occasional cross, not with another race, but with
another family of the same race; and that, on the other hand, injurious
consequences follow from long-continued close interbreeding in the same
family. Of marine animals, many more, than was till lately believed,
have their sexes on separate individuals; and where they are
hermaphrodite, there seems very generally to be means through the water
of one individual occasionally impregnating another: if individual
animals can singly propagate themselves for perpetuity, it is
unaccountable that no terrestrial animal, where the means of observation
are more obvious, should be in this predicament of singly perpetuating
its kind. I conclude, then, that races of most animals and plants, when
unconfined in the same country, would tend to blend together.

     {204} The so-called Knight-Darwin Law is often misunderstood. See
     Goebel in _Darwin and Modern Science_, 1909, p. 419; also F.
     Darwin, _Nature_, Oct. 27, 1898.


_Whether our domestic races have descended from one or more wild
stocks._

Several naturalists, of whom Pallas{205} regarding animals, and Humboldt
regarding certain plants, were the first, believe that the breeds of
many of our domestic animals such as of the horse, pig, dog, sheep,
pigeon, and poultry, and of our plants have descended from more than one
aboriginal form. They leave it doubtful, whether such forms are to be
considered wild races, or true species, whose offspring are fertile when
crossed _inter se_. The main arguments for this view consist, firstly,
of the great difference between such breeds, as the Race-and Cart-Horse,
or the Greyhound and Bull-dog, and of our ignorance of the steps or
stages through which these could have passed from a common parent; and
secondly that in the most ancient historical periods, breeds resembling
some of those at present most different, existed in different countries.
The wolves of N. America and of Siberia are thought to be different
species; and it has been remarked that the dogs belonging to the
savages in these two countries resemble the wolves of the same country;
and therefore that they have probably descended from two different wild
stocks. In the same manner, these naturalists believe that the horse of
Arabia and of Europe have probably descended from two wild stocks both
apparently now extinct. I do not think the assumed fertility of these
wild stocks any very great difficulty on this view; for although in
animals the offspring of most cross-bred species are infertile, it is
not always remembered that the experiment is very seldom fairly tried,
except when two near species _both_ breed freely (which does not readily
happen, as we shall hereafter see) when under the dominion of man.
Moreover in the case of the China{206} and common goose, the canary and
siskin, the hybrids breed freely; in other cases the offspring from
hybrids crossed with either pure parent are fertile, as is practically
taken advantage of with the yak and cow; as far as the analogy of plants
serves, it is impossible to deny that some species are quite fertile
_inter se_; but to this subject we shall recur.

     {205} Pallas' theory is discussed in the _Origin_, Ed. i. pp. 253,
     254, vi. p. 374.

     {206} See Darwin's paper on the fertility of hybrids from the
     common and Chinese goose in _Nature_, Jan. 1, 1880.

On the other hand, the upholders of the view that the several breeds of
dogs, horses, &c., &c., have descended each from one stock, may aver
that their view removes all _difficulty about fertility_, and that the
main argument from the high antiquity of different breeds, somewhat
similar to the present breeds, is worth little without knowing the date
of the domestication of such animals, which is far from being the case.
They may also with more weight aver that, knowing that organic beings
under domestication do vary in some degree, the argument from the great
difference between certain breeds is worth nothing, without we know the
limits of variation during a long course of time, which is far from the
case. They may argue that almost every county in England, and in many
districts of other countries, for instance in India, there are slightly
different breeds of the domestic animals; and that it is opposed to all
that we know of the distribution of wild animals to suppose that these
have descended from so many different wild races or species: if so, they
may argue, is it not probable that countries quite separate and exposed
to different climates would have breeds not slightly, but considerably,
different? Taking the most favourable case, on both sides, namely that
of the dog; they might urge that such breeds as the bull-dog and
turnspit have been reared by man, from the ascertained fact that
strictly analogous breeds (namely the Niata ox and Ancon sheep) in other
quadrupeds have thus originated. Again they may say, seeing what
training and careful selection has effected for the greyhound, and
seeing how absolutely unfit the Italian greyhound is to maintain itself
in a state of nature, is it not probable that at least all
greyhounds,--from the rough deerhound, the smooth Persian, the common
English, to the Italian,--have descended from one stock{207}? If so, is
it so improbable that the deerhound and long-legged shepherd dog have so
descended? If we admit this, and give up the bull-dog, we can hardly
dispute the probable common descent of the other breeds.

     {207} _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 19, vi. p. 22.

The evidence is so conjectural and balanced on both sides that at
present I conceive that no one can decide: for my own part, I lean to
the probability of most of our domestic animals having descended from
more than one wild stock; though from the arguments last advanced and
from reflecting on the slow though inevitable effect of different races
of mankind, under different circumstances, saving the lives of and
therefore selecting the individuals most useful to them, I cannot doubt
but that one class of naturalists have much overrated the probable
number of the aboriginal wild stocks. As far as we admit the difference
of our races <to be> due to the differences of their original stocks, so
much must we give up of the amount of variation produced under
domestication. But this appears to me unimportant, for we certainly know
in some few cases, for instance in the Dahlia, and potato, and rabbit,
that a great number of varieties have proceeded from one stock; and, in
many of our domestic races, we know that man, by slowly selecting and by
taking advantage of sudden sports, has considerably modified old races
and produced new ones. Whether we consider our races as the descendants
of one or several wild stocks, we are in far the greater number of cases
equally ignorant what these stocks were.


_Limits to Variation in degree and kind._

Man's power in making races deends, in the first instance, on the stock
on which he works being variable; but his labours are modified and
limited, as we have seen, by the direct effects of the external
conditions,--by the deficient or imperfect hereditariness of new
peculiarities,--and by the tendency to continual variation and
especially to reversion to ancestral forms. If the stock is not variable
under domestication, of course he can do nothing; and it appears that
species differ considerably in this tendency to variation, in the same
way as even sub-varieties from the same variety differ greatly in this
respect, and transmit to their offspring this difference in tendency.
Whether the absence of a tendency to vary is an unalterable quality in
certain species, or depends on some deficient condition of the
particular state of domestication to which they are exposed, there is no
evidence. When the organization is rendered variable, or plastic, as I
have expressed it, under domestication, different parts of the frame
vary more or less in different species: thus in the breeds of cattle it
has been remarked that the horns are the most constant or least variable
character, for these often remain constant, whilst the colour, size,
proportions of the body, tendency to fatten &c., vary; in sheep, I
believe, the horns are much more variable. As a general rule the less
important parts of the organization seem to vary most, but I think there
is sufficient evidence that every part occasionally varies in a slight
degree. Even when man has the primary requisite variability he is
necessarily checked by the health and life of the stock he is working
on: thus he has already made pigeons with such small beaks that they can
hardly eat and will not rear their own young; he has made families of
sheep with so strong a tendency to early maturity and to fatten, that in
certain pastures they cannot live from their extreme liability to
inflammation; he has made (_i.e._ selected) sub-varieties of plants with
a tendency to such early growth that they are frequently killed by the
spring frosts; he has made a breed of cows having calves with such large
hinder quarters that they are born with great difficulty, often to the
death of their mothers{208}; the breeders were compelled to remedy this
by the selection of a breeding stock with smaller hinder quarters; in
such a case, however, it is possible by long patience and great loss, a
remedy might have been found in selecting cows capable of giving birth
to calves with large hinder quarters, for in human kind there <are> no
doubt hereditary bad and good confinements. Besides the limits already
specified, there can be little doubt that the variation of different
parts of the frame are connected together by many laws{209}: thus the
two sides of the body, in health and disease, seem almost always to vary
together: it has been asserted by breeders that if the head is much
elongated, the bones of the extremities will likewise be so; in
seedling-apples large leaves and fruit generally go together, and serve
the horticulturalist as some guide in his selection; we can here see the
reason, as the fruit is only a metamorphosed leaf. In animals the teeth
and hair seem connected, for the hairless Chinese dog is almost
toothless. Breeders believe that one part of the frame or function being
increased causes other parts to decrease: they dislike great horns and
great bones as so much flesh lost; in hornless breeds of cattle certain
bones of the head become more developed: it is said that fat
accumulating in one part checks its accumulation in another, and
likewise checks the action of the udder. The whole organization is so
connected that it is probable there are many conditions determining the
variation of each part, and causing other parts to vary with it; and man
in making new races must be limited and ruled by all such laws.

     {208} _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 211.

     {209} This discussion corresponds to the _Origin_, Ed. i. pp. 11
     and 143, vi. pp. 13 and 177.


_In what consists Domestication._

In this chapter we have treated of variation under domestication, and it
now remains to consider in what does this power of domestication
consist{210}, a subject of considerable difficulty. Observing that
organic beings of almost every class, in all climates, countries, and
times, have varied when long bred under domestication, we must conclude
that the influence is of some very general nature{211}. Mr Knight alone,
as far as I know, has tried to define it; he believes it consists of an
excess of food, together with transport to a more genial climate, or
protection from its severities. I think we cannot admit this latter
proposition, for we know how many vegetable products, aborigines of this
country, here vary, when cultivated without any protection from the
weather; and some of our variable trees, as apricots, peaches, have
undoubtedly been derived from a more genial climate. There appears to be
much more truth in the doctrine of excess of food being the cause,
though I much doubt whether this is the sole cause, although it may well
be requisite for the kind of variation desired by man, namely increase
of size and vigour. No doubt horticulturalists, when they wish to raise
new seedlings, often pluck off all the flower-buds, except a few, or
remove the whole during one season, so that a great stock of nutriment
may be thrown into the flowers which are to seed. When plants are
transported from high-lands, forests, marshes, heaths, into our gardens
and greenhouses, there must be a considerable change of food, but it
would be hard to prove that there was in every case an excess of the
kind proper to the plant. If it be an excess of food, compared with that
which the being obtained in its natural state{212}, the effects continue
for an improbably long time; during how many ages has wheat been
cultivated, and cattle and sheep reclaimed, and we cannot suppose their
_amount_ of food has gone on increasing, nevertheless these are amongst
the most variable of our domestic productions. It has been remarked
(Marshall) that some of the most highly kept breeds of sheep and cattle
are truer or less variable than the straggling animals of the poor,
which subsist on commons, and pick up a bare subsistence{213}. In the
case of forest-trees raised in nurseries, which vary more than the same
trees do in their aboriginal forests, the cause would seem simply to lie
in their not having to struggle against other trees and weeds, which in
their natural state doubtless would limit the conditions of their
existence. It appears to me that the power of domestication resolves
itself into the accumulated effects of a change of all or some of the
natural conditions of the life of the species, often associated with
excess of food. These conditions moreover, I may add, can seldom remain,
owing to the mutability of the affairs, habits, migrations, and
knowledge of man, for very long periods the same. I am the more inclined
to come to this conclusion from finding, as we shall hereafter show,
that changes of the natural conditions of existence seem peculiarly to
affect the action of the reproductive system{214}. As we see that
hybrids and mongrels, after the first generation, are apt to vary much,
we may at least conclude that variability does not altogether depend on
excess of food.

     {210} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 7, vi. p. 7.

     {211} <Note in the original.> "Isidore G. St Hilaire insists that
     breeding in captivity essential element. Schleiden on alkalies.
     <See _Var. under Dom._, Ed. ii. vol. II. p. 244, note 10.> What is
     it in domestication which causes variation?"

     {212} <Note in the original.> "It appears that slight changes of
     condition <are> good for health; that more change affects the
     generative system, so that variation results in the offspring;
     that still more change checks or destroys fertility not of the
     offspring." Compare the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 9, vi. p. 11. What the
     meaning of "not of the offspring" may be is not clear.

     {213} In the _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 41, vi. p. 46 the question is
     differently treated; it is pointed out that a large stock of
     individuals gives a better chance of available variations
     occurring. Darwin quotes from Marshall that sheep in small lots can
     never be improved. This comes from Marshall's _Review of the
     Reports to the Board of Agriculture_, 1808, p. 406. In this Essay
     the name Marshall occurs in the margin. Probably this refers to
     _loc. cit._ p. 200, where unshepherded sheep in many parts of
     England are said to be similar owing to mixed breeding not being
     avoided.

     {214} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 8, vi. p. 8.

After these views, it may be asked how it comes that certain animals
and plants, which have been domesticated for a considerable length of
time, and transported from very different conditions of existence, have
not varied much, or scarcely at all; for instance, the ass, peacock,
guinea-fowl, asparagus, Jerusalem artichoke{215}. I have already said
that probably different species, like different sub-varieties, possess
different degrees of tendency to vary; but I am inclined to attribute in
these cases the want of numerous races less to want of variability than
to selection not having been practised on them. No one will take the
pains to select without some corresponding object, either of use or
amusement; the individuals raised must be tolerably numerous, and not so
precious, but that he may freely destroy those not answering to his
wishes. If guinea-fowls or peacocks{216} became "fancy" birds, I cannot
doubt that after some generations several breeds would be raised. Asses
have not been worked on from mere neglect; but they differ in _some_
degree in different countries. The insensible selection, due to
different races of mankind preserving those individuals most useful to
them in their different circumstances, will apply only to the oldest and
most widely domesticated animals. In the case of plants, we must put
entirely out of the case those exclusively (or almost so) propagated by
cuttings, layers or tubers, such as the Jerusalem artichoke and laurel;
and if we put on one side plants of little ornament or use, and those
which are used at so early a period of their growth that no especial
characters signify, as asparagus{217} and seakale, I can think of none
long cultivated which have not varied. In no case ought we to expect to
find as much variation in a race when it alone has been formed, as when
several have been formed, for their crossing and recrossing will
greatly increase their variability.

     {215} See _Origin_, Ed. i. p. 42, vi. p. 48.

     {216} <Note in the original.> There are white peacocks.

     {217} <Note in the original.> There are varieties of asparagus.


_Summary of first Chapter._

To sum up this chapter. Races are made under domestication: 1st, by the
direct effects of the external conditions to which the species is
exposed: 2nd, by the indirect effects of the exposure to new conditions,
often aided by excess of food, rendering the organization plastic, and
by man's selecting and separately breeding certain individuals, or
introducing to his stock selected males, or often preserving with care
the life of the individuals best adapted to his purposes: 3rd, by
crossing and recrossing races already made, and selecting their
offspring. After some generations man may relax his care in selection:
for the tendency to vary and to revert to ancestral forms will decrease,
so that he will have only occasionally to remove or destroy one of the
yearly offspring which departs from its type. Ultimately, with a large
stock, the effects of free crossing would keep, even without this care,
his breed true. By these means man can produce infinitely numerous
races, curiously adapted to ends, both most important and most
frivolous; at the same time that the effects of the surrounding
conditions, the laws of inheritance, of growth, and of variation, will
modify and limit his labours.




