Chapter III{22} accounts for the curious error which occurs in pp. 18
and 22 where the second Part of the Essay is called Part III.

     {22} It is evident that _Parts_ and _Chapters_ were to some extent
     interchangeable in the author's mind, for p. 1 (of the MS. we have
     been discussing) is headed in ink Chapter I, and afterwards altered
     in pencil to Part I.

The division of the Essay into two parts is maintained in the enlarged
Essay of 1844, in which he writes: "The Second Part of this work is
devoted to the general consideration of how far the general economy of
nature justifies or opposes the belief that related species and genera
are descended from common stocks." The _Origin of Species_ however is
not so divided.

We may now return to the question of the date of the Essay. I have found
additional evidence in favour of 1842 in a sentence written on the back
of the Table of Contents of the 1844 MS.--not the copied version but the
original in my father's writing: "This was written and enlarged from a
sketch in 37 pages{23} in Pencil (the latter written in summer of 1842
at Maer and Shrewsbury) in beginning of 1844, and finished it <_sic_> in
July; and finally corrected the copy by Mr Fletcher in the last week in
September." On the whole it is impossible to doubt that 1842 is the date
of the earlier of the two Essays.

     {23} On p. 23 of the MS. of the _Foundations_ is a reference to the
     "back of p. 21 bis": this suggests that additional pages had been
     interpolated in the MS. and that it may once have had 37 in place
     of 35 pp.

The sketch of 1842 is written on bad paper with a soft pencil, and is in
many parts extremely difficult to read, many of the words ending in mere
scrawls and being illegible without context. It is evidently written
rapidly, and is in his most elliptical style, the articles being
frequently omitted, and the sentences being loosely composed and often
illogical in structure. There is much erasure and correction, apparently
made at the moment of writing, and the MS. does not give the impression
of having been re-read with any care. The whole is more like hasty
memoranda of what was clear to himself, than material for the convincing
of others.

Many of the pages are covered with writing on the back, an instance of
his parsimony in the matter of paper{24}. This matter consists partly of
passages marked for insertion in the text, and these can generally
(though by no means always) be placed where he intended. But he also
used the back of one page for a preliminary sketch to be rewritten on a
clean sheet. These parts of the work have been printed as footnotes, so
as to allow what was written on the front of the pages to form a
continuous text. A certain amount of repetition is unavoidable, but much
of what is written on the backs of the pages is of too much interest to
be omitted. Some of the matter here given in footnotes may, moreover,
have been intended as the final text and not as the preliminary sketch.

     {24} _Life and Letters_, i. p. 153.

When a word cannot be deciphered, it is replaced by:--<illegible>, the
angular brackets being, as already explained, a symbol for an insertion
by the editor. More commonly, however, the context makes the
interpretation of a word reasonably sure although the word is not
strictly legible. Such words are followed by an inserted mark of
interrogation <?>. Lastly, words inserted by the editor, of which the
appropriateness is doubtful, are printed thus <variation?>.

Two kinds of erasure occur in the MS. of 1842. One by vertical lines
which seem to have been made when the 35 pp. MS. was being expanded into
that of 1844, and merely imply that such a page is done with: and
secondly the ordinary erasures by horizontal lines. I have not been
quite consistent in regard to these: I began with the intention of
printing (in square brackets) all such erasures. But I ultimately found
that the confusion introduced into the already obscure sentences was
greater than any possible gain; and many such erasures are altogether
omitted. In the same way I have occasionally omitted hopelessly obscure
and incomprehensible fragments, which if printed would only have
burthened the text with a string of <illegible>s and queried words. Nor have I
printed the whole of what is written on the backs of the pages, where it
seemed to me that nothing but unnecessary repetition would have been the
result.

In the matter of punctuation I have given myself a free hand. I may no
doubt have misinterpreted the author's meaning in so doing, but without
such punctuation, the number of repellantly crabbed sentences would have
been even greater than at present. In dealing with the Essay of 1844, I
have corrected some obvious slips without indicating such alterations,
because the MS. being legible, there is no danger of changing the
author's meaning.

The sections into which the Essay of 1842 is divided are in the original
merely indicated by a gap in the MS. or by a line drawn across the page.
No titles are given except in the case of Sec. VIII.; and Sec. II. is the only
section which has a number in the original. I might equally well have
made sections of what are now subsections, _e.g. Natural Selection_ p.
7, or _Extermination_ p. 28. But since the present sketch is the germ of
the Essay of 1844, it seemed best to preserve the identity between the
two works, by using such of the author's divisions as correspond to the
chapters of the enlarged version of 1844. The geological discussion with
which Part II begins corresponds to two chapters (IV and V) of the 1844
Essay. I have therefore described it as Sec.Sec. IV. and V., although I cannot
make sure of its having originally consisted of two sections. With this
exception the ten sections of the Essay of 1842 correspond to the ten
chapters of that of 1844.

The _Origin of Species_ differs from the sketch of 1842 in not being
divided into two parts. But the two volumes resemble each other in
general structure. Both begin with a statement of what may be called the
mechanism of evolution,--variation and selection: in both the argument
proceeds from the study of domestic organisms to that of animals and
plants in a state of nature. This is followed in both by a discussion of
the _Difficulties on Theory_ and this by a section _Instinct_ which in
both cases is treated as a special case of difficulty.

If I had to divide the _Origin_ (first edition) into two parts without
any knowledge of earlier MS., I should, I think, make Part II begin with
Ch. VI, _Difficulties on Theory_. A possible reason why this part of the
argument is given in Part I of the Essay of 1842 may be found in the
Essay of 1844, where it is clear that the chapter on instinct is placed
in Part I because the author thought it of importance to show that
heredity and variation occur in mental attributes. The whole question is
perhaps an instance of the sort of difficulty which made the author give
up the division of his argument into two Parts when he wrote the
_Origin_. As matters stand Sec.Sec. IV. and V. of the 1842 Essay correspond to
the geological chapters, IX and X, in the _Origin_. From this point
onwards the material is grouped in the same order in both works:
geographical distribution; affinities and classification; unity of type
and morphology; abortive or rudimentary organs; recapitulation and
conclusion.

In enlarging the Essay of 1842 into that of 1844, the author retained
the sections of the sketch as chapters in the completer presentment. It
follows that what has been said of the relation of the earlier Essay to
the _Origin_ is generally true of the 1844 Essay. In the latter,
however, the geological discussion is, clearly instead of obscurely,
divided into two chapters, which correspond roughly with Chapters IX and
X of the _Origin_. But part of the contents of Chapter X (_Origin_)
occurs in Chapter VI (1844) on Geographical Distribution. The treatment
of distribution is particularly full and interesting in the 1844 Essay,
but the arrangement of the material, especially the introduction of Sec.
III. p. 183, leads to some repetition which is avoided in the _Origin_.
It should be noted that Hybridism, which has a separate chapter (VIII)
in the _Origin_, is treated in Chapter II of the Essay. Finally that
