
Transcriber's note:

   Text enclosed between underscores was in italics in the original
   (_italics_).

   Text enclosed between equal sings was in bold face in the original
   (=bold=).

   A list of changes made to the text is at the end of the e-book.





THE CHURCH
THE SCHOOLS
and
EVOLUTION

by

J. E. CONANT, D.D.

Bible Teacher and Evangelist

Author of _Why the Pastor Failed_, _Is it Scholarly to Be
Orthodox?_ _Is Atonement by Substitution Reasonable?_
_Divine Dynamite_, etc.







Chicago
The Bible Institute Colportage Ass'n
826 North La Salle Street

Copyright, 1922
by
J. E. Conant




FOREWORD


The following pages have grown out of a paper, following the same outline
more briefly, which was read before the Pastors' Conference of the San
Juaquin Valley Baptist Association, the largest association in the Northern
California Baptist Convention. At the close of the reading a request for
its publication was enthusiastically and unanimously voted.

The author has since divided the paper into two chapters; in the first
chapter has added to and classified the quotations concerning evolution,
has enlarged the remarks on the influence of evolution on Scripture
doctrine, and has both enlarged upon and entirely rearranged the matter of
the second chapter, in an attempt to make it both more obvious and more
conclusive to the reader than it was felt to be to the hearers.

The term "Church" in the following pages is intended to cover that
fellowship, of every name, which includes all who have been really born
again. When organized church fellowship is referred to, the whole
evangelical Protestant fellowship in general is meant, as distinguished
from Roman Catholic, Greek church, or any other non-evangelical faith,
although true Christians are to be found within every fellowship. The term
"Schools," in its larger meaning, includes all institutions of learning
maintained at private, denominational, or public expense; more
specifically, those dominated by the present evolutionary philosophy are
meant. With notable exceptions in a few schools that refuse to be so
dominated, the whole educational system in general, especially in the
Northern States, has practically capitulated to the evolutionists, and the
schools that have so surrendered are particularly in mind in the following
discussion.

It is but a humble effort to point out what is obviously the only possible
solution for the present distressing and destructive controversy between
the Church and the Schools, but the author fondly hopes that it will prove
to be a real, even though small, contribution toward the ending of that
controversy.

It is sent out with the prayer that He who is Truth incarnate may lead
those in both the Church and the Schools who really want to know the truth
at all cost to a common attitude toward Himself, to a common, because truly
scientific, method of investigating truth in both the natural and the
spiritual realms, and therefore to a common goal which will unite them
against all those forces that seek to capture both the Church and the
Schools for the enemy.

                                                              J. E. Conant.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I
  THE PRESENT CONTROVERSY--THE CAUSE

                                                                   Page

  I. =The Theory of Evolution is Unproven=                           11
    1. The Testimony =for= Evolution                                 12
    2. The Testimony =Against= Evolution
      a. In the Biological Realm; (i) The Doctrine of Natural
         Selection; (ii) The Doctrine of Acquired Characters;
         (iii) The Biogenetic "Law"                                  14
      b. In the Geological Realm                                     19
      c. The Whole Theory in General                                 20

  II. =The Logic of Evolution is Destructive=                        23
    1. Evolution and =Inspiration=                                   23
    2. Evolution and the =Fall of Man=                               26
    3. Evolution and the =Nature of Sin=                             29
    4. Evolution and the =Nature of Christ=                          32
    5. Evolution and the =Atonement=                                 34
    6. Evolution and the =New Birth=                                 35
    7. Evolution and the =Holiness of God=                           40


  CHAPTER II
  THE PRESENT CONTROVERSY--THE CURE

  I. =Truth Must be Classified Scientifically=                       46
    1. The =Realms of Truth= Must be Classified                      46
    2. The =Faculties of Investigation= Must be Distinguished        47
    3. The =Different Kinds of Truth= Must be Separated              52
    4. The =Primacy of Primary Truth= Must be Maintained             52

  II. =Truth Must be Investigated Scientifically=                    55
    1. =Faith= Must be Given Precedence Over =Reason=                55
      a. The Method of the Rationalist                               56
      b. The Method of the Believer                                  61
    2. The =Spiritual Realm= Must be Given Primacy Over the
        =Natural=                                                    68
      a. By Surrendering the Heart to God                            70
      b. By Interpreting Natural Truth in the Light of the Bible     76




The Church, the Schools and Evolution



CHAPTER I

The Present Controversy--the Cause


It must be so self-evident as to be axiomatic that there are two distinct
realms in God's universe. One is the realm that contains the Creator, and
the other that which contains His creation. Of course, if we are
pantheists, we will not admit that classification; but those who believe
and accept the Word of God are not pantheists.

It is inevitable, therefore, that the facts, the verities, the truths of
the universe should be classified according to their realms; those having
to do with the Person and relationships of the Creator being separable into
one realm, and those having to do with His creation into another.

That this classification is universally recognized, is a matter of common
knowledge. That class of truth which has to do with God we call
supernatural, or spiritual, truth, and that which relates to His creation
we call natural, or scientific, truth.

It is precisely because of this classification that there are two separate
institutions in the world, each of which is working in one of these realms.
The =Church= accepts it as her function to receive and propagate spiritual
truth, as God has revealed Himself in His character; while the =Schools=
accept it as their function to study and teach scientific truth, as God has
revealed Himself in His works. This is the entire logic of the existence in
the world of these two separate institutions, both of which are engaged in
the investigation and propagation of truth.

But although the Church and the Schools are entirely separate institutions,
and although they are engaged, one in the spread of spiritual truth and the
other in the diffusion of scientific truth, yet =truth is an eternal
unity=. This must be so, in the nature of things, for all truth proceeds
from and reveals the one and only God Who is its Source and of Whom it is
the consistent and perfect expression.

Conflict between these two realms of truth is, therefore, eternally
impossible. Men talk of a conflict between science and the Bible, but no
such conflict exists. If there is any contradiction, it is not between the
statements of Scripture and the facts of science, but between the false
interpretations of Scripture and the immature conclusions of science.
Herbert Spencer was right when he said:

    It is incredible that there should be two orders
    of truth in absolute and everlasting opposition.

Not until God begins to contradict Himself will these two realms of truth
ever be in conflict with each other.

The Church and the Schools, then, can never be in conflict until some
abnormal condition creeps into the one or the other; for, although working
in different realms of truth, each is yet receiving revelations of the one
God who can never be in conflict with Himself.

When these two institutions are in normal condition, each will not only not
destroy the work of the other, but each will make every possible
contribution to the success of the other, and antagonism between them will
be impossible. When conflict occurs, therefore, it is because the teachers
in one realm or in both have not arrived at the truth in their respective
realms.

And so when the Church denies the =facts=--not the unproven theories,
notice, but the clearly demonstrated =facts=--of science, something is
wrong with the Church. And when the Schools put forth =theories= that
undermine the very foundations of the Church and her work, there is
something wrong with the Schools.

Now it is no secret that the Church and the Schools, broadly speaking, are
in serious conflict with each other today. Where lies the cause? If the
Church is denying and fighting the demonstrated =facts= of science, then
the Church is clearly at fault and ought to get right at once.

But this is not so, for the conflict is altogether over unproven theories,
and has nothing to do with demonstrated scientific facts. And so this takes
us at once and completely out of the realm of science and lands us in that
of speculative philosophy--a fact that shows how unreasonable and even
foolish the conflict is. For the thing that has set the Church and the
Schools into battle array against each other is that speculative guess
concerning origins called the =Theory of Evolution=. This lies at the heart
of the opposition that each of these great institutions feels toward the
other.

It is true that a certain amount of the trouble arises from
misunderstanding, because the term "evolution" is used in so many loose,
illogical, and unscientific ways; but back of all misuse of the term there
is a fundamental cause on which this antagonism rests, and that cause is
found in the nature of the theory and its effects on those who consistently
believe it.

The technical meaning of the term may be said to be a structural change in
the direction of development into higher forms of existence, brought about
by internal force without external aid.

There is also a scientific classification of the subject, into sub-organic,
organic, and super-organic evolution. Sub-organic evolution applies to the
development of non-living matter; organic, to the development of vegetable
and animal life; and super-organic, to the development of intellectual,
moral, and spiritual life. But while the subject is thus classified for
convenience, it is all one doctrine, and is meant to describe one process
of development from the non-living realm to the spiritual.

There is also one theory which is called causal, and another which is
called modal, evolution. According to the former, evolution is the first
cause of all life, which, of course, excludes God as the First Cause; and
according to the latter, evolution is the mode, or method, used by God in
creation.

Now, the Church has vital reasons for fighting this philosophical guess.
One reason is, that it is entirely unsupported by =facts=, and is therefore
altogether unproven. But if this were the only reason, the Church could be
convicted of the supreme folly of her entire history, for turning aside to
fight an unproven guess. A more vital reason is that the theory does not
stop with the natural realm, but goes right on up into the realm of
spiritual truth, and assumes to pronounce on the most vital spiritual
realities in such a way that the logic of the theory, if consistently
accepted, utterly destroys both the foundations of the Church and the
content of the Gospel. Indeed, evolution has been proclaimed to the world
as the ally of a philosophy which boasts of its capacity to drive
Christianity out of existence.

For the Church, therefore, to fail to fight a theory that strikes at her
very vitals would be to become a traitor to the Lord who bought her and
sent her into the world to preach His gospel. And so she is compelled to
choose between submitting to an unproven and destructive theory, which has
never saved =any= one who has believed it, and preaching the gospel of
God's grace, which has infallibly saved =every= one who has believed it.
The true Church is fighting the theory of evolution in order that the
message she is commissioned to preach may not be rendered of no effect
by a non-belligerent attitude toward it being mistaken for approval of it.

Not only the fact that the theory is entirely unproven, but also and more
particularly the nature of its influence on faith in the Bible compels the
Church to reckon with it. We will go into these two reasons for
antagonizing this speculative guess.


I. =The Theory of Evolution is Unproven.=

The reason we reflect on this for a few moments lies in what has already
been said. If evolution is a fact, then for the Church to refuse it and
fight against it would be to fight against God, which ought to bring her to
swift judgment for her mad folly. But if it is only an unproven theory,
then she is justified if she has good reasons for fighting its propagation.
We will therefore note what the scientists themselves have to say regarding
the theory.

1. Testimony =for= Evolution.

There are teachers of science who do not hesitate to assure us that the
doctrine of evolution is now no longer a theory but an assured fact. A few
representative quotations from that class will suffice.

Dr. P. C. Mitchell says, in a late edition of the "Encyclopedia
Britannica":

    The vast bulk of botanical and biological work on living
    and extinct forms published during the last quarter of the
    nineteenth century increased almost beyond all expectation
    the evidence for the =fact= of evolution.

Prof. S. C. Schmucker, of the West Chester, Pennsylvania, State Normal
School, in his book, "The Meaning of Evolution," says:

    Among students of animals and plants there is no longer any
    question as to the =truth= of evolution. That the animals of
    the present are the altered animals of the past, that the
    plants of today are the modified plants of yesterday, that
    civilized man of today is the savage of yesterday and the
    tree dweller of the day before, is no longer debatable to
    the mass of biologists.

Professor Fish, then of Denison University, Granville, Ohio, not long ago
dictated to his class, of which the writer's daughter was a member, the
following statement:

    Organic evolution is the key to all biological thinking of
    today. It is not a =theory= but a =fact=, because the main
    facts are true. Man is the off-spring of the lower animals,
    and the ancestry can be traced back to the simplest forms
    of animals known. All medical research takes that fact into
    account.

Prof. S. W. Williston, department of paleontology, University of Chicago,
says:

    I know of no biologist, whether of high or low degree,
    master or tyro, who ventures to suggest a doubt as to the
    fundamental truths of organic evolution.

Prof. William Patten, department of biology and zoology, Dartmouth College,
says:

    Evolution is the accepted doctrine of the natural sciences
    to the extent that it has long ceased to be a subject of
    debate in standard scientific journals or in organized
    conferences of men of science.

Prof. Charles B. Davenport, department of experimental evolution, Carnegie
Institute, Washington, D. C., says:

    I do not know of a single modern scientific
    man who does not believe in evolution.

And Prof. Frank R. Lillie, department of embryology, University of Chicago,
says:

    I feel pretty impatient over the statements of certain
    religious teachers that evolution has collapsed.

These statements are sufficiently representative to indicate the attitude
toward the theory of evolution of a great section of the scientific world
today, including many science teachers in schools founded and endowed by
the Church for the giving of Christian education.

But it is not true that the theory is universally accepted or even
scientifically proved to be a fact. Let a few scientists of at least equal
eminence with those quoted above bear their testimony.

2. Testimony =Against= Evolution.

But before we quote this testimony it may be well to pause a moment for a
little information that may make it more intelligible to us.

The so-called proofs of evolution are derived from both the biological and
the geological realms of natural science.

=a.= We will consider, first, the so-called proofs taken from the
=biological= realm.

Darwin's theory was arrived at from data taken from the biological realm,
and consists of two doctrines. One is the doctrine of =natural selection=,
which was his own personal contribution to the discussion, and the other is
that of =the inheritance of acquired characters=, which he borrowed from
Lamarck. The former is the doctrine meant when pure Darwinism is referred
to.

(i). The Doctrine of Natural Selection.

Darwin himself said:

    We cannot prove that a single species has changed,

and, also,

    Many of the objections to the hypothesis of evolution are so
    serious I can hardly reflect on them without being
    staggered.

Dr. N. S. Shaler, department of geology, Harvard, says:

    It begins to be evident that the Darwinian hypothesis is
    still essentially unverified.... It is not yet proven that
    a single species of the two or three million now inhabiting
    the earth had been established solely or mainly by the
    operation of natural selection.

Professor Fleischmann, of Erlangen, has said:

    The Darwinian theory of descent has in the realms of nature
    not a single fact to confirm it. It is not the result of
    scientific research, but purely the product of the
    imagination.

And John Burroughs, although an evolutionist up to his recent death, said
of Darwin, in the August, 1920, "Atlantic Monthly":

    He has already been as completely shorn of his selection
    doctrines as Samson was shorn of his locks.

If these statements from scientific men mean anything at all, they mean, at
least, that pure Darwinism is altogether unproven, if not that it is dead.

(ii). The Doctrine of Acquired Characters.

Spencer made this doctrine the fundamental one in his evolutionary
philosophy. Its importance was so vital to him that he said:

    Close contemplation of the facts impresses me more strongly
    than ever with the two alternatives--either there has been
    inheritance of acquired characters, or there has been no
    evolution.

It is of great interest, therefore, to note what competent scientists have
said about this doctrine.

Dr. Thomas Hunt Morgan, department of science, Columbia University, says:

    Today the theory has few followers among trained
    investigators, but it still has a popular vogue that is
    wide-spread and vociferous.

Alfred Russell Wallace, in his "Autobiography," said:

    All the available evidence is opposed to the doctrine of
    acquired characters.

Prof. William Bateson, in his 1914 Presidential Address before the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, said:

    We have done with the notion that Darwin came latterly to
    favor, that large differences can arise by the accumulation
    of small differences.

He also remarks that the new knowledge of heredity shows that whatever
evolution there is occurs by loss of factors and not by gain, and that in
this way the progress of science is

    destroying much that till lately passed for gospel.

And commenting on these remarks of Bateson, Prof. S. C. Holmes, of the
University of California, says they are

    an illustration of the bankruptcy of the present
    evolutionary theory.

Then Prof. George McCready Price, department of geology, Pacific Union
College, Helena, California, has said very recently:

    It has long since been definitely settled that acquired
    characters are not transmitted in heredity.

And in another place he exclaims:

    If cells did not maintain their ancestral character in a
    very remarkable way, what would be the use of grafting a
    good kind of fruit on to a stock of poorer quality? The very
    permanency of the graft thus produced is proof of the
    persistency with which the cells reproduce only "after their
    kind."

Then in speaking of Mendel's discoveries in the realm of heredity, and
which have now become scientifically demonstrated laws, he says that

    the whole foundation of biological evolution has been
    completely undermined by these new discoveries.

And he sums up the conclusions to which present-day scientists are coming,
in the words:

    The principles of heredity, as now understood, have brought
    us back to that great truth which is given in the first
    chapter of our Bible, that each form of plant or animal was
    designed by the Creator to reproduce only "after its kind."

The one who accepts this testimony, therefore, is compelled to conclude
that the doctrine of acquired characters is also dead.

(iii). The Biogenetic "Law."

In addition to the two forms of the theory above noted, Haeckel added
emphasis to these so-called biological proofs by putting forth a doctrine
that came to be called the biogenetic "law," even though it was nothing but
a hypothesis. It was called the recapitulation theory, because it was
imagined that the developing human embryo recapitulates or passes through
successive stages of the more mature forms of some of the lower animals.

Concerning this theory Dr. A. Weber, University of Geneva, Switzerland,
said in the "Scientific American Monthly" for February, 1921:

    The critical comments of such men as O. Hertwig, Kiebel, and
    Vialleton, indeed, have practically torn to shreds the
    aforesaid fundamental biogenetic law. Its almost universal
    abandonment has left considerably at a loss those
    investigators who sought in the structures of organisms the
    key to their remote origins or to their relationships.

So it would seem that if this form of the theory is utterly destitute of
proof, the whole biological foundation of the theory is gone.

It is perfectly in harmony with scientific testimony, therefore, that
Professor Price says concerning this phase of the theory:

    The science of twenty or thirty years ago was in high glee at
    the thought of having almost proved the theory of biological
    evolution. Today, for every careful, candid inquirer, these
    hopes are crushed; and with weary, reluctant sadness does
    modern biology now confess that the Church has probably been
    right all the time.

If these men have borne faithful testimony to the situation as it now
exists in the biological realm, the only conclusion possible is that the
borrowed portion of Darwin's theory has also utterly collapsed.

It is passing strange, in view of these facts, that competent and scholarly
men of science should still cling to a theory so utterly discredited by
eminent scientists. Is it because they are determined to believe in
evolution in spite of such evidence to the contrary, or is it because there
is still left a foundation for the doctrine lying back of all this which
has not yet been disturbed, even though "the biological clues have all run
out," as Professor Price says they have?

The supposed evidence of geology, with its theories of uniformity and
successive ages, forms precisely such a foundation.

=b.= We will consider, therefore, in the next place, the so-called proofs
taken from the =geological= realm.

Dr. T. H. Morgan, who was quoted above as against the theory of the
inheritance of acquired characters, rests his faith in the theory of
evolution on a geological foundation. He says:

    The direct evidence furnished by fossil remains is by all
    odds the strongest evidence we have in favor of organic
    evolution.

Has present-day science anything to say about this? In spite of the
collapse of the supposed biological proofs, are there any tangible and
scientifically established proofs in the geological realm?

Professor Price, who, as noted above, is a geologist, and therefore speaks
according to first-hand knowledge, shows that fossil remains are deposited
over many thousands of square miles in widely separated sections of the
earth, not only in the opposite order from that required to prove the
theory of evolution, but in a great variety of orders, demonstrating, as he
says, that they cannot be arranged off into ages, but that they simply
indicate different forms of life that existed side by side. He then
exclaims:

    =How much of the earth's crust would we have to find= in this
    upside down order of the fossils, before we would be
    convinced that there must be something hopelessly wrong with
    the theory of Successive Ages which drives otherwise
    competent observers to throw away their common sense and
    cling desperately to a fantastic theory in the very teeth of
    such facts?

Then he tells us that

    the theory of Successive Ages, with the forms of life
    appearing on earth in a precise and invariable order, is dead
    for all coming time for every man who has had a chance to
    examine the evidence and has enough training in logic and
    scientific methods to know when a thing is really proved.

And he concludes that the work of strict inductive science has destroyed
this "fantastic scheme" forever,

    and thus =leaves the way open= to say that life must have
    originated by just such a literal creation as is recorded in
    the first chapters of the Bible.

If these statements have any meaning at all, they can mean only that the
geological foundation for the theory of evolution has also collapsed.

=c.= It remains for us to listen to the testimony of a few more men of
science concerning the =whole theory= of evolution in general.

Professor Virchow, the greatest German authority on physiology, and once a
strong advocate of the theory, has said:

    It is all nonsense. It cannot be proved by science that man
    descends from the ape or from any other animal. Since the
    announcement of the theory, all real scientific knowledge has
    proceeded in the opposite direction.

Professor Tyndall, in an article in the "Fortnightly Review," said:

    There ought to be a clear distinction made between science in
    a state of hypothesis and science in a state of fact. And
    inasmuch as it is still in its hypothetical stage, the ban of
    exclusion ought to fall upon the theory of evolution. I agree
    with Virchow that the proofs of it are still wanting, that
    the failures have been lamentable, and that the doctrine has
    been utterly discredited.

Prof. L. S. Beal, physiologist and professor of anatomy in King's College,
London, says:

    The idea of any relation having been established between the
    non-living and the living by a gradual advance from lifeless
    matter to the lowest forms of life, and so onward to the
    higher and more complex, has not the slightest evidence from
    the facts of any section of living nature of which anything
    is known.

Professor Zoeckler, of the University of Greifswald, says:

    The claim that the hypothesis of descent is scientifically
    secured must most decidedly be denied.

DeCyon, the Russian scientist, says:

    Evolution is pure assumption.

Prof. George McCready Price says:

    In almost every one of the separate sciences the arguments
    upon which the theory of evolution gained its popularity a
    generation or so ago are now known by the various specialists
    to have been blunders, or mistakes, or hasty conclusions of
    one kind or another.

And Sir J. William Dawson says:

    "The evolution doctrine itself is one of the strangest
    phenomena of humanity." It is "a system destitute of any
    shadow of proof, and supported merely by vague analogies and
    figures of speech, and by the arbitrary and artificial
    coherence of its parts." And he concludes that it is
    "surpassingly strange" that such a theory should find
    adherents.

To this list might be added such names as those of Professor Henslow,
former President of the British Association; Prof. C. C. Everett, of
Harvard; Dr. E. Dennert; Dr. Goette; Prof. Edward Hoppe, the "Hamburg
Savant"; Professor Paulson, of Berlin; Professor Rutemeyer, of Basel; and
Prof. Max Wundt, of Leipsic.

After all this contrary testimony on the part of such unquestioned
authorities, we are forced to conclude not only that the testimony for
evolution is far from unanimous, but also that the theory is altogether
unproven, and that it is therefore utterly unscientific to teach it as a
fact, especially when those who do so furnish us with no direct evidence
whatever.

So long, therefore, as there is an unbridged gulf in the sub-organic realm
between nothing and matter, in the organic realm between the non-living and
the living, and in the super-organic realm between animals and man, the
Church cannot be blamed for being scientific enough to refuse to accept
such an unproven and discredited theory, at least until a few =facts= are
forthcoming. Until then we must conclude that all the proofs the scientists
can furnish rest altogether on inferences and assumptions.

When evolutionists can produce =matter= from nothing or increase =energy=
by any natural means known to man, or bring forth the =living= from the
non-living, or bring into existence even one new and distinct =species=,
then they will be in a position to compel the Church to listen to proofs;
but until then the Church is forced to reject evolution.

The most serious aspect of the controversy, however, lies in the second
objection mentioned above.


=II. The Logic of Evolution Is Destructive.=

It is destructive of all the fundamental doctrines the Church was sent into
the world to preach.

1. It destroys the doctrine of the =inspiration of the Bible=, by denying
its inerrancy and infallible and final authority.

Over and again in the early verses of Genesis we are told that God created
the various species to reproduce =after their kind=. But evolution says
that this is not true, for as a matter of fact, the various species have
continuously evolved from one to another all the way to man.

To a mind that is working normally, these two propositions are mutually
exclusive. And so those who retain their intellectual integrity and
consistency, and who therefore cannot accept two contradictory propositions
at the same time, are compelled to =make a choice= between them.

Huxley saw this when he said:

    The doctrine of evolution is directly antagonistic to that of
    creation. Evolution, if consistently accepted, makes it
    impossible to believe the Bible.

When Professor Schmucker; therefore, speaks of the creation story as

    the poetical account of Genesis;

when Dr. S. B. Meeser, of Crozer Theological Seminary, describes the
Scriptures as

    the survivals of the fittest of those communion experiences
    which men, who have lived intensely in the moral interest,
    have had with God;

when Dr. H. C. Vedder, of the same seminary, says the Scriptures

    "grew in ... accuracy" as they were written;

when Dr. W. H. P. Faunce, President of Brown University, can say:

    Mr. Gladstone's last book is called "The Impregnable Rock of
    Holy Scripture." The very title shows a conception of the
    Bible at the farthest removed from the present Biblical
    scholarship, to which the Bible is a growth, not a rock;

when Dr. Ernest D. Burton, of the University of Chicago, says:

    Some among us have been constrained to admit that the books
    [of the Bible] are not infallible in history or in matters of
    science, and not wholly consistent and therefore not
    ultimately and as a whole inerrant in the field of morals and
    religion;

and when Dr. Shailer Mathews, of the same University, urges us to think the
gospel

    in terms of evolution,

and then shows us what that means to him when he says:

    For in the New Testament there are conceptions which the
    modern world under the dominance of science [at the heart of
    which lies the evolutionary philosophy] finds it impossible
    to understand, much less to believe;

these men are simply demonstrating the fact that they still retain their
intellectual integrity and consistency, and that they are therefore
entirely unable to accept the doctrine of evolution and believe in an
inerrant Bible at the same time. That is, the logic of the doctrine of
evolution destroys for them the faith that, in its original manuscripts,
the Bible as it came from God to man was "truth unmixed with error," with
the resulting confidence that He who gave it has preserved it to us by His
providence essentially as it was given.

This means that these men and all who agree with them have rejected that
Word which is forever settled in heaven, in order to accept a hypothesis
which is never settled on earth; that they have given up the Book which has
stood unchanged through the centuries against every conceivable form of
assault, and taken in its place a set of scientific speculations that have
either to be revised or discarded for new speculations every few years;
that they have turned from an inspired, inerrant and authoritative
revelation of God, and turned to an unproven theory which makes the Bible a
human document, of supreme value, so they say, as unfolding the religious
evolution of the race, but full of errors because of the human element in
it.

The result of this is the so-called "scientific" or "historical" method of
interpreting the Bible, which means, to quote Dr. Meeser, that while the
Scriptures

    have the wisdom of experts in religion, [yet] "authority" is
    scarcely the term to describe their value, and may, when
    applied to them, obscure their real character.

"But why make all this ado about it," say the evolutionists; "it is all
simply a question of interpretation."

That is absolutely right. It is the interpretation of the evolutionists set
in opposition to that of the Holy Spirit; and the true Church, compelled to
make a choice, takes that of the Holy Spirit.

2. The logic of evolution destroys the doctrine of the =fall of man= and
its result in total depravity.

After an address somewhat along these lines in one of the largest normal
schools in the world, the science professor said to the writer, "Yes, but
you know there is evolution and =evolution=."

That is indeed true. We are all aware of the fact that there are various
kinds, shapes, and colors of evolution, from theistic to atheistic; but the
fact still remains that =every= theory is =still evolution=, and that =any=
theory of evolution whatsoever, if it means anything at all, means steady
=progress= from lower to higher. Progress is certainly the one thought that
is vital to any definition of evolution, and progress =downward= is
excluded by the very meaning of the word, and so evolution under =any=
theory can mean nothing but progress =upward=.

But the Word of God says that man has gone =down= from a condition of
purity and innocence into a condition of such sinful enmity against God,
that he is not only not subject to the law of God, but is utterly incapable
of bringing himself into subjection to it. And the experience of every
Christian gives sorrowful but certain evidence to that fact.

This condition the Bible describes as being =dead= in sin. And since death
is not death at all until it is total, man, therefore, being dead, is
totally dead--and this is total depravity.

This means that the only progress possible to man in his natural state is
=progress in corruption=. For total depravity, which is total spiritual
death, does not mean that the last limit of corruption has been reached,
but that while death is total, corruption may have just begun.

The reality of the natural man's spiritual death is abundantly illustrated
in human history. After man fell into sin, and died, he was given fullest
opportunity to recover himself and to demonstrate thereby that he was still
spiritually alive. But the corruption of spiritual death worked until man
was so far down in the filth of his moral putrefaction that the only way
God could save the race from extinction was to save the one family that had
accepted spiritual life from Him, and blot the rest of the race out in the
flood.

Then, starting out again under more favorable circumstances than before,
man went from bad to worse until, in one great universal brotherhood, he
rose up and defied God at the Tower of Babel, and God had to smash the
brotherhood into fragments by the confusion of languages.

Time after time God tried man and found his progress downward always, no
matter how favorable the circumstances that surrounded him, until finally
he came to earth Himself in the Person of His Son. This brought both the
reality and the completeness of man's spiritual death to a demonstration
that can never be refuted, for at the cross man displayed, to its eternal
uncovering, the awful corruption of that spiritual condition that could not
tolerate in its presence incarnate purity and holiness, even though he had
to become the murderer of God manifest in the flesh to get away from it.

Even in his worship man's progress is steadily downward. Beginning with
God, he progresses downward until he is worshipping birds, then beasts, and
then creeping things.

But evolution says that man is =coming up= from primitive conditions into
fuller life. And so the evolutionist cannot tolerate such doctrines as
these which the Word of God sets forth. To a consistent evolutionist, man
is not spiritually dead, for that would make progress out of the question.
And if progress upward is denied--if the only progress possible to the
natural man is progress in corruption, then the whole doctrine of evolution
is gone.

This is why it becomes necessary for Canon E. W. Barnes, of Westminster
Abbey, when he accepts evolution, to reject the Bible. He says:

    The inevitable acceptance of evolution means giving up belief
    in the fall and in all the theology built upon it by the
    theologians from St. Paul onward. Man was not made perfect
    and then marred; his evolution is still proceeding.

So here again it is utterly impossible for the consistent evolutionist to
accept the Bible doctrine of the fall of man.

3. The logic of evolution destroys the doctrine of =sin=.

The Bible makes man's fall deliberate and wilful, and his continued
attitude of sinful enmity against God, in spite of all God's offered power
to change it into love, one of excuseless lawlessness and rebellion.

This makes man entirely responsible for his sin and accountable to God for
everything sin does in his life. And so the Bible says:

    Every one shall give account of himself to God.

And those who go out of this life in the unconfessed and therefore
unforgiven sin of rejecting God's mercy in Christ shall "go away into
everlasting punishment," where there will be "weeping and gnashing of
teeth."

But to the evolutionary philosophy, sin cannot be "exceeding sinful," for
it is either inherent in the process of evolution, or, at worst, but an
unfortunate slip in the working out of that process, if, indeed, it is not
even a mark of budding virtue.

John Fiske says:

    Theology has much to say about original sin. This original
    sin is neither more nor less than the brute inheritance that
    every man carries with him.

Rev. Dwight Bradley, a Cleveland, Ohio, pastor, says:

    There is no escape for intelligent people today from the
    acceptance of the law of evolution.... It follows that what
    we call evil [sin] is the remains of a lower form of life....
    We are in the midst of the slow process of ridding ourselves
    of our animal inheritance.

And Dr. Shailer Mathews follows the evolutionary philosophy to its logical
and necessary end when he says:

    But for men who think of God as dynamically imminent in an
    infinite universe, who think of man's relation to Him as
    determined not by statutory but by cosmic law, who regard sin
    and righteousness alike as the working out of the fundamental
    forces of life itself, the conception of God as King and of
    man as condemned or acquitted subject is but a figure of
    speech.

Such a doctrine as this absolutely and forever destroys man's
responsibility for sin. For if sin is what Dr. Mathews suggests it
is,--"the working out of the fundamental forces of life itself,"--then it
is inherent in man's natural constitution as a process of his evolution.
And if this is so, man is in no way responsible for his sin.

This altogether removes man's accountability to God, for he cannot be
brought to account for that which is the working out of the fundamental
forces of life itself, and which is therefore inevitable in the very
workings of his nature. And even if sin is an unfortunate slip in the
process of evolution, man cannot be held accountable for an accident.

This doctrine also puts a high premium on the whole beastly, selfish,
lustful, murderous history of the race, for it makes sin a ladder up which
man is climbing to his high destiny.

Punishment for sin is therefore absolutely out of the question. For if man
is not responsible for his sin, and if God punishes him for it, as the
Bible says He will, even by the law of cause and effect, that would make
God an infinite tyrant and an unspeakable fiend. And so if God is not a
monster, and if evolution is true, there is no punishment for sin, and the
Bible lies.

Thinking men see that this is the inevitable logic of the doctrine of
evolution. Sir J. William Dawson, speaking of the evolutionary doctrines as
speculations, says:

    They seek to revolutionize the religious beliefs of the
    world, and if accepted would destroy much of the existing
    theology and philosophy.... With one class of minds they
    constitute a sort of religion.... With another and perhaps
    larger class, they are accepted as affording a welcome
    deliverance from all scruples of conscience and fears of a
    hereafter.

The theory of evolution cannot be consistently held and the statements of
the Bible concerning sin and its consequences be accepted at the same time.
And so the evolutionist will come, sooner or later, to refuse any meaning
to Scripture statements concerning sin, as did Dr. W. N. Clarke, when he
said:

    We have no historical narrative of the beginning of sin, and
    theology receives from the Scriptures no record of that
    beginning.

That is, the perfectly plain and easily understood statements of Scripture
concerning the beginning of sin are altogether unhistorical and utterly
unworthy of credence to the man who looks at the Bible from the
"scientific" or "historical" standpoint, which is the evolutionist's method
of handling the Word of God. To accept evolution, therefore, is to
discredit the Bible.

4. The logic of evolution destroys the doctrines of the =Deity= and the
=virgin birth= of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Bible makes Christ the Seed of the woman, not of the man, as all other
human beings are; it makes His conception to have been that of the Holy
Spirit; it declares His virgin birth in language that cannot be
misunderstood; it makes Him the Son of God, not the son of Joseph.

It also makes Him God tabernacling in the flesh; it makes Him the Second
Person of the Triune =God=; it declares in so many words that He =is= God.

But evolution cannot accept such a doctrine, and so the evolutionist
juggles the Scripture statements of His Deity and denies His virgin birth,
making Him a Jewish bastard, born out of wedlock, and stained forever with
the shame of His mother's immorality.

Dr. A. C. McGiffert says of Christ, that He is

    no more divine than we are, or than nature is.

A magazine article on "The Cosmic Coming of the Christ" says:

    First the little scum on the warm, stagnant water, then the
    little colonies of cells, the organisms, the green moss and
    lichen, the beauty of vegetation, the movement of shell fish,
    sponges, jelly fish, worms, crabs, trilobites, centipedes,
    insects, fish, frogs, lizards, dinosaurs, reptile birds,
    birds, kangaroos, mastodons, deer, apes, primitive man, cave
    man, man of the stone age, of earliest history, Abraham's
    migration, the Exodus, the development of the Jewish
    religious life and the climax in that purest of maidens, Mary
    of Nazareth. The hour had come for the dawn of a new day, and
    the light of that new day was the birth of Jesus. The eternal
    purpose of the ages was now to be made clear, and the long,
    long aeons of creation explained.

It is no wonder that after quoting these words the "Sunday School Times"
exclaims:

    In other words, without moss we could not have had Mary;
    without an ape we could not have had Abraham; and--shocking
    blasphemy--without a centipede we could not have had Christ!
    Praise God, we may turn from this to the words of God; "For
    it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the
    discernment of the discerning I will bring to naught."

And so here once more the consistent evolutionist is compelled to reject
the Bible by denying the doctrines of the Deity and the virgin birth of
Christ.

5. The logic of evolution destroys the doctrine of =atonement by
substitution=.

The Bible says:

    Without the shedding of blood there is no remission [of sin].

    Him who knew no sin He hath made to be sin for us.

    The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.

    Who Himself bore our sins in His own body on the tree.

    We "were redeemed ... with the precious blood of Christ."

    We are "justified by His blood."

    The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin.

These and many other statements make Christ's death one of atonement by
substitution for our sins.

But evolution cannot tolerate such a doctrine. To the evolutionist this is
a "doctrine of the shambles," a "slaughter house religion," a "gospel of
gore." Christ's death is rather a revelation of the evolutionist's
conception of divine love, and an example of sacrificial service set before
struggling man to help him climb. Let those who believe in the
evolutionist's "historical" method of interpreting Scripture speak for
themselves.

Dr. Gerald Birney Smith, of the University of Chicago, says:

    To insist dogmatically, as an _à priori_ principle, that
    "without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sin,"
    is both foolish and futile in an age that has abandoned the
    conception of bloody sacrifice and which is loudly demanding
    the abolition of capital punishment.

Dr. Walter Rauschenbusch said:

    What the death of Jesus now does for us, the death of the
    prophets did for him.

Dr. H. C. Vedder says:

    Jesus never taught and never authorized anybody to teach in
    his name that he suffered in our stead and bore the penalty
    of our sins;

and also:

    The "one crowning absurdity of theology" is "that the penalty
    of an evil deed can be vicariously borne by another while he
    goes scot free,"

which he describes in another place as

    taking an immunity bath in the "fountain filled with blood."

And Dr. J. H. Coffin, of Earlham College, Earlham, Indiana, says:

    The sacrificial life of Jesus is the essential factor in His
    atonement. His principles and example are the way of the
    individual and society to God.

Such statements make it perfectly evident that those who accept evolution
utterly reject God's provision for salvation through the shed blood of
Christ as an atonement by substitution for our sins.

6. The logic of evolution destroys the doctrine of =regeneration=.

The Bible describes man as dead to God and running away from Him; as having
a nature so full of corruption that "From the sole of the foot even unto
the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and
putrifying sores"; and as having a character in the grip of such enmity
against God that by nature he "loves darkness rather than light."

This indicates that man is =past improvement= in his natural state, for no
improvement is possible in the dead.

The Bible therefore speaks, not of the improvement, but of the burial, of
the old life, and of resurrection, by the power of a new nature, to newness
of life.

Hear what it says:

    We were buried with Christ by baptism into death, that like
    as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
    Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

There is a large section of the Church that understand this passage to
refer to immersion in water in confession of faith in Christ. Not that they
believe that immersion has anything to do with saving us, for they do not,
but that it is the divinely appointed symbol or picture of the salvation
that has already become a reality in the life.

To an immersionist, therefore, when a believer is buried with Christ in
symbol in his baptism, and raised again in symbol of resurrection, he
confesses, among other things, that by his first birth he is so completely
dead that there is nothing left to do with him but to bury him, and his
willingness to be buried in the grave of Christ has been met by God with
the gift of the risen and incorruptible life which is in His Son, and by
which he is now enabled to walk in newness of life.

And so an immersionist cannot be a consistent evolutionist. For when an
evolutionist is immersed, he is either perpetrating a meaningless travesty
on immersion, or else he is denying the whole doctrine of evolution. For
immersion certainly does not picture a step in the progress of the living,
but rather the burial of the totally dead. Immersing churches that have
gone over to the evolutionary position should therefore be consistent and
nail up their baptistries.

But another large portion of the Church believe that the above passage does
not refer to immersion in water, but rather to the statement:

    For by one Spirit have we all been baptized into one body.

They regard it as referring to the inward, spiritual union with Christ
which takes place in the new birth, rather than to an outward act. For in
the moment of regeneration, every believer is baptized by the Holy Spirit
into the Body of Christ.

But even so, the word "buried" still stands in the first passage above, and
a burial has to do with the dead, not with the living. Being "buried,"
therefore, when the Holy Spirit baptizes us into Christ, it is "into
death," not into an enlarging life, because we are so completely dead that
the baptizing Spirit sets the "old man" forever aside as utterly
unimprovable, in order that He may make us "partakers of the divine nature"
by which we become a "new creation" in Christ.

All this, however, is utterly intolerable to the consistent evolutionist.
For if man is dead and therefore unimprovable, that makes progress upward
impossible, and, if that is impossible, the whole doctrine of evolution is
at an end.

And so the evolutionist assumes the presence of life, and conceives the
race to be progressing upward out of crude forms and unethical conceptions
toward God. It is perfectly consistent, therefore, that he should seek to
stir man's noble aspirations and should present high ideals for him to
strive after. For it is not life man needs, they say, it is simply
conversion to higher ideals and aspirations in life.

Hence Dr. E. D. Burton is in perfect harmony with this evolutionary
conception when he says:

    Jesus was a teacher of great principles, which it is
    incumbent upon us to apply to the multitudinous phases and
    experiences of life, and the embodiment of an ideal, which it
    is ours to endeavor, as best we can, to achieve.

Dr. Herbert L. Willett, of the University of Chicago, was also in harmony
with all this when he said in an address heard by the writer:

    It is the task of the Church to interpret to the world the
    ideals of Jesus for men to strive after.

And Dr. J. H. Coffin also voiced the evolutionary position when, in
speaking of conversion, he said:

    It is conversion =to= something, namely, the =principles= of
    Jesus.

Now when the logic of this conception is followed out, it turns evangelism
into religious education. And so it is easy to see why the advocates of
evolution are stressing religious education with increasing insistence. For
it is through the methods of religious education, according to Dr. Burton,
that the lost are being

    led to adopt the principles of Jesus and to accept his
    leadership quietly and gradually.

This makes regeneration simply an added impulse in the direction in which
men are imagined already to be going. It also has the effect of altogether
reversing the emphasis in the work of the Church with the lost. According
to Dr. Burton, it transfers it

    from the salvation of the individual, with emphasis upon
    rescue from future woe, to the creation of a human society
    dominated by the spirit of Jesus.

And Dr. Gerald Birney Smith, speaking of present-day missionary methods,
says:

    Humanly determined programs are being substituted for
    dogmatic decrees in the work of the churches. This is genuine
    democracy. The missionary enterprise is rapidly being
    conceived as a democratic social program rather than as the
    rescue of a few individuals from the divine wrath....
    Education is coming to be a primary means of accomplishing
    the missionary task.

Such a mission to the lost would be altogether unthinkable if men were
believed to be spiritually dead. For dead men are helpless to adopt
principles and strive after ideals. Dead men do not need education, they
need life.

Any one of average intelligence can see at a glance that these two programs
of salvation are headed in opposite directions. By one we strive after an
ideal; by the other we quit all striving and surrender to a Person. One is
salvation by a human resolution to press toward the pattern set before us
by the "Flower of the Race"; the other is salvation by a divine rescue from
that natural hatred of purity and holiness which made possible the murder
of the Son of God. By one program we adopt the principles and follow the
spirit of the life of Christ; by the other we trust in the merits of the
shed blood and substitutionary death of Christ.

These two programs are mutually exclusive. Thus the evolutionary philosophy
utterly destroys the doctrine of the new birth.

7. The logic of evolution destroys the doctrine of the =holiness of God=,
for it makes God the =author of sin=.

Le Conte says:

    If evolution be true, and especially if man be indeed a
    product of evolution, then what we call evil is not a unique
    phenomenon confined to man and the result of an accident [the
    fall], but must be a great fact pervading all nature and a
    part of its very constitution.

No thinking man can get away from that conclusion. For if evolution in any
form is a fact, then the thing the Bible calls sin was either somehow
embedded, by a competent and responsible Creator, in man's very
constitution as a necessary process of his evolution, or else it slipped
into the race through the bungling and unwatchful incompetence of an
impotent Creator. Thus in either case God becomes the author of sin!

This puts evolution almost, if not altogether, on the ground of blasphemy!
God responsible for the unspeakable woe and the unmeasured suffering of
man? God the author of that inherent force in man's nature which has filled
the earth with hatred, violence, bloodshed, and death? Let him think so who
can!

After these doctrines of the Word are set beside the evolutionary
philosophy, and after it begins to dawn on the thinking mind how utterly
irreconcilable they are, the absolute impossibility of a consistent
evolutionist believing in an inspired, inerrant, and infallible Bible
becomes well nigh an axiom. It is no wonder that Dr. W. B. Riley exclaims:

    What thinking man fails to see the infinity of space between
    Modernism and Orthodoxy, or to apprehend the fact that daily
    they are drawing farther apart! Time holds no promise of even
    a patched-up peace.

Lord Kelvin was astonished at the preachers and teachers who are trying to
apply the doctrine of evolution to the fundamentals of the faith. He said:

    I marvel at the undue haste with which teachers in our
    Universities and preachers in our pulpits are restating the
    truth in the terms of evolution, while evolution itself
    remains an unproven hypothesis in the laboratories of
    science.

And well might he marvel. And well might the Church become aroused and
alarmed as the logical workings of these false doctrines produce more and
more fearful results within her ranks. The whole Church is being moved away
from the foundations of the faith, and this false philosophy is at the
bottom of it all.

The group announcements of the Sunday services of the Los Angeles liberal
churches show where all consistent evolutionists are headed. Standing at
the head of these announcements are these words, the capital letters being
theirs:

    We found our faith on the thought of EVOLUTION rather than
    Special Creation; on revelation through NORMAL HUMAN
    EXPERIENCE rather than the supernatural; on salvation through
    GROWTH rather than a miraculous rebirth.

And when it comes to the awful harvest that is being gathered from our
churches for the forces of spiritual destruction through our colleges and
universities, William Jennings Bryan has had some information given to him
that will give us a hint of what is going on. He says:

    Having had opportunity to make a personal investigation, I
    feel it my duty to warn the lovers of the Bible of the
    insidious attacks which are being made upon every vital part
    of the Word of God. A father tells me of a daughter educated
    at Wellesley who calmly informs him that no one believes in
    the Bible now; a teacher in Columbia University begins his
    lessons in geology by asking students to lay aside all that
    they have learned in Sunday-school; a professor of the
    University of Wisconsin tells his class that the Bible is a
    collection of myths; a professor of philosophy at Ann Arbor
    occupies a Sunday evening explaining to an audience that
    Christianity is a state of mind and that there are only two
    books in the Bible with any literary merit; another professor
    in the same institution informs students that he once taught
    a Sunday-school class and was active in the Young Men's
    Christian Association, but that no thinking man can believe
    in God or the Bible; a woman teacher in a public school in
    Indiana rebukes a boy for answering that Adam was the first
    man, explaining to him and the class that the "tree man" was
    the first man; a young man in South Carolina traces his
    atheism back to two teachers in a Christian college; a senior
    in an Illinois high school writes that he became skeptical
    during his sophomore year but has been brought back by
    influences outside of school while others of his class are
    agnostics; a professor in Yale has the reputation of making
    atheists of all who come under his influence--this
    information was given by a boy whose brother has come under
    the influence of this teacher; a professor in Bryn Mawr
    combats Christianity for a session and then puts to his class
    the question whether or not there is a God, and is happy to
    find that a majority of the class vote that there is no God;
    a professor in a Christian college writes a book in which the
    virgin birth of Christ is disputed; one professor declares
    that life is merely a by-product and will ultimately be
    produced in the laboratory; another says that the ingredients
    necessary to create life have already been brought together
    and that life will be developed from these ingredients,
    adding, however, that it will require a million years to do
    it. These are a few of the illustrations furnished by
    informants whom I have reason to believe.

These facts certainly furnish sufficient reason why the Church cannot
compromise with the evolutionary philosophy. To do so would be to head
herself toward destruction. She must stand uncompromised and unflinching
against that unproven and discredited theory, the acceptance of which
destroys faith in that infallible and inerrant Word on which she was
founded, and on whose "thus saith the Lord" she must rest her message to a
lost world. =There is no middle ground. To compromise would be to commit
suicide.= If the Church and the Schools are ever to come into harmony, it
cannot be because the Church gives up an infallible Book and accepts a
discredited theory in its place, and so it must be because the Schools give
up this unscientific, because unproven, theory and get back to faith in the
inerrant Word of God.

That this is the only basis on which the Church and the Schools can ever
come into harmony is strenuously denied by the evolutionists in both
Schools and Church. But their denial is meaningless when it is remembered
that they are working night and day to capture the Church, as they have
already almost done with the Schools, before we wake up to what is going
on. But it can never be done. The true Church will never surrender to those
who would remove her foundations and wreck her message.




