PART IV

DISPLAYING THE SECRETS OF

NATURE

RELATING TO

PHYSIOGNOMY

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I


SECTION 1.--_Of Physiognomy, showing what it is, and whence it is
derived._

Physiognomy is an ingenious science, or knowledge of nature, by which
the inclinations and dispositions of every creature are understood, and
because some of the members are uncompounded, and entire of themselves,
as the tongue, the heart, etc., and some are of a mixed nature, as the
eyes, the nose and others, we therefore say that there are signs which
agree and live together, which inform a wise man how to make his
judgment before he be too rash to deliver it to the world.

Nor is it to be esteemed a foolish or idle art, seeing it is derived
from the superior bodies; for there is no part of the face of man but
what is under the peculiar influence or government, not only of the
seven planets but also of the twelve signs of Zodiac; and the
dispositions, vices, virtues and fatality, either of a man or woman are
plainly foretold, if the person pretending to the knowledge thereof be
an artist, which, that my readers may hereby attain it I shall set these
things in a clearer light.

The reader should remember that the forehead is governed by Mars; the
right eye is under the domination of Sol; the left is ruled by the Moon;
the right ear is under Jupiter; the left, Saturn, the rule of the nose
is claimed by Venus, which, by the way, is one reason that in all
unlawful venereal encounters, the nose is too subject to bear the scars
that are gotten in those wars; and nimble Mercury, the significator of
eloquence claims the dominion of the mouth, and that very justly.

Thus have the seven planets divided the face among them, but not with so
absolute a way but that the twelve signs of the Zodiac do also come in
with a part (see the engraving) and therefore the sign Cancer presides
in the upper part of the forehead, and Leo attends upon the right
eyebrow, as Saggittarius does upon the right eye, and Libra upon the
right ear, upon the left eyebrow you will find Aquarius; and Gemini and
Aries taking care of the left ear; Taurus rules in the middle of the
forehead, and Capricorn the chin; Scorpio takes upon him the protection
of the nose; Virgo claims the precedence of the right cheek, Pisces the
left. And thus the face of man is cantoned out amongst the signs and
planets; which being carefully attended to, will sufficiently inform
the artist how to pass a judgment. For according to the sign or planet
ruling so also is the judgment to be of the part ruled, which all those
that have understanding know easily how to apply.

[Illustration]

In the judgment that is to be made from physiognomy, there is a great
difference betwixt a man and a woman; the reason is, because in respect
of the whole composition men more fully comprehend it than women do, as
may evidently appear by the manner and method we shall give. Wherefore
the judgments which we shall pass in every chapter do properly concern a
man, as comprehending the whole species, and but improperly the woman,
as being but a part thereof, and derived from the man, and therefore,
whoever is called to give judgment on such a face, ought to be wary
about all the lines and marks that belong to it, respect being also had
to the sex, for when we behold a man whose face is like unto a woman's
and we pass a judgment upon it, having diligently observed it, and not
on the face only, but on other parts of the body, as hands, etc., in
like manner we also behold the face of a woman, who in respect to her
flesh and blood is like unto a man, and in the disposure also of the
greatest part of the body. But does physiognomy give the same judgment
on her, as it does of a man that is like unto her? By no means, but far
otherwise, in regard that the conception of the woman is much different
from that of a man, even in those respects which are said to be common.
Now in those common respects two parts are attributed to a man, and a
third part to a woman.

Wherefore it being our intention to give you an exact account, according
to the rule of physiognomy of all and every part of the members of the
body, we will begin with the head, as it hath relation only to man and
woman, and not to any other creature, that the work may be more obvious
to every reader.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER II

     _Of the Judgment of Physiognomy._


Hair that hangs down without curling, if it be of a fair complexion,
thin and soft withal, signifies a man to be naturally faint-hearted, and
of a weak body, but of a quiet and harmless disposition. Hair that is
big, and thick and short withal, denotes a man to be of a strong
constitution, secure, bold, deceitful and for the most part, unquiet and
vain, lusting after beauty, and more foolish than wise, though fortune
may favour him. He whose hair is partly curled and partly hanging down,
is commonly wise or a very great fool, or else as very a knave as he is
a fool. He whose hair grows thick on his temples and his brow, one may
certainly at first sight conclude that such a man is by nature simple,
vain, luxurious, lustful, credulous, clownish in his speech and
conversation and dull in his apprehension. He whose hair not only curls
very much, but bushes out, and stands on end, if the hair be white or of
a yellowish colour, he is by nature proud and bold, dull of
apprehension, soon angry, and a lover of venery, and given to lying,
malicious and ready to do any mischief. He whose hair arises in the
corners of the temples, and is gross and rough withal, is a man highly
conceited of himself, inclined to malice, but cunningly conceals it, is
very courtly and a lover of new fashions. He who hath much hair, that is
to say, whose hair is thick all over his head, is naturally vain and
very luxurious, of a good digestion, easy of belief, and slow of
performance, of a weak memory and for the most part unfortunate. He
whose hair is of a reddish complexion, is for the most part, if not
always, proud, deceitful, detracting and full of envy. He whose hair is
extraordinarily fair, is for the most part a man fit for the most
praiseworthy enterprises, a lover of honour, and much more inclined to
do good than evil; laborious and careful to perform whatsoever is
committed to his care, secret in carrying on any business, and
fortunate. Hair of a yellowish colour shows a man to be good
conditioned, and willing to do anything, fearful, shamefaced and weak of
body, but strong in the abilities of the mind, and more apt to remember,
than to avenge an injury. He whose hair is of a brownish colour, and
curled not too much nor too little, is a well-disposed man, inclined to
that which is good, a lover of peace, cleanliness and good manners. He
whose hair turns grey or hoary in the time of his youth, is generally
given to women, vain, false, unstable, and talkative. [Note. That
whatever signification the hair has in men, it has the same in women
also.]

The forehead that riseth in a round, signifies a man liberally merry, of
a good understanding, and generally inclined to virtue. He whose
forehead is fleshy, and the bone of the brow jutting out, and without
wrinkles, is a man much inclined to suits of law, contentious, vain,
deceitful, and addicted to follow ill courses. He whose forehead is
very low and little, is of a good understanding, magnanimous, but
extremely bold and confident, and a great pretender to love and honour.
He whose forehead seems sharp, and pointed up in the corners of his
temples, so that the bone seems to jut forth a little, is a man
naturally weak and fickle, and weak in the intellectuals. He whose brow
upon the temples is full of flesh, is a man of a great spirit, proud,
watchful and of a gross understanding. He whose brow is full of
wrinkles, and has as it were a seam coming down the middle of the
forehead, so that a man may think he has two foreheads, is one that is
of a great spirit, a great wit, void of deceit, and yet of a hard
fortune. He who has a full, large forehead, and a little round withal,
destitute of hair, or at least that has little on it is bold, malicious,
full of choler and apt to transgress beyond all bounds, and yet of a
good wit and very apprehensive. He whose forehead is long and high and
jutting forth, and whose face is figured, almost sharp and peaked
towards the chin, is one reasonably honest, but weak and simple, and of
a hard fortune.

Those eyebrows that are much arched, whether in man or woman, and which
by frequent motion elevate themselves, show the person to be proud,
high-spirited, vain-glorious, bold and threatening, a lover of beauty,
and indifferently inclined to either good or evil. He whose eyelids bend
down when he speaks to another or when he looks upon him, and who has a
kind of skulking look, is by nature a penurious wretch, close in all his
actions, of a very few words, but full of malice in his heart. He whose
eyebrows are thick, and have but little hair upon them, is but weak in
his intellectuals, and too credulous, very sincere, sociable, and
desirous of good company. He whose eyebrows are folded, and the hair
thick and bending downwards, is one that is clownish and unlearned,
heavy, suspicious, miserable, envious, and one that will cheat and cozen
you if he can. He whose eyebrows have but short hair and of a whitish
colour is fearful and very easy of belief, and apt to undertake
anything. Those, on the other side, whose eyebrows are black, and the
hair of them thin, will do nothing without great consideration, and are
bold and confident of the performance of what they undertake; neither
are they apt to believe anything without reason for so doing.

If the space between the eyebrows be of more than the ordinary distance,
it shows the person to be hard-hearted, envious, close, cunning,
apprehensive, greedy of novelties, of a vain fortune, addicted to
cruelty more than love. But those men whose eyebrows are at a lesser
distance from each other, are for the most part of a dull understanding;
yet subtle enough in their dealings, and of an uncommon boldness, which
is often attended with great felicity; but that which is most
commendable in them is, that they are most sure and constant in their
friendship.

Great and full eyes in either man or woman, show the person to be for
the most part slothful, bold, envious, a bad concealer of secrets,
miserable, vain, given to lying, and yet a bad memory, slow in
invention, weak in his intellectuals, and yet very much conceited of
that little knack of wisdom he thinks himself master of. He whose eyes
are hollow in his head, and therefore discerns well at a great distance,
is one that is suspicious, malicious, furious, perverse in his
conversation, of an extraordinary memory, bold, cruel, and false, both
in words and deeds, threatening, vicious, luxurious, proud, envious and
treacherous; but he whose eyes are, as it were, starting out of his
head, is a simple, foolish person, shameless, very fertile and easy to
be persuaded either to vice or virtue. He who looks studiously and
acutely, with his eyes and eyelids downwards, denotes thereby to be of a
malicious nature, very treacherous, false, unfaithful, envious,
miserable, impious towards God, and dishonest towards men. He whose
eyes are small and conveniently round, is bashful and weak, very
credulous, liberal to others, and even in his conversation. He whose
eyes look asquint, is thereby denoted to be a deceitful person, unjust,
envious, furious, a great liar, and as the effect of all that is
miserable. He who hath a wandering eye and which is rolling up and down,
is for the most part a vain, simple, deceitful, lustful, treacherous, or
high-minded man, an admirer of the fair sex, and one easy to be
persuaded to virtue or vice. He or she whose eyes are twinkling, and
which move forward or backward, show the person to be luxurious,
unfaithful and treacherous, presumptuous, and hard to believe anything
that is spoken. If a person has any greenness mingled with the white of
his eye, such is commonly silly, and often very false, vain and
deceitful, unkind to his friends, a great concealer of his own secrets,
and very choleric. Those whose eyes are every way rolling up and down,
or they who seldom move their eyes, and when they do, as it were, draw
their eyes inwardly and accurately fasten them upon some object, such
are by their inclinations very malicious, vain-glorious, slothful,
unfaithful, envious, false and contentious. They whose eyes are addicted
to blood-shot, are naturally proud, disdainful, cruel, without shame,
perfidious and much inclined to superstition. But he whose eyes are
neither too little nor too big, and inclined to black, do signify a man
mild, peaceable, honest, witty, and of a good understanding; and one
that, when need requires, will be serviceable to his friends.

A long and thin nose, denotes a man bold, furious, angry, vain, easy to
be persuaded either to good or evil, weak and credulous. A long nose
extended, the tip of it bending downwards, shows the person to be wise,
discreet, secret and officious, honest, faithful and one that will not
be over-reached in bargaining.

A bottle-nose is what denotes a man to be impetuous in the obtaining of
his desires, also a vain, false, luxurious, weak and uncertain man; apt
to believe and easy to be persuaded. A broad nose in the middle, and
less towards the end, denotes a vain, talkative person, a liar, and one
of hard fortune. He who hath a long and great nose is an admirer of the
fair sex, and well accomplished for the wars of Venus, but ignorant of
the knowledge of anything that is good, extremely addicted to vice;
assiduous in the obtaining what he desires, and very secret in the
prosecution of it; and though very ignorant, would fain be thought very
knowing.

A nose very sharp on the tip of it, and neither too long nor too short,
too thick nor too thin, denotes the person, if a man, to be of a fretful
disposition, always pining and peevish; and if a woman, a scold, or
contentious, wedded to her own humours, of a morose and dogged carriage,
and if married, a plague to her husband. A nose very round at the end of
it, and having but little nostrils, shows the person to be munificent
and liberal, true to his trust, but withal, very proud, credulous and
vain. A nose very long and thin at the end of it, and something round,
withal, signifies one bold in his discourse, honest in his dealings,
patient in receiving, and slow in offering injuries, but yet privately
malicious. He whose nose is naturally more red than any other part of
his face, is thereby denoted to be covetous, impious, luxurious, and an
enemy to goodness. A nose that turns up again, and is long and full at
the tip of it, shows the person that has it to be bold, proud, covetous,
envious, luxurious, a liar and deceiver, vain, glorious, unfortunate and
contentious. He whose nose riseth high in the middle, is prudent and
polite, and of great courage, honourable in his actions, and true to his
word. A nose big at the end shows a person to be of a peaceable
disposition, industrious and faithful, and of a good understanding. A
very wide nose, with wide nostrils, denotes a man dull of apprehension,
and inclined more to simplicity than wisdom, and withal vain,
contentious and a liar.

When the nostrils are close and thin, they denote a man to have but
little testicles, and to be very desirous of the enjoyment of women, but
modest in his conversation. But he whose nostrils are great and wide, is
usually well hung and lustful; but withal of an envious, bold and
treacherous disposition and though dull of understanding, yet confident
enough.

A great and wide mouth shows a man to be bold, warlike, shameless and
stout, a great liar and as great a talker, also a great eater, but as to
his intellectuals, he is very dull, being for the most part very simple.

A little mouth shows the person to be of a quiet and pacific temper,
somewhat reticent, but faithful, secret, modest, bountiful, and but a
little eater.

He whose mouth smells of a bad breath, is one of a corrupted liver and
lungs, is oftentimes vain, wanton, deceitful, of indifferent intellect,
envious, covetous, and a promise-breaker. He that has a sweet breath, is
the contrary.

The lips, when they are very big and blubbering, show a person to be
credulous, foolish, dull and stupid, and apt to be enticed to anything.
Lips of a different size denote a person to be discreet, secret in all
things, judicious and of a good wit, but somewhat hasty. To have lips,
well coloured and more thin than thick, shows a person to be
good-humoured in all things and more easily persuaded to good than evil.
To have one lip bigger than the other, shows a variety of fortunes, and
denotes the party to be of a dull, sluggish temper, but of a very
indifferent understanding, as being much addicted to folly.

When the teeth are small, and but weak in performing their office, and
especially if they are short and few, though they show the person to be
of a weak constitution, yet they denote him to be of a meek disposition,
honest, faithful and secret in whatsoever he is intrusted with. To have
some teeth longer and shorter than others, denotes a person to be of a
good apprehension, but bold, disdainful, envious and proud. To have the
teeth very long, and growing sharp towards the end, if they are long in
chewing, and thin, denotes the person to be envious, gluttonous, bold,
shameless, unfaithful and suspicious. When the teeth look very brown or
yellowish, whether they be long or short, it shows the person to be of a
suspicious temper, envious, deceitful and turbulent. To have teeth
strong and close together, shows the person to be of a long life, a
desirer of novelties, and things that are fair and beautiful, but of a
high spirit, and one that will have his humour in all things; he loves
to hear news, and to repeat it afterwards, and is apt to entertain
anything on his behalf. To have teeth thin and weak, shows a weak,
feeble man, and one of a short life, and of a weak apprehension; but
chaste, shame-faced, tractable and honest.

A tongue to be too swift of speech shows a man to be downright foolish,
or at best but a very vain wit. A stammering tongue, or one that
stumbles in the mouth, signifies a man of a weak understanding, and of a
wavering mind, quickly in a rage, and soon pacified. A very thick and
rough tongue denotes a man to be apprehensive, subtle and full of
compliments, yet vain and deceitful, treacherous, and prone to impiety.
A thin tongue shows a man of wisdom and sound judgment, very ingenious
and of an affable disposition, yet somewhat timorous and too credulous.

A great and full voice in either sex shows them to be of a great spirit,
confident, proud and wilful. A faint and weak voice, attended with but
little breath, shows a person to be of good understanding, a nimble
fancy, a little eater, but weak of body, and of a timorous disposition.
A loud and shrill voice, which sounds clearly denotes a person
provident, sagacious, true and ingenious, but withal capricious, vain,
glorious and too credulous. A strong voice when a man sings denotes him
to be of a strong constitution, and of a good understanding, a nimble
fancy, a little eater, but weak of body, and of a timorous disposition.

A strong voice when a man sings, denotes him to be of a strong
constitution, and of a good understanding, neither too penurious nor too
prodigal, also ingenious and an admirer of the fair sex. A weak and
trembling voice shows the owner of it to be envious, suspicious, slow in
business, feeble and fearful. A loud, shrill and unpleasant voice,
signifies one bold and valiant, but quarrelsome and injurious and
altogether wedded to his own humours, and governed by his own counsels.
A rough and hoarse voice, whether in speaking or singing, declares one
to be a dull and heavy person, of much guts and little brains. A full
and yet mild voice, and pleasing to the hearer, shows the person to be
of a quiet and peaceable disposition (which is a great virtue and rare
to be found in a woman), and also very thrifty and secret, not prone to
anger, but of a yielding temper. A voice beginning low or in the bass,
and ending high in the treble, denotes a person to be violent, angry,
bold and secure.

A thick and full chin abounding with too much flesh, shows a man
inclined to peace, honest and true to his trust, but slow in invention,
and easy to be drawn either to good or evil. A peaked chin and
reasonably full of flesh, shows a person to be of a good understanding,
a high spirit and laudable conversation. A double chin shows a peaceable
disposition, but dull of apprehension, vain, credulous, a great
supplanter, and secret in all his actions. A crooked chin, bending
upwards, and peaked for want of flesh, is by the rules of physiognomy,
according to nature, a very bad man, being proud, imprudent, envious,
threatening, deceitful, prone to anger and treachery, and a great thief.

The hair of young men usually begins to grow down upon their chins at
fifteen years of age, and sometimes sooner. These hairs proceed from the
superfluity of heat, the fumes whereof ascend to their chin, like smoke
to the funnel of a chimney; and because it cannot find an open passage
by which it may ascend higher, it vents itself forth in the hairs which
are called the beard. There are very few, or almost no women at all,
that have hairs on their cheeks; and the reason is, that those humours
which cause hair to grow on the cheeks of a man are by a woman
evacuated in the monthly courses, which they have more or less,
according to the heat or coldness of their constitution, and the age and
motion of the moon, of which we have spoken at large in the first part
of this book. Yet sometimes women of a hot constitution have hair to be
seen on their cheeks, but more commonly on their lips, or near their
mouths, where the heat most aboundeth. And where this happens, such
women are much addicted to the company of men, and of a strong and manly
constitution. A woman who hath little hair on her cheeks, or about her
mouth and lips, is of a good complexion, weak constitution, shamefaced,
mild and obedient, whereas a woman of a more hot constitution is quite
otherwise. But in a man, a beard well composed and thick of hair,
signifies a man of good nature, honest, loving, sociable and full of
humanity; on the contrary, he that hath but a little beard, is for the
most part proud, pining, peevish and unsociable. They who have no
beards, have always shrill and a strange kind of squeaking voices, and
are of a weak constitution, which is apparent in the case of eunuchs,
who, after they are deprived of their virility are transformed from the
nature of men into the condition of women.

Great and thick ears are a certain sign of a foolish person, or a bad
memory and worse understanding. But small and thin ears show a person to
be of a good wit, grave, sweet, thrifty, modest, resolute, of a good
memory, and one willing to serve his friend. He whose ears are longer
than ordinary, is thereby signified to be a bold man, uncivil, vain,
foolish, serviceable to another more than to himself, and a man of small
industry, but of a great stomach.

A face apt to sweat on every motion, shows a person to be of a very hot
constitution, vain and luxurious, of a good stomach, but of a bad
understanding, and a worse conversation. A very fleshy face shows the
person to be of a fearful disposition, but a merry heart, and withal
bountiful and discreet, easy to be entreated, and apt to believe
everything. A lean face, by the rules of physiognomy, denotes the person
to be of a good understanding, but somewhat capricious and disdainful in
his conversation. A little and round face, shows a person to be simple,
very fearful, of a bad memory, and a clownish disposition. A plump face,
full of carbuncles, shows a man to be a great drinker of wine, vain,
daring, and soon intoxicated. A face red or high coloured, shows a man
much inclined to choler, and one that will be soon angry and not easily
pacified. A long and lean face, shows a man to be both bold, injurious
and deceitful. A face every way of a due proportion, denotes an
ingenious person, one fit for anything and very much inclined to what is
good. One of a broad, full, fat face is, by the rules of physiognomy, of
a dull, lumpish, heavy constitution, and that for one virtue has three
vices. A plain, flat face, without any rising shows a person to be very
wise, loving and courtly in his carriage, faithful to his friend and
patient in adversity. A face sinking down a little, with crosses in it,
inclining to leanness, denotes a person to be very laborious, but
envious, deceitful, false, quarrelsome, vain and silly, and of a dull
and clownish behaviour. A face of a handsome proportion, and more
inclining to fat than lean, shows a person just in his actions, true to
his word, civil, and respectful in his behaviour, of an indifferent
understanding, and of an extraordinary memory. A crooked face, long and
lean, denotes a man endued with as bad qualities as the face is with ill
features. A face broad about the brows, and sharper and less as it grows
towards the chin, shows a man simple and foolish in managing his
affairs, vain in his discourse, envious in his nature, deceitful,
quarrelsome and rude in his conversation. A face well-coloured, full of
good features, and of an exact symmetry, and a just proportion in all
its parts, and which is delightful to look upon, is commonly the index
of a fairer mind and shows a person to be well disposed; but withal
declares that virtue is not so impregnably seated there, but that by
strong temptations (especially by the fair sex) it may be supplanted and
overcome by vice. A pale complexion, shows the person not only to be
fickle, but very malicious, treacherous, false, proud, presumptuous, and
extremely unfaithful. A face well-coloured, shows the person to be of a
praiseworthy disposition and a sound complexion, easy of belief, and
respectful to his friend, ready to do a courtesy, and very easy to be
drawn to anything.

A great head, and round, withal, denotes the person to be secret, and of
great application in carrying on business, and also ingenious and of a
large imaginative faculty and invention; and likewise laborious,
constant and honest. The head whose gullet stands forth and inclines
towards the earth, signifies a person thrifty, wise, peaceable, secret,
of a retired temper, and constant in the management of his affairs. A
long head and face, and great, withal, denotes a vain, foolish, idle and
weak person, credulous and very envious. To have one's head always
shaking and moving from side to side, denotes a shallow, weak person,
unstable in all his actions, given to lying, a great deceiver, a great
talker, and prodigal in all his fortunes. A big head and broad face,
shows a man to be very courageous, a great hunter after women, very
suspicious, bold and shameless. He who hath a very big head, but not so
proportionate as it ought to be to the body, if he hath a short neck and
crooked gullet is generally a man of apprehension, wise, secret,
ingenious, of sound judgment, faithful, true and courteous to all. He
who hath a little head, and long, slender throat, is for the most part a
man very weak, yet apt to learn, but unfortunate in his actions. And so
much shall suffice with respect to judgment from the head and face.

       *       *       *       *       *




