CHAPTER VI

     _Of the happy state of matrimony, as it is appointed by God, the
     true felicity that rebounds thereby to either sex; and to what end
     it is ordained._


Without doubt the uniting of hearts in holy wedlock is of all conditions
the happiest; for then a man has a second self to whom he can reveal his
thoughts, as well as a sweet companion in his labours, toils, trials,
and difficulties. He has one in whose breast, as in a safe cabinet, he
can confide his inmost secrets, especially where reciprocal love and
inviolable faith is centred; for there no care, fear, jealousy, mistrust
or hatred can ever interpose. For base is the man that hateth his own
flesh! And truly a wife, if rightly considered, as Adam well observed,
is or ought to be esteemed of every honest man as "Bone of his bone and
flesh of his flesh," etc. Nor was it the least care of the Almighty to
ordain so near a union, and that for two causes; the first, for the
increase of posterity; the second, to restrain man's wandering desires
and affections; nay, that they might be yet happier, when God has joined
them together, he "blessed them," as in Gen. ii. An ancient writer,
contemplating this happy state, says, in the economy of Xenophon, "that
the marriage bed is not only the most pleasant, but also profitable
course of life, that may be entered on for the preservation and increase
of posterity. Wherefore, since marriage is the most safe, and delightful
situation of man he does in no ways provide amiss for his own
tranquillity who enters into it, especially when he comes to maturity of
years."

There are many abuses in marriage contrary to what is ordained, the
which in the ensuing chapter I shall expose to view. But to proceed:
Seeing our blessed Saviour and His holy apostles detested unlawful
lusts, and pronounced those to be excluded the kingdom of heaven that
polluted themselves with adultery and whoring, I cannot conceive what
face people have to colour their impieties, who hating matrimony, make
it their study how they may live licentiously: for, in so doing, they
take in themselves torment, enmity, disquietude, rather than certain
pleasure, not to mention the hazard of their immortal soul; and certain
it is that mercenary love (or as the wise man called it harlot-smiles)
cannot be true and sincere and therefore not pleasant, but rather a net
laid to betray such as trust in them with all mischief, as Solomon
observes of the young man void of understanding, who turned aside to the
harlot's house, "as a bird to the snare of the fowler, or as an ox to
the slaughter, till a dart was struck through his liver." Nor in this
case can they have children, those endearing pledges of conjugal
affection; or if they have, they will rather redound to their shame than
comfort, bearing the odious brand of bastards. Harlots, likewise are
like swallows, flying in the summer season of prosperity; but the black
stormy weather of adversity coming, they take wing and fly into other
regions--that is, seek other lovers; but a virtuous, chaste wife, fixing
her entire love upon her husband, and submitting to him as her head and
king, by whose directions she ought to steer in all lawful courses,
will, like a faithful companion, share patiently with him in all
adversities, run with cheerfulness through all difficulties and dangers,
though ever so hazardous, to preserve and assist him, in poverty,
sickness, or whatsoever misfortunes befall him, acting according to her
duty in all things; but a proud, imperious harlot will do no more than
she lists, in the sunshine of prosperity; and like a horse-leech, ever
craving, and never satisfied; still seeming displeased, if all her
extravagant cravings be not answered; not regarding the ruin and misery
she brings on him by those means, though she seems to doat upon him,
used to confirming her hypocrisy with crocodile tears, vows and
swoonings, when her cully has to depart awhile, or seems but to deny
immediate desires; yet this lasts no longer than she can gratify her
appetite, and prey upon his fortune.

Now, on the contrary, a loving, chaste and even-tempered wife, seeks
what she may to prevent such dangers, and in every condition does all
she can to make him easy. And, in a word, as there is no content in the
embraces of a harlot, so there is no greater joy in the reciprocal
affection and endearing embraces of a loving, obedient, and chaste wife.
Nor is that the principal end for which matrimony was ordained, but that
the man might follow the law of his creation by increasing his kind and
replenishing the earth; for this was the injunction laid upon him in
Paradise, before his fall. To conclude, a virtuous wife is a crown and
ornament to her husband, and her price is above all rubies: but the
ways of a harlot are deceitful.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VII

     _Of Errors in Marriages; Why they are, and the Injuries caused by
     them._


By errors in marriage, I mean the unfitness of the persons marrying to
enter into this state, and that both with respect to age and the
constitution of their bodies; and, therefore, those who design to enter
into that condition ought to observe their ability and not run
themselves into inconveniences; for those that marry too young may be
said to marry unseasonably, not considering their inability, nor
examining the forces of nature; for some, before they are ripe for the
consummation of so weighty a matter, who either rashly, of their own
accord, or by the instigation of procurers or marriage-brokers, or else
forced thereto by their parents who covet a large dower take upon them
this yoke to their prejudice; by which some, before the expiration of a
year, have been so enfeebled, that all their vital moisture has been
exhausted; which had not been restored again without great trouble and
the use of medicines. Therefore, my advice is: that it is not convenient
to suffer children, or such as are not of age, to marry, or get
children.

He that proposes to marry, and wishes to enjoy happiness in that state,
should choose a wife descended from honest and temperate parents, she
being chaste, well bred, and of good manners. For if a woman has good
qualities, she has portion enough. That of Alcmena, in Plautus, is much
to the purpose, where he brings in a young woman speaking thus:--

    "I take not that to be my dowry, which
    The vulgar sort do wealth and honour call;
    That all my wishes terminate in this:----
    I'll obey my husband and be chaste withall;
    To have God's fear, and beauty in my mind,
    To do those good who are virtuously inclined."

And I think she was in the right, for such a wife is more precious than
rubies.

It is certainly the duty of parents to bring up their children in the
ways of virtue, and to have regard to their honour and reputation; and
especially to virgins, when grown to be marriageable. For, as has been
noted, if through the too great severity of parents, they may be crossed
in their love, many of them throw themselves into the unchaste arms of
the first alluring tempter that comes in the way, being, through the
softness and flexibility of their nature, and the strong desire they
have after what nature strongly incites them to, easily induced to
believe men's false vows of promised marriage, to cover their shame: and
then too late, their parents repent of their severity which has brought
an indelible stain upon their families.

[Illustration:
    Conception
    First Month
    Second Month
    Third Month
    Fourth Month]

[Illustration:
    Fifth Month
    Sixth Month
    Seventh Month
    Eighth Month
   Ninth Month]

Another error in marriage is, the inequality of years in the parties
married; such as for a young man, who, to advance his fortune, marries a
woman old enough to be his grandmother: between whom, for the most part,
strife, jealousies, and dissatisfaction are all the blessings which
crown the genial bed, is being impossible for such to have any children.
The like may be said, though with a little excuse, when an old doting
widower marries a virgin in the prime of her youth and her vigour, who,
while he vainly tries to please her, is thereby wedded to his grave.
For, as in green youth, it is unfit and unseasonable to think of
marriage, so to marry in old age is just the same; for they that enter
upon it too soon are soon exhausted, and fall into consumptions and
divers other diseases; and those who procrastinate and marry
unseemingly, fall into the like troubles; on the other side having only
this honour, if old men, they become young cuckolds, especially if their
wives have not been trained up in the paths of virtue, and lie too much
open to the importunity and temptation of lewd and debauched men. And
thus much for the errors of rash and inconsiderate marriages.

       *       *       *       *       *




