CHAPTER VII

     _Of the Descending or Falling of the Womb._


The descent of the womb is caused by a relaxation of the ligatures,
whereby the matrix is carried backward, and in some women it protrudes
to the size of an egg, and there are two kinds of this, distinguished by
a descending and a precipitation. The descending of the womb is, when it
sinks down to the entrance of the private parts, and appears either very
little or not at all, to the eye. Its precipitation is when it is turned
inside out like a purse, and hangs out between the thighs, like a
cupping glass.



CAUSE.

This is either external or internal. The external cause is difficult
childbirth, violent pulling away, or inexperience in drawing away the
child, violent coughing, sneezing, falls, blows, and carrying heavy
burdens. The internal cause, is generally the flow of too much moisture
into these parts, which hinders the operation of the womb, whereby the
ligaments by which the womb is supported are relaxed. The particular
cause, however, lies in the retention of the _semen_, or in the
suppression of the monthly courses.



SIGNS.

The principal gut and the bladder are often so crushed, that the passage
of both evacuations is hindered. If the urine flows out white and thick,
and the midriff is interfered with, the loins suffer, the private parts
are in pain, and the womb descends to them, or else comes clean out.



PROGNOSTICS.

If an old woman is thus affected, the cure is very difficult, because it
weakens the womb, and therefore, though it may be put back into its
proper place, yet it is apt to get displaced again, by a very slight
amount of illness. And also with younger women, if this disease is
inveterate, and if it is caused by putrefaction of the nerves, it is
incurable.



CURE.

The womb, being placed by nature between the straight gut and the
bladder, ought not to be put back again until the powers of both are
excited. Now that nature is relieved of her burden, let the woman be
laid on her back so that her legs may be higher than her head; let her
feet be drawn up towards her private parts, and her knees spread open.
Then apply oil of sweet almonds and lilies, or a decoction of mallows,
beet, fenugreek and linseed, to the swelling; when the inflammation is
reduced, let the midwife rub her hand with oil of mastic, and restore
the womb to its proper place. When the matrix is up, the patient's
position must be changed. Her legs must be put out quite straight and
laid together, and apply six cupping glasses to her breast and navel.
Boil feverfew, mugwort, red rose leaves and comfrey in red wine; make a
suffumigation for the matrix, and apply sweet scents to her nose. When
she comes out of her bath, give her an ounce of syrup of feverfew with a
drachm of dog's tooth (_mithridate_). Take three drachms each of
laudanum and mastic, and make a plaster for the navel of it, and then
make pessaries of asafoetida, saffron, comfrey, and mastic, adding a
little castor oil.--Parius in such cases makes his pessaries only of
cork, shaped like a small egg; he covered them with wax and mastic
dissolved together, and fastening them to a thread, he put them into the
womb.

The immediate danger being now removed and the matrix returned to its
natural place the remote cause must be got rid of. If she be of full
habit of body open a vein, after preparing her with syrup of betony,
calamint, hyssop and feverfew. Give a purge, and if the stomach be
oppressed with any crude matter relieve it by emetics and by sudorifics
of lignum sanctum and sassafras taken twenty days consecutively, which
dry up the superfluous moisture, and consequently suppress the cause of
the disease.

The air should be hot and dry, and her diet hot and attenuating. Let her
abstain from dancing, jumping, sneezing, as well as from all mental and
bodily emotions, eat sparingly, not drink much, and be moderate in her
sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VIII

     _Of the Inflammation of the Womb._


The phlegmon, or inflammation of the matrix, is a humour which affects
the whole womb, and is accompanied by unnatural heat, by obstruction and
by an accumulation of corrupt blood.



CAUSE.

The cause of this affection is suppression of the courses, fullness of
body, the immoderate use of sexual intercourse, frequent handling the
genitals, difficult child-birth, violent motions of the body, falls,
blows, to which may be added, the use of strong pessaries, whereby the
womb is frequently inflamed, cupping glasses, also, fastened to the
_pubis_ and _hypogastrium_, draw the humours of the womb.



SIGNS.

The signs are pains in the lower parts of the body and head, humours,
sickness, coldness in the knees, throbbing in the neck, palpitation of
the heart. Often, also, there is shortness of breath because of the
heart which is close to the midriff, and the breasts sympathising with
the swollen and painful womb. Besides this, if the front of the matrix
be inflamed, the privates suffer, and the urine is suppressed, or only
flows with difficulty. If the hinder part be inflamed, the loins and
back suffer, and the bowels are very costive; if the right side be
inflamed, the right hip suffers, and the right leg is heavy and moves
slowly, so that at times she seems almost lame. If, however, the left
side of the womb be inflamed, then the left hip suffers and the left leg
is weaker than the right. If the neck of the womb is affected, by
putting her finger in, the midwife feels that its mouth is contracted
and closed up, and that it is hard round it.



CURE.

In the cure, first of all, let the humours which flow to the womb be
expelled. To effect this, after the bowels have been loosened by cooling
clysters bleeding will be necessary. Therefore, open a vein in the arm,
if she is not with child; the day after strike the saphena in both feet,
fasten ligatures and cupping glasses to the arm, and rub the upper part.
Purge gently with cassia, rhubarb, senna and myrobalan. Take one drachm
of senna, a scruple of aniseed, myrobalan, half an ounce, with a
sufficient quantity of barley water. Make a decoction and dissolve syrup
of succory in it, and two ounces of rhubarb; pound half an ounce of
cassia with a few drops of oil of aniseed and make a draught. At the
commencement of the disease, anoint the private parts and loins with oil
of roses and quinces: make plasters of plantain, linseed, barley meal,
melilot, fenugreek, white of eggs, and if the pain be intense, a little
laudanum; foment the genitals with a decoction of poppy-heads, purslace,
knot-grass and water-lilies. Make injections of goat's milk, rose water,
clarified whey and honey of roses. When the disease is on a decline, use
injections of sage, linseed, mugwort, pennyroyal, horehound, fenugreek,
and anoint the lower parts of the stomach with oil of camomiles and
violets.

Take four ounces each of lily and mallow roots, a handful of dog's
mercury, a handful and a half each of mugwort, feverfew, camomile
flowers and melilot, bruise the herbs and roots, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of milk; then add two ounces each of fresh butter,
oil of camomiles and lilies, with a sufficient quantity of bran, make
two plasters, and apply one before and the other behind.

If the tumour cannot be removed, but seems inclined to suppurate, take
three drachms each of fenugreek, mallow roots, boiled figs, linseed,
barley meal, dove's dung and turpentine; half a drachm of deer's suet,
half a scruple of opium and make a plaster of wax.

Take bay leaves, sage, hyssop, camomiles, and mugwort, and make an
infusion in water.

Take half a handful of wormwood and betony and half a pint each of white
wine and milk, boil them until reduced to half; then take four ounces of
this decoction and make an injection, but you must be careful that the
humours are not brought down into the womb. Take three drachms each of
roast figs, and bruised dog's mercury; three drachms each of turpentine
and duck's grease, and two grains of opium; make a pessary with wax.

The room must be kept cool, and all motions of the body, especially of
the lower parts, must be prohibited. Wakefulness is to be recommended,
for humours are carried inward by sleep, and thus inflammation is
increased. Eat sparingly, and drink only barley water or clarified whey,
and eat chickens and chicken broth, boiled with endive, succory, sorrel,
bugloss and mallows.

       *       *       *       *       *




