CHAPTER V

     _Of Monsters and Monstrous Births; and the several reasons thereof,
     according to the opinions of the Ancients. Also, whether the
     Monsters are endowed with reasonable Souls; and whether the Devils
     can engender; is here briefly discussed._


By the ancients, monsters are ascribed to depraved conceptions, and are
designated as being excursions of nature, which are vicious in one of
these four ways: either in figure, magnitude, situation, or number.

In figure, when a man bears the character of a beast, as did the beast
in Saxony. In magnitude, when one part does not equalise with another;
as when one part is too big or too little for the other parts of the
body. But this is so common among us that I need not produce a
testimony.

[Illustration: There was a Monster at Ravenna in Italy of this kind, in
the year 1512.]

I now proceed to explain the cause of their generation, which is either
divine or natural. The divine cause proceeds from God's permissive will,
suffering parents to bring forth abominations for their filthy and
corrupt affections, which are let loose unto wickedness like brute
beasts which have no understanding. Wherefore it was enacted among the
ancient Romans that those who were in any way deformed, should not be
admitted into religious houses. And St. Jerome was grieved in his time
to see the lame and the deformed offering up spiritual sacrifices to God
in religious houses. And Keckerman, by way of inference, excludes all
that are ill-shapen from this presbyterian function in the church. And
that which is of more force than all, God himself commanded Moses not to
receive such to offer sacrifice among his people; and he also renders
the reason Leviticus, xxii. 28, "Lest he pollute my sanctuaries."
Because of the outward deformity, the body is often a sign of the
pollution of the heart, as a curse laid on the child for the
incontinency of its parents. Yet it is not always so. Let us therefore
duly examine and search out the natural cause of their generation, which
(according to the ancients who have dived into the secrets of nature) is
either in the mother or in the agent, in the seed, or in the womb.

The matter may be in default two ways--by defect or by excess: by
defect, when the child has only one arm; by excess, when it has four
hands or two heads. Some monsters are begotten by a woman's unnatural
lying with beasts; as in the year 1603, there was a monster begotten by
a woman's generating with a dog; which from the navel upwards had the
perfect resemblance of its mother: but from its navel downwards it
resembled a dog.

[Illustration]

The agent or womb may be in fault three ways; firstly, the formative
faculty, which may be too strong or too weak, by which is procured a
depraved figure; secondly, to the instrument or place of conception, the
evil confirmation or the disposition whereof will cause a monstrous
birth; thirdly, in the imaginative power at the time of conception;
which is of such a force that it stamps the character of the thing
imagined on the child. Thus the children of an adulteress may be like
her husband, though begotten by another man, which is caused through the
force of imagination that the woman has of her own husband at the act
of coition. And I have heard of a woman, who, at the time of conception,
beholding the picture of a blackamoor, conceived and brought forth an
Ethiopian. I will not trouble you with more human testimonies, but
conclude with a stronger warrant. We read (Gen. xxx. 31) how Jacob
having agreed with Laban to have all the spotted sheep for keeping his
flock to augment his wages, took hazel rods and peeled white streaks on
them, and laid them before the sheep when they came to drink, which
coupling together there, whilst they beheld the rods, conceived and
brought forth young.

[Illustration:
    "Where children thus are born with hairy coats
    Heaven's wrath unto the kingdom it denotes"]

Another monster representing a hairy child. It was all covered with hair
like a beast. That which made it more frightful was, that its navel was
in the place where its nose should stand, and its eyes placed where the
mouth should have been, and its mouth placed in the chin. It was of the
male kind, and was born in France, in the year 1597, at a town called
Arles in Provence, and lived a few days, frightening all that beheld it.
It was looked upon as a forerunner of desolations which soon after
happened to that kingdom, in which men to each other were more like
brutes than human creatures.

There was a monster born at Nazara in the year 1530. It had four arms
and four legs.

The imagination also works on the child, after conception, of which we
have a pregnant instance.

A worthy gentlewoman in Suffolk, who being with child and passing by a
butcher who was killing his meat, a drop of blood sprung on her face,
whereupon she said her child would have a blemish on its face, and at
the birth it was found marked with a red spot.

[Illustration]

Likewise in the reign of Henry III, there was a woman delivered of a
child having two heads and four arms, and the bodies were joined at the
back; the heads were so placed that they looked contrary ways; each had
two distinct arms and hands. They would both laugh, both speak, and
both cry, and be hungry together; sometimes the one would speak and the
other keep silence, and sometimes both speak together. They lived
several years, but one outlived the other three years, carrying the dead
one (for there was no parting them) till the survivor fainted with the
burden, and more with the stench of the dead carcase.

[Illustration]

It is certain that monstrous births often happen by means of undue
copulation; for some there are, who, having been long absent from one
another, and having an eager desire for enjoyment, consider not as they
ought, to do as their circumstances demand. And if it happen that they
come together when the woman's menses are flowing, and notwithstanding,
proceed to the act of copulation, which is both unclean and unnatural,
the issue of such copulation does often prove monstrous, as a just
punishment for doing what nature forbids. And, therefore, though men
should be ever so eager for it, yet women, knowing their own condition,
should at such times positively refuse their company. And though such
copulations do not always produce monstrous birth, yet the children,
thus begotten, are generally heavy, dull, and sluggish, besides
defective in their understandings, lacking the vivacity and loveliness
with which children begotten in proper season are endowed.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

In Flanders, between Antwerp and Mechlin, in a village called Uthaton, a
child was born which had two heads, four arms, seeming like two girls
joined together, having two of their arms lifted up between and above
their heads, the thighs being placed as it were across one another,
according to the figure on p. 39. How long they lived I had no account
of.

By the figure on p. 40 you may see that though some of the members are
wanting, yet they are supplied by other members.

It remains now that I make some inquiry whether those that are born
monsters have reasonable souls, and are capable of resurrection. And
here both divines and physicians are of opinion that those who,
according to the order of generations deduced from our first parents,
proceed by mutual means from either sex, though their outward shape be
deformed and monstrous, have notwithstanding a reasonable soul, and
consequently their bodies are capable of resurrection, as other men's
and women's are; but those monsters that are not begotten by men, but
are the product of women's unnatural lusts in copulating with other
creatures shall perish as the brute beasts by whom they were begotten,
not having a reasonable soul nor any breath of the Almighty infused into
them; and such can never be capable of resurrection. And the same is
also true of imperfect and abortive births.

Some are of opinion that monsters may be engendered by some infernal
spirit. Of this mind was Adigus Fariur, speaking of a deformed monster
born at Craconia; and Hieronimus Cardamnus wrote of a maid that was got
with child by the devil, she thinking it had been a fair young man. The
like also is recorded by Vicentius, of the prophet Merlin, that he was
begotten by an evil spirit. But what a repugnance it would be both to
religion and nature, if the devils could beget men; when we are taught
to believe that not any was ever begotten without human seed, except the
Son of God. The devil then being a spirit and having no corporeal
substance, has therefore no seed of generation; to say that he can use
the act of generation effectually is to affirm that he can make
something out of nothing, and consequently to affirm the devil to be
God, for creation belongs to God only. Again, if the devil could assume
to himself a human body and enliven the faculties of it, and cause it to
generate, as some affirm he can, yet this body must bear the image of
the devil. And it borders on blasphemy to think that God should so far
give leave to the devil as out of God's image to raise his own
diabolical offspring. In the school of Nature we are taught the
contrary, viz., that like begets like; therefore, of a devil cannot man
be born. Yet, it is not denied, but the devils, transforming themselves
into human shapes, may abuse both men and women, and, with wicked
people, use carnal copulation; but that any unnatural conjunction can
bring forth a human creature is contrary to nature and all religion.

       *       *       *       *       *




