CHAPTER II

     _Of Conception; what it is; how women are to order themselves after
     Conception._


SECTION I.--_What Conception is, and the qualifications requisite
    thereto._

Conception is nothing but an action of the womb, by which the prolific
seed is received and retained, that an infant may be engendered and
formed out of it. There are two sorts of conception: the one according
to nature, which is followed by the generation of the infant in the
womb; the other false and wholly against nature, in which the seed
changes into water, and produces only false conceptions, moles, or other
strange matter. Now, there are three things principally necessary in
order to a true conception, so that generation may follow, viz., without
diversity of sex there can be no conception; for, though some will have
a woman to be an animal that can engender of herself, it is a great
mistake; there can be no conception without a man discharge his seed
into the womb. What they allege of pullets laying eggs without a cock's
treading them is nothing to the purpose, for those eggs should they be
set under a hen, will never become chickens because they never received
any prolific virtue from the male, which is absolutely necessary to this
purpose, and is sufficient to convince us, that diversity of the sex is
necessary even to those animals, as well as to the generation of man.
But diversity of sex, though it be necessary to conception, yet it will
not do alone; there must also be a congression of the different sexes;
for diversity of sex would profit little if copulation did not follow. I
confess I have heard of subtle women, who, to cover their sin and
shame, have endeavoured to persuade some peasants that they were never
touched by man to get them with child; and that one in particular
pretended to conceive by going into a bath where a man had washed
himself a little before and spent his seed in it, which was drawn and
sucked into her womb, as she pretended. But such stories as these are
only for such who know no better. Now that these different sexes should
be obliged to come to the touch, which we call copulation or coition,
besides the natural desire of begetting their like, which stirs up men
and women to it, the parts appointed for generation are endowed by
nature with a delightful and mutual itch, which begets in them a desire
to the action; without which, it would not be very easy for a man, born
for the contemplation of divine mysteries, to join himself, by the way
of coition, to a woman, in regard to the uncleanness of the part and the
action. And, on the other side, if the woman did but think of those
pains and inconveniences to which they are subject by their great
bellies, and those hazards of life itself, besides the unavoidable pains
that attend their delivery, it is reasonable to believe they would be
affrighted from it. But neither sex makes these reflections till after
the action is over, considering nothing beforehand but the pleasure of
the enjoyment, so that it is from this voluptuous itch that nature
obliges both sexes to this congression. Upon which the third thing
followeth of course, viz., the emission of seed into the womb in the act
of copulation. For the woman having received this prolific seed into her
womb, and retained it there, the womb thereupon becomes depressed, and
embraces the seed so closely, that being closed the point of a needle
cannot enter into it without violence. And now the woman may be said to
have conceived, having reduced by her heat from power into action, the
several faculties which are contained in the seed, making use of the
spirits with which the seed abounds, and which are the instruments which
begin to trace out the first lineaments of the parts, and which
afterwards, by making use of the menstruous blood flowing to it, give
it, in time, growth and final perfection. And thus much shall suffice to
explain what conception is. I shall next proceed to show



SECT. II.--_How a Woman ought to order herself after Conception._

My design in this treatise being brevity, I shall bring forward a little
of what the learned have said of the causes of twins, and whether there
be any such things as superfoetations, or a second conception in a woman
(which is yet common enough), and as to twins, I shall have occasion to
speak of them when I come to show you how the midwife ought to proceed
in the delivery of the women that are pregnant with them. But having
already spoken of conception, I think it now necessary to show how such
as have conceived ought to order themselves during their pregnancy, that
they may avoid those inconveniences, which often endanger the life of
the child and many times their own.

A woman, after conception, during the time of her being with child,
ought to be looked upon as indisposed or sick, though in good health;
for child bearing is a kind of nine months' sickness, being all that
time in expectation of many inconveniences which such a condition
usually causes to those that are not well governed during that time; and
therefore, ought to resemble a good pilot, who, when sailing on a rough
sea and full of rocks, avoids and shuns the danger, if he steers with
prudence, but if not, it is a thousand to one but he suffers shipwreck.
In like manner, a woman with child is often in danger of miscarrying and
losing her life, if she is not very careful to prevent those accidents
to which she is subject all the time of her pregnancy. All which time
her care must be double, first of herself, and secondly of the child
she goes with for otherwise, a single error may produce a double
mischief; for if she receives a prejudice, the child also suffers with
her. Let a woman, therefore, after conception, observe a good diet,
suitable to her temperament, custom, condition and quality; and if she
can, let the air where she ordinarily dwells be clear and well tempered,
and free from extremes, either of heat or cold; for being too hot, it
dissipateth the spirits too much and causes many weaknesses; and by
being too cold and foggy, it may bring down rheums and distillations on
the lungs, and so cause her to cough, which, by its impetuous motion,
forcing downwards, may make her miscarry. She ought alway to avoid all
nauseous and ill smells; for sometimes the stench of a candle, not well
put out, may cause her to come before time; and I have known the smell
of charcoal to have the same effect. Let her also avoid smelling of rue,
mint, pennyroyal, castor, brimstone, etc.

But, with respect to their diet, women with child have generally so
great loathings and so many different longings, that it is very
difficult to prescribe an exact diet for them. Only this I think
advisable, that they may use those meats and drinks which are to them
most desirable, though, perhaps, not in themselves so wholesome as some
others, and, it may be not so pleasant; but this liberty must be made
use of with this caution, that what they desire be not in itself
unwholesome; and also that in everything they take care of excess. But,
if a child-bearing woman finds herself not troubled with such longings
as we have spoken of, let her take simple food, and in such quantity as
may be sufficient for herself and the child, which her appetite may in a
great measure regulate; for it is alike hurtful to her to fast too long
as to eat too much; and therefore, rather let her eat a little and
often; especially let her avoid eating too much at night, because the
stomach being too much filled, compresseth the diaphragm, and thereby
causeth difficulty of breathing. Let her meat be easy of digestion, such
as the tenderest parts of beef, mutton, veal, fowls, pullets, capons,
pigeons and partridges, either boiled or roasted, as she likes best, new
laid eggs are also very good for her; and let her put into her broth
those herbs that purify it, as sorrel, lettuce, succory and borage; for
they will purge and purify the blood. Let her avoid whatever is hot
seasoned, especially pies and baked meats, which being of hot digestion,
overcharge the stomach. If she desire fish let it be fresh, and such as
is taken out of rivers and running streams. Let her eat quinces and
marmalade, to strengthen her child: for which purpose sweet almonds,
honey, sweet apples, and full ripe grapes, are also good. Let her
abstain from all salt, sour, bitter and salt things, and all things that
tend to provoke the terms--such as garlic, onions, mustard, fennel,
pepper and all spices except cinnamon, which in the last three months is
good for her. If at first her diet be sparing, as she increases in
bigness, let her diet be increased, for she ought to consider that she
has a child as well as herself to nourish. Let her be moderate in her
drinking; and if she drinks wine, let it be rather claret than white
(for it will breed good blood, help the digestion, and comfort the
stomach, which is weakly during pregnancy); but white wine being
diuretic, or that which provokes urine, ought to be avoided. Let her be
careful not to take too much exercise, and let her avoid dancing, riding
in a coach, or whatever else puts the body into violent motion,
especially in the first month. But to be more particular, I shall here
set down rules proper for every month for the child-bearing woman to
order herself, from the time she first conceived, to the time of her
delivery.



_Rules for the First Two Months._

As soon as a woman knows, or has reason to believe, that she has
conceived, she ought to abstain from all violent motions and exercise;
whether she walks afoot, or rides on horseback or in a coach, it ought
to be very gently. Let her also abstain from Venery (for which, after
conception, she has usually no great inclination), lest there be a mole
or superfoetation, which is the adding of one embryo to another. Let her
beware not to lift her arms too high, nor carry great burdens, nor
repose herself on hard and uneasy seats. Let her use moderately good,
juicy meat and easy of digestion, and let her wines be neither too
strong nor too sharp, but a little mingled with water; or if she be very
abstemious, she may use water wherein cinnamon has been boiled. Let her
avoid fastings, thirst, watchings, mourning, sadness, anger, and all
other perturbations of the mind. Let no one present any strange or
unwholesome thing to her, nor so much as name it, lest she should desire
it and not be able to get it, and so either cause her to miscarry, or
the child to have some deformity on that account. Let her belly be kept
loose with prunes, raisins or manna in her broth, and let her use the
following electuary, to strengthen the womb and the child--

"Take conserve of borage, buglos and roses, each two ounces; an ounce of
balm; an ounce each of citron peel and shreds, candied mirobalans, an
ounce each; extract of wood aloes a scruple; prepared pearl, half a
drachm; red coral and ivory, of each a drachm; precious stones each a
scruple; candied nutmegs, two drachms, and with syrup of apples and
quinces make an electuary."



_Let her observe the following rules._

"Take pearls prepared, a drachm; red coral and ivory prepared, each half
a drachm, precious stones, each a scruple; yellow citron peel, mace,
cinnamon, cloves, each half a drachm; saffron, a scruple; wood aloes,
half a scruple; ambergris, six drachms; and with six ounces of sugar
dissolved in rosewater make rolls." Let her also apply strengtheners of
nutmeg, mace and mastich made up in bags, to the navel, or a toast
dipped in malmsey, or sprinkled with powdered mint. If she happens to
desire clay, chalk, or coals (as many women with child do), give her
beans boiled with sugar, and if she happens to long for anything that
she cannot obtain, let her presently drink a large draught of pure cold
water.



_Rules for the Third Month._

In this month and the next, be sure to keep from bleeding; for though it
may be safe and proper at other times, yet it will not be so at the end
of the fourth month; and yet if blood abound, or some incidental disease
happens which requires evacuation, you may use a cupping glass, with
scarification, and a little blood may be drawn from the shoulders and
arms, especially if she has been accustomed to bleed. Let her also take
care of lacing herself too straitly, but give herself more liberty than
she used to do; for inclosing her belly in too strait a mould, she
hinders the infant from taking its free growth, and often makes it come
before its time.



_Rules for the Fourth Month._

In this month also you ought to keep the child-bearing woman from
bleeding, unless in extraordinary cases, but when the month is passed,
blood-letting and physic may be permitted, if it be gentle and mild, and
perhaps it may be necessary to prevent abortion. In this month she may
purge, in an acute disease, but purging may only be used from the
beginning of this month to the end of the sixth; but let her take care
that in purging she use no vehement medicine, nor any bitter, as aloes,
which is disagreeable and hurtful to the child, and opens the mouth of
the vessels; neither let her use coloquintida, scammony nor turbith; she
may use cassia, manna, rhubarb, agaric and senna but dyacidodium
purgans is best, with a little of the electuary of the juice of roses.



_Rules for the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Months._

In these months, child-bearing women are troubled with coughs, colds,
heart-beating, fainting, watching, pains in the loins and hips, and
bleeding. The cough is from a sharp vapour that comes to the jaws and
rough artery from the terms, or the thin part of that blood got less
into the reins of the breast; this endangers abortion, and strength
fails from watching: therefore, purge the humours that come to the
breast, with rhubarb and agaric, and strengthen the head as in a
catarrh, and give sweet lenitives as in a cough. Palpitation and
faintness arises from vapours that go to it by the arteries, or from
blood that abounds and cannot get out of the womb, but ascends and
oppresses the heart; and in this case cordials should be used both
inwardly and outwardly. Watching, is from sharp dry vapours that trouble
the animal spirits, and in this case use frictions, and let the woman
wash her feet at bed-time, and let her take syrup of poppies, dried
roses, emulsions of sweet almonds, and white poppy seed. If she be
troubled with pains in her loins and hips, as in those months she is
subject to be, from the weight of her child as it grows big and heavy,
and so stretches the ligaments of the womb and part adjacent, let her
hold it up with swathing bands about her neck. About this time also the
woman often happens to have a flux of blood, either at the nose, womb or
haemorrhoids, from plenty of blood, or from the weakness of the child
that takes it not in, or else from evil humour in the blood, that stirs
up nature and sends it forth. And sometimes it happens that the vessels
of the womb may be broken, either by some violent motion, fall, cough or
trouble of the mind (for any of these will work that effect), and this
is so dangerous, that in such a case the child cannot be well, but if it
be from blood only, the danger is less, provided it flows by the veins
of the neck of the womb, for then it prevents plethora and takes not
away the nourishment of the child; but if it proceeds from the weakness
of the child, that draws it not in, abortion of the child often follows,
or hard travail, or else she goes beyond her time. But if it flows from
the inward veins of the womb, there is more danger by the openness of
the womb, if it come from evil blood; the danger is alike from
cacochymy, which is like to fall upon both. If it arises from plethora,
open a vein, but with great caution, and use astringents, of which the
following will do well:--Take prepared pearls, a scruple; red coral, two
scruples; mace, nutmeg, each a drachm; cinnamon, half a drachm; make a
powder, or with white sugar make rolls. Or give this powder in
broth:--"Take red coral, a drachm; half a drachm precious stones; red
sander, half a drachm; bole, a drachm; scaled earth and tormental roots,
each two scruples, with sugar of roses and Manus Christi; with pearl,
five drachms; make a powder." You may also strengthen the child at the
navel, and if there be a cacochymy, alter the humours, and if you can do
it safely, evacuate; you may likewise use amulets on her hands and about
her neck. In a flux of haemorrhoids, wear off the pain, and let her
drink hot wine with a toasted nutmeg. In these months the belly is also
subject to be bound, but if it be without any apparent disease, the
broth of a chicken or veal, sodden with oil, or with the decoction of
mallows or marsh-mallows, mercury or linseed, put up in a clyster, will
not be amiss, but in less quantity than is given in other cases:--viz.
of the decoction, five ounces, of common oil, three ounces, of sugar,
two ounces, and of cassia fistula, one ounce. But if she will not take a
clyster, one or two yolks of new laid eggs, or a little peas-pottage
warm, a little salt and sugar, and supped a little before meat, will be
very convenient. But if her belly be distended and stretched with wind a
little fennel seed and aniseed reduced to a powder and mixed with honey
and sugar made after the manner of an electuary, will be very well Also,
if thighs and feet swell let them be anointed with erphodrinum (which is
a liquid medicine) made with vinegar and rose-water, mingled with salt.



_Rules for the Eighth Month._

The eighth month is commonly called the most dangerous; therefore the
greatest care and caution ought to be used, the diet better in quality,
but no more, nor indeed, so much in quantity as before, but as she must
abate her diet, she must increase her exercise; and because then women
with child, by reason that sharp humours alter the belly, are accustomed
to weaken their spirits and strength, they may well take before meat, an
electuary of diarrhoden, or aromaticum rosatum or diamagarton; and
sometimes they may lick a little honey. As they will loathe, nauseate
their meat, they may take green ginger, candied with sugar, and the
rinds of citron and oranges candied; and let them often use honey for
strengthening the infant. When she is not very far from her labour, let
her eat every day seven roasted figs before her meat, and sometimes let
her lick a little honey. But let her beware of salt and powdered meat,
for it is neither good for her nor the child.



_Rules for the Ninth Month._

In the ninth month let her have a care of lifting any great weight, but
let her move a little more, to dilate the parts, and stir up natural
heat. Let her take heed of stooping, and neither sit too much nor lie on
her sides, neither ought she to bend herself much enfolded in the
umbilical ligaments, by which means it often perisheth. Let her walk and
stir often, and let her exercise be, rather to go upwards than
downwards. Let her diet, now especially, be light and easy of digestion
and damask prunes with sugar, or figs with raisins, before meat, as also
the yolks of eggs, flesh and broth of chickens, birds, partridges and
pheasants; astringent and roasted meats, with rice, hard eggs, millet
and such like other things are proper. Baths of sweet water, with
emollient herbs, ought to be used by her this month with some
intermission, and after the baths let her belly be anointed with oil of
sweet roses and of violets; but for her privy parts, it is better to
anoint them with the fat of hens, geese or ducks, or with oil of
lilies, and the decoction of linseed and fenugreek, boiled with oil of
linseed and marshmallows, or with the following liniment:--

Take mallows and marshmallows, cut and shred, of each one ounce; of
linseed, one ounce; let them be boiled from twenty ounces of water to
ten; then let her take three ounces of the boiled broth, of oil of
almonds and oil of flower-de-luce, of each one ounce; of deer's suet,
three ounces. Let her bathe with this, and anoint herself with it, warm.

If for fourteen days before the birth, she do every morning and evening
bathe and moisten her belly with muscadine and lavender water, the child
will be much strengthened thereby. And if every day she eat toasted
bread, it will hinder anything from growing to the child. Her privy
parts must be gently stroked down with this fomentation.

"Take three ounces of linseed, and one handful each of mallows and
marshmallows sliced, then let them be put into a bag and immediately
boiled." Let the woman with child, every morning and evening, take the
vapour of this decoction in a hollow stool, taking great heed that no
wind or air come to her in-parts, and then let her wipe the part so
anointed with a linen cloth, and she may anoint the belly and groins as
at first.

When she has come so near to her time, as to be ten or fourteen days
thereof, if she begins to feel any more than ordinary pain let her use
every day the following:--"Take mallows and marshmallows, of each a
handful; camomiles, hard mercury, maidenhair, of each a handful; of
linseed, four ounces; let them be boiled in a sufficient quantity of
water as to make a bath therewith." But let her not sit too hot upon the
seat, nor higher than a little above her navel; nor let her sit upon it
longer than about half an hour, lest her strength languish and decay,
for it is better to use it often than to stay too long in it.

And thus have I shown how a child-bearing woman ought to govern herself
each month during her pregnancy. How she must order herself at her
delivery, shall be shown in another chapter, after I have first shown
the intended midwife how the child is first formed in the womb, and the
manner of its decumbiture there.

       *       *       *       *       *




