BOOK II

       *       *       *       *       *

Having finished the first part of this book, and wherein, I hope, amply
made good my promise to the reader, I am now come to treat only of those
distempers to which they are more subject when in a breeding condition,
and those that keep them from being so; together with such proper and
safe remedies as may be sufficient to repel them. And since amongst all
the diseases to which human nature is subject, there is none that more
diametrically opposes the very end of our creation, and the design of
nature in the formation of different sexes, and the power thereby given
us for the work of generation, than that of sterility or barrenness
which, where it prevails, renders the most accomplished midwife but a
useless person, and destroys the design of our book; I think, therefore,
that barrenness is an effect that deserves our first and principal
consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

     _Of Barrenness; its several Kinds; with the proper Remedies for it;
     and the Signs of Insufficiency both in Men and Women._


SECTION I.--_Of Barrenness in General._

Barrenness is either natural or artificial.

Natural barrenness is when a woman is barren, though the instruments of
generation are perfect both in herself and in her husband, and no
preposterous or diabolical course used to it, and neither age, nor
disease, nor any defect hindering, and yet the woman remains naturally
barren.

Now this may proceed from a natural cause, for if the man and woman be
of one complexion, they seldom have children, and the reason is clear,
for the universal course of nature being formed of a composition of
contraries, cannot be increased by a composition of likes; and,
therefore, if the constitution of the woman be hot and dry, as well as
the man's there can be no conception; and if, on the contrary, the man
should be of a cold and moist constitution, as well as the woman, the
effect would be the same; and this barrenness is purely natural. The
only way to help this is, for people, before they marry, to observe each
others constitution and complexion, if they design to have children. If
their complexions and constitutions be alike, they are not fit to come
together, for discordant natures only, make harmony in the work of
generation.

Another natural cause of barrenness, is want of love between man and
wife. Love is that vivid principle that ought to inspire each organ in
the act of generation, or else it will be spiritless and dull; for if
their hearts be not united in love, how should their seed unite to cause
Conception? And this is sufficiently evinced, in that there never
follows conception on a rape. Therefore, if men and women design to have
children, let them live so, that their hearts as well as their bodies
may be united, or else they may miss their expectations.

A third cause of natural barrenness, is the letting virgins blood in the
arm before their natural courses are come down, which is usually in the
fourteenth and fifteenth year of their age; sometimes, perhaps before
the thirteenth, but never before the twelfth. And because usually, they
are out of order, and indisposed before their purgations come down,
their parents run to the doctor to know what is the matter; and he, if
not skilled, will naturally prescribe opening a vein in the arm,
thinking fullness of blood the cause; and thus she seems recovered for
the present: and when the young virgin happens to be in the same
disorder, the mother applies again to the surgeon, who uses the same
remedy; and by these means the blood is so diverted from its proper
channel, that it comes not down the womb as usual, and so the womb dries
up, and she is for ever barren. To prevent this, let no virgin blood in
the arm before her courses come down well; for that will bring the blood
downwards, and by that means provoke the _menstrua_ to come down.

Another cause of natural barrenness, is debility in copulation. If
persons perform not that act with all the bent and ardour that nature
requires, they may as well let it alone; for frigidity and coldness
never produces conception. Of the cure of this we will speak by and by,
after I have spoken of accidental barrenness, which is occasioned by
some morbific matter or infirmity in the body, either of the man or of
the woman, which being removed they become fruitful. And since, as I
have before noted, the first and great law of creation, was to increase
and multiply, and barrenness is in direct opposition to that law, and
frustrates the end of our creation, and often causes man and wife to
have hard thoughts one of another, I shall here, for the satisfaction of
well meaning people, set down the signs and causes of insufficiency both
in men and women; premising first that when people have no children,
they must not presently blame either party, for neither may be in fault.



SECT. II.--_Signs and Causes of Insufficiency in Men._

One cause may be in some viciousness of the yard, as if the same be
crooked, or any ligaments thereof distorted and broken, whereby the ways
and passages, through which the seed should flow, come to be stopped or
vitiated.

Another cause may be, too much weakness of the yard, and tenderness
thereof, so that it is not strong enough erected to inject seed into the
womb; for the strength and stiffness of the yard very much conduces to
conception, by reason of the forcible injection of the seed.

Also, if the stones have received any hurt, so that they cannot exercise
the proper gift in producing seed, or if they be oppressed with an
inflammation, tumour, wound or ulcer, or drawn up within the belly, and
not appearing outwardly.

Also, a man may be barren by reason of the defect of seed, as first, if
he cast forth no seed at all, or less in substance than is needful. Or,
secondly, if the seed be vicious, or unfit for generation; as on the one
side, it happens in bodies that are gross and fat, the matter of it
being defective; and on the other side, too much leanness, or continual
wasting or consumption of the body, destroys seed; nature turning all
the matter and substance thereof into the nutriment of the body.

Too frequent copulation is also one great cause of barrenness in men;
for it attracteth the seminal moisture from the stones, before it is
sufficiently prepared and concocted. So if any one, by daily
copulation, do exhaust and draw out all their moisture of the seed, then
do the stones draw the moist humours from the superior veins unto
themselves; and so, having but a little blood in them, they are forced
of necessity to cast it out raw and unconcocted, and thus the stones are
violently deprived of the moisture of their veins, and the superior
veins, and all the other parts of the body, of their vital spirits;
therefore it is no wonder that those who use immoderate copulation are
very weak in their bodies, seeing their whole body is deprived of the
best and purest blood, and of the spirit, insomuch that many who have
been too much addicted to that pleasure, have killed themselves in the
very act.

Gluttony, drunkenness, and other excesses, do so much hinder men from
fruitfulness, that it makes them unfit for generation.

But among other causes of barrenness of men, this also is one, and makes
them almost of the nature of eunuchs, and that is the incision or the
cutting of the veins behind their ears, which in case of distempers is
oftentimes done; for, according to the opinions of most physicians and
anatomists, the seed flows from the brain by those veins behind the
ears, more than any part of the body. From whence it is very probable,
that the transmission of the seed is hindered by the cutting of the
veins behind the ears, so that it cannot descend to the testicles, or
may come thither very crude and raw.



SECT. III.--_Signs and Causes of Insufficiency or Barrenness in Women._

Although there are many causes of the barrenness of women, yet the chief
and principal are internal, respecting either the privy parts, the womb
or menstruous blood.

Therefore, Hippocrates saith (speaking as well of easy as difficult
conception in women) the first consideration is to be had of their
species; for little women are more apt to conceive than great, slender
than gross, white and fair than ruddy and high coloured, black than wan,
those that have their veins conspicuous, than others; but to be very
fleshy is evil, and to have great swelled breasts is good.

The next thing to be considered is, the monthly purgations, whether they
have been duly every month, whether they flow plentifully, are of a good
colour, and whether they have been equal every month.

Then the womb, or place of conception, is to be considered. It ought to
be clean and sound, dry and soft, not retracted or drawn up; not prone
or descending downward; nor the mouth thereof turned away, nor too
close shut up. But to speak more particularly:--

The first parts to be spoken of are the _pudenda_, or privities, and the
womb; which parts are shut and enclosed either by nature or against
nature; and from hence, such women are called _imperforate_; as in some
women the mouth of their womb continues compressed, or closed up, from
the time of their birth until the coming down of their courses, and
then, on a sudden, when their terms press forward to purgation, they are
molested with great and unusual pains. Sometimes these break of their
own accord, others are dissected and opened by physicians; others never
break at all, which bring on disorders that end in death.

All these _Aetius_ particularly handles, showing that the womb is shut
three manner of ways, which hinders conception. And the first is when
the _pudenda_ grow and cleave together. The second is, when these
certain membranes grow in the middle part of the matrix within. The
third is, when (though the lips and bosom of the _pudenda_ may appear
fair and open), the mouth of the womb may be quite shut up. All which
are occasions of barrenness, as they hinder the intercourse with man,
the monthly courses, and conception.

But amongst all causes of barrenness in women, the greatest is in the
womb, which is the field of generation; and if this field is corrupt, it
is in vain to expect any fruit, be it ever so well sown. It may be unfit
for generation by reason of many distempers to which it is subject; as
for instance, overmuch heat and overmuch cold; for women whose wombs are
too thick and cold, cannot conceive, because coldness extinguishes the
heat of the human seed. Immoderate moisture of the womb also destroys
the seed of man, and makes it ineffectual, as corn sown in ponds and
marshes; and so does overmuch dryness of the womb, so that the seed
perisheth for want of nutriment. Immoderate heat of the womb is also a
cause of barrenness for it scorcheth up the seed as corn sown in the
drought of summer; for immoderate heat burns all parts of the body, so
that no conception can live in the womb.

When unnatural humours are engendered, as too much phlegm, tympanies,
wind, water, worms, or any other evil humour abounding contrary to
nature, it causes barrenness as do all terms not coming down in due
order.

A woman may also have accidental causes of barrenness (at least such as
may hinder her conception), as sudden frights, anger, grief and
perturbation of mind; too violent exercises, as leaping, dancing,
running, after copulation, and the like. But I will now add some signs,
by which these things may be known.

If the cause of barrenness be in the man, through overmuch heat in the
seed, the woman may easily feel that in receiving it.

If the nature of the woman be too hot, and so unfit for conception, it
will appear by her having her terms very little, and the colour
inclining to yellowness; she is also very hasty, choleric and crafty;
her pulse beats very swift, and she is very desirous of copulation.

To know whether the fault is in the man or in the woman, sprinkle the
man's urine upon a lettuce leaf, and the woman's urine upon another, and
that which dries away first is unfruitful. Also take five wheaten corns
and seven beans, put them into an earthen pot, and let the party make
water therein; let this stand seven days, and if in that time they begin
to sprout, then the party is fruitful; but if they sprout not, then the
party is barren, whether it be the man or the woman; this is a certain
sign.

There are some that make this experiment of a woman's fruitfulness; take
myrrh, red storax and some odoriferous things, and make a perfume of
which let the woman receive into the neck of the womb through a funnel;
if the woman feels the smoke ascend through her body to the nose, then
she is fruitful; otherwise she is barren. Some also take garlic and
beer, and cause the woman to lie upon her back upon it, and if she feel
the scent thereof in her nose, it is a sign of her being fruitful.

Culpepper and others also give a great deal of credit to the following
experiment. Take a handful of barley, and steep half of it in the urine
of a man, and the other half in the urine of the woman, for the space of
twenty-four hours; then take it out, and put the man's by itself, and
the woman's by itself; set it in a flower-pot, or some other thing,
where let it dry; water the man's every morning with his own urine, and
the woman's with hers, and that which grows first is the most fruitful;
but if they grow not at all, they are both naturally barren.

_Cure_. If the barrenness proceeds from stoppage of the menstrua, let
the woman sweat, for that opens the parts; and the best way to sweat is
in a hot-house. Then let the womb be strengthened by drinking a draught
of white wine, wherein a handful of stinking arrach, first bruised, has
been boiled, for by a secret magnetic virtue, it strengthens the womb,
and by a sympathetic quality, removes any disease thereof. To which add
also a handful of vervain, which is very good to strengthen both the
womb and the head, which are commonly afflicted together by sympathy.
Having used these two or three days, if they come not down, take of
calamint, pennyroyal, thyme, betony, dittany, burnet, feverfew, mugwort,
sage, peony roots, juniper berries, half a handful of each, or as many
as can be got; let these be boiled in beer, and taken for her drink.

Take one part of gentian-root, two parts of centaury, distil them with
ale in an alembic after you have bruised the gentian-roots and infused
them well. This water is an admirable remedy to provoke the terms. But
if you have not this water in readiness, take a drachm of centaury, and
half a drachm of gentian-roots bruised, boiled in posset drink, and
drink half a drachm of it at night going to bed. Seed of wild navew
beaten to powder, and a drachm of it taken in the morning in white wine,
also is very good; but if it answers not, she must be let blood in the
legs. And be sure you administer your medicines a little before the full
of the moon, by no means in the wane of the moon; if you do, you will
find them ineffectual.

If barrenness proceed from the overflowing of the menstrua, then
strengthen the womb as you were taught before; afterwards anoint the
veins of the back with oil of roses, oil of myrtle and oil of quinces
every night, and then wrap a piece of white baise about your veins, the
cotton side next to the skin and keep the same always to it. But above
all, I recommend this medicine to you. Take comfrey-leaves or roots, and
clown woundwort, of each a handful; bruise them well, and boil them in
ale, and drink a good draught of it now and then. Or take cinnamon,
cassia lignea, opium, of each two drachms; myrrh, white pepper,
galbanum, of each one drachm; dissolve the gum and opium in white wine;
beat the rest into powder and make pills, mixing them together exactly,
and let the patient take two each night going to bed; but let the pills
not exceed fifteen grains.

If barrenness proceed from a flux in the womb, the cure must be
according to the cause producing it, or which the flux proceeds from,
which may be known by signs; for a flux of the womb, being a continual
distillation from it for a long time together, the colour of what is
voided shows what humour it is that offends; in some it is red, and that
proceeds from blood putrified, in some it is yellow, and that denotes
choler; in others white and pale, and denotes phlegm. If pure blood
comes out, as if a vein were opened, some corrosion or gnawing of the
womb is to be feared. All these are known by the following signs:

The place of conception is continually moist with the humours, the face
ill-coloured, the party loathes meat and breathes with difficulty, the
eyes are much swollen, which is sometimes without pain. If the offending
humour be pure blood, then you must let blood in the arm, and the
cephalic vein is fittest to draw back the blood; then let the juice of
plantain and comfrey be injected into the womb. If phlegm be a cause,
let cinnamon be a spice used in all her meats and drinks, and let her
take a little Venice treacle or mithridate every morning. Let her boil
burnet, mugwort, feverfew and vervain in all her broths. Also, half a
drachm of myrrh, taken every morning, is an excellent remedy against
this malady. If choler be the cause, let her take burrage, buglos, red
roses, endive and succory roots, lettuce and white poppy-seed, of each a
handful; boil these in white wine until one half be wasted; let her
drink half a pint every morning to which half pint add syrup of chicory
and syrup of peach-flowers, of each an ounce, with a little rhubarb, and
this will gently purge her. If it proceed from putrified blood, let her
be bled in the foot, and then strengthen the womb, as I have directed in
stopping the menstrua.

If barrenness be occasioned by the falling out of the womb, as sometimes
it happens, let her apply sweet scents to the nose, such as civet,
galbanum, storax, calamitis, wood of aloes; and such other things as
are of that nature; and let her lay stinking things to the womb, such as
asafoetida, oil of amber, or the smoke of her own hair, being burnt; for
this is a certain truth, that the womb flies from all stinking, and to
all sweet things. But the most infallible cure in this case is; take a
common burdock leaf (which you may keep dry, if you please, all the
year), apply this to her head and it will draw the womb upwards. In fits
of the mother, apply it to the soles of the feet, and it will draw the
womb downwards. But seed beaten into a powder, draws the womb which way
you please, accordingly as it is applied.

If barrenness in the woman proceed from a hot cause, let her take whey
and clarify it; then boil plantain leaves and roots in it, and drink it
for her ordinary drink. Let her inject plantain juice into her womb with
a syringe. If it be in the winter, when you cannot get the juice, make a
strong decoction of the leaves and roots in water, and inject that up
with a syringe, but let it be blood warm, and you will find this
medicine of great efficacy. And further, to take away barrenness
proceeding from hot causes, take of conserve of roses, cold lozenges,
make a tragacanth, the confections of trincatelia; and use, to smell to,
camphor, rosewater and saunders. It is also good to bleed the basilica
or liver vein, and take four or five ounces of blood, and then take this
purge; take electuarium de epithymo de succo rosarum, of each two
drachms and a half; clarified whey, four ounces; mix them well together,
and take it in the morning fasting; sleep after it about an hour and a
half, and fast for four hours after; and about an hour before you eat
anything, drink a good draught of whey. Also take lilywater, four
ounces; mandragore water, one ounce; saffron, half a scruple; beat the
saffron to a powder, and mix it with waters, drink them warm in the
morning; use these eight days together.



_Some apparent Remedy against Barrenness and to cause Fruitfulness._

Take broom flowers, smallage, parsley seed, cummin, mugwort, feverfew,
of each half a scruple; aloes, half an ounce; Indian salt, saffron, of
each half a drachm; beat and mix them together, and put it to five
ounces of feverfew water warm; stop it up, and let it stand and dry in a
warm place, and this do, two or three times, one after the other; then
make each drachm into six pills, and take one of them every night before
supper.

For a purging medicine against barrenness, take conserve of benedicta
lax, a quarter of an ounce; depsillo three drachms, electuary de
rosarum, one drachm; mix them together with feverfew water, and drink it
in the morning betimes. About three days after the patient hath taken
this purge, let her be bled, taking four or five ounces from the median,
or common black vein in the foot; and then give for five successive
days, filed ivory, a drachm and a half, in feverfew water; and during
the time let her sit in the following bath an hour together, morning and
night. Take mild yellow sapes, daucas, balsam wood and fruit, ash-keys,
of each two handfuls, red and white behen, broom flowers, of each a
handful; musk, three grains; amber, saffron, of each a scruple; boiled
in water sufficiently; but the musk, saffron, amber and broom flowers
must be put into the decoction, after it is boiled and strained.



_A Confection very good against Barrenness._

Take pistachia, eringoes, of each half an ounce; saffron, one drachm;
lignum aloes, galengal, mace, coriophilla, balm flowers, red and white
behen, of each four scruples; syrup of confected ginger, twelve ounces;
white sugar, six ounces, decoct all these in twelve ounces of balm
water, and stir them well together; then put in it musk and amber, of
each a scruple; take thereof the quantity of a nutmeg three times a day;
in the morning, an hour before noon and an hour after supper.

But if the cause of barrenness, either in man or woman, be through
scarcity or diminution of the natural seed, then such things are to be
taken as do increase the seed, and incite to stir up to venery, and
further conception; which I shall here set down, and then conclude the
chapter concerning barrenness.

For this, yellow rape seed baked in bread is very good; also young, fat
flesh, not too much salted; also saffron, the tails of stincus, and long
pepper prepared in wine. But let such persons eschew all sour, sharp,
doughy and slimy meats, long sleep after meat, surfeiting and
drunkenness, and so much as they can, keep themselves from sorrow,
grief, vexation and anxious care.

These things following increase the natural seed, stir up the venery and
recover the seed again when it is lost, viz., eggs, milk, rice, boiled
in milk, sparrows' brains, flesh, bones and all; the stones and pizzles
of bulls, bucks, rams and bears, also cocks' stones, lambs' stones,
partridges', quails' and pheasants' eggs. And this is an undeniable
aphorism, that whatever any creature is addicted unto, they move or
incite the man or the woman that eats them, to the like, and therefore
partridges, quails, sparrows, etc., being extremely addicted to venery,
they work the same effect on those men and women that eat them. Also,
take notice, that in what part of the body the faculty that you would
strengthen, lies, take that same part of the body of another creature,
in whom the faculty is strong, as a medicine. As for instance, the
procreative faculty lies in the testicles; therefore, cocks' stones,
lambs' stones, etc., are proper to stir up venery. I will also give you
another general rule; all creatures that are fruitful being eaten, make
them fruitful that eat them, as crabs, lobsters, prawns, pigeons, etc.
The stones of a fox, dried and beaten to a powder, and a drachm taken in
the morning in sheep's milk, and the stones of a boar taken in like
manner, are very good. The heart of a male quail carried about a man,
and the heart of a female quail carried about a woman, causes natural
love and fruitfulness. Let them, also, that would increase their seed,
eat and drink of the best, as much as they can; for _sine Cerere el
Libero, friget Venus_, is an old proverb, which is, "without good meat
and drink, Venus will be frozen to death."

Pottages are good to increase the seed; such as are made of beans, peas,
and lupins, mixed with sugar. French beans, wheat sodden in broth,
aniseed, also onions, stewed garlic, leeks, yellow rapes, fresh mugwort
roots, eringo roots confected, ginger connected, etc. Of fruits, hazel
nuts, cyprus nuts, pistachio, almonds and marchpanes thereof. Spices
good to increase seed are cinnamon, galengal, long pepper, cloves,
ginger, saffron and asafoetida, a drachm and a half taken in good wine,
is very good for this purpose.

The weakness and debility of a man's yard, being a great hindrance to
procreation let him use the following ointment to strengthen it: Take
wax, oil of beaver-cod, marjoram, gentle and oil of costus, of each a
like quantity, mix them into an ointment, and put it to a little musk,
and with it anoint the yard, cods, etc. Take of house emmets, three
drachms, oil of white safannum, oil of lilies, of each an ounce; pound
and bruise the ants, and put them to the oil and let them stand in the
sun six days; then strain out the oil and add to it euphorbium one
scruple, pepper and rue, of each one drachm, mustard seed half a drachm,
set this altogether in the sun two or three days, then anoint the
instrument of generation therewith.

       *       *       *       *       *




