CHAPTER II

     _The Diseases of the Womb._


I have already said, that the womb is the field of generation; and if
this field be corrupted, it is vain to expect any fruit, although it be
ever so well sown. It is, therefore, not without reason that I intend in
this chapter to set down the several distempers to which the womb is
obnoxious, with proper and safe remedies against them.



SECTION I.--_Of the Hot Distemper of the Womb._

The distemper consists in excess of heat; for as heat of the womb is
necessary for conception, so if it be too much, it nourisheth not the
seed, but it disperseth its heat, and hinders the conception. This
preternatural heat is sometimes from the birth, and causeth barrenness,
but if it be accidental, it is from hot causes, that bring the heat and
the blood to the womb; it arises also from internal and external
medicines, and from too much hot meat, drink and exercise. Those that
are troubled with this distemper have but few courses, and those are
yellow, black, burnt or sharp, have hair betimes on their privities, are
very prone to lust, subject to headache, and abound with choler, and
when the distemper is strong upon them, they have but few terms, which
are out of order, being bad and hard to flow, and in time they become
hypochondriacal, and for the most part barren, having sometimes a
phrenzy of the womb.

_Cure_. The remedy is to use coolers, so that they offend not the
vessels that most open for the flux of the terms. Therefore, take the
following inwardly; succory, endive, violets, water lilies, sorrel,
lettuce, saunders and syrups and conserve made thereof. Also take a
conserve of succory, violets, water-lilies, burrage, each an ounce;
conserve of roses, half an ounce, diamargation frigid, diatriascantal,
each half a drachm; and with syrup of violets, or juice of citrons, make
an electuary. For outward applications, make use of ointment of roses,
violets, water-lilies, gourd, Venus navel, applied to the back and
loins.

Let the air be cool, her garments thin, and her food endive, lettuce,
succory and barley. Give her no hot meats, nor strong wine, unless mixed
with water. Rest is good for her, but she must abstain from copulation,
though she may sleep as long as she pleases.



SECT. II.--_Of the Cold Distempers of the Womb._

This distemper is the reverse of the foregoing, and equally an enemy to
generation, being caused by a cold quality abounding to excess, and
proceeds from a too cold air, rest, idleness and cooling medicines. It
may be known by an aversion to venery, and taking no pleasure in the act
of copulation when the seed is spent; the terms are phlegmatic, thick
and slimy, and do not flow as they should; the womb is windy and the
seed crude and waterish. It is the cause of obstructions and barrenness,
and is hard to be cured.

_Cure_. Take galengal, cinnamon, nutmeg mace, cloves, ginger, cububs,
cardamom, grains of paradise, each an ounce and a half, galengal, six
drachms, long pepper, half an ounce, Zedoary five drachms; bruise them
and add six quarts of wine, put them into a cellar nine days, daily
stirring them; then add of mint two handfuls, and let them stand
fourteen days, pour off the wine and bruise them, and then pour on the
wine again, and distil them. Also anoint with oil of lilies, rue,
angelica, cinnamon, cloves, mace and nutmeg. Let her diet and air be
warm, her meat of easy concoction, seasoned with ant-seed, fennel and
thyme; and let her avoid raw fruits and milk diets.



SECT. III.--_Of the Inflation of the Womb._

The inflation of the womb is a stretching of it by wind, called by some
a windy mole; the wind proceeds from a cold matter, whether thick or
thin, contained in the veins of the womb, by which the heat thereof is
overcome, and which either flows thither from other parts, or is
gathered there by cold meats and drinks. Cold air may be a producing
cause of it also, as women that lie in are exposed to it. The wind is
contained either in the cavity of the vessels of the womb, or between
the tumicle, and may be known by a swelling in the region of the womb,
which sometimes reaches to the navel, loins and diaphragm, and rises and
abates as the wind increaseth or decreaseth. It differs from the dropsy,
in that it never swells so high. That neither physician nor midwife may
take it for dropsy, let them observe the signs of the woman with the
child laid down in a former part of this work; and if any sign be
wanting, they may suspect it to be an inflation; of which it is a
further sign, that in conception the swelling is invariable; also if you
strike upon the belly, in an inflation, there will be noise, but not so
in case there be a conception. It also differs from a mole, because in
that there is a weight and hardness of the belly, and when the patient
moves from one side to the other she feels a great weight which moveth,
but not so in this. If the inflation continue without the cavity of the
womb, the pain is greater and more extensive, nor is there any noise,
because the wind is more pent up.

_Cure_. This distemper is neither of a long continuance nor dangerous,
if looked after in time; and if it be in the cavity of the womb it is
more easily expelled. To which purpose give her diaphnicon, with a
little castor and sharp clysters that expel the wind. If this distemper
happen to a woman in travail let her not purge after delivery, nor
bleed, because it is from a cold matter; but if it come after
child-bearing, and her terms come down sufficiently, and she has
fullness of blood, let the saphoena vein be opened, after which, let her
take the following electuary: take conserve of betony and rosemary, of
each an ounce and a half; candied eringoes, citron peel candied, each
half an ounce; diacimium, diagenel, each a drachm; oil of aniseed, six
drops, and with syrup of citrons make an electuary. For outward
application make a cataplasm of rue, mugwort, camomile, dill, calamint,
new pennyroyal, thyme, with oil of rue, keir and camomile. And let the
following clyster to expel the wind be put into the womb: Take agnus
castus, cinnamon, each two drachms, boil them in wine to half a pint.
She may likewise use sulphur, Bath and Spa waters, both inward and
outward, because they expel the wind.



SECT. IV.--_Of the Straitness of the Womb and its Vessels._

This is another effect of the womb, which is a very great obstruction to
the bearing of children, hindering both the flow of the menses and
conception, and is seated in the vessel of the womb, and the neck
thereof. The causes of this straitness are thick and rough humours, that
stop the mouths of the veins and arteries. These humours are bred either
by gross or too much nourishment, when the heat of the womb is so weak
that it cannot attenuate the humours, which by reason thereof, either
flow from the whole body, or are gathered into the womb. Now the vessels
are made straiter or closer several ways; sometimes by inflammation,
scirrhous or other tumours; sometimes by compressions, scars, or by
flesh or membranes that grow after a wound. The signs by which this is
known are, the stoppage of the terms, not conceiving, and condities
abounding in the body which are all shown by particular signs, for if
there is a wound, or the secundine be pulled out by force phlegm comes
from the wound; if stoppage of the terms be from an old obstruction of
humours, it is hard to be cured; if it be only from the disorderly use
of astringents, it is more curable; if it be from a scirrhous, or other
tumours that compress or close the vessel, the disease is incurable.

_Cure_. For the cure of that which is curable, obstructions must be
taken away, phlegm must be purged, and she must be let blood, as will be
hereafter directed in the stoppage of the terms. Then use the following
medicines: Take of aniseed and fennel seed, each a drachm; rosemary,
pennyroyal, calamint, betony flowers, each an ounce; castus, cinnamon,
galengal, each half an ounce; saffron half a drachm, with wine. Or take
asparagus roots, parsley roots, each an ounce; pennyroyal, calamint,
each a handful; wallflowers, gilly-flowers, each two handfuls; boil,
strain and add syrup of mugwort, an ounce and a half. For a fomentation,
take pennyroyal, mercury, calamint, marjoram, mugwort, each two
handfuls, sage, rosemary bays, camomile-flowers, each a handful, boil
them in water and foment the groin and the bottom of the belly; or let
her sit up to the navel in a bath, and then anoint about the groin with
oil of rue, lilies, dill, etc.



SECT. V.--_Of the falling of the Womb._

This is another evil effect of the womb which is both very troublesome,
and also a hindrance to conception. Sometimes the womb falleth to the
middle of the thighs, nay, almost to the knees, and may be known then by
its hanging out. Now, that which causeth the womb to change its place
is, that the ligaments by which it is bound to the other parts, are not
in order; for there are four ligaments, two above, broad and membranous,
round and hollow; it is also bound to the great vessels by veins and
arteries, and to the back by nerves; but the place is changed when it is
drawn another way, or when the ligaments are loose, and it falls down by
its own weight. It is drawn on one side when the menses are hindered
from flowing, and the veins and arteries are full, namely, those that go
to the womb. If it be a mole on one side, the liver and spleen cause it;
by the liver vein on the right side, and the spleen on the left, as they
are more or less filled. Others are of opinion, it comes from the
solution of the connexion of the fibrous neck and the parts adjacent;
and that it is from the weight of the womb descending; this we deny not,
but the ligaments must be loose or broken. But women with a dropsy could
not be said to have the womb fallen down, if it came only from
looseness; but in them it is caused by the saltness of the water, which
dries more than it moistens. Now, if there be a little tumour, within or
without the privities, it is nothing else but a descent of the womb, but
if there be a tumour like a goose's egg and a hole at the bottom and
there is at first a great pain in the parts to which the womb is
fastened, as the loins, the bottom of the belly, and the os sacrum, it
proceeds from the breaking or stretching of the ligaments; and a little
after the pain is abated, and there is an impediment in walking, and
sometimes blood comes from the breach of the vessels, and the excrements
and urine are stopped, and then a fever and convulsion ensueth,
oftentimes proving mortal, especially if it happen to women with child.

_Cure_. For the cure of this distemper, first put up the womb before the
air alter it, or it be swollen or inflamed; and for this purpose give a
clyster to remove the excrements, and lay her upon her back, with her
legs abroad, and her thighs lifted up and her head down; then take the
tumour in your hand and thrust it in without violence; if it be swelled
by alteration and cold, foment it with the decoction of mallows,
althoea, lime, fenugreek, camomile flowers, bay-berries, and anoint it
with oil of lilies, and hen's grease. If there be an inflammation, do
not put it up, but fright it in, by putting a red-hot iron before it
and making a show as if you intended to burn it; but first sprinkle upon
it the powder of mastich, frankincense and the like; thus, take
frankincense, mastich, each two drachms; sarcocol steeped in milk,
drachm; mummy, pomegranate flowers, sanguisdraconis, each half a drachm.
When it is put up, let her lie with her legs stretched, and one upon the
other, for eight or ten days, and make a pessary in the form of a pear,
with cork or sponge, and put it into the womb, dipped in sharp wine, or
juice of acacia, with powder of sanguis, with galbanum and bdellium.
Apply also a cupping-glass, with a great flame, under the navel or paps,
or both kidneys, and lay this plaster to the back; take opopanax, two
ounces, storax liquid, half an ounce; mastich, frankincense, pitch,
bole, each two drachms; then with wax make a plaster; or take laudanum,
a drachm and a half; mastich, and frankincense, each half a drachm, wood
aloes, cloves, spike, each a drachm; ash-coloured ambergris, four
grains: musk, half a scruple; make two round plasters to be laid on each
side of the navel; make a fume of snails' skins salted, or of garlic,
and let it be taken in by the funnel. Use also astringent fomentations
of bramble leaves, plantain, horse-tails, myrtles, each two handfuls;
wormseed, two handfuls; pomegranate flowers, half an ounce; boil them in
wine and water. For an injection take comfrey root, an ounce;
rupturewort, two drachms; yarrow, mugwort, each half an ounce; boil them
in red wine, and inject with a syringe. To strengthen the womb, take
hartshorn, bays, of each half a drachm; myrrh half a drachm; make a
powder of two doses, and give it with sharp wine. Or you may take
Zedoary, parsnip seed, crabs' eyes prepared, each a drachm, nutmeg, half
a drachm; and give a drachm, in powder; but astringents must be used
with great caution, lest by stopping the courses a worse mischief
follow. To keep in its place, make rollers and ligatures as for a
rupture; and put pessaries into the bottom of the womb, that may force
it to remain. Let the diet be such as has drying, astringent and glueing
qualities, as rice, starch, quinces, pears and green cheese; but let the
summer fruits be avoided; and let her wine be astringent and red.

       *       *       *       *       *




