CHAPTER XVII

     _A word of Advice to both Sexes, consisting of several Directions
     with regard to Copulation._


As Nature has a mutual desire for copulation in every creature, for the
increase and propagation of its kind, and more especially in man, the
lord of creation and the masterpiece of Nature, in order that such a
noble piece of divine workmanship should not perish, something ought to
be said concerning it, it being the foundation of everything that we
have hitherto been treating of, since without copulation there can be no
generation. Seeing, therefore, so much depends upon it, I have thought
it necessary, before concluding the first book, to give such directions
to both sexes, for the performance of that act, as may appear
efficacious to the end for which nature designed it, but it will be done
with such caution as not to offend the chastest ear, nor to put the fair
sex to the blush when they read it.

In the first place, then, when a married couple from the desire of
having children are about to make use of those means that Nature has
provided for that purpose, it is well to stimulate the body with
generous restoratives, that it may be active and vigorous. And the
imagination should be charmed with sweet music, and if all care and
thoughts of business be drowned in a glass of rosy wine, so that their
spirit may be raised to the highest pitch of ardour, it would be as
well, for troubles, cares or sadness are enemies to the pleasures of
Venus. And if the woman should conceive when sexual intercourse takes
place at such times of disturbance, it would have a bad effect upon the
child. But though generous restoratives may be employed for invigorating
nature, yet all excess should be carefully avoided, for it will check
the briskness of the spirits and make them dull and languid, and as it
also interferes with digestion, it must necessarily be an enemy _to_
copulation; for it is food taken moderately and that is well digested,
which enables a man to perform the dictates of Nature with vigour and
activity, and it is also necessary, that in their mutual embraces they
meet each other with equal ardour, for, if not, the woman either will
not conceive, or else the child may be weak bodily, or mentally
defective. I, therefore, advise them to excite their desires mutually
before they begin their conjugal intercourse, and when they have done
what nature requires, a man must be careful not to withdraw himself from
his wife's arms too soon, lest some sudden cold should strike into the
womb and occasion miscarriage, and so deprive them of the fruits of
their labour.

And when the man has withdrawn himself after a suitable time, the woman
should quietly go to rest, with all calmness and composure of mind, free
from all anxious and disturbing thoughts, or any other mental worry. And
she must, as far as possible, avoid turning over from the side on which
she was first lying, and also keep from coughing and sneezing, because
as it violently shakes the body, it is a great enemy to conception.

       *       *       *       *       *




A

PRIVATE LOOKING-GLASS

FOR THE

FEMALE SEX

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

     _Treating of the several Maladies incident to the womb, with proper
     remedies for the cure of each._


The womb is placed in the _hypogastrium_, or lower part of the body, in
the cavity called the _pelvis_, having the straight gut on one side to
protect it against the hardness of the backbone, and the bladder on the
other side to protect it against blows. Its form or shape is like a
virile member, with this exception, that the man's is outside, and the
woman's inside.

It is divided into the neck and body. The neck consists of a hard fleshy
substance, much like cartilage, and at the end of it there is a membrane
placed transversely, which is called the hymen. Near the neck there is a
prominent pinnacle, which is called the door of the womb, because it
preserves the _matrix_ from cold and dust. The Greeks called it
_clitoris_, and the Latins _praeputium muliebre_, because the Roman
women abused these parts to satisfy their mutual unlawful lusts, as St.
Paul says, Romans 1. 26.

The body of the womb is where the child is conceived, and this is not
altogether round, but dilates itself into two angles; the outward part
is full of sinews, which are the cause of its movements, but inside it
is fleshy. It is wrongly said, that in the cavity of the womb there are
seven divided cells or receptacles for the male seed, but anatomists
know that there are only two, and also that those two are not divided by
a partition, but only by a line or suture running through the middle of
it.

At the bottom of the cavity there are little holes called
_cotyledones_, which are the ends of certain veins or arteries, and
serve breeding women to convey nourishment to the child, which is
received by the umbilical and other veins, to carry the courses to the
_matrix_.

As to menstruation, it is defined as a monthly flow of bad and useless
blood, and of the super-abundance of it, for it is an excrement in
quality, though it is pure and incorrupt, like the blood in the veins.
And that the menstruous blood is pure in itself, and of the same quality
as that in the veins, is proved in two ways.--First, from the final
object of the blood, which is the propagation and preservation of
mankind, that man might be conceived; and that, being begotten, he might
be comforted and preserved both in and out of the womb, and all allow
that it is true that a child in the matrix is nourished by the blood.
And it is true that when it is out of it, it is nourished by the same;
for the milk is nothing but the menstruous blood made white in the
breast. Secondly, it is proved to be true by the way it is produced, as
it is the superfluity of the last aliment of the fleshy parts.

The natural end of man and woman's being is to propagate. Now, in the
act of conception one must be an active agent and the other passive, for
if both were similarly constituted, they could not propagate. Man,
therefore, is hot and dry, whilst woman is cold and moist: he is the
agent, and she the passive or weaker vessel, that she may be subject to
the office of the man. It is necessary that woman should be of a cold
constitution, because a redundancy of Nature for the infant that depends
on her is required of her; for otherwise there would be no surplus of
nourishment for the child, but no more than the mother requires, and the
infant would weaken the mother, and like as in the viper, the birth of
the infant would be the death of the parent.

The monthly purgations continue from the fifteenth to the forty-sixth or
fiftieth year; but a suppression often occurs, which is either natural
or morbid: the courses are suppressed naturally during pregnancy, and
whilst the woman is suckling. The morbid suppression remains to be
spoken of.

       *       *       *       *       *




