CHAPTER XVII

     _How child-bearing Women ought to be ordered after Delivery._


If a woman has had very hard labour, it is necessary that she should be
wrapped up in a sheep's skin, taken off before it is cold, applying the
fleshy side to her veins and belly, or, for want of this, the skin of a
hare or coney, flayed off as soon as killed, may be applied to the same
parts, and in so doing, a dilation being made in the birth, and the
melancholy blood being expelled in these parts, continue these for an
hour or two.

Let the woman afterwards be swathed with fine linen cloth, about a
quarter of a yard in breadth, chafing the belly before it is swathed,
with oil of St. John's wort; after that raise up the matrix with a linen
cloth, many times folded: then with a linen pillar or quilt, cover the
flanks, and place the swathe somewhat above the haunches, winding it
pretty stiff, applying at the same time a linen cloth to her nipples; do
not immediately use the remedies to keep back the milk, by reason the
body, at such a time, is out of frame; for there is neither vein nor
artery which does not strongly beat; and remedies to drive back the
milk, being of a dissolving nature, it is improper to apply them to the
breasts during such disorder, lest by doing so, evil humours be
contracted in the breast. Wherefore, twelve hours at least ought to be
allowed for the circulation and settlement of the blood, and what was
cast on the lungs by the vehement agitation during labour, to retire to
its proper receptacles.

Some time after delivery, you may take a restrictive of the yolks of two
eggs, and a quarter of a pint of white wine, oil of St. John's wort, oil
of roses, plantain and roses water, of each an ounce, mix them together,
fold a linen cloth and apply it to the breast, and the pains of those
parts will be greatly eased.

She must by no means sleep directly after delivery; but about four hours
after, she may take broth, caudle or such liquid victuals as are
nourishing; and if she be disposed to sleep it may be very safely
permitted. And this is as much, in the case of a natural birth, as ought
immediately to be done.

But in case of an extremity or an unnatural birth, the following rules
ought to be observed:--

In the first place, let the-woman keep a temperate diet, by no means
overcharging herself after such an extraordinary evacuation, not being
ruled by giving credit to unskilful nurses, who admonish them to feed
heartily, the better to repair the loss of blood. For that blood is not
for the most part pure, but such as has been retained in the vessels or
membrane better voided, for the health of the woman, than kept, unless
there happen an extraordinary flux of the blood. For if her nourishment
be too much, which curding, very often turns to imposthumes.

Therefore, it is requisite, for the first five days especially, that she
take moderately panado broth, poached eggs, jelly of chickens or calves'
feet or fresh barley broth; every day increasing the quantity a little.

And if she intend to be a nurse to the child, she may take something
more than ordinary, to increase the milk by degrees, which must be of no
continuance, but drawn off by the child or otherwise. In this case
likewise, observe to let her have coriander or fennel seeds boiled in
barley broth; but by all means, for the time specified, let her abstain
from meat. If no fever trouble her, she may drink now and then a small
quantity of pure white wine or of claret, as also syrup of maidenhead or
any other syrup that is of an astringent quality, taken in a little
water well boiled.

After the fear of fever or contraction of humour in the breast is over,
she may be nourished more plentifully with the broth of capons, pullets,
pigeons, mutton, veal, etc., which must not be until after eight days
from the time of delivery; at which time the womb, unless some accident
binds, has purged itself. It will then likewise be expedient to give
cold meats, but let it be sparingly, so that she may the better gather
strength. And let her, during the time, rest quietly and free from
disturbance, not sleeping in the day time, if she can avoid it.

Take of both mallows and pellitory of the wall a handful; camomile and
melilot flowers, of each a handful; aniseed and fennel of each two
ounces; boil them in a decoction of sheep's head and take of this three
quarts, dissolving in it common honey, coarse sugar and fresh butter and
administer it clysterwise; but if it does not penetrate well take an
ounce of catholicon.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XVIII

     _Acute Pains after Delivery._


These pains frequently afflict the woman no less than the pain of her
labour, and are, by the more ignorant, many times taken the one for the
other; and sometimes they happen both at the same instant; which is
occasioned by a raw, crude and watery matter in the stomach, contracted
through ill digestion; and while such pains continue, the woman's
travail is retarded.

Therefore, to expel fits of the cholic, take two ounces of oil of sweet
almonds, and an ounce of cinnamon water, with three or four drops of
syrup of ginger; then let the woman drink it off.

If this does not abate the pain, make a clyster of camomile,
balm-leaves, oil of olives and new milk, boiling the former in the
latter. Administer it as is usual in such cases. And then, fomentation
proper for dispelling the wind will not be amiss.

If the pain produces a griping in the guts after delivery, then take of
the root of great comfrey, one drachm, nutmeg and peach kernels, of each
two scruples, yellow amber, eight drachms, ambergris, one scruple;
bruise them together, and give them to the woman as she is laid down, in
two or three spoonfuls of white wine; but if she be feverish, then let
it be in as much warm broth.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE

FAMILY PHYSICIAN

       *       *       *       *       *

BEING

CHOICE AND APPROVED

REMEDIES

FOR SEVERAL DISEASES

INCIDENTAL TO HUMAN BODIES

       *       *       *       *       *



_For the Apoplexy._

Take man's skull prepared, and powder of male peony, of each an ounce
and a half, contrayerva, bastard dittany, angelica, zedvary, of each two
drachms, mix and make a powder, add thereto two ounces of candied
orange and lemon peel, beat all together to a powder, whereof you may
take half a drachm or a drachm.



_A Powder for the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness._

Take of opopanax, crude antimony, castor, dragon's blood, peony seeds,
of each an equal quantity; make a subtle powder; the dose, half a drachm
of black cherry water. Before you take it, the stomach must be prepared
with some proper vomit, as that of Mynficht's emetic tartar, from four
grains to six; if for children, salts of vitrol, from a scruple to half
a drachm.



_For a Headache of Long Standing._

Take the juice or powder in distilled water of hog lice and continue it.



_For Spitting of Blood._

Take conserve of comfrey and of hips, of each an ounce and a half;
conserve of red roses, three ounces; dragon's blood, a drachm; spices of
hyacinths, two scruples; red coral, a drachm; mix and with syrup of
poppies make a soft electuary. Take the quantity of a walnut, night and
morning.



_For a Looseness._

Take Venice treacle and diascordium, of each half a drachm, in warm ale
or water gruel, or what you like best, at night, going to bed.



_For the Bloody Flux._

First take a drachm of powder of rhubarb in a sufficient quantity of
conserve of red roses, in the morning early; then at night, take of
tornified or roasted rhubarb, half a drachm; diascordium, a drachm and a
half; liquid laudanum cyclomated, a scruple: mix and make into a bolus.



_For an Inflammation of the Lungs._

Take of cherious water, ten ounces; water of red poppies, three ounces;
syrup of poppies, an ounce; pearl prepared, a drachm; make julep, and
take six spoonfuls every fourth hour.



_An Ointment for the Pleurisy._

Take oil of violets or sweet almonds, an ounce of each, with wax and a
little saffron, make an ointment, warm it and bathe it upon the parts
affected.



_An Ointment for the Itch._

Take sulphur vive in powder, half an ounce, oil of tartar per deliquim,
a sufficient quantity, ointment of roses, four ounces; make a liniment,
to which add a scruple of rhodium to aromatize, and rub the parts
affected with it.



_For Running Scab._

Take two pounds of tar, incorporate it into a thick mass with
well-sifted ashes; boil the mass in fountain-water, adding leaves of
ground-ivy, white horehound, fumitory roots, sharp-pointed dock and of
flocan pan, of each four handfuls; make a bath to be used with care of
taking cold.



_For Worms in Children._

Take wormseed, half a drachm, flour of sulphur, a drachm; mix and make a
powder. Give as much as will lie on a silver threepence, night and
morning, in grocer's treacle or honey, or to grown up people, you may
add a sufficient quantity of aloe rosatum and so make them up into
pills; three or four may be taken every morning.



_For Fevers in Children._

Take crab-eyes, a drachm, cream of tartar, half a drachm; white
sugar-candy finely powdered, weight of both; mix all well together and
give as much as will lie on a silver threepence, in a spoonful of
barley-water or sack whey.



_A Quieting Night-Draught, when the Cough is Violent._

Take water of green wheat, six ounces, syrup diascordium, three ounces,
take two or three spoonfuls going to bed every night or every other
night.



_An Electuary for the Dropsy._

Take best rhubarb, one drachm, gum lac, prepared, two drachms,
zyloaloes, cinnamon, long birthwort, half an ounce each, best English
saffron, half a scruple; with syrup of chicory and rhubarb make an
electuary. Take the quantity of a nutmeg or small walnut every morning
fasting.



_For a Tympany Dropsy._

Take roots of chervil and candied eringo roots, half an ounce of each,
roots of butcher-broom, two ounces, grass-roots, three ounces, shavings
of ivory and hartshorn, two drachms and a half each; boil them in two or
three pounds of spring water. Whilst the strained liquor is hot, pour it
upon the leaves of watercresses and goose-grass bruised, of each a
handful, adding a pint of Rhenish wine. Make a close infusion for two
hours, then strain out the liquor again, and add to it three ounces of
magirtral water and earth worms and an ounce and a half of the syrup of
the five opening roots. Make an apozen, whereof take four ounces twice a
day.



_For an Inward Bleeding._

Take leaves of plantain and stinging nettles, of each three handfuls,
bruise them well and pour on them six ounces of plantain water,
afterwards make a strong expression and drink the whole off. _Probatum
est._

       *       *       *       *       *




GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

     _Worthy of Notice._


WHEN YOU FIND

A red man to be faithful, a tall man to be wise, a fat man to be swift
of foot, a lean man to be a fool, a handsome man not to be proud, a poor
man not to be envious, a knave to be no liar, an upright man not too
bold and hearty to his own loss, one that drawls when he speaks not to
be crafty and circumventing, one that winks on another with his eyes not
to be false and deceitful, a sailor and hangman to be pitiful, a poor
man to build churches, a quack doctor to have a good conscience, a
bailiff not to be a merciless villain, an hostess not to over-reckon
you, and an usurer to be charitable----

THEN SAY,

     _Ye have found a prodigy._

Men acting contrary to the common course of nature.

       *       *       *       *       *




