CHAPTER VIII

     _Directions for the Nurses, in ordering Newly-born Children._


When the child's navel-string hath been cut according to the rules
prescribed, let the midwife presently cleanse it from the excrements and
filth it brings into the world with it; of which some are within the
body, as the urine in the bladder, and the excrements found in the guts;
and the others without, which are thick, whitish and clammy, proceeding
from the sliminess of the waters. There are sometimes children covered
all over with this, that one would think they were rubbed over with soft
cheese, and some women are of so easy a belief, that they really think
it so, because they have eaten some while they were with child. From
these excrements let the child be cleansed with wine and water a little
warmed, washing every part therewith, but chiefly the head because of
the hair, also the folds of the groin, and the cods or privities; which
parts must be gently cleansed with a linen rag, or a soft sponge dipped
in lukewarm wine. If this clammy or viscous excrement stick so close
that it will not easily be washed off from those places, it may be
fetched off with oil of sweet almond, or a little fresh butter melted
with wine, and afterwards well dried off; also make tents of fine rags,
and wetting them in this liquor, clear the ears and nostrils; but for
the eyes, wipe them only with a dry, soft rag, not dipping it in the
wine, lest it should make them smart.

The child being washed, and cleansed from the native blood and
impurities which attend it into the world, it must in the next place be
searched to see whether all things be right about it, and that there is
no fault nor dislocation; whether its nose be straight, or its tongue
tied, or whether there be any bruise or tumour of the head; or whether
the mold be not over shot; also whether the scrotum (if it be a male) be
not blown up and swelled, and, in short, whether it has suffered any
violence by its birth, in any part of its body, and whether all the
parts be well and duly shaped; that suitable remedies may be applied if
anything be found not right. Nor is it enough to see that all be right
without, and that the outside of the body be cleansed, but she must also
observe whether it dischargeth the excrements contained within, and
whether the passage be open; for some have been born without having been
perforated. Therefore, let her examine whether the conduits of the urine
and stool be clear, for want of which some have died, not being able to
void their excrements, because timely care was not taken at first. As to
the urine all children, as well males as females, do make water as soon
as they are born, if they can, especially if they feel the heat of the
fire, and also sometimes void the excrements, but not so soon as the
urine. If the infant does not ordure the first day, then put into its
fundament a small suppository, to stir it up to be discharged, that it
may not cause painful gripes, by remaining so long in the belly. A sugar
almond may be proper for this purpose, anointed all over with a little
boiled honey; or else a small piece of castile-soap rubbed over with
fresh butter; also give the child for this purpose a little syrup of
roses or violets at the mouth, mixed with some oil of sweet almonds,
drawn without a fire, anointing the belly also, with the same oil or
fresh butter.

The midwife having thus washed and cleansed the child, according to the
before mentioned directions, let her begin to swaddle it in swathing
clothes, and when she dresses the head, let her put small rags behind
the ears, to dry up the filth which usually engenders there, and so let
her do also in the folds of the armpits and groins, and so swathe it;
then wrap it up warm in a bed with blankets, which there is scarcely any
woman so ignorant but knows well enough how to do; only let me give
them this caution, that they swathe not the child too tightly in its
blankets, especially about the breast and stomach, that it may breathe
the more freely, and not be forced to vomit up the milk it sucks,
because the stomach cannot be sufficiently distended to contain it;
therefore let its arms and legs be wrapped in its bed, stretched and
straight and swathed to keep them so, viz., the arms along its sides,
and its legs equally both together with a little of the bed between
them, that they may not be galled by rubbing each other; then let the
head be kept steady and straight, with a stay fastened each side of the
blanket, and then wrap the child up in a mantle and blankets to keep it
warm. Let none think this swathing of the infant is needless to set
down, for it is necessary it should be thus swaddled, to give its little
body a straight figure, which is most proper and decent for a man, and
to accustom him to keep upon his feet, who otherwise would go upon all
fours, as most animals do.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER IX


SECTION I.--_Of Gripes and Pains in the, Bellies of Young Children._

This I mention first, as it is often the first and most common distemper
which happens to little infants, after their birth; many children being
so troubled therewith, that it causes them to cry day and night and at
last die of it. The cause of it for the most part comes from the sudden
change of nourishment, for having always received it from the umbilical
vessel whilst in the mother's womb, they come on a sudden not only to
change the manner of receiving it, but the nature and quality of what
they received, as soon as they are born; for instead of purified blood
only, which was conveyed to them by means of the umbilical vein, they
are now obliged to be nourished by their mother's milk, which they suck
with their mouths, and from which are engendered many excrements,
causing gripes and pains; and not only because it is not so pure as the
blood with which it was nourished in the womb, but because the stomach
and the intestines cannot make a good digestion, being unaccustomed to
it. It is sometimes caused also by a rough phlegm, and sometimes by
worms; for physicians affirm that worms have been bred in children even
in their mother's belly.

_Cure_. The remedy must be suited to the cause. If it proceed from the
too sudden change of nourishment, the remedy must be to forbear giving
the child suck for some days, lest the milk be mixed with phlegm, which
is then in the stomach corrupt; and at first it must suck but little,
until it is accustomed to digest it. If it be the excrements in the
intestines, which by their long stay increase their pains, give them at
the month a little oil of sweet almonds and syrup of roses; if it be
worms, lay a cloth dipped in oil of wormwood mixed with ox-gall, upon
the belly, or a small cataplasm, mixed with the powder of rue, wormwood,
coloquintida, aloes, and the seeds of citron incorporated with ox-gall
and the powder of lupines. Or give it oil of sweet almonds and syrup of
roses; if it be worms, lay a cloth, dipped in oil of wormwood mixed with
ox-gall, upon the belly, or a small cataplasm mixed with the powder of
rue, wormwood, coloquintida, aloes, and the seeds of citron incorporated
with ox-gall and the powder of lupines. Or give it oil of sweet almonds
with sugar-candy, and a scruple of aniseed; it purgeth new-born babes
from green cholera and stinking phlegm, and, if it be given with
sugar-pap, it allays the griping pains of the belly. Also anoint the
belly with oil of dill, or lay pelitory stamped with oil of camomile to
the belly.



SECT. II.--_Of Weakness In Newly-born Infants._

Weakness is an accident that many children bring into the world along
with them, and is often occasioned by the labour of the mother; by the
violence and length whereof they suffer so much, that they are born with
great weakness, and many times it is difficult to know whether they are
alive or dead, their body appearing so senseless, and their face so blue
and livid, that they seem to be quite choked; and even after some hours,
then-showing any signs of life is attended with weakness, that it looks
like a return from death, and that they are still in a dying condition.

_Cure_. Lay the infant speedily in a warm blanket, and carry it to the
fire, and then let the midwife take a little wine in her mouth and spout
it into its mouth, repeating it often, if there be occasion. Let her
apply linen dipped in urine to the breast and belly, and let the face be
uncovered, that it may breathe the more freely; also, let the midwife
keep its mouth a little open, cleanse the nostrils with small linen
tents[11] dipt in white wine, that so it may receive the smell of it;
and let her chafe every part of its body well with warm cloths, to bring
back its blood and spirits, which being retired inwards through
weakness, often puts him in danger of being choked. By the application
of these means, the infant will gradually recover strength, and begin to
stir its limbs by degrees, and at length to cry; and though it be but
weakly at first, yet afterwards, as it breathes more freely, its cry
will become more strong.



SECT. III.--_Of the Fundament being closed up in a newly-born Infant._

Another defect that new-born infants are liable to is, to have their
fundaments closed up, by which they can neither evacuate the new
excrements engendered by the milk they suck, nor that which was amassed
in their intestines before birth, which is certainly mortal without a
speedy remedy. There have been some female children who have their
fundaments quite closed, and yet have voided the excrements of the guts
by an orifice which nature, to supply the defect, had made within the
neck of the womb.

_Cure_. Here we must take notice, that the fundament is closed two ways;
either by a single skin, through which one may discover some black and
blue marks, proceeding from the excrements retained, which, if one touch
with the finger, there is a softness felt within, and thereabout it
ought to be pierced; or else it is quite stopped by a thick, fleshy
substance, in such sort that there appears nothing without, by which its
true situation may be known. When there is nothing but the single skin
which makes the closure, the operation is very easy, and the children
may do very well; for then an aperture or opening may be made with a
small incision-knife, cross-ways, that it may the better receive a round
form, and that the place may not afterwards grow together, taking care
not to prejudice the sphincter or muscle of the rectum. The incision
being thus made, the excrements will certainly have issue. But if, by
reason of their long stay in the belly, they become so dry that the
infant cannot void them, then let a clyster be given to moisten and
bring them away; afterwards put a linen tent into the new-made
fundament, which at first had best be anointed with honey of roses, and
towards the end, with a drying, cicatrizing ointment, such as unguentum
album or ponphilex, observing to cleanse the infant of its excrement,
and dry it again as soon and as often as it evacuates them, that so the
aperture may be prevented from turning into a malignant ulcer.

But if the fundament be stopped up in such a manner, that neither mark
nor appearance of it can be seen or felt, then the operation is much
more difficult, and, even when it is done, the danger is much greater
that the infant will not survive it. Then, if it be a female, and it
sends forth its excrements by the way I mentioned before, it is better
not to meddle than, by endeavouring to remedy an inconvenience, run an
extreme hazard of the infant's death. But when there is no vent for the
excrements, without which death is unavoidable, then the operation is
justifiable.

_Operation_. Let the operator, with a small incision-knife that hath but
one edge, enter into the void place, and turning the back of it upwards,
within half a finger's breadth of the child's rump, which is the place
where he will certainly find the intestines, let him thrust it forward,
that it may be open enough to give free vent to matter there contained,
being especially careful of the sphincter; after which, let the wound
be dressed according to the method directed.



SECT. IV.--_Of the Thrush, or Ulcers In the Mouth of the Infant._

The thrush is a distemper that children are very subject to, and it
arises from bad milk, or from foul humour in the stomach; for sometimes,
though there be no ill humour in the milk itself, yet it may corrupt the
child's stomach because of its weakness or some other indisposition; in
which, acquiring an acrimony, instead of being well digested, there
arise from it thrice biting vapours, which forming a thick viscosity, do
thereby produce this distemper.

_Cure_. It is often difficult, as physicians tell us, because it is
seated in hot and moist places, where the putrefaction is easily
augmented; and because the remedies applied cannot lodge there, being
soon washed with spittle. But if it arises from too hot quality in the
nurse's milk, care must be taken to temper and cool, prescribing her
cool diet, bleeding and purging her also, if there be occasion.

Take lentils, husked, powder them, and lay a little of them upon the
child's gums. Or take bdellium flowers, half an ounce, and with oil of
roses make a liniment. Also wash the child's mouth with barley and
plantain-water, and honey of roses, mixing with them a little verjuice
of lemons, as well to loosen and cleanse the vicious humours which
cleave to the inside of the infant's mouth, as to cool those parts which
are already over-heated. It may be done by means of a small fine rag,
fastened to the end of a little stick, and dipped therein, wherewith the
ulcers may be gently rubbed, being careful not to put the child in too
much pain, lest an inflammation make the distemper worse. The child's
body must also be kept open, that the humours being carried to the lower
parts, the vapours may not ascend, as is usual for them to do when the
body is costive, and the excrements too long retained.

If the ulcers appear malignant, let such remedies be used as do their
work speedily, that the evil qualities that cause them, being thereby
instantly corrected, their malignity may be prevented; and in this case,
touch the ulcers with plantain water, sharpened with spirits of vitriol;
for the remedy must be made sharp, according to the malignity of the
distemper. It will be necessary to purge these ill humours out of the
whole habit of the child, by giving half an ounce of succory and
rhubarb.



SECT. V.--_Of Pains in the Ears, Inflammation, Moisture, etc._

The brain in infants is very moist, and hath many excrements which
nature cannot send out at the proper passages; they get often to the
ears, and there cause pains, flux of blood, with inflammation and matter
with pain; this in children is hard to be known as they have no other
way to make it known but by constant crying; you will perceive them
ready to feel their ears themselves, but will not let others touch them,
if they can prevent; and sometimes you may discern the parts about the
ears to be very red.

These pains, if let alone, are of dangerous consequences, because they
may bring forth watchings and epilepsy; for the moisture breeds worms
there, and fouls the spongy bones, and by degrees causes incurable
deafness.

_Cure_. Allay the pain with all convenient speed, but have a care of
using strong remedies. Therefore, only use warm milk about the ears,
with the decoction of poppy tops, or oil of violets; to take away the
moisture, use honey of roses, and let aqua mollis be dropped into the
ears; or take virgin honey, half an ounce; red wines two ounces; alum,
saffron, saltpetre, each a drachm, mix them at the fire; or drop in
hemp seed oil with a little wine.



SECT. VI.--_Of Redness and Inflammation of the Buttocks, Groin and the
    Thighs of a Young Child._

If there be no great care taken to change and wash the child's bed as
soon as it is fouled with the excrements, and to keep the child very
clean, the acrimony will be sure to cause redness, and beget a smarting
in the buttocks, groin and thighs of the child, which, by reason of the
pain, will afterwards be subject to inflammations, which follow the
sooner, through the delicacy and tenderness of their skin, from which
the outward skin of the body is in a short time separated and worn away.

_Cure_. First, keep the child cleanly, and secondly, take off the
sharpness of its urine. As to keeping it cleanly, she must be a sorry
nurse who needs to be taught how to do it; for if she lets it but have
dry, warm and clean beds and cloths, as often and as soon as it has
fouled and wet them, either by its urine or its excrements, it will be
sufficient. And as to taking off the sharpness of the child's urine,
that must be done by the nurse's taking a cool diet, that her milk may
have the same quality; and, therefore, she ought to abstain from all
things that may tend to heat it.

But besides these, cooling and drying remedies are requisite to be
applied to the inflamed parts; therefore let the parts be bathed in
plantain-water, with a fourth of lime water added to it, each time the
child's excrements are wiped off; and if the pain be very great, let it
only be fomented with lukewarm milk. The powder of a post to dry it, or
a little mill-dust strewed upon the parts affected, may be proper
enough, and is used by many women. Also, unguentum album, or
diapompholigos, spread upon a small piece of leather in form of a
plaster, will not be amiss.

But the chief thing must be, the nurse's taking great care to wrap the
inflamed parts with fine rags when she opens the child, that these parts
may not gather and be pained by rubbing together.



SECT. VII.--_Of Vomiting in Young Children._

Vomiting in young children proceeds sometimes from too much milk, and
sometimes from bad milk, and as often from a moist, loose stomach; for
as dryness retains so looseness lets go. This is, for the most part,
without danger in children; for they that vomit from their birth are
the lustiest; for the stomach not being used to meat, and milk being
taken too much, crudities are easily bred, or the milk is corrupted; and
it is better to vomit these up than to keep them in; but if vomiting
last long, it will cause an atrophy or consumption, for want of
nourishment.

_Cure_. If this be from too much milk, that which is emitted is yellow
and green, or otherwise ill-coloured and stinking; in this case, mend
the milk, as has been shown before; cleanse the child with honey of
roses, and strengthen its stomach with syrup of milk and quinces, made
into an electuary. If the humours be hot and sharp, give the syrup of
pomegranates, currants and coral, and apply to the belly the plaster of
bread, the stomach cerate, or bread dipped in hot wine; or take oil of
mastich, quinces, mint, wormwood, each half an ounce; of nutmegs by
expression, half a drachm; chemical oil of mint, three drops. Coral hath
an occult property to prevent vomiting, and is therefore hung about the
neck.



SECT. VIII--_Of Breeding Teeth in Young Children._

This is a very great and yet necessary evil in all children, having
variety of symptoms joined with it. They begin to come forth, not all
at once, but one after the other, about the sixth or seventh month; the
fore-teeth coming first, then the eye-teeth, and last of all the
grinders. The eye-teeth cause more pain to the child than any of the
rest, because they have a deep root, and a small nerve which has
communication with that which makes the eye move.

[Illustration]

In the breeding of the teeth, first they feel an itching in their gums,
then they are pierced as with a needle, and pricked by the sharp bones,
whence proceed great pains, watching, inflammation of the gums, fever,
looseness and convulsions, especially when they breed their eye-teeth.

The signs when children breed their eye-teeth are these:

1. It is known by the time, which is usually about the seventh month.

2. Their gums are swelled, and they feel a great heat there with an
itching, which makes them put their fingers into their mouths to rub
them; a moisture also distils from the gums into the mouth, because of
the pain they feel there.

3. They hold the nipple faster than before.

4. The gums are white when the teeth begin to come, and the nurse, in
giving them suck, finds the mouth hotter, and that they are much
changed, crying every moment, and cannot sleep, or but very little at a
time.

The fever that follows breeding of teeth comes from choleric humours,
inflamed by watching, pain and heat. And the longer teeth are breeding,
the more dangerous it is; so that many in the breeding of them, die of
fevers and convulsions.

_Cure_. Two things are to be regarded:--one is, to preserve the child
from the evil accidents that may happen to it by reason of the great
pain; the other, to assist as much as may be, the cutting of the teeth,
when they can hardly cut the gums themselves.

For the first of these, viz., the preventing of those accidents to the
child, the nurse ought to take great care to keep a good diet, and to
use all things that may cool and temper her milk, that so a fever may
not follow the pain of the teeth. And to prevent the humour falling too
much upon the inflamed gums, let the child's belly be always kept loose
by gentle clysters, if he be bound; though oftentimes there is no need
of them, because they are at those times usually troubled with a
looseness; and yet, for all that, clysters may not be improper.

As to the other, which is to assist it cutting the teeth, that the nurse
must do from time to time by mollifying and loosening them, and by
rubbing them with her finger dipped in butter or honey; or let the child
have a virgin-wax candle to chew upon; or anoint the gums with the
mucilage of quince made with mallow-water, or with the brains of a hare;
also foment the cheeks with the decoction of althoea, and camomile
flowers and dill, or with the juice of mallows and fresh butter. If the
gums are inflamed, add juice of nightshade and lettuce. I have already
said, the nurse ought to take a temperate diet; I shall now only add,
that barley-broth, water-gruel, raw eggs, prunes, lettuce and endive,
are good for her; but let her avoid salt, sharp, biting and peppered
meats, and wine.



SECT. IX.--_Of the Flux of the Belly, or Looseness in Infants._

It is very common for infants to have the flux of the belly, or
looseness, especially upon the least indisposition; nor is it to be
wondered at, seeing their natural moistness contributes so much thereto;
and even if it be extraordinarily violent, such are in a better state of
health than those that are bound. The flux, if violent, proceeds from
divers causes, as 1. From breeding of the teeth, and is then commonly
attended with a fever in which the concoction is hindered, and the
nourishment corrupted. 2. From watching. 3. From pain. 4. From stirring
up of the humours by a fever. 5. When they suck or drink too much in a
fever. Sometimes they have a flux without breeding of teeth, from inward
cold in the guts or stomach that obstructs concoction. If it be from the
teeth, it is easily known; for the signs of breeding in teeth will
discover it. If it be from external cold, there are signs of other
causes. If from a humour flowing from the head there are signs of a
catarrh, and the excrements are frothy. If crude and raw humours are
voided, and there be wind, belching, and phlegmatic excrements, or if
they be yellow, green and stink, the flux is from a hot and sharp
humour. It is best in breeding of teeth when the belly is loose, as I
have said before; but if it be too violent, and you are afraid it may
end in a consumption, it must be stopped; and if the excrements that are
voided be black, and attended with a fever, it is very bad.

_Cure_. The remedy in this case, is principally in respect to the nurse,
and the condition of the milk must be chiefly observed; the nurse must
be cautioned that she eat no green fruit, nor things of hard concoction.
If the child suck not, remove the flux with such purges as leave a
cooling quality behind them, as syrup of honey or roses, or a clyster.
Take the decoction of millium, myrobolans, of each two or three ounces,
with an ounce or two of syrup of roses, and make a clyster. After
cleansing, if it proceed from a hot cause, give syrup of dried roses,
quinces, myrtles and a little sanguis draconis. Also anoint with oil of
roses, myrtles, mastich, each two drachms; with oil of myrtles and wax
make an ointment. Or take red roses and moulin, of each a handful;
cypress roots two drachms; make a bag, boil it in red wine and apply it
to the belly. Or use the plaster bread or stomach ointment. If the cause
be cold, and the excrements white give syrup of mastich and quinces,
with mint-water. Use outwardly, mint, mastich, cummin; or take rose
seeds, an ounce, cummin, aniseed, each two drachms; with oil of mastich,
wormwood and wax, make an ointment.



SECT. X.--_Of the Epilepsy and Convulsions in Children._

This is a distemper that is often fatal to young children, and
frequently proceeds from the brain, originating either from the parents,
or from vapours, or bad humours that twitch the membranes of the brain;
it is also sometimes caused by other distempers and by bad diet;
likewise, the toothache, when the brain consents, causes it, and so does
a sudden fright. As to the distemper itself, it is manifest and well
enough known where it is; and as to the cause whence it comes, you may
know by the signs of the disease, whether it comes from bad milk, or
worms, or teeth; if these are all absent, it is certain that the brain
is first affected; if it come with the small-pox or measles, it ceaseth
when they come forth, if nature be strong enough.

_Cure_. For the remedy of this grievous, and often mortal distemper,
give the following powder to prevent it, to a child as soon as it is
born:--Take male peony roots, gathered in the decrease of the moon, a
scruple; with leaf gold make a powder; or take peony roots, a drachm;
peony seeds, mistletoe of the oak, elk's hoof, man's skull, amber, each
a scruple; musk, two grains; make a powder. The best part of the cure is
taking care of the nurse's diet, which must be regular, by all means. If
it be from corrupt milk, provoke a vomit; to do which, hold down the
tongue, and put a quill dipped in sweet almonds, down the throat. If it
come from the worms, give such things as will kill the worms. If there
be a fever, with respect to that also, give coral smaragad and elk's
hoof. In the fit, give epileptic water, as lavender water, and rub with
oil of amber, or hang a peony root, and elk's hoof smaragad, about the
child's neck.

As to a convulsion, it is when the brain labours to cast out that which
troubles it; the mariner is in the marrow of the back, and fountain of
the nerves; it is a stubborn disease, and often kills.

Wash the body, when in the fit, with decoction of althoea, lily roots,
peony and camomile flowerets, and anoint it with man's and goose's
grease, oils of worms, orris, lilies, foxes, turpentine, mastich, storax
and calamint. The sun flower is also very good, boiled in water, to wash
the child.



FOOTNOTES:

[11] Tent (_surgical_). A bunch of some fibre such as sponge or
horsehair introduced into an opening, natural or artificial, to keep it
open, or increase its calibre.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPER AND SAFE REMEDIES

FOR

CURING ALL THOSE DISTEMPERS

THAT ARE PECULIAR

TO THE FEMALE SEX

AND ESPECIALLY THOSE OBSERVATIONS

TO BEARING OF CHILDREN

       *       *       *       *       *

