CHAPTER III

     _Of the Parts proper to a Child in the womb; How it is formed
     there, and the manner of its Situation therein._


In the last chapter I treated of conception, showed what it was, how
accomplished and its signs, and how she who has conceived ought to order
herself during the time of her pregnancy. Now, before I come to speak of
her delivery, it is necessary that the midwife be first made acquainted
with the parts proper to a child in the womb, and also that she be shown
how it is formed, and the manner of its situation and decumbiture there;
which are so necessary to her, that without the knowledge thereof, no
one can tell how to deliver a woman as she ought. This, therefore, shall
be the work of this chapter. I shall begin with the first of these.



SECTION I.--_Of the Parts proper to a Child in the Womb._

In this section, I must first tell you what I mean by the parts proper
to a child in the womb; and they are only those that either help or
nourish it; and whilst it is lodged in that dark repository of nature,
and that help to clothe and defend it there and are cast away, as of no
more use, after it is born, and these are two, viz., the umbilicars, or
navel vessels, and the secundinum. By the first it is nourished, and by
the second clothed and defended from wrong. Of each of these I shall
speak distinctly; and first,



_Of the Umbilicars, or Navel Vessels._

These are four in number, viz.:--one vein, two arteries, and the vessel
which is called the urachos.

(1) The vein is that on which the infant is nourished, from the time of
its conception till the time of its delivery; till being brought into
the light of the world, it has the same way of concocting the food we
have. This vein ariseth from the liver of the child, and is divided into
two parts when it has passed the navel; and these two are divided and
subdivided, the branches being upheld by the skin called _chorion_ (of
which I speak by and by), and are joined to the veins of the mother's
womb, from whence they have their blood for the nourishment of the
child.

(2) The arteries are two on each side which proceed from the back
branches of the great artery of the mother, and the vital blood is
carried by those to the child being ready concocted by the mother.

(3) A nervous or sinewy production is led from the bottom of the
bladder of the infant to the navel, and this is called _urachos_, and
its use is, to convey the urine of the infant from the bladder to the
alantois. Anatomists do very much vary in their opinion concerning this,
some denying any such thing to be in the delivery of the woman, and
others on the contrary affirming it; but experience has testified there
is such a thing, for Bartholomew Carbrolius, the ordinary doctor of
anatomy to the College of Physicians at Montpellier in France, records
the history of a maid, whose water being a long time stopped, at last
issued out through the navel. And Johannes Fernelius speaks of the same
thing that happened to a man of thirty years of age, who having a
stoppage at the neck of the bladder, his urine issued out of his navel
for many months together, and that without any prejudice at all to his
health, which he ascribes to the ill lying of his navel, whereby the
urachos was not well dried. And Volchier Coitas quotes such another
instance in a maid of thirty-four at Nuremburg in Germany. These
instances, though they happen but seldom, are sufficient to prove that
there is such a thing as anurachos in men.

These four vessels before mentioned, viz., one vein, two arteries and
the urachos, join near the navel, and are united by a skin which they
have from the chorion and so become like a gut or rope, and are
altogether void of sensibility, and this is that which women call the
navel-string. The vessels are thus joined together, that so they may
neither be broken, severed nor entangled; and when the infant is born
are of no use save only to make up the ligament which stops the hole of
the navel and for some other physical use, etc.



_Of the Secundine or After-birth._

Setting aside the name given to this by the Greeks and Latins, it is
called in English by the name of secundine, after-birth or after-burden;
which are held to be four in number.

(1) The _first_ is called placenta, because it resembles the form of a
cake, and is knit both to the navel and chorion, and makes up the
greatest part of the secundine or after-birth. The flesh of it is like
that of the melt or spleen, soft, red and tending something to
blackness, and hath many small veins and arteries in it: and certainly
the chief use of it is, for containing the child in the womb.

(2) The _second_ is the chorion. This skin and that called the amnios,
involve the child round, both above and underneath, and on both sides,
which the alantois does not. This skin is that which is most commonly
called the secundine, as it is thick and white garnished with many small
veins and arteries, ending in the placenta before named, being very
light and slippery. Its use is, not only to cover the child round about,
but also to receive, and safely bind up the roots of the veins and
arteries or navel vessels before described.

(3) The _third_ thing which makes up the secundine in the alantois, of
which there is a great dispute amongst anatomists. Some say there is
such a thing, and others that there is not. Those who will have it to be
a membrane, say it is white, soft and exceedingly thin, and just under
the placenta, where it is knit to the urachos, from which it receives
the urine; and its office is to keep it separate from the sweat, that
the saltness of it may not offend the tender skin of the child.

(4) The _fourth_, and last covering of the child is called amnios; and
it is white, soft and transparent, being nourished by some very small
veins and arteries. Its use is, not only to enwrap the child, but also
to retain the sweat of the child.

Having thus described the parts proper to a child in the womb, I will
next proceed to speak of the formation of the child therein, as soon as
I have explained the hard terms of the section, that those for whose
help it is designed, may understand what they read. A _vein_ is that
which receives blood from the liver, and distributes in several branches
to all parts of the body. _Nerve_ is the same with _sinew_, and is that
by which the brain adds sense and motion to the body. _Placenta_,
properly signifies _sugar_ cake; but in this section it is used to
signify a spongy piece of flesh resembling a cake, full of veins and
arteries, and is made to receive a mother's blood appointed for the
infant's nourishment in the womb. The _chorion_ is an outward skin which
compasseth the child in the womb. The _amnios_ is the inner skin which
compasseth the child in the womb. The _alantois_ is the skin that holds
the urine of the child during the time that it abides in the womb. The
_urachos_ is the vessel that conveys the urine from the child in the
womb to the _alantois_. I now proceed to



SECT. II.--_Of the Formation of the Child in the Womb._

To speak of the formation of the child in the womb, we must begin where
nature begins, and, that is at the act of coition, in which the womb
having received the generative seed (without which there can be no
conception), the womb immediately shuts up itself so close that the
point of a needle cannot enter the inward orifice; and this it does,
partly to hinder the issuing out of the seed again, and partly to
cherish it by an inward heat, the better to provoke it to action; which
is one reason why women's bellies are so lank at their first conception.
The woman having thus conceived, the first thing which is operative in
conception is the spirit whereof the seed is full, which, nature
quickening by the heat of the womb, stirs up the action. The internal
spirits, therefore, separate the parts that are less pure, which are
thick, cold and clammy, from those that are more pure and noble. The
less pure are cast to the outside, and with these seed is circled round
and the membrane made, in which that seed that is most pure is wrapped
round and kept close together, that it may be defended from cold and
other accidents, and operate the better.

The first thing that is formed is the amnios; the next the chorion; and
they enwrap the seed round like a curtain. Soon after this (for the seed
thus shut up in the woman lies not idle), the navel vein is bred, which
pierceth those skins, being yet very tender, and carries a drop of blood
from the veins of the mother's womb to the seed; from which drop the
vena cava, or chief vein, proceeds, from which all the rest of the veins
which nourish the body spring; and now the seed hath something to
nourish it, whilst it performs the rest of nature's work, and also blood
administered to every part of it, to form flesh.

This vein being formed, the navel arteries are soon after formed; then
the great artery, of which all the others are but branches; and then the
heart, for the liver furnisheth the arteries with blood to form the
heart, the arteries being made of seed, but the heart and the flesh, of
blood. After this the brain is formed, and then the nerves to give sense
and motion to the infant. Afterwards the bones and flesh are formed; and
of the bones, first of all, the vertebrae or chine bones, and then the
skull, etc. As to the time in which this curious part of nature's
workmanship is formed, having already in Chapter II of the former part
of this work spoken at large upon this point, and also of the
nourishment of the child in the womb, I shall here only refer the reader
thereto, and proceed to show the manner in which the child lies in the
womb.



SECT. III.--_Of the manner of the Child's lying in the Womb._

This is a thing so essential for a midwife to know, that she can be no
midwife who is ignorant of it; and yet even about this authors
extremely differ; for there are not two in ten that agree what is the
form that the child lies in the womb, or in what fashion it lies there;
and yet this may arise in a great measure from the different times of
the women's pregnancy; for near the time of its deliverance out of those
winding chambers of nature it oftentimes changes the form in which it
lay before, for another.

I will now show the several situations of the child in the mother's
womb, according to the different times of pregnancy, by which those that
are contrary to nature, and are the chief cause of ill labours, will be
more easily conceived by the understanding midwife. It ought, therefore,
in the first place to be observed, that the infant, as well male as
female, is generally situated in the midst of the womb; for though
sometimes, to appearance a woman's belly seems higher on one side than
the other, yet it is so with respect to the belly only, and not to her
womb, in the midst of which it is always placed.

But, in the second place, a woman's great belly makes different figures,
according to the different times of pregnancy; for when she is young
with child, the embryo is always found of a round figure, a little long,
a little oblong, having the spine moderately turned inwards, and the
thighs folded, and a little raised, to which the legs are so raised,
that the heels touch the buttocks; the arms are bending, and the hands
placed upon the knees, towards which part of the body, the head is
turned downwards towards the inward orifice of the womb, tumbling as it
were over its head so that then the feet are uppermost, and the face
towards the mother's great gut; and this turning of the infant in this
manner, with its head downwards, towards the latter end of a woman's
reckoning, is so ordered by nature, that it may be thereby the better
disposed of its passage into the world at the time of its mother's
labour, which is not then far off (and indeed some children turn not at
all until the very time of birth); for in this posture all its joints
are most easily extended in coming forth; for by this means its arms and
legs cannot hinder its birth, because they cannot be bent against the
inner orifice of the womb and the rest of the body, being very supple,
passeth without any difficulty after the head, which is hard and big;
being passed the head is inclined forward, so that the chin toucheth the
breast, in which posture, it resembles one sitting to ease nature, and
stooping down with the head to see what comes from him. The spine of the
back is at that time placed towards the mother's, the head uppermost,
the face downwards; and proportionately to its growth, it extends its
members by little and little, which were exactly folded in the first
month. In this posture it usually keeps until the seventh or eighth
month, and then by a natural propensity and disposition of the upper
first. It is true there are divers children, that lie in the womb in
another posture, and come to birth with their feet downwards, especially
if there be twins; for then, by their different motions they do so
disturb one another, that they seldom come both in the same posture at
the time of labour, but one will come with the head, and another with
the feet, or perhaps lie across; but sometimes neither of them will come
right. But, however the child may be situated in the womb, or in
whatever posture it presents itself at the time of birth, if it be not
with its head forwards, as I have before described, it is always against
nature, and the delivery will occasion the more pain and danger, and
require greater care and skill from the midwife, than when the labour is
more natural.

       *       *       *       *       *




