CHAPTER VII

     _Directions for Child-bearing Women in their Lying-in._


SECTION I.--_How a Woman newly Delivered ought to be ordered._

As soon as she is laid in her bed, let her be placed in it conveniently
for ease and rest, which she stands in great need of to recover herself
of the great fatigue she underwent during her travail, and that she may
lie the more easily let her hands and body be a little raised, that she
may breathe more freely, and cleanse the better, especially of that
blood which then comes away, that so it may not clot, which being
retained causeth great pain.

Having thus placed her in bed, let her take a draught of burnt white
wine, having a drachm of spermaceti melted therein. The best vervain is
also singularly good for a woman in this condition, boiling it in what
she either eats or drinks, fortifying the womb so exceedingly that it
will do it more good in two days, than any other thing does in double
that time, having no offensive taste. And this is no more than what she
stands in need of; for her lower parts being greatly distended until the
birth of the infant, it is good to endeavour the prevention of an
inflammation there. Let there also be outwardly applied, all over the
bottom of her belly and privities, the following anodyne and
cataplasm:--Take two ounces of oil of sweet almonds, and two or three
new laid eggs, yolks and whites, stirring them together in an earthen
pipkin over hot embers till they come to the consistence of a poultice;
which being spread upon a cloth, must be applied to those parts
indifferently warm, having first taken away the closures (which were put
to her presently after her delivery), and likewise such clots of blood
as were then left. Let this lie on for five or six hours, and then renew
it again when you see cause.

Great care ought to be taken at first, that if her body be very weak,
she be not kept too hot, for extremity of heat weakens nature and
dissolves the strength; and whether she be weak or strong, be sure that
no cold air comes near her at first; for cold is an enemy to the
spermatic parts; if it get into the womb it increases the after pains,
causes swelling in the womb and hurts the nerves. As to her diet, let it
be hot, and let her eat but little at a time. Let her avoid the light
for the first three days, and longer if she be weak, for her labour
weakens her eyes exceedingly, by a harmony between the womb and them.
Let her also avoid great noise, sadness and trouble of mind.

If the womb be foul, which may easily be perceived by the impurity of
the blood (which will then easily come away in clots or stinking, or if
you suspect any of the after-burden to be left behind, which may
sometimes happen), make her drink a feverfew, mugwort, pennyroyal and
mother of thyme, boiled in white wine and sweetened with sugar.

Panado and new laid eggs are the best meat for her at first, of which
she may eat often, but not too much at a time. And let her nurse use
cinnamon in all her meats and drinks, for it generally strengthens the
womb.

Let her stir as little as may be until after the fifth, sixth, or
seventh day after her delivery, if she be weak; and let her talk as
little as possible, for that weakens her very much.

If she goes not well to stool, give a clyster made only of the
decoction of mallows and a little brown sugar.

When she hath lain in a week or more, let her use such things as close
the womb, of which knot-grass and comfrey are very good, and to them you
may add a little polypodium, for it will do her good, both leaves and
root being bruised.



SECT. II.--_How to remedy those Accidents which a Lying-in Woman is
    subject to._

I. The first common and usual accident that troubles women in their
lying-in is after-pains. They proceed from cold and wind contained in
the bowels, with which they are easily filled after labour, because then
they have more room to dilate than when the child was in the womb, by
which they were compressed; and also, because nourishment and matter,
contained as well in them as in the stomach, have been so confusedly
agitated from side to side during the pains of labour, by the throes
which always must compress the belly, that they could not be well
digested, whence the wind is afterwards generated and, by consequence,
the gripes which the woman feels running into her belly from side to
side, according as the wind moves more or less, and sometimes likewise
from the womb, because of the compression and commotion which the
bowels make. This being generally the case, let us now apply a suitable
remedy.

1. Boil an egg soft, and pour out the yolk of it, with which mix a
spoonful of cinnamon water, and let her drink it; and if you mix in it
two grains of ambergris, it will be better; and yet vervain taken in
anything she drinks, will be as effectual as the other.

2. Give a lying-in woman, immediately after delivery, oil of sweet
almonds and syrup of maiden-hair mixed together. Some prefer oil of
walnuts, provided it be made of nuts that are very good; but it tastes
worse than the other at best. This will lenify the inside of the
intestines by its unctuousness, and by that means bring away that which
is contained in them more easily.

3. Take and boil onions well in water, then stamp them with oil of
cinnamon, spread them on a cloth, and apply them to the region of the
womb.

4. Let her be careful to keep her belly warm, and not to drink what is
too cold; and if the pain prove violent, hot cloths from time to time
must be laid on her belly, or a pancake fried in walnut oil may be
applied to it, without swathing her belly too strait. And for the better
evacuating the wind out of the intestines, give her a clyster, which
may be repeated as often as necessity requires.

5. Take bay-berries, beat them to a powder, put the powder upon a
chafing-dish of coals, and let her receive the smoke of them up her
privities.

6. Take tar and bear's grease, of each an equal quantity, boil them
together, and whilst it is boiling, add a little pigeon's dung to it.
Spread some of this upon a linen cloth, and apply it to the veins of the
back of her that is troubled with afterpains, and it will give her
speedy ease.

Lastly, let her take half a drachm of bay-berries beaten into a powder,
in a drachm of muscadel or teat.

II. Another accident to which women in child-bed are subject is
haemorrhoids or piles, occasioned through the great straining in
bringing the child into the world. To cure this,

1. Let her be let blood in the saphoena vein.

2. Let her use polypodium in her meat, and drink, bruised and boiled.

3. Take an onion, and having made a hole in the middle, of it, fill it
full of oil, roast it and having bruised it all together, apply it to
the fundament.

4. Take a dozen of snails without shells, if you can get them, or else
so many shell snails, and pull them out, and having bruised them with a
little oil, apply them warm as before.

5. If she go not well to stool, let her take an ounce of cassia fistula
drawn at night, going to bed; she needs no change of diet after.

III. Retention of the menses is another accident happening to women in
child-bed, and which is of so dangerous a consequence, that, if not
timely remedied, it proves mortal. When this happens,

1. Let the woman take such medicines as strongly provoke the terms, such
as dittany, betony, pennyroyal, feverfew, centaury, juniper-berries,
peony roots.

2. Let her take two or three spoonfuls of briony water each morning.

3. Gentian roots beaten into a powder, and a drachm of it taken every
morning in wine, are an extraordinary remedy.

4. The roots of birthwort, either long or round, so used and taken as
the former, are very good.

5. Take twelve peony seeds, and beat them into a very fine powder, and
let her drink them in a draught of hot cardus posset, and let her sweat
after. And if the last medicine do not bring them down the first time
she takes it, let her take as much more three hours after, and it seldom
fails.

IV. Overflowing of the menses is another accident incidental to
child-bed women. For which,

1. Take shepherd's purse, either boiled in any convenient liquor, or
dried and beaten into a powder, and it will be an admirable remedy to
stop them, this being especially appropriated to the privities.

2. The flower and leaves of brambles or either of them, being dried and
beaten into a powder, and a drachm of them taken every morning in a
spoonful of red wine, or in a decoction of leaves of the same (which,
perhaps, is much better), is an admirable remedy for the immoderate
flowing of the term in women.

V. Excoriations, bruises, and rents in the lower part of the womb are
often occasioned by the violent distention and separation of the
caruncles in a woman's labour. For the healing whereof,

As soon as the woman is laid, if there be only simple contusions and
excoriations, then let the anodyne cataplasm, formerly directed, be
applied to the lower parts to ease the pain, made of the yolks and
whites of new laid eggs, and oil of roses, boiled a little over warm
embers, continually stirring it until it be mixed, and then spread on a
fine cloth; it must be applied very warm to the bearing place for five
or six hours, and when it is taken away, lay some fine rags, dipped in
oil of St. John's wort twice or thrice a day; also foment the parts with
barley water and honey of roses, to cleanse them from the excrements
which pass. When the woman makes water, let them be defended with fine
rags, and thereby hinder the urine from causing smart or pain.

VI. The curding and clotting of the milk is another accident that
happens to women in child-bed, for in the beginning of child-bed, the
woman's milk is not purified because of the great commotions her body
suffered during her labour, which affected all the parts, and it is then
affected with many humours. Now this clotting of the milk does, for the
most part, proceed from the breasts not being fully drawn, and that,
either because she has too much milk, and that the infant is too small
and weak to suck it all, or because she doth not desire to be a nurse,
for the milk in those cases remaining in the breasts after concoction,
without being drawn, loses its sweetness and the balsamic qualities it
had, and by reason of the heat it requires, and the too long stay it
makes there, is sours, curds and clots, in like manner as we see rennet
put into ordinary milk to turn it into curds. The curding of the milk
may also be caused by having taken a great cold, and not keeping the
breasts well covered.

But from what cause so ever this curding of the milk proceeds, the most
certain remedy is, to draw the breasts until it is emitted and dried.
But in regard that the infant by reason of weakness, cannot draw
strength enough, the woman being hard marked when her milk is curded, it
will be most proper to get another woman to draw her breasts until the
milk comes freely, and then she may give her child suck. And that she
may not afterwards be troubled with a surplus of milk, she must eat such
diet as give but little nourishment, and keep her body open.

But if the case be such that the woman neither can nor will be a nurse,
it is necessary to apply other remedies for the curing of this
distemper; for then it will be best not to draw the breasts, for that
will be the way to bring more milk into them. For which purpose it will
be necessary to empty the body by bleeding the arms, besides which, let
the humours be drawn down by strong clysters and bleeding at the foot;
nor will it be amiss to purge gently, and to digest, dissolve and
dissipate the curded milk, four brans dissolved in a decoction of sage,
milk, smallage and fennel, mixing with it oil of camomile, with which
oil let the breasts be well anointed. The following liniment is also
good to scatter and dissipate the milk.



_A Liniment to Scatter and Dissipate the Milk._

That the milk flowing back to the breast may without offence be
dissipated, you must use this ointment:--"Take pure wax, two ounces,
linseed, half a pound; when the wax is melted, let the liniment be made,
wherein linen cloths must be clipped, and, according to their largeness,
be laid upon the breasts; and when it shall be dispersed, and pains no
more, let other linen cloths be laid in the distilled water of acorns,
and put upon them.

_Note._--That the cloths dipped into distilled water of acorns must be
used only by those who cannot nurse their own children; but if a
swelling in the breast of her who gives such do arise, from abundance of
milk, threatens an inflammation, let her use the former ointment, but
abstain from using the distilled water of acorns.

       *       *       *       *       *




