CHAPTER IX

     _Of the Green-Sickness in Virgins, with its causes, signs and
     cures; together with the chief occasions of Barrenness in Women,
     and the Means to remove the Cause, and render them fruitful._


The green-sickness is so common a complaint amongst virgins, especially
those of a phlegmatic complexion, that it is easily discerned, showing
itself by discolouring the face, making it look green, pale, and of a
dusty colour, proceeding from raw and indigested humours; nor doth it
only appear to the eye, but sensibly affects the person with difficulty
of breathing, pains in the head, palpitation of the heart, with unusual
beatings and small throbbings of the arteries in the temples, back and
neck, which often cast them into fevers when the humour is over vicious;
also loathing of meat and the distention of the hypochondriac part, by
reason of the inordinate effluxion of the menstruous blood of the
greater vessels; and from the abundance of humours, the whole body is
often troubled with swellings, or at least the thighs, legs and ankles,
all above the heels; there is also a weariness of the body without any
reason for it.

The Galenical physicians affirm, that this distemper proceeds from the
womb; occasioned by the gross, vicious and rude humours arising from
several inward causes; but there are also outward causes which have a
share in the production of it; as taking cold in the feet, drinking of
water, intemperance of diet, eating things contrary to nature, viz., raw
or burnt flesh, ashes, coals, old shoes, chalk, wax, nutshells, mortar,
lime, oatmeal, tobacco pipes, etc., which occasion both a suppression of
the menses and obstructions through the whole body; therefore, the first
thing necessary to vindicate the cause, is matrimonial conjunction, and
such copulation as may prove satisfactory to her that is afflicted, for
then the menses will begin to flow according to their natural and due
course, and the humours being dispersed, will soon waste themselves; and
then no more matter being admitted to increase them, they will vanish
and a good temperament of body will return; but in case this best remedy
cannot be had soon enough, then let blood in the ankles, and if she be
about sixteen, you may likewise do it in the arm, but let her be bled
sparingly, especially if the blood be good. If the disease be of any
continuance, then it is to be eradicated by purging, preparation of the
humour being first considered, which may be done by the virgin's
drinking the decoction of guaiacum, with dittany of erete; but the best
purge in this case ought to be made of aloes, agaric, senna, rhubarb;
and for strengthening the bowels and removing obstructions, chaly-beate
medicines are chiefly to be used. The diet must be moderate, and sharp
things by all means avoided.

And now, since barrenness daily creates discontent, and that discontent
breeds indifference between man and wife, or, by immediate grief,
frequently casts the woman into one or another distemper, I shall in the
next place treat thereof.



OF BARRENNESS.

Formerly, before women came to the marriage-bed, they were first
searched by the mid-wife, and those only which she allowed of as
fruitful were admitted. I hope, therefore, it will not be amiss to show
you how they may prove themselves and turn barren ground into fruitful
soil. Barrenness is a deprivation of the life and power which ought to
be in the seed to procreate and propagate; for which end men and women
were made. Causes of barrenness may be over much cold or heat, drying up
the seed and corrupting it, which extinguishes the life of the seed,
making it waterish and unfit for generation. It may be caused also, by
the not flowing or over-flowing of the courses by swellings, ulcers, and
inflammation of the womb, by an excrescence of flesh growing about the
mouth of the matrix, by the mouth of the matrix being turned up to the
back or side by the fatness of the body, whereby the mouth of the matrix
is closed up, being pressed with the omentum or caul, and the matter of
the seed is turned to fat; if she be a lean and dry body, and though she
do conceive, yet the fruit of her body will wither before it come to
perfection, for want of nourishment. One main cause of barrenness is
attributed to want of a convenient moderating quality, which the woman
ought to have with the man; as, if he be hot, she must be cold; if he be
dry, she must be moist; as, if they be both dry or both moist of
constitution, they cannot propagate; and yet, simply considering of
themselves, they are not barren, for she who was before as the barren
fig-tree being joined to an apt constitution becomes as the fruitful
vine. And that a man and woman, being every way of like constitution,
cannot create, I will bring nature itself for a testimony, who hath made
man of a better constitution than woman, that the quality of the one,
may moderate the quality of the other.



SIGNS OF BARRENNESS.

If barrenness proceeds from overmuch heat, if she is a dry body, subject
to anger, has black hair, quick pulse, and her purgations flow but
little, and that with pain, she loves to play in the courts of Venus.
But if it comes by cold, then the signs are contrary to the above
mentioned. If through the evil quality of the womb, make a suffumigation
of red styrax, myrrh, cassia-wood, nutmeg, and cinnamon; and let her
receive the fumes into her womb, covering her very close; and if the
odour so received passes through the body to the mouth and nostrils,
she is fruitful. But if she feels not the fumes in her mouth and
nostrils, it argues barrenness one of these ways--that the spirit of the
seed is either extinguished through cold, or dissipated through heat. If
any woman be suspected to be unfruitful, cast natural brimstone, such as
is digged out of mines, into her urine, and if worms breed therein, she
is not barren.



PROGNOSTICS.

Barrenness makes women look young, because they are free from those
pains and sorrows which other women are accustomed to. Yet they have not
the full perfection of health which other women enjoy, because they are
not rightly purged of the menstruous blood and superfluous seed, which
are the principal cause of most uterine diseases.

First, the cause must be removed, the womb strengthened, and the spirits
of the seed enlivened. If the womb be over hot, take syrup of succory,
with rhubarb, syrup of violets, roses, cassia, purslain. Take of endive,
water-lilies, borage flowers, of each a handful; rhubarb, mirobalans, of
each three drachms; make a decoction with water, and to the straining of
the syrup add electuary violets one ounce, syrup of cassia half an
ounce, manna three drachms; make a potion. Take of syrup of mugwort one
ounce, syrup of maiden-hair two ounces, pulv-elect triasand one drachm;
make a julep. Take prus. salt, elect. ros. mesua, of each three drachms,
rhubarb one scruple, and make a bolus; apply to the loins and privy
parts fomentations of the juice of lettuce, violets, roses, malloes,
vine leaves and nightshade; anoint the secret parts with the cooling
unguent of Galen.

If the power of the seed be extinguished by cold, take every morning two
spoonfuls of cinnamon water, with one scruple of mithridate. Take syrup
of calamint, mugwort and betony, of each one ounce; waters of
pennyroyal, feverfew, hyssop and sage, of each two ounces; make a julep.
Take oil of aniseed two scruples and a half; diacimini,
diacliathidiamosei and diagla-ongoe, of each one drachm, sugar four
ounces, with water of cinnamon, and make lozenges; take of them a drachm
and a half twice a day, two hours before meals; fasten cupping glasses
to the hips and belly. Take of styrax and calamint one ounce, mastick,
cinnamon, nutmeg, lign, aloes, and frankincense, of each half ounce;
musk, ten grains, ambergris, half a scruple; make a confection with
rosewater, divide it into four equal parts; one part make a pomatum
oderation to smell at if she be not hysterical; of the second, make a
mass of pills, and let her take three every other night: of the third
make a pessary, dip it in oil of spikenard, and put it up; of the
fourth, make a suffumigation for the womb.

If the faculties of the womb be weakened, and the life of the seed
suffocated by over much humidity flowing to those parts: take of betony,
marjoram, mugwort, pennyroyal and balm, of each a handful; roots of alum
and fennel, of each two drachms; aniseed and cummin, of each one drachm,
with sugar and water a sufficient quantity; make a syrup, and take three
ounces every morning.

Purge with the following things; take of the diagnidium, two grains,
spicierum of castor, a scruple, pill foedit two scruples, with syrup of
mugwort, make six pills. Take apeo, diagem. diamoser, diamb. of each one
drachm; cinnamon, one drachm and a half; cloves, mace and nutmeg, of
each half a drachm; sugar six ounces, with water of feverfew; make
lozenges, to be taken every morning. Take of decoction of sarsaparilla
and virga aurea, not forgetting sage, which Agrippa, wondering at its
operation, has honoured with the name of _sacra herba_, a holy herb. It
is recorded by Dodonoeus in the _History of Plants_, lib. ii. cap. 77,
that after a great mortality among the Egyptians, the surviving women,
that they might multiply quickly, were commanded to drink the juice of
sage, and to anoint the genitals with oil of aniseed and spikenard. Take
mace, nutmeg, cinnamon, styrax and amber, of each one drachm; cloves,
laudanum, of each half a drachm; turpentine, a sufficient quantity;
trochisks, to smooth the womb. Take roots of valerian and elecampane, of
each one pound; galanga, two ounces; origan lavender, marjoram, betony,
mugwort, bay leaves, calamint, of each a handful; make an infusion with
water, in which let her sit, after she hath her courses.

If barrenness proceed from dryness, consuming the matter of the seed;
take every day almond milk, and goat's milk extracted with honey, but
often of the root satyrion, candied, and electuary of diasyren. Take
three wethers' heads, boil them until all the flesh comes from the
bones, then take melilot, violets, camomiles, mercury, orchia with their
roots, of each a handful; fenugreek, linseed, valerian roots, of each
one pound; let all these be decocted in the aforesaid broth, and let the
woman sit in the decoction up to the navel.

If barrenness be caused by any proper effect of the womb, the cure is
set down in the second book. Sometimes the womb proves barren where
there is no impediment on either side, except only in the manner of the
act; as when in the emission of the seed, the man is quick and the woman
is slow, whereby there is not an emission of both seeds at the same
instant as the rules of conception require. Before the acts of coition,
foment the privy parts with the decoction of betony, sage, hyssop and
calamint and anoint the mouth and neck of the womb with musk and civet.

The cause of barrenness being removed, let the womb be strengthened as
follows; Take of bay berries, mastic, nutmeg, frankincense, nuts,
laudanum, giapanum, of each one drachm, styracis liquid, two scruples,
cloves half a scruple, ambergris two grains, then make a pessary with
oil of spikenard.

Take of red roses, lapididis hoematis, white frankincense, of each half
an ounce. Dragon's blood, fine bole, mastic, of each two drachms;
nutmeg, cloves, of each one drachm; spikenard, half a scruple, with oil
of wormwood; make a plaster for the lower part of the belly, then let
her eat candied eringo root, and make an injection only of the roots of
satyrion.

The aptest time for conception is instantly after the menses have
ceased, because then the womb is thirsty and dry, apt both to draw the
seed and return it, by the roughness of the inward surface, and besides,
in some, the mouth of the womb is turned into the back or side, and is
not placed right until the last day of the courses.

Excess in all things is to be avoided. Lay aside all passions of the
mind, shun study and care, as things that are enemies to conception, for
if a woman conceive under such circumstances, however wise the parents
may be, the children, at best, will be but foolish; because the mental
faculties of the parents, viz., the understanding and the rest (from
whence the child derives its reason) are, as it were, confused through
the multiplicity of cares and thought; of which we have examples in
learned men, who, after great study and care, having connection with
their wives, often beget very foolish children. A hot and moist air is
most suitable, as appears by the women in Egypt, who often bring forth
three or four children at one time.

       *       *       *       *       *




