CHAPTER IX

     _Of Scirrhous Tumours, or Hardness of the Womb._


A _scirrhus_, or a hard unnatural swelling of the matrix is generally
produced by neglected, or imperfectly cured phlegm, which, insensibly,
hinders the functions of the womb, and predisposes the whole body to
listlessness.



CAUSE.

One cause of this disease may be ascribed to want of judgment on the
part of the physician, as many empirics when attending to inflammation
of the womb, chill the humour so much that it can neither pass backward
nor forward, and hence, the matter being condensed, turns into a hard,
stony substance. Other causes may be suppression of the menses,
retention of the _Lochein_, commonly called the after purging; eating
decayed meat, as in the disordered longing after the _pleia_ to which
pregnant women are often subject. It may, however, also proceed from
obstructions and ulcers in the matrix or from some evil affections of
the stomach or spleen.

If the bottom of the womb be affected, she feels, as it were, a heavy
burden representing a mole,[7] yet differing from it, in that the
breasts are attenuated, and the whole body grows less. If the neck of
the womb be affected, no outward humours will appear; its mouth is
retracted and feels hard to the touch, nor can the woman have sexual
intercourse without great pain.



PROGNOSTICS.

Confirmed scirrhus is incurable, and will turn to cancer or incurable
dropsy, and when it ends in cancer it proves fatal, because as the
innate heat of these parts is almost smothered, it can hardly be
restored again.



CURE.

Where there is repletion, bleeding is advisable, therefore open a vein
in one arm and in both feet, more especially if the menses are
suppressed.

Treat the humours with syrup of borage, succory made with a poultice,
and then take the following pills, according to the patient's strength.

Hiera piera six drachms, two and a half drachms each of black hellebore
and polypody; a drachm and a half each of agaric, lapis lazuli, sal
Indiae, coloquintida, mix them and make two pills. After purging,
mollify the hardness as follows:--the privy parts and the neck of the
womb with an ointment of decalthea and agrippa; or take two drachms each
of opopanax, bdellium, ammoniac and myrrh, and half a drachm of saffron;
dissolve the gum in oil of lilies and sweet almond and make an ointment
with wax and turpentine. Apply diacatholicon ferellia below the navel,
and make infusions of figs, mugwort, mallows, pennyroyal, althea, fennel
roots, melilot, fenugreek and the four mollifying herbs, with oil of
dill, camomiles and lilies dissolved in it. Take three drachms of gum
bdellium, put the stone pyrites on the coals, and let her take the fumes
into her womb. Foment the privy parts with a decoction of the roots and
leaves of dane wort. Take a drachm each of gum galbanum and opopanax,
half an ounce each of juice of dane wort and mucilage of fenugreek, an
ounce of calve's marrow, and a sufficient quantity of wax, and make a
pessary. Or make a pessary of lead only, dip it in the above mentioned
things, and put it up.

The atmosphere must be kept temperate, and gross and salt meats such as
pork, bull beef, fish and old cheese, must be prohibited.



FOOTNOTES:

[7] _Mole_: "A somewhat shapeless, compact fleshy mass occurring in the
uterus, due to the retention and continued life of the whole or a part
of the foetal envelopes, after the death of the foetus (a _maternal or
true mole_); or being some other body liable to be mistaken for this, or
perhaps a polypus or false mole." (_Whitney's Century Dictionary_.)

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER X

     _Of Dropsy of the Womb._


Uterine dropsy is an unnatural swelling, caused by the collection of
wind or phlegm in the cavity, membranes or substance of the womb, on
account of the want of innate heat and of sufficient alimentation, and
so it turns into an excrescence. The causes are, too much cold and
moisture of the milt and liver, immoderate drinking, eating
insufficiently cooked meat, all of which by causing repletion, overpower
the natural heat. It may likewise be caused by undue menstruation, or by
any other immoderate evacuation. To these may be added abortions,
subcutaneous inflammations and a hardened swelling of the womb.



SIGNS.

The signs of this affection are as follows:--The lower parts of the
stomach, with the genitals, are swollen and painful; the feet swell, the
natural colour of the face is lost, the appetite becomes depraved, and
there is a consequent heaviness of the whole body. If the woman turns
over in bed a noise like flowing water is heard, and sometimes water is
discharged from the womb. If the swelling is caused by wind and the
stomach feels hot, it sounds like a drum; the bowels rumble, and the
wind escapes through the neck of the womb with a murmuring noise. This
affection may be distinguished from true conception in many ways, as
will be shown in the chapter on _conception_. It is distinguished from
common dropsy, by the lower parts of the stomach being most swollen.
Again, it does not appear so injurious in this blood-producing
capability, nor is the urine so pale, nor the face so altered. The upper
parts are also not so reduced, as in usual dropsy.



PROGNOSTICS.

This affection foretells the ruin of the natural functions, by that
peculiar sympathy it has with the liver, and that, therefore,
_kathydria_, or general dropsy will follow.



CURE.

In the cure of this disease, imitate the practice of Hippocrates, and
first mitigate the pain with fomentations of melilot, dog's mercury,
mallows, linseed, camomiles and althoea. Then let the womb be prepared
with syrup of stoebis, hyssop, calamint, mugwort, with distilled water,
a decoction of elder, marjoram, sage, origan, spearage, pennyroyal, and
betony. Purge with senna, agaric, rhubarb, and claterium. Take spicierum
hier, a scruple each of rhubarb, agaric lozenges, and make into pills
with iris juice.

When diseases arise from moistness, purge with pills, and in those
affections which are caused by emptiness or dryness, purge by means of a
draught. Apply cupping glasses to the stomach and also to the navel,
especially if the swelling be flatulent. Put a seton on to the inside of
each leg, the width of a hand below the knee. Take two drachms each of
sparganium, diambrae, diamolet, diacaliminti, diacinamoni, myrrh
lozenges, and a pound of sugar; make these into lozenges with betony
water, and take them two hours before meals. Apply a little bag of
camomiles, cummin and melilot boiled in oil of rue, to the bottom of the
stomach as hot as it can be borne; anoint the stomach and the privates
with unguent agripp, and unguent aragon. Mix iris oil with it, and cover
the lower part of the stomach with a plaster of bay berries, or a
cataplasm made of cummin, camomiles, briony root, adding cows' and
goats' dung.

Our modern medical writers ascribe great virtues to tobacco-water,
injected into the womb by means of a clyster. Take a handful each of
balm of southernwood, origanum, wormwood, calamint, bay berries and
marjoram, and four drachms of juniper berries; make a decoction of these
in water, and use this for fomentations and infusions. Make pessaries of
storax, aloes, with the roots of dictam, aristolochia and gentian, but
instead of this you may use the pessary prescribed at the end of Chapter
XVII. Let her take aromatic electuary, disatyrion and candied eringo
roots, every morning.

The air must be hot and dry, moderate exercise is to be taken and too
much sleep prohibited. She may eat the flesh of partridges, larks,
grouse, hares, rabbits, etc., and let her drink diluted urine.

       *       *       *       *       *




