CHAPTER III

     _Of Excessive Menstruation._


The learned say, that truth is manifested by comparing contraries, and
so, as I have above spoken of the suppression of menstruation, it is now
necessary that I should treat of excessive menstruation, which is no
less dangerous than the former. This immoderate monthly flow is defined
as a sanguineous discharge, as it consists merely of blood, wherein it
differs from the false courses or whites, of which I shall speak further
on. Secondly, it is said to proceed from the womb; for there are two
ways in which the blood issues forth; one by the internal veins of the
body of the womb (and this is properly called the monthly flow), the
other is by those veins which terminate in the neck of the matrix, which
Aetius calls haemorrhoids of the womb. In quantity, Hippocrates said, it
should be about eighteen ounces, and they should last about three days:
and when the faculties of the body are weakened by their flow, we may
take it that the discharge is inordinate. In bodies which abound in
gross humours, this immoderate flow sometimes unburdens nature of her
load and ought not to be checked without a physician's advice.



CAUSE.

The cause is either internal or external. The internal cause is
threefold; in the substance, the instrument or the power. The matter,
which is the blood, may be vitiated in two ways; first, by the heat of
the constitution, climate or season, heating the blood, whereby the
passages are dilated, and the power weakened so that it cannot retain
the blood. Secondly, by falls, blows, violent motions, rupture of the
veins, etc. The external cause may be the heat of the air, heavy
burdens, unnatural childbirth, etc.



SIGNS.

In this excessive flow the appetite is lessened, conception is checked
and all the functions weakened; the feet swell, the colour of the face
changes, and the whole body is weakened. If the flow comes from the
rupture of a vein, the body is sometimes cold, the blood flows out in
streams, suddenly, and causes great pain. If it arises from heat, and
the orifice of the vein is dilated, there is little or no pain, but yet
the blood flows faster than it does when caused by erosion, but not so
fast as it does in a rupture. If caused by erosion, the woman feels a
scalding of the passage, and it differs from the other two, in so much
as it does not flow so quickly or so freely as they do. If it is caused
by weakness of the womb, the woman feels a dislike for sexual
intercourse. Lastly, if it proceeds from the defective quality of the
blood let some of it drop into a cloth, and when it is dry, you may
judge, of the quality by the colour. If it be passionate it will be
yellow; if melancholy, it will be black, and if phlegmatic, it will be
waterish and whitish.



PROGNOSTICS.

If convulsions are joined to the flow, it is dangerous, because that
intimates that the noble parts are affected, convulsions caused by
emptiness are deadly. If they continue long, they will be very difficult
to cure, and it was one of the miracles which our Saviour Christ
wrought, to cure a woman of this disease of twelve years standing.

To conclude, if the flow be excessive, many diseases will follow, which
will be almost impossible to cure; the blood, being consumed together
with the innate heat, either morbid, dropsical, or paralytical diseases
will follow.



CURE.

The cure consists in three particulars. First, in expelling and
carrying away the blood. Secondly, in connecting and removing the
fluxibility of the matter. Thirdly, in incorporating the veins and
faculties. For the first, to get rid of the superfluous blood, open a
vein in the arm, and draw off as much blood as the strength of the
patient will allow; not all at one time, but at intervals, for by those
means the spirits are less weakened, and the reaction so much the
greater.

Apply cupping glasses to the breasts and also over the liver, and to
correct the flexibility of the matter, purgative means, moderated by
astringents, may be employed.

If it is caused by erosion, and salt phlegm, prepare with syrup of
violets, wormwood, roses, citron peel, succory, etc. Then make the
following purge:--mirabolans, half an ounce; trochisks of agaric, one
drachm; make a decoction with the plantain-water, and add syrup of roses
lax. three ounces, and make a draught.

If caused by any mental excitement, prepare the body by syrup of roses,
myrtles, sorrel and parsley, mixed with plantain-water, knot-grass and
endive. Then purge with the following draught:--Take one drachm each of
the void of mirabolans, and rhubarb, cinnamon fifteen grains; infuse for
a night in endive water; add to the strained water half an ounce of pulp
of tamarinds and of cassia, and make a draught. If the blood be
waterish as it is in dropsical subjects and flows out easily on account
of its thinness, it will be a good plan to draw off the water by purging
with agaric, elaterium and coloquintida. Sweating is also useful in this
case, as by it the noxious matter is carried off, and the motion of the
blood to other parts. To produce sweating, employ cardus water, and
mithridate, or a decoction of guaiacum and sarsaparilla. Gum guaiacum is
also a great producer of perspiration, and sarsaparilla pills, taken
every night before going to bed are also highly to be recommended. If
the blood pours out, without any evil quality in itself, then
strengthening means only should be employed, which is a thing to be done
in cases of inordinate discharge.

Take one scruple of ol. ammoniac, one drachm of treacle, half an ounce
of conserve of roses and make an electuary with syrup of myrtle, or if
the discharge be of long standing take two drachms of matrix, one drachm
of olilanum troch. de carbara, a scruple of balustium; make into a
powder and form into pills with syrup of quinces, and take one before
every meal. Take two scruples each of troch. dechambede, scoriaferri,
coral and frankincense; pound these to a fine powder, and make into
lozenges with sugar and plantain water. Asses' dung is also approved
of, whether taken inwardly with syrup of quinces or applied outwardly
with steeled water. Galen by sending the juice of it into the womb by
means of a syringe for four days consecutively, cured this immediate
flow, which could not be checked in any other way. Let the patient take
one scruple and a half of pilon in water before going to bed; make a
fumigation for the womb of mastic, frankincense and burnt frogs, adding
the hoof of a mule. Take an ounce each of the juice of knot-grass,
comfoly and quinces; a drachm of camphor; dip a piece of silk or cotton
into it and apply it to the place. Take half an ounce each of oil of
mastic, myrtle, and quinces; a drachm each of fine bole and troch.
decardas, and a sufficient quantity of dragon's blood, make an ointment
and apply it before and behind. Take an ounce and a half each of
plantain, shepherd's purse and red rose leaves; an ounce of dried mint,
and three ounces of bean flour; boil all these in plantain water and
make two plasters:--apply one before and one behind. If the blood flows
from those veins which are terminated at the neck of the matrix, then it
is not called an undue discharge of the _menses_, but haemorrhoids of
the womb. The same remedy, however, will serve for both, only the
instrumental cure will be a little different; for in uterine
haemorrhoids, the ends of the veins hang over like teats, which must
be removed by cutting, and then the veins closed with aloes, fine bole,
burnt alum, myrrh, mastic, with comfoly-juice and knot grass, laid upon
it like a plaster.

[Illustration: _Position of the Embryos in a plural conception_]

[Illustration: Process of Delivery.]

The air should be cold and dry, and all motion of the body should be
prohibited. Her diet should consist of pheasants, partridges, grouse,
rabbits, calves' feet, etc., and her drink should be mixed with the
juice of pomegranates and quinces.

       *       *       *       *       *




