CHAPTER V

     _Of Natural Labour; What it is and what the Midwife is to do in
     such Labour._


SECTION I.--_What Natural Labour is._

There are four things which denominate a woman's natural labour; the
first is, that it be at the full time, for if a woman comes before her
time, it cannot be termed natural labour, neither will it be so easy as
though she had completed her nine months. The second thing is, that it
be speedy, and without any ill accident; for when the time of her birth
come, nature is not dilatory in the bringing it forth, without some ill
accident intervene, which renders it unnatural.

The third is, that the child be alive; for all will grant, that the
being delivered of a dead child is very unnatural. The fourth is, that
the child come right, for if the position of the child in the womb be
contrary to that which is natural, the event will prove it so, by making
that which should be a time of life, the death both of the mother and
the child.

Having thus told you what I mean by natural labour, I shall next show
how the midwife is to proceed therein, in order to the woman's
delivery. When all the foregoing requisites concur, and after the
waters be broken of themselves, let there rather a quilt be laid upon
the pallet bedstead than a feather bed, having there-on linen and cloths
in many folds, with such other things as are necessary, and that may be
changed according to the exigency requiring it, so that the woman may
not be incommoded with the blood, waters and other filth which are
voided in labour. The bed ought to be ordered, that the woman being
ready to be delivered, should lie on her back upon it, having her body
in a convenient posture; this is, her head and breast a little raised,
so that she may be between lying and sitting, for being so placed, she
is best capable of breathing, and, likewise, will have more strength to
bear her pains than if she lay otherwise, or sunk down in her bed. Being
so placed, she must spread her thighs abroad, folding her legs a little
towards her buttocks, somewhat raised by a little pillow underneath, to
the end that her rumps should have more liberty to retire back; and let
her feet be stayed against some firm thing; besides this, let her take
firm hold of some of the good women attending her, with her hands, that
she may the better stay herself during her pains. She being thus placed
at her bed, having her midwife at hand, the better to assist as nature
may require, let her take courage, and help her pains as best she can,
bearing them down when they take her, which she must do by holding her
breath, and forcing them as much as possible, in like manner as when she
goes to stool, for by such straining, the diaphragm, or midriff, being
strongly thrust downward, necessarily forces down the womb and the child
in it. In the meantime, let the midwife endeavour to comfort her all she
can, exhorting her to bear her labour courageously, telling her it will
be quickly over, and that there is no fear but that she will have a
speedy delivery. Let the midwife also, having no rings on her fingers,
anoint them with oil of fresh butter, and therewith dilate gently the
inward orifice of the womb putting her finger ends into the entry
thereof, and then stretch them one from the other, when her pains take
her; by this means endeavouring to help forward the child, and thrusting
by little and little, the sides of the orifice towards the hinder part
of the child's head, anointing it with fresh butter if it be necessary.

When the head of the infant is a little advanced into the inward
orifice, the midwife's phrase is:--"It is crowned"; because it girds and
surrounds it just as a crown; but when it is so far that the extremities
begin to appear without the privy parts, then they say, "The infant is
in the passage"; and at this time the woman feels herself as if it were
scratched, or pricked with pins, and is ready to imagine that the
midwife hurts her, when it is occasioned by the violent distension of
those parts and the laceration which sometimes the bigness of the
child's head causeth there. When things are in this posture, let the
midwife seat herself conveniently to receive the child, which will come
quickly, and with her finger ends (which she must be sure to keep close
pared) let her endeavour to thrust the crowning of the womb (of which I
have spoken before), back over the head of the child, and as soon as it
is advanced as far as the ears, or thereabouts, let her take hold of the
two sides with her two hands, that when a good pain comes she may
quickly draw forth the child, taking care that the navel-string be not
entangled about the neck or any part, as sometimes it is, lest thereby
the after-burden be pulled with violence, and perhaps the womb also, to
which it is fastened, and so either cause her to flood or else break the
strings, both which are of bad consequence to the woman, whose delivery
may thereby be rendered the more difficult. It must also be carefully
observed that the head be not drawn forth straight, but shaking it a
little from one side to the other, that the shoulders may sooner and
easier take their places immediately after it is past, without losing
time, lest the head being past, the child be stopped there by the
largeness of the shoulders, and so come in danger of being suffocated
and strangled in the passage, as it sometimes happens, for the want of
care therein. But as soon as the head is born, if there be need, she may
slide her fingers under the armpits, and the rest of the body will
follow without any difficulty.

As soon as the midwife hath in this manner drawn forth the child, let
her put it on one side, lest the blood and water which follows
immediately, should do it any injury by running into its mouth and nose,
as they would do, if it lay on its back; and so endanger the choking of
it. The child being thus born, the next thing requisite is, to bring
away the after-burden, but before that let the midwife be very careful
to examine whether there be more children in the womb; for sometimes a
woman may have twins that expected it not; which the midwife may easily
know by the continuance of the pains after the child is born, and the
bigness of the mother's belly. But the midwife may be sure of it, if she
puts her hand up to the entry of the womb, and finds there another
watery gathering, and the child in it presenting to the passage, and if
she find it so, she must have a care of going to fetch the after-birth,
till the woman be delivered of all the children she is pregnant with.
Wherefore the first string must be cut, being first tied with a thread
three or four times double, and fasten the other end with string to the
woman's thighs, to prevent the inconvenience it may cause by hanging
between the thighs; and then removing the child already born, she must
take care to deliver her of the rest, observing all the circumstances as
with the first; after which, it will be necessary to fetch away the
after-birth, or births. But of that I shall treat in another section,
and first show what is to be done to the new-born infant.



SECT. II.--_Of the Cutting of the Child's Navel String._

Though this is accounted by many but as a trifle, yet great care is to
be taken about it, and it shows none of the least art and skill of a
midwife to do it as it should be; and that it may be so done, the
midwife should observe: (1) The time. (2) The place. (3) The manner. (4)
The event.

(1) The time is, as soon as ever the infant comes out of the womb,
whether it brings part of the after-burden with it or not; for
sometimes the child brings into the world a piece of the amnios upon its
head, and is what mid wives call the _caul_, and ignorantly attribute
some extraordinary virtue to the child so born; but this opinion is only
the effect of their ignorance; for when a child is born with such a
crown (as some call it) upon its brows, it generally betokens weakness
and denotes a short life. But to proceed to the matter in hand. As soon
as the child comes into the world, it should be considered whether it is
weak or strong; and if it be weak, let the midwife gently put back part
of the natural and vital blood into the body of the child by its navel;
for that recruits a weak child (the vital and natural spirits being
communicated by the mother to the child by its navel-string), but if the
child be strong, the operation is needless. Only let me advise you, that
many children that are born seemingly dead, may soon be brought to life
again, if you squeeze six or seven drops of blood out of that part of
the navel-string which is cut off, and give it to the child inwardly.

(2) As to the place in which it should be cut, that is, whether it
should be cut long or short, it is that which authors can scarcely agree
in, and which many midwives quarrel about; some prescribing it to be cut
at four fingers' breadth, which is, at best, but an uncertain rule,
unless all fingers were of one size. It is a received opinion, that the
parts adapted to the generation are contracted and dilated according to
the cutting of the navel-string, and this is the reason why midwives are
generally so kind to their own sex, that they leave a longer part of the
navel-string of a male than female, because they would have the males
well provided for the encounters of Venus; and the reason they give, why
they cut that of the female shorter is, because they believe it makes
them more acceptable to their husbands. Mizaldus was not altogether of
the opinion of these midwives, and he, therefore, ordered the navel
string to be cut long both in male and female children; for which he
gives the following reason, that the instrument of generation follows
the proportion of it; and therefore, if it be cut too short in a female,
it will be a hindrance to her having children. I will not go about to
contradict the opinions of Mizaldus; these, experience has made
good:--That one is, that if the navel-string of a child, after it be
cut, be suffered to touch the ground, the child will never hold its
water, either sleeping or waking, but will be subjected to an
involuntary making of water all its lifetime. The other is, that a piece
of a child's navel-string carried about one, so that it touch his skin,
defends him that wears it from the falling sickness and convulsions.

(3) As to the manner it must be cut, let the midwife take a brown
thread, four or five times double, of an ell long, or thereabouts, tied
with a single knot at each of the ends, to prevent their entangling; and
with this thread so accommodated (which the woman must have in readiness
before the woman's labour, as also a good pair of scissors, that no time
may be lost) let her tie the string within an inch of the belly with a
double knot, and turning about the end of the thread, let her tie two
more on the other side of the string, reiterating it again, if it be
necessary; then let her cut off the navel-string another inch below the
ligatures, towards the after-birth, so that there only remains but two
inches of the string, in the midst of which will be the knot we speak
of, which must be so close knit, as not to suffer a drop of blood to
squeeze out of the vessels, but care must be taken, not to knit it so
strait, as to out it in two, and therefore the thread must be pretty
thick and pretty strait cut, it being better too strait than too loose;
for some children have miserably lost their lives, with all their blood,
before it was discovered, because the navel-string was not well tied,
therefore great care must be taken that no blood squeeze through; for if
there do, a new knot must be made with the rest of the string. You need
not fear to bind the navel-string very hard because it is void of sense,
and that part which you leave, falls off in a very few days, sometimes
in six or seven, or sooner, but never tarries longer than eight or nine.
When you have thus cut the navel-string, then take care the piece that
falls off touch not the ground, for the reason I told you Mizaldus gave,
which experience has justified.

(4) The last thing I mentioned, was the event or consequence, or what
follows cutting the navel-string. As soon as it is cut, apply a little
cotton or lint to the place to keep it warm, lest the cold enter into
the body of the child, which it most certainly will do, if you have not
bound it hard enough. If the lint or cotton you apply to it, be dipped
in oil of roses, it will be the better, and then put another small rag
three or four times double upon the belly; upon the top of all, put
another small bolster, and then swathe it with a linen swathe, four
fingers broad, to keep it steady, lest by moving too much, or from being
continually stirred from side to side, it comes to fall off before the
navel-string, which you left remaining, is fallen off.

It is the usual custom of midwives to put a piece of burnt rag to it,
which we commonly call tinder; but I would rather advise them to put a
little ammoniac to it, because of its drying qualities.



SECT. III.--_How to bring away the After-burden._

A woman cannot be said to be fairly delivered, though the child be born,
till the after-burden be also taken from her; herein differing from most
animals, who, when they have brought forth their young, cast forth
nothing else but some water, and the membranes which contained them. But
women have an after-labour, which sometimes proves more dangerous than
the first; and how to bring it safely away without prejudice to her,
shall be my business to show in this section.

As soon as the child is born, before the midwife either ties or cuts the
navel-string, lest the womb should close, let her take the string and
wind it once or twice about one or two fingers on her left hand joined
together, the better to hold it, with which she may draw it moderately,
and with the right hand, she may only take a single hold of it, above
the left, near the privities, drawing likewise with that very gently,
resting the while the forefinger of the same hand, extended and
stretched forth along the string towards the entrance of the vagina,
always observing, for the greater facility, to draw it from the side
where the burden cleaves least; for in so doing, the rest will separate
the better; and special care must be taken that it be not drawn forth
with too much violence, lest by breaking the string near the burden, the
midwife be obliged to put the whole hand into the womb to deliver the
woman; and she need to be a very skilful person that undertakes it, lest
the womb, to which the burden is sometimes very strongly fastened, be
drawn away with it, as has sometimes happened. It is, therefore, best to
use such remedies as may assist nature. And here take notice, that what
brings away the birth, will also bring away the after-birth. And
therefore, for effecting this work, I will lay down the following rules.

(1) Use the same means of bringing away the after-birth, that you made
use of to bring away the birth; for the same care and circumspection are
needful now that there were then.

(2) Considering that the labouring woman cannot but be much spent by
what she has already undergone in bringing forth the infant, be
therefore sure to give her something to comfort her. And in this case
good jelly broths, also a little wine and toast in it, and other
comforting things, will be necessary.

(3) A little hellebore in powder, to make her sneeze, is in this case
very proper.

(4) Tansey, and the stone aetites, applied as before directed, are also
of good use in this case.

(5) If you take the herb vervain, and either boil it in wine, or a syrup
with the juice of it, which you may do by adding to it double its weight
of sugar (having clarified the juice before you boil it), a spoonful of
that given to the woman is very efficacious to bring away the secundine;
and feverfew and mugwort have the same operation taken as the former.

(6) Alexanders[10] boiled in wine, and the wine drank, also sweet
servile, sweet cicily, angelica roots, and musterwort, are excellent
remedies in this case.

(7) Or, if this fail, the smoke of marigolds, received up a woman's
privities by a funnel, have been known to bring away the after-birth,
even when the midwife let go her hold.

(8) Boil mugwort in water till it be very soft, then take it out, and
apply it in the manner of a poultice to the navel of the labouring
woman, and it instantly brings away the birth. But special care must be
taken to remove it as soon as they come away, lest by its long tarrying
it should draw away the womb also.



SECT. IV.--_Of Laborious and Difficult Labours and how the Midwife is
    to proceed therein._

There are three sorts of bad labours, all painful and difficult, but not
all properly unnatural. It will be necessary, therefore, to distinguish
these.

The _first_ of these labours is that when the mother and child suffer
very much extreme pain and difficulty, even though the child come right;
and this is distinguishably called the laborious labour.

The _second_ is that which is difficult and differs not much from the
former, except that, besides those extraordinary pains, it is generally
attended with some unhappy accident, which, by retarding the birth,
causes the difficulty; but these difficulties being removed, it
accelerates the birth, and hastens the delivery.

Some have asked, what is the reason that women bring forth their
children with so much pain? I answer, the sense of feeling is
distributed to the whole body by the nerves, and the mouth of the womb
being so narrow, that it must of necessity be dilated at the time of the
woman's delivery, the dilating thereof stretches the nerves, and from
thence comes the pain. And therefore the reason why some women have more
pain in their labour than others, proceeds from their having the mouth
of the matrix more full of nerves than others. The best way to remove
those difficulties that occasion hard pains and labour, is to show first
from whence they proceed. Now the difficulty of labour proceeds either
from the mother, or child, or both.

From the mother, by reason of the indisposition of the body, or from
some particular part only, and chiefly the womb, as when the woman is
weak, and the mother is not active to expel the burden, or from
weakness, or disease, or want of spirits; or it may be from strong
passion of the mind with which she was once possessed; she may also be
too young, and so may have the passage too narrow; or too old, and then,
if it be her first child, because her pains are too dry and hard, and
cannot be easily dilated, as happens also to them which are too lean;
likewise those who are small, short or deformed, as crooked women who
have not breath enough to help their pains, and to bear them down,
persons that are crooked having sometimes the bones of the passage not
well shaped. The colic also hinders labour, by preventing the true
pains; and all great and active pains, as when the woman is taken with a
great and violent fever, a great flooding, frequent convulsions, bloody
flux, or any other great distemper. Also, excrements retained cause
great difficulty, and so does a stone in the bladder: or when the
bladder is full of urine, without being able to void it, or when the
woman is troubled with great and painful piles. It may also be from the
passages, when the membranes are thick, the orifice too narrow, and the
neck of the womb not sufficiently open, the passages strained and
pressed by tumours in the adjacent parts, or when the bones are too
firm, and will not open, which very much endangers the mother and the
child; or when the passages are not slippery, by reason of the waters
having broken too soon, or membranes being too thin. The womb may also
be out of order with regard to its bad situation or conformation, having
its neck too narrow, hard and callous, which may easily be so naturally,
or may come by accident, being many times caused by a tumour, an
imposthume, ulcer or superfluous flesh.

As to hard labour occasioned by the child, it is when the child happens
to stick to a mole, or when it is so weak it cannot break the membranes;
or if it be too big all over, or in the head only; or if the natural
vessels are twisted about its neck; when the belly is hydropsical; or
when it is monstrous, having two heads, or joined to another child,
also, when the child is dead or so weak that it can contribute nothing
to its birth; likewise when it comes wrong, or there are two or more.
And to all these various difficulties there is oftentimes one more, and
that is, the ignorance of the midwife, who for want of understanding in
her business, hinders nature in her work instead of helping her.

Having thus looked into the cause of hard labour, I will now show the
industrious midwife how she may minister some relief to the labouring
woman under these difficult circumstances. But it will require judgment
and understanding in the midwife, when she finds a woman in difficult
labour, to know the particular obstruction, or cause thereof, that so a
suitable remedy may be applied; as for instance, when it happens by the
mother's being too young and too narrow, she must be gently treated, and
the passages anointed with oil, hog's lard, or fresh butter, to relax
and dilate them the easier, lest there should happen a rupture of any
part when the child is born; for sometimes the peritoneum breaks, with
the skin from the privities to the fundament.

But if the woman be in years with her first child, let her lower parts
be anointed to mollify the inward orifice, which in such a case being
more hard and callous, does not easily yield to the distention of
labour, which is the true cause why such women are longer in labour, and
also why their children, being forced against the inward orifice of the
womb (which, as I have said, is a little callous) are born with great
bumps and bruises on their heads.

Those women who are very small and mis-shaped, should not be put to bed,
at least until the waters are broken, but rather kept upright and
assisted to walk about the chamber, by being supported under the arms;
for by that means, they will breathe more freely, and mend their pains
better than on the bed, because there they lie all of a heap. As for
those that are very lean, and have hard labour from that cause, let them
moisten the parts with oil and ointments, to make them more smooth and
slippery, that the head of the infant, and the womb be not so compressed
and bruised by the hardness of the mother's bones which form the
passage. If the cause be weakness, she ought to be strengthened, the
better to support her pains, to which end give her good jelly broths,
and a little wine with a toast in it. If she fears her pains, let her be
comforted, assuring her that she will not endure any more, but be
delivered in a little time. But if her pains be slow and small, or none
at all, they must be provoked by frequent and pretty strong clysters;
let her walk about her chamber, so that the weight of the child may help
them forward. If she flood or have strong convulsions she must then be
helped by a speedy delivery; the operation I shall relate in this
section of unnatural labours. If she be costive, let her use clysters,
which may also help to dispel colic, at those times very injurious
because attended with useless pains, and because such bear not downward,
and so help not to forward the birth. If she find an obstruction or
stoppage of the urine, by reason of the womb's bearing too much on the
bladder, let her lift up her belly a little with her hands, and try if
by that she receives any benefit; if she finds she does not, it will be
necessary to introduce a catheter into her bladder, and thereby draw
forth her urine. If the difficulty be from the ill posture of the woman,
let her be placed otherwise, in a posture more suitable and convenient
for her; also if it proceeds from indispositions of the womb, as from
its oblique situation, etc., it must be remedied, as well as it can be,
by the placing her body accordingly; or, if it be a vicious
conformation, having the neck too hard, too callous, too straight, it
must be anointed with oil and ointments, as before directed. If the
membranes be so strong that the waters do not break in due time, they
may be broken with the fingers, if the midwife be first well assured
that the child is come forward into the passage, and ready to follow
presently after; or else, by the breaking of the waters too soon, the
child may be in danger of remaining dry a long time; to supply which
defect, you may moisten the parts with fomentations, decoctions, and
emollient oils; which yet is not half so well as when nature does her
work in her own time, with the ordinary slime and waters. The membranes
sometimes do press forth with the waters, three or four fingers' breadth
out of the body before the child resembling a bladder full of water; but
there is no great danger in breaking them, if they be not already
broken; for when the case is so, the child is always in readiness to
follow, being in the passage, but let the midwife be very careful not to
pull it with her hand, lest the after-burden be thereby loosened before
its time, for it adheres thereto very strongly. If the navel-string
happen to come first, it must presently be put up again, and kept so, if
possible, or otherwise, the woman must be immediately delivered. But if
the after-burden should come first, it must not be put up again by any
means; for the infant having no further occasion for it, it would be but
an obstacle if it were put up; in this case, it must be cut off, having
tied the navel-string, and afterwards draw forth the child with all
speed that may be, lest it be suffocated.



SECT. V.--_Of Women labouring of a dead Child._

When the difficulty of labour arises from a dead child, it is a great
danger to a mother and great care ought to be taken therein; but before
anything be done, the midwife ought to be well assured that the child is
dead indeed, which may be known by these signs.

(1) The breast suddenly slacks, or falls flat, or bags down. (2) A great
coldness possesses the belly of the mother, especially about the navel.
(3) Her urine is thick, with a filthy stinking settling at the bottom.
(4) No motion of the child can be perceived; for the trial whereof, let
the midwife put her hand into warm water, and lay it upon the belly, for
that, if it is alive, will make it stir. (5) She is very subject to
dreams of dead men, and affrighted therewith. (6) She has extraordinary
longings to eat such things as are contrary to nature. (7) Her breath
stinks, though not used so to do. (8) When she turns herself in her bed,
the child sways that way like a lump of lead.

These things being carefully observed, the midwife may make a judgment
whether the child be alive or dead, especially if the woman take the
following prescription:--"Take half a pint of white wine and burn it,
and add thereto half an ounce of cinnamon, but no other spices
whatever, and when she has drunk it, if her travailing pains come upon
her, the child is certainly dead; but if not, the child may possibly be
either weak or sick, but not dead. This will bring her pains upon her if
it be dead, and will refresh the child and give her ease if it be
living; for cinnamon refresheth and strengtheneth the child.

Now, if upon trial it be found the child is dead, let the mother do all
she can to forward the delivery, because a dead child can in no wise be
helpful therein. It will be necessary, therefore, that she take some
comfortable things to prevent her fainting, by reason of the putrid
vapours arising from the dead child. And in order to her delivery let
her take the following herbs boiled in white wine (or at least as many
of them as you can get), viz., dittany, betony, pennyroyal, sage,
feverfew, centaury, ivy leaves and berries. Let her also take sweet
basil in powder, and half a drachm at a time in white wine; let her
privities also be anointed with the juice of the garden tansey. Or take
the tansey in the summer when it can most plentifully be had, and before
it runs up to flower, and having bruised it well, boil it in oil until
the juice of it be consumed. If you set it in the sun, after you have
mixed it with oil, it will be more effectual. This, an industrious
midwife, who would be prepared against all events, ought to have always
by her. As to the manner of her delivery, the same methods must be used
as are mentioned in the section of natural labour. And here again, I
cannot but commend the stone aetites, held near the privities, whose
magnetic virtue renders it exceedingly necessary on this occasion, for
it draws the child any way with the same facility that the load-stone
draws iron.

Let the midwife also make a strong decoction of hyssop with water, and
let the woman drink it very hot, and it will in a little time bring away
the dead child.

If, as soon as she is delivered of the dead child, you are in doubt that
part of the afterbirth is left behind in the body (for in such cases as
these many times it rots, and comes away piece-meal), let her continue
drinking the same decoction until her body be cleansed.

A decoction made of herbs, muster-wort, used as you did the decoction of
hyssop, works the effect. Let the midwife also take the roots of
pollodum and stamp them well; warm them a little and bind them on the
sides of her feet, and it will soon bring away the child either dead or
alive.

The following medicines also are such as stir up the expulsive faculty,
but in this case they must be stronger, because the motion of the child
ceases.

Take savine, round birthwort, trochisks of myrrh, castor, cinnamon and
saffron, each half a drachm; make a powder, give a drachm.

Or she may purge first, and then apply an emollient, anointing her about
the womb with oil of lilies, sweet almonds, camomiles, hen and
goose-grease. Also foment to get out the child, with a decoction of
mercury, orris, wild cucumbers, saecus, broom flowers. Then anoint the
privities and loins with ointment of sow-bread. Or, take coloquintida,
agaric, birthwort, of each a drachm; make a powder, add ammoniacum
dissolved in wine, ox-gall, each two drachms. Or make a fume with an
ass's hoof burnt, or gallianum, or castor, and let it be taken in with a
funnel.

To take away pains and strengthen the parts, foment with the decoction
of mugwort, mallows, rosemary, with wood myrtle, St. John's wort, each
half an ounce, spermaceti two drachms, deer's suet, an ounce; with wax
make an ointment. Or take wax six ounces, spermaceti an ounce; melt
them, dip flux therein, and lay it all over her belly.

If none of these things will do, the last remedy is to try surgery, and
then the midwife ought without delay to send for an expert and able
man-midwife, to deliver her by manual operation, of which I shall treat
more at large in the next chapter.



FOOTNOTES:

[10] Horse-parsley.

       *       *       *       *       *




