CHAPTER VI

MOUNTAINS

     Mountains "seem to have been built for the human race, as at
     once their schools and cathedrals; full of treasures of
     illuminated manuscript for the scholar, kindly in simple
     lessons for the worker, quiet in pale cloisters for the
     thinker, glorious in holiness for the worshipper. They are
     great cathedrals of the earth, with their gates of rock,
     pavements of cloud, choirs of stream and stone, altars of snow,
     and vaults of purple traversed by the continual
     stars."--RUSKIN.

[Illustration: SUMMIT OF MONT BLANC. _To face page 203._]




CHAPTER VI

MOUNTAINS


The Alps are to many of us an inexhaustible source of joy and peace, of
health, and even of life. We have gone to them jaded and worn, feeling,
perhaps without any external cause, anxious and out of spirits, and have
returned full of health, strength, and energy. Among the mountains
Nature herself seems freer and happier, brighter and purer, than
elsewhere. The rush of the rivers, and the repose of the lakes, the pure
snowfields and majestic glaciers, the fresh air, the mysterious summits
of the mountains, the blue haze of the distance, the morning tints and
the evening glow, the beauty of the sky and the grandeur of the storm,
have all refreshed and delighted us time after time, and their memories
can never fade away.

Even now as I write comes back to me the bright vision of an Alpine
valley--blue sky above, glittering snow, bare grey or rich red rock,
dark pines here and there, mixed with bright green larches, then patches
of smooth alp, with clumps of birch and beech, and dotted with brown
châlets; then below them rock again, and wood, but this time with more
deciduous trees; and then the valley itself, with emerald meadows,
interspersed with alder copses, threaded together by a silver stream;
and I almost fancy I can hear the tinkling of distant cowbells coming
down from the alp, and the delicious murmur of the rushing water. The
endless variety, the sense of repose and yet of power, the dignity of
age, the energy of youth, the play of colour, the beauty of form, the
mystery of their origin, all combine to invest mountains with a solemn
beauty.

I feel with Ruskin that "mountains are the beginning and the end of all
natural scenery; in them, and in the forms of inferior landscape that
lead to them, my affections are wholly bound up; and though I can look
with happy admiration at the lowland flowers, and woods, and open
skies, the happiness is tranquil and cold, like that of examining
detached flowers in a conservatory, or reading a pleasant book." And of
all mountain views which he has seen, the finest he considers is that
from the Montanvert: "I have climbed much and wandered much in the heart
of the high Alps, but I have never yet seen anything which equalled the
view from the cabin of the Montanvert."

It is no mere fancy that among mountains the flowers are peculiarly
large and brilliant in colour. Not only are there many beautiful species
which are peculiar to mountains,--alpine Gentians, yellow, blue, and
purple; alpine Rhododendrons, alpine Primroses and Cowslips, alpine
Lychnis, Columbine, Monkshood, Anemones, Narcissus, Campanulas,
Soldanellas, and a thousand others less familiar to us,--but it is well
established that even within the limits of the same species those living
up in the mountains have larger and brighter flowers than their sisters
elsewhere.

Various alpine species belonging to quite distinct families form close
moss-like cushions, gemmed with star-like flowers, or covered
completely with a carpet of blossom. On the lower mountain slopes and in
alpine valleys trees seem to flourish with peculiar luxuriance. Pines
and Firs and Larches above; then, as we descend, Beeches and magnificent
Chestnuts, which seem to rejoice in the sweet, fresh air and the pure
mountain streams.

To any one accustomed to the rich bird life of English woods and
hedgerows, it must be admitted that Swiss woods and Alps seem rather
lonely and deserted. Still the Hawk, or even Eagle, soaring high up in
the air, the weird cry of the Marmot, and the knowledge that, even if
one cannot see Chamois, they may all the time be looking down on us,
give the Alps, from this point of view also, a special interest of their
own.

Another great charm of mountain districts is the richness of colour.
"Consider,[38] first, the difference produced in the whole tone of
landscape colour by the introductions of purple, violet, and deep
ultra-marine blue which we owe to mountains. In an ordinary lowland
landscape we have the blue of the sky; the green of the grass, which I
will suppose (and this is an unnecessary concession to the lowlands)
entirely fresh and bright; the green of trees; and certain elements of
purple, far more rich and beautiful than we generally should think, in
their bark and shadows (bare hedges and thickets, or tops of trees, in
subdued afternoon sunshine, are nearly perfect purple and of an
exquisite tone), as well as in ploughed fields, and dark ground in
general. But among mountains, in addition to all this, large unbroken
spaces of pure violet and purple are introduced in their distances; and
even near, by films of cloud passing over the darkness of ravines or
forests, blues are produced of the most subtle tenderness; these azures
and purples passing into rose colour of otherwise wholly unattainable
delicacy among the upper summits, the blue of the sky being at the same
time purer and deeper than in the plains. Nay, in some sense, a person
who has never seen the rose colour of the rays of dawn crossing a blue
mountain twelve or fifteen miles away can hardly be said to know what
tenderness in colour means at all; bright tenderness he may, indeed,
see in the sky or in a flower, but this grave tenderness of the far-away
hill-purples he cannot conceive."

"I do not know," he says elsewhere, "any district possessing a more pure
or uninterrupted fulness of mountain character (and that of the highest
order), or which appears to have been less disturbed by foreign
agencies, than that which borders the course of the Trient between
Valorsine and Martigny. The paths which lead to it, out of the valley of
the Rhone, rising at first in steep circles among the walnut trees, like
winding stairs among the pillars of a Gothic tower, retire over the
shoulders of the hills into a valley almost unknown, but thickly
inhabited by an industrious and patient population. Along the ridges of
the rocks, smoothed by old glaciers, into long, dark, billowy swellings,
like the backs of plunging dolphins, the peasant watches the slow
colouring of the tufts of moss and roots of herb, which, little by
little, gather a feeble soil over the iron substance; then, supporting
the narrow strip of clinging ground with a few stones, he subdues it to
the spade, and in a year or two a little crest of corn is seen waving
upon the rocky casque."

Tyndall, speaking of the scene from the summit of the Little
Scheideck,[39] says: "The upper air exhibited a commotion which we did
not experience; clouds were wildly driven against the flanks of the
Eiger, the Jungfrau thundered behind, while in front of us a magnificent
rainbow, fixing one of its arms in the valley of Grindelwald, and,
throwing the other right over the crown of the Wetterhorn, clasped the
mountain in its embrace. Through jagged apertures in the clouds floods
of golden light were poured down the sides of the mountain. On the
slopes were innumerable châlets, glistening in the sunbeams, herds
browsing peacefully and shaking their mellow bells; while the blackness
of the pine trees, crowded into woods, or scattered in pleasant clusters
over alp and valley, contrasted forcibly with the lively green of the
fields."

Few men had more experience of mountains than Mr. Whymper, and from him,
I will quote one remarkable passage describing the view from the summit
of the Matterhorn just before the terrible catastrophe which overshadows
the memory of his first ascent.

"The day was one of those superlatively calm and clear ones which
usually precede bad weather. The atmosphere was perfectly still and free
from all clouds or vapours. Mountains fifty, nay, a hundred miles off
looked sharp and near. All their details--ridge and crag, snow and
glacier--stood out with faultless definition. Pleasant thoughts of happy
days in bygone years came up unbidden as we recognised the old familiar
forms. All were revealed, not one of the principal peaks of the Alps was
hidden. I see them clearly now, the great inner circle of giants, backed
by the ranges, chains, and _massifs_.... Ten thousand feet beneath us
were the green fields of Zermatt, dotted with châlets, from which blue
smoke rose lazily. Eight thousand feet below, on the other side, were
the pastures of Breuil. There were black and gloomy forests; bright and
cheerful meadows, bounding waterfalls and tranquil lakes, fertile lands
and savage wastes, sunny plains and frigid plateaux. There were the most
rugged forms and the most graceful outlines, bold perpendicular cliffs
and gentle undulating slopes; rocky mountains and snowy mountains,
sombre and solemn, or glittering and white, with walls, turrets,
pinnacles, pyramids, domes, cones, and spires! There was every
combination that the world can give, and every contrast that the heart
could desire."

These were summer scenes, but the Autumn and Winter again have a
grandeur and beauty of their own.

"Autumn is dark on the mountains; grey mist rests on the hills. The
whirlwind is heard on the heath. Dark rolls the river through the narrow
plain. The leaves twirl round with the wind, and strew the grave of the
dead."[40]

Even bad weather often but enhances the beauty and grandeur of
mountains. When the lower parts are hidden, and the peaks stand out
above the clouds, they look much loftier than if the whole mountain
side is visible. The gloom lends a weirdness and mystery to the scene,
while the flying clouds give it additional variety.

Rain, moreover, adds vividness to the colouring. The leaves and grass
become a brighter green, "every sunburnt rock glows into an agate," and
when fine weather returns the new snow gives intense brilliance, and
invests the woods especially with the beauty of Fairyland. How often in
alpine districts does one long "for the wings of a dove," more
thoroughly to enjoy and more completely to explore, the mysteries and
recesses of the mountains. The mind, however, can go, even if the body
must remain behind.

Each hour of the day has a beauty of its own. The mornings and evenings
again glow with different and even richer tints.

In mountain districts the cloud effects are brighter and more varied
than in flatter regions. The morning and evening tints are seen to the
greatest advantage, and clouds floating high in the heavens sometimes
glitter with the most exquisite iridescent hues

          that blush and glow
    Like angels' wings.[41]

On low ground one may be in the clouds, but not above them. But as we
look down from mountains and see the clouds floating far below us, we
almost seem as if we were looking down on earth from one of the heavenly
bodies.

Not even in the Alps is there anything more beautiful than the "after
glow" which lights up the snow and ice with a rosy tint for some time
after the sun has set. Long after the lower slopes are already in the
shade, the summit of Mont Blanc for instance is transfigured by the
light of the setting sun glowing on the snow. It seems almost like a
light from another world, and vanishes as suddenly and mysteriously as
it came.

As we look up from the valleys the mountain peaks seem like separate
pinnacles projecting far above the general level. This, however, is a
very erroneous impression, and when we examine the view from the top of
any of the higher mountains, or even from one of very moderate
elevation, if well placed, such say as the well-known Piz Languard, we
see that in many cases they must have once formed a dome, or even a
table land, out of which the valleys have been carved. Many mountain
chains were originally at least twice as high as they are now, and the
highest peaks are those which have suffered least from the wear and tear
of time.

We used to speak of the everlasting hills, and are only beginning to
realise the vast and many changes which our earth has undergone.

    There rolls the deep where grew the tree.
        O earth, what changes hast thou seen!
        There where the long street roars, hath been
    The stillness of the central sea.

    The hills are shadows, and they flow
        From form to form, and nothing stands;
        They melt like mist, the solid lands,
    Like clouds they shape themselves and go.[42]


THE ORIGIN OF MOUNTAINS

Geography moreover acquires a new interest when we once realise that
mountains are no mere accidents, but that for every mountain chain, for
every peak and valley, there is a cause and an explanation.

The origin of Mountains is a question of much interest. The building up
of Volcanoes is even now going on before our eyes. Some others, the
Dolomites for instance, have been regarded by Richthofen and other
geologists as ancient coral islands. The long lines of escarpment which
often stretch for miles across country, are now ascertained, mainly
through the researches of Whitaker, to be due to the differential action
of aerial causes. The general origin of mountain chains, however, was at
first naturally enough attributed to direct upward pressure from below.
To attribute them in any way to subsidence seems almost a paradox, and
yet it appears to be now well established that the general cause is
lateral compression, due to contraction of the underlying mass. The
earth, we know, has been gradually cooling, and as it contracted in
doing so, the strata of the crust would necessarily be thrown into
folds. When an apple dries and shrivels in winter, the surface becomes
covered with ridges. Or again, if we place some sheets of paper between
two weights on a table, and then bring the weights nearer together, the
paper will be crumpled up.

[Illustration: Fig. 17.--Adapted from Ball's paper "On the Formation of
Alpine Valleys and Lakes," _Lond. and Ed. Phil. Mag._ 1863, p. 96.]

In the same way let us take a section of the earth's surface AB (Fig.
17), and suppose that, by the gradual cooling and consequent contraction
of the mass, AB sinks to A'B', then to A''B'', and finally to A'''B'''.
Of course if the cooling of the surface and of the deeper portion were
the same, then the strata between A and B would themselves contract, and
might consequently still form a regular curve between A''' and B'''. As
a matter of fact, however, the strata at the surface of our globe have
long since approached a constant temperature. Under these circumstances
there would be no contraction of the strata between A and B
corresponding to that of those in the interior, and consequently they
could not lie flat between A''' and B''', but must be thrown into folds,
commencing along any line of least resistance. Sometimes indeed the
strata are completely inverted, as in Fig. 19, and in other cases they
have been squeezed for miles out of their original position. This
explanation was first, I believe, suggested by Steno. It has been
recently developed by Ball and Suess, and especially by Heim. In this
manner it is probable that most mountain chains originated.[43]

The structure of mountain districts confirms this theoretical
explanation. It is obvious of course that when strata are thrown into
folds, they will, if strained too much, give way at the summit of the
fold. Before doing so, however, they are stretched and consequently
loosened, while on the other hand the strata at the bottom of the fold
are compressed: the former, therefore, are rendered more susceptible of
disintegration, the latter on the contrary acquire greater powers of
resistance. Hence denudation will act with more effect on the upper
than on the lower portion of the folds, and if continued long enough, so
that, as shown in the above diagram, the dotted portion is removed, we
find the original hill tops replaced by valleys, and the original
valleys forming the hill tops. Every visitor to Switzerland must have
noticed hills where the strata lie as shown in parts of Fig. 18, and
where it is obvious that strata corresponding to those in dots must have
been originally present.

In the Jura, for instance, a glance at any good map of the district will
show a succession of ridges running parallel to one another in a
slightly curved line from S.W. to N.E. That these ridges are due to
folds of the earth's surface is clear from the following figure in
Jaccard's work on the Geology of the Jura, showing a section from
Brenets due south to Neuchâtel by Le Locle. These folds are
comparatively slight and the hills of no great height. Further south,
however, the strata are much more violently dislocated and compressed
together. The Mont Salève is the remnant of one of these ridges.

[Illustration: Fig. 18.--Section across the Jura from Brenets to
Neuchâtel.]

In the Alps the contortions are much greater than in the Jura. Fig. 19
shows a section after Heim, from the Spitzen across the Brunnialp, and
the Maderanerthal. It is obvious that the valleys are due mainly to
erosion, that the Maderaner valley has been cut out of the crystalline
rocks _s_, and was once covered by the Jurassic strata _j_, which must
have formerly passed in a great arch over what is now the valley.

However improbable it may seem that so great an amount of rock should
have disappeared, evidence is conclusive. Ramsay has shown that in some
parts of Wales not less than 29,000 feet have been removed, while there
is strong reason for the belief that in Switzerland an amount has been
carried away equal to the present height of the mountains; though of
course it does not follow that the Alps were once twice as high as they
are at present, because elevation and erosion must have gone on
contemporaneously.

[Illustration: Fig. 19.--_e_, Eocene strata; _j_, Jurassic; _s_,
Crystalline rocks.]

It has been calculated that the strata between Bâle and the St. Gotthard
have been compressed from 202 miles to 130 miles, the Ardennes from 50
to 25 miles, and the Appalachians from 153 miles to 65! Prof. Gumbel has
recently expressed the opinion that the main force to which the
elevation of the Alps was due acted along the main axis of elevation.
Exactly the opposite inference would seem really to follow from the
facts. If the centre of force were along the axis of elevation, the
result would, as Suess and Heim have pointed out, be to extend, not to
compress, the strata; and the folds would remain quite unaccounted for.
The suggestion of compression is on the contrary consistent with the
main features of Swiss geography. The principal axis follows a curved
line from the Maritime Alps towards the north-east by Mont Blanc and
Monte Rosa and St. Gotthard to the mountains overlooking the Engadine.
The geological strata follow the same direction. North of a line running
through Chambery, Yverdun, Neuchâtel, Solothurn, and Olten to Waldshut
on the Rhine are Jurassic strata; between that line and a second nearly
parallel and running through Annecy, Vevey, Lucerne, Wesen, Appenzell,
and Bregenz on the Lake of Constance, is the lowland occupied by later
Tertiary strata; between this second line and another passing through
Albertville, St. Maurice, Lenk, Meiringen, and Altdorf lies a more or
less broken band of older Tertiary strata; south of which are a
Cretaceous zone, one of Jurassic age, then a band of crystalline rocks,
while the central core, so to say, of the Alps, as for instance at St.
Gotthard, consists mainly of gneiss or granite. The sedimentary deposits
reappear south of the Alps, and in the opinion of some high authorities,
as, for instance, of Bonney and Heim, passed continuously over the
intervening regions. The last great upheaval commenced after the Miocene
period, and continued through the Pliocene. Miocene strata attain in the
Righi a height of 6000 feet.

For neither the hills nor the mountains are everlasting, or of the same
age.

The Welsh mountains are older than the Vosges, the Vosges than the
Pyrenees, the Pyrenees than the Alps, and the Alps than the Andes, which
indeed are still rising; so that if our English mountains are less
imposing so far as mere height is concerned, they are most venerable
from their great antiquity.

But though the existing Alps are in one sense, and speaking
geologically, very recent, there is strong reason for believing that
there was a chain of lofty mountains there long previously. "The first
indication," says Judd, "of the existence of a line of weakness in this
portion of the earth's crust is found towards the close of the Permian
period, when a series of volcanic outbursts on the very grandest scale
took place" along a line nearly following that of the present Alps, and
led to the formation of a range of mountains, which, in his opinion,
must have been at least 8000 to 9000 feet high. Ramsay and Bonney have
also given strong reasons for believing that the present line of the
Alps was, at a still earlier period, occupied by a range of mountains no
less lofty than those of to-day. Thus then, though the present Alps are
comparatively speaking so recent, there are good grounds for the belief
that they were preceded by one or more earlier ranges, once as lofty as
they are now, but which were more or less completely levelled by the
action of air and water, just as is happening now to the present
mountain ranges.

Movements of elevation and subsidence are still going on in various
parts of the world. Scandinavia is rising in the north, and sinking at
the south. South America is rising on the west and sinking in the east,
rotating in fact on its axis, like some stupendous pendulum.

The crushing and folding of the strata to which mountain chains are due,
and of which the Alps afford such marvellous illustrations, necessarily
give rise to Earthquakes, and the slight shocks so frequent in parts of
Switzerland[44] appear to indicate that the forces which have raised the
Alps are not yet entirely spent, and that slow subterranean movements
are still in progress along the flanks of the mountains.

But if the mountain chains are due to compression, the present valleys
are mainly the result of denudation. As soon as a mountain range is once
raised, all nature seems to conspire against it. Sun and Frost, Heat
and Cold, Air and Water, Ice and Snow, every plant, from the Lichen to
the Oak, and every animal, from the Worm to Man himself, combine to
attack it. Water, however, is the most powerful agent of all. The autumn
rains saturate every pore and cranny; the water as it freezes cracks and
splits the hardest rocks; while the spring sun melts the snow and swells
the rivers, which in their turn carry off the debris to the plains.

Perhaps, however, it would after all be more correct to say that Nature,
like some great artist, carves the shapeless block into form, and endows
the rude mass with life and beauty.

"What more," said Hutton long ago, "is required to explain the
configuration of our mountains and valleys? Nothing but time. It is not
any part of the process that will be disputed; but, after allowing all
the parts, the whole will be denied; and for what? Only because we are
not disposed to allow that quantity of time which the absolution of so
much wasted mountain might require."

The tops of the Swiss mountains stand, and since their elevation have
probably always stood, above the range of ice, and hence their bold
peaks. In Scotland, on the contrary, and still more in Norway, the sheet
of ice which once, as is the case with Greenland now, spread over the
whole country, has shorn off the summits and reduced them almost to
gigantic bosses; while in Wales the same causes, together with the
resistless action of time--for, as already mentioned, the Welsh hills
are far older than the mountains of Switzerland--has ground down the
once lofty summits and reduced them to mere stumps, such as, if the
present forces are left to work out their results, the Swiss mountains
will be thousands, or rather tens of thousands, of years hence.

The "snow line" in Switzerland is generally given as being between 8500
and 9000 feet. Above this level the snow or _névé_ gradually accumulates
until it forms "glaciers," solid rivers of ice which descend more or
less far down the valleys. No one who has not seen a glacier can
possibly realise what they are like. Fig. 20 represents the glacier of
the Blümlis Alp, and the Plate the Mer de Glace.

[Illustration: Fig. 20.--Glacier of the Blümlis Alp.]

[Illustration: THE MER DE GLACE.

_To face page 229._]

They are often very beautiful. "Mount Beerenberg," says Lord Dufferin,
"in size, colour, and effect far surpassed anything I had anticipated.
The glaciers were quite an unexpected element of beauty. Imagine a
mighty river, of as great a volume as the Thames, started down the side
of a mountain, bursting over every impediment, whirled into a thousand
eddies, tumbling and raging on from ledge to ledge in quivering
cataracts of foam, then suddenly struck rigid by a power so
instantaneous in its action that even the froth and fleeting wreaths of
spray have stiffened to the immutability of sculpture. Unless you had
seen it, it would be almost impossible to conceive the strangeness of
the contrast between the actual tranquillity of these silent crystal
rivers and the violent descending energy impressed upon their exterior.
You must remember too all this is upon a scale of such prodigious
magnitude, that when we succeeded subsequently in approaching the
spot--where with a leap like that of Niagara one of these glaciers
plunges down into the sea--the eye, no longer able to take in its
fluvial character, was content to rest in simple astonishment at what
then appeared a lucent precipice of grey-green ice, rising to the height
of several hundred feet above the masts of the vessel."[45]

The cliffs above glaciers shower down fragments of rock which gradually
accumulate at the sides and at the end of the glaciers, forming mounds
known as "moraines." Many ancient moraines occur far beyond the present
region of glaciers.

In considering the condition of alpine valleys we must remember that the
glaciers formerly descended much further than they do at present. The
glaciers of the Rhone for instance occupied the whole of the Valais,
filled the Lake of Geneva--or rather the site now occupied by that
lake--and rose 2000 feet up the slopes of the Jura; the Upper Ticino,
and contributory valleys, were occupied by another which filled the
basin of the Lago Maggiore; a third occupied the valley of the Dora
Baltea, and has left a moraine at Ivrea some twenty miles long, and
which rises no less than 1500 feet above the present level of the river.
The Scotch and Scandinavian valleys were similarly filled by rivers of
ice, which indeed at one time covered the whole country with an immense
sheet, as Greenland is at present. Enormous blocks of stone, the Pierre
à Niton at Geneva and the Pierre à Bot above Neuchâtel, for instance,
were carried by these glaciers for miles and miles; and many of the
stones in the Norfolk cliffs were brought by ice from Norway (perhaps,
however, by Icebergs), across what is now the German Ocean. Again
wherever the rocks are hard enough to have withstood the weather, we
find them polished and ground, just as, and even more so than, those at
the ends and sides of existing glaciers.

The most magnificent glacier tracks in the Alps are, in Ruskin's
opinion, those on the rocks of the great angle opposite Martigny; the
most interesting those above the channel of the Trient between Valorsine
and the valley of the Rhone.

In Great Britain I know no better illustration of ice action than is to
be seen on the road leading down from Glen Quoich to Loch Hourn, one of
the most striking examples of desolate and savage scenery in Scotland.
Its name in Celtic is said to mean the Lake of Hell. All along the
roadside are smoothed and polished hummocks of rock, most of them deeply
furrowed with approximately parallel striæ, presenting a gentle slope on
the upper end, and a steep side below, clearly showing the direction of
the great ice flow.

Many of the upper Swiss valleys contain lakes, as, for instance, that of
the Upper Rhone, the Lake of Geneva, of the Reuss, the Lake of Lucerne,
of the Rhine, that of Constance. These lakes are generally very deep.

The colour of the upper rivers, which are white with the diluvium from
the glaciers, is itself evidence of the erosive powers which they
exercise. This finely-divided matter is, however, precipitated in the
lakes, which, as well as the rivers issuing from them, are a beautiful
rich blue.

"Is it not probable that this action of finely-divided matter may have
some influence on the colour of some of the Swiss lakes--as that of
Geneva for example? This lake is simply an expansion of the river Rhone,
which rushes from the end of the Rhone glacier, as the Arveiron does
from the end of the Mer de Glace. Numerous other streams join the Rhone
right and left during its downward course; and these feeders, being
almost wholly derived from glaciers, join the Rhone charged with the
finer matter which these in their motion have ground from the rocks over
which they have passed. But the glaciers must grind the mass beneath
them to particles of all sizes, and I cannot help thinking that the
finest of them must remain suspended in the lake throughout its entire
length. Faraday has shown that a precipitate of gold may require months
to sink to the bottom of a bottle not more than five inches high, and in
all probability it would require ages of calm subsidence to bring all
the particles which the Lake of Geneva contains to its bottom. It seems
certainly worthy of examination whether such particles suspended in the
water contribute to the production of that magnificent blue which has
excited the admiration of all who have seen it under favourable
circumstances."[46]

Among the Swiss mountains themselves each has its special character.
Tyndall thus describes a view in the Alps, certainly one of the most
beautiful--that, namely, from the summit of the Ægischhorn.

"Skies and summits are to-day without a cloud, and no mist or turbidity
interferes with the sharpness of the outlines. Jungfrau, Monk, Eiger,
Trugberg, cliffy Strahlgrat, stately lady-like Aletschhorn, all grandly
pierce the empyrean. Like a Saul of Mountains, the Finsteraarhorn
overtops all his neighbours; then we have the Oberaarhorn, with the
riven glacier of Viesch rolling from his shoulders. Below is the
Mârjelin See, with its crystal precipices and its floating icebergs,
snowy white, sailing on a blue green sea. Beyond is the range which
divides the Valais from Italy. Sweeping round, the vision meets an
aggregate of peaks which look as fledglings to their mother towards the
mighty Dom. Then come the repellent crags of Mont Cervin; the ideal of
moral savagery, of wild untameable ferocity, mingling involuntarily with
our contemplation of the gloomy pile. Next comes an object, scarcely
less grand, conveying, it may be, even a deeper impression of majesty
and might than the Matterhorn itself--the Weisshorn, perhaps the most
splendid object in the Alps. But beauty is associated with its force,
and we think of it, not as cruel, but as grand and strong. Further to
the right the great Combin lifts up his bare head; other peaks crowd
around him; while at the extremity of the curve round which our gaze has
swept rises the sovran crown of Mont Blanc. And now, as day sinks,
scrolls of pearly clouds draw themselves around the mountain crests,
being wafted from them into the distant air. They are without colour of
any kind; still, by grace of form, and as the embodiment of lustrous
light and most tender shade, their beauty is not to be described."[47]


VOLCANOES

Volcanoes belong to a totally different series of mountains.

It is practically impossible to number the Volcanoes on our earth.
Humboldt enumerated 223, which Keith Johnston raised to nearly 300.
Some, no doubt, are always active, but in the majority the eruptions are
occasional, and though some are undoubtedly now extinct, it is
impossible in all cases to distinguish those which are only in repose
from those whose day of activity is over. Then, again, the question
would arise, which should be regarded as mere subsidiary cones and which
are separate volcanoes. The slopes of Etna present more than 700 small
cones, and on Hawaii there are several thousands. In fact, most of the
very lofty volcanoes present more or less lateral cones.

The molten matter, welling up through some fissure, gradually builds
itself up into a cone, often of the most beautiful regularity, such as
the gigantic peaks of Chimporazo, Cotopaxi (Fig. 21), and Fusiyama, and
hence it is that the crater is so often at, or very near, the summit.

[Illustration: Fig. 21.--Cotopaxi.]

Perhaps no spectacle in Nature is more magnificent than a Volcano in
activity. It has been my good fortune to have stood more than once at
the edge of the crater of Vesuvius during an eruption, to have watched
the lava seething below, while enormous stones were shot up high into
the air. Such a spectacle can never be forgotten.

The most imposing crater in the world is probably that of Kilauea, at a
height of about 4000 feet on the side of Mouna Loa, in the Island of
Hawaii. It has a diameter of 2 miles, and is elliptic in outline, with a
longer axis of about 3, and a circumference of about 7 miles. The
interior is a great lake of lava, the level of which is constantly
changing. Generally, it stands about 800 feet below the edge, and the
depth is about 1400 feet. The heat is intense, and, especially at night,
when the clouds are coloured scarlet by the reflection from the molten
lava, the effect is said to be magnificent. Gradually the lava mounts in
the crater until it either bursts through the side or runs over the
edge, after which the crater remains empty, sometimes for years.

A lava stream flows down the slope of the mountain like a burning river,
at first rapidly, but as it cools, scoriæ gradually form, and at length
the molten matter covers itself completely (Fig. 22), both above and at
the sides, with a solid crust, within which, as in a tunnel, it
continues to flow slowly as long as it is supplied from the source, here
and there breaking through the crust which, as continually, re-forms in
front. Thus the terrible, inexorable river of fire slowly descends,
destroying everything in its course.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.--Lava Stream.]

The stream of lava which burst from Mouna Loa in 1885 had a length of 70
miles; that of Skaptar-Jokul in Iceland in 1783 had a length of 50
miles, and a maximum depth of nearly 500 feet. It has been calculated
that the mass of lava equalled that of Mont Blanc.

The stones, ashes, and mud ejected during eruptions are even more
destructive than the rivers of lava. In 1851 Tomboro, a volcano on the
Island of Sumbava, cost more lives than fell in the battle of Waterloo.
The earthquake of Lisbon in 1755 destroyed 60,000 persons. During the
earthquake of Riobamba and the mud eruption of Tunguragua, and again in
that of Krakatoa, it is estimated that the number who perished was
between 30,000 and 40,000. At the earthquake of Antioch in 526 no less
than 200,000 persons are said to have lost their lives.

Perhaps the most destructive eruption of modern times has been that on
Cosequina. For 25 miles it covered the ground with muddy water 16 feet
in depth. The dust and ashes formed a dense cloud, extending over many
miles, some of it being carried 20 degrees to the west. The total mass
ejected has been estimated at 60 milliards of square yards.

Stromboli, in the Mediterranean (Fig. 23), though only 2500 feet in
height, is very imposing from its superb regularity, and its roots
plunge below the surface to a depth of 4000 feet.

It is, moreover, very interesting from the regularity of its action,
which has a period of 5 minutes or a little less. On looking down into
the crater one sees at a depth of say 300 feet a seething mass of
red-hot lava; this gradually rises, and then explodes, throwing up a
cloud of vapour and stones, after which it sinks again. So regular is it
that the Volcano has been compared to a "flashing" lighthouse, and this
wonderful process has been going on for ages.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.--Stromboli, viewed from the north-west, April
1874.]

Though long extinct, volcanoes once existed in the British Isles;
Arthur's Seat, near Edinburgh, for instance, appears to be the funnel of
a small volcano, belonging to the Carboniferous period.

The summit of a volcanic mountain is sometimes entirely blown away.
Between my first two visits to Vesuvius 200 feet of the mountain had
thus disappeared. Vesuvius itself stands in a more ancient crater, part
of which still remains, and is now known as Somma, the greater portion
having disappeared in the great eruption of 79, when the mountain,
waking from its long sleep, destroyed Herculaneum and Pompeii.

As regards the origin of volcanoes there have been two main theories.
Impressed by the magnitude and grandeur of the phenomena, enhanced as
they are by their destructive character, many have been disposed to
regard the craters of volcanoes as gigantic chimneys, passing right
through the solid crust of the globe, and communicating with a central
fire. Recent researches, however, have indicated that, grand and
imposing as they are, volcanoes must yet be regarded as due mainly to
local and superficial causes.

A glance at the map shows that volcanoes are almost always situated on,
or near, the sea coast. From the interior of continents they are
entirely wanting. The number of active volcanoes in the Andes,
contrasted with their absence in the Alps and Ourals, the Himalayas, and
Central Asian chains, is very striking. Indeed, the Pacific Ocean is
encircled, as Ritter has pointed out, by a ring of fire. Beginning with
New Zealand, we have the Volcanoes of Tongariro, Whakaii, etc.; thence
the circle passes through the Fiji Islands, Solomon Islands, New Guinea,
Timor, Flores, Sumbava, Lombock, Java, Sumatra, the Philippines, Japan,
the Aleutian Islands, along the Rocky Mountains, Mexico, Peru, and
Chili, to Tierra del Fuego, and, in the far south, to the two great
Volcanoes of Erebus and Terror on Victoria Land.

We know that the contraction of the Earth's surface with the strains and
fractures, the compression and folds, which must inevitably result, is
still in operation, and must give rise to areas of high temperature,
and consequently to volcanoes. We must also remember that the real
mountain chains of our earth are the continents, compared to which even
the Alps and Andes are mere wrinkles. It is along the lines of the great
mountain chains, that is to say, along the main coast lines, rather than
in the centres of the continents, which may be regarded as comparatively
quiescent, that we should naturally expect to find the districts of
greatest heat, and this is perhaps why volcanoes are generally
distributed along the coast lines.

Another reason for regarding Volcanoes as local phenomena is that many
even of those comparatively near one another act quite independently.
This is so with Kilauea and Mouna Loa, both on the small island of
Hawaii.

Again, if volcanoes were in connection with a great central sea of fire,
the eruptions must follow the same laws as regulate the tides. This,
however, is not the case. There are indeed indications of the existence
of slight tides in the molten lake which underlies Vesuvius, and during
the eruption of 1865 there was increased activity twice a day, as we
should expect to find in any great fluid reservoir, but very different
indeed from what must have been the case if the mountain was in
connection with a central ocean of molten matter.

Indeed, unless the "crust" of our earth was of great thickness we should
be subject to perpetual earthquakes. No doubt these are far more
frequent than is generally supposed; indeed, with our improved
instruments it can be shown that instead of occasional vibrations, with
long intermediate periods of rest, we have in reality short intervals of
rest with long periods of vibration, or rather perhaps that the crust of
the earth is in constant tremor, with more violent oscillation from time
to time.

It appears, moreover, that earthquakes are not generally deep-seated.
The point at which the shock is vertical can be ascertained, and it is
also possible in some cases to determine the angle at which it emerges
elsewhere. When this has been done it has always been found that the
seat of disturbance must have been within 30 geographical miles of the
surface.

Yet, though we cannot connect volcanic action with the central heat of
the earth, but must regard it as a minor and local manifestation of
force, volcanoes still remain among the grandest, most awful, and at the
same time most magnificent spectacles which the earth can afford.

FOOTNOTES:

[38] Ruskin.

[39] _The Glaciers of the Alps._

[40] Ossian.

[41] Bullar, _Azores_.

[42] Tennyson.

[43] See especially Heim's great work, _Unt. ü. d. Mechanismus der
Gebirgsbildung_.

[44] In the last 150 years more than 1000 are recorded.

[45] _Letters from High Latitudes._

[46] _Glaciers of the Alps._

[47] _Mountaineering in 1861._




