CHAPTER VII

WATER

     Of all inorganic substances, acting in their own proper nature,
     and without assistance or combination, water is the most
     wonderful. If we think of it as the source of all the
     changefulness and beauty which we have seen in the clouds; then
     as the instrument by which the earth we have contemplated was
     modelled into symmetry, and its crags chiselled into grace;
     then as, in the form of snow, it robes the mountains it has
     made, with that transcendent light which we could not have
     conceived if we had not seen; then as it exists in the foam of
     the torrent, in the iris which spans it, in the morning mist
     which rises from it, in the deep crystalline pools which mirror
     its hanging shore, in the broad lake and glancing river,
     finally, in that which is to all human minds the best emblem of
     unwearied, unconquerable power, the wild, various, fantastic,
     tameless unity of the sea; what shall we compare to this
     mighty, this universal element, for glory and for beauty? or
     how shall we follow its eternal cheerfulness of feeling? It is
     like trying to paint a soul.--RUSKIN.

[Illustration: RYDAL WATER. _To face page 251._]




CHAPTER VII

WATER


In the legends of ancient times running water was proof against all
sorcery and witchcraft:

    No spell could stay the living tide
    Or charm the rushing stream.[48]

There was much truth as well as beauty in this idea.

Flowing waters, moreover, have not only power to wash out material
stains, but they also clear away the cobwebs of the brain--the results
of over incessant work--and restore us to health and strength.

Snowfields and glaciers, mountain torrents, sparkling brooks, and
stately rivers, meres and lakes, and last, not least, the great ocean
itself, all alike possess this magic power.

"When I would beget content," says Izaak Walton, "and increase
confidence in the power and wisdom and providence of Almighty God, I
will walk the meadows by some gliding stream, and there contemplate the
lilies that take no care, and those very many other little living
creatures that are not only created, but fed (man knows not how) by the
goodness of the God of Nature, and therefore trust in Him;" and in his
quaint old language he craves a special blessing on all those "that are
true lovers of virtue, and dare trust in His Providence, and be quiet,
and go a angling."

At the water's edge flowers are especially varied and luxuriant, so that
the banks of a river are a long natural garden of tall and graceful
grasses and sedges, the Meadow Sweet, the Flowering Rush, the sweet
Flag, the Bull Rush, Purple Loosestrife, Hemp Agrimony, Dewberry,
Forget-me-not, and a hundred more, backed by Willows, Alders, Poplars,
and other trees.

The Animal world, if less conspicuous to the eye, is quite as
fascinating to the imagination. Here and there a speckled Trout may be
detected (rather by the shadow than the substance) suspended in the
clear water, or darting across a shallow; if we are quiet we may see
Water Hens or Wild Ducks swimming among the lilies, a Kingfisher sitting
on a branch or flashing away like a gleam of light; a solemn Heron
stands maybe at the water's edge, or slowly rises flapping his great
wings; Water Rats, neat and clean little creatures, very different from
their coarse brown namesakes of the land, are abundant everywhere; nor
need we even yet quite despair of seeing the Otter himself.

Insects of course are gay, lively, and innumerable; but after all the
richest fauna is that visible only with a microscope.

"To gaze," says Dr. Hudson, "into that wonderful world which lies in a
drop of water, crossed by some stems of green weed, to see transparent
living mechanism at work, and to gain some idea of its modes of action,
to watch a tiny speck that can sail through the prick of a needle's
point; to see its crystal armour flashing with ever varying tint, its
head glorious with the halo of its quivering cilia; to see it gliding
through the emerald stems, hunting for its food, snatching at its prey,
fleeing from its enemy, chasing its mate (the fiercest of our passions
blazing in an invisible speck); to see it whirling in a mad dance, to
the sound of its own music, the music of its happiness, the exquisite
happiness of living--can any one, who has once enjoyed this sight, ever
turn from it to mere books and drawings, without the sense that he has
left all Fairyland behind him?"[49]

The study of Natural History has indeed the special advantage of
carrying us into the country and the open air.

Lakes are even more restful than rivers or the sea. Rivers are always
flowing, though it may be but slowly; the sea may rest awhile, now and
then, but is generally full of action and energy; while lakes seem to
sleep and dream. Lakes in a beautiful country are like silver ornaments
on a lovely dress, like liquid gems in a beautiful setting, or bright
eyes in a lovely face. Indeed as we gaze down on a lake from some hill
or cliff it almost looks solid, like some great blue crystal.

[Illustration: WINDERMERE. _To face page 254._]

It is not merely for purposes of commerce or convenience that men love
to live near rivers.

    Let me live harmlessly, and near the brink
      Of Trent or Avon have my dwelling-place;
    Where I may see my quill, or cork, down sink,
      With eager bite of pike, or bleak, or dace;
    And on the world and my Creator think:
      While some men strive ill-gotten goods t' embrace:
    And others spend their time in base excess
    Of wine; or worse, in war, or wantonness.

    Let them that will, these pastimes still pursue,
      And on such pleasing fancies feed their fill:
    So I the fields and meadows green may view
      And daily by fresh rivers walk at will,
    Among the daisies and the violets blue,
      Red hyacinth and yellow daffodil.[50]

It is interesting and delightful to trace a river from its source to the
sea.

"Beginning at the hill-tops," says Geikie, "we first meet with the
spring or 'well-eye,' from which the river takes its rise. A patch of
bright green, mottling the brown heathy slope, shows where the water
comes to the surface, a treacherous covering of verdure often concealing
a deep pool beneath. From this source the rivulet trickles along the
grass and heath, which it soon cuts through, reaching the black, peaty
layer below, and running in it for a short way as in a gutter.
Excavating its channel in the peat, it comes down to the soil, often a
stony earth bleached white by the peat. Deepening and widening the
channel as it gathers force with the increasing slope, the water digs
into the coating of drift or loose decomposed rock that covers the
hillside. In favourable localities a narrow precipitous gully, twenty or
thirty feet deep, may thus be scooped out in the course of a few years."

If, however, we trace one of the Swiss rivers to its source we shall
generally find that it begins in a snow field or _névé_ nestled in a
shoulder of some great mountain.

Below the _névé_ lies a glacier, on, in, and under which the water runs
in a thousand little streams, eventually emerging at the end, in some
cases forming a beautiful blue cavern, though in others the end of the
glacier is encumbered and concealed by earth and stones.

[Illustration: Fig. 24.--Upper Valley of St. Gotthard.]

The uppermost Alpine valleys are perhaps generally, though by no means
always, a little desolate and severe, as, for instance, that of St.
Gotthard (Fig. 24). The sides are clothed with rough pasture, which is
flowery indeed, though of course the flowers are not visible at a
distance, interspersed with live rock and fallen masses, while along the
bottom rushes a white torrent. The snowy peaks are generally more or
less hidden by the shoulders of the hills.

The valleys further down widen and become more varied and picturesque.
The snowy peaks and slopes are more often visible, the "alps" or
pastures to which the cows are taken in summer, are greener and dotted
with the huts or châlets of the cow-herds, while the tinkling of the
cowbells comes to one from time to time, softened by distance, and
suggestive of mountain rambles. Below the alps there is generally a
steeper part clothed with Firs or with Larches and Pines, some of which
seem as if they were scaling the mountains in regiments, preceded by a
certain number of skirmishers. Below the fir woods again are Beeches,
Chestnuts, and other deciduous trees, while the central cultivated
portion of the valley is partly arable, partly pasture, the latter
differing from our meadows in containing a greater variety of
flowers--Campanulas, Wild Geraniums, Chervil, Ragged Robin, Narcissus,
etc. Here and there is a brown village, while more or less in the centre
hurries along, with a delightful rushing sound, the mountain torrent, to
which the depth, if not the very existence of the valley, is mainly due.
The meadows are often carefully irrigated, and the water power is also
used for mills, the streams seeming to rush on, as Ruskin says, "eager
for their work at the mill, or their ministry to the meadows."

Apart from the action of running water, snow and frost are continually
disintegrating the rocks, and at the base of almost any steep cliff may
be seen a slope of debris (as in Figs. 25, 26). This stands at a regular
angle--the angle of repose--and unless it is continually removed by a
stream at the base, gradually creeps up higher and higher, until at last
the cliff entirely disappears.

[Illustration: Fig. 25.--Section of a river valley. The dotted line
shows a slope or talus of debris.]

Sometimes the two sides of the valley approach so near that there is not
even room for the river and the road: in that case Nature claims the
supremacy, and the road has to be carried in a cutting, or perhaps in a
tunnel through the rock. In other cases Nature is not at one with
herself. In many places the debris from the rocks above would reach
right across the valley and dam up the stream. Then arises a struggle
between rock and river, but the river is always victorious in the end;
even if dammed back for a while, it concentrates its forces, rises up
the rampart of rock, rushes over triumphantly, resumes its original
course, and gradually carries the enemy away.

[Illustration: Fig. 26.--Valley of the Rhone, with the waterfall of
Sallenches, showing talus of debris.]

Another prominent feature in many valleys is afforded by the old river,
or lake, terraces, which were formed at a time when the river ran at a
level far above its present bed.

Thus many a mountain valley gives some such section as the following.

[Illustration: Fig. 27.--_A_, present river valley; _B_, old river
terrace.]

First, a face of rock, very steep, and in some places almost
perpendicular; secondly, a regular talus of fallen rocks, stones, etc.,
as shown in the view of the Rhone Valley (Fig. 26), which takes what is
known as the slope of repose, at an angle which depends on the character
of the material. As a rule for loose rock fragments it may be taken
roughly to be an angle of about 45°. Then an irregular slope followed in
many places by one or more terraces, and lastly the present bed of the
river.

[Illustration: Fig. 28.--Diagram of an Alpine valley showing a river
cone. Front view.]

The width or narrowness of the valley in relation to its depth depends
greatly on the condition of the rocks, the harder and tougher they are
the narrower as a rule being the valley.

From time to time a side stream enters the main valley. This is itself
composed of many smaller rivulets. If the lateral valleys are steep, the
streams bring with them, especially after rains, large quantities of
earth and stones. When, however, they reach the main valley, the
rapidity of the current being less, their power of transport also
diminishes, and they spread out the material which they carry down in a
depressed cone (Figs. 28, 29, 31, 32).

A side stream with its terminal cone, when seen from the opposite side
of the valley, presents the appearance shown in Figs. 28, 31, or, if we
are looking down the valley, as in Figs. 29, 32, the river being often
driven to one side of the main valley, as, for instance, is the case in
the Valais, near Sion, where the Rhone (Fig. 30) is driven out of its
course by, and forms a curve round, the cone brought down by the torrent
of the Borgne.

[Illustration: Fig. 29.--Diagram of an Alpine valley, showing a river
cone. Lateral view.]

Sometimes two lateral valleys (see Plate) come down nearly opposite one
another, so that the cones meet, as, for instance, some little way below
Vernayaz, and, indeed, in several other places in the Valais (Fig. 31).
Or more permanent lakes may be due to a ridge of rock running across the
valley, as, for instance, just below St. Maurice in the Valais.

[Illustration: Fig. 30.]

[Illustration: VIEW IN THE VALAIS BELOW ST. MAURICE. _To face page
266._]

[Illustration: Fig. 31.--View in the Rhone Valley, showing a lateral
cone.]

Almost all river valleys contain, or have contained, in their course one
or more lakes, and where a river falls into a lake a cone like those
just described is formed, and projects into the lake. Thus on the Lake
of Geneva, between Vevey and Villeneuve (see Fig. 33), there are several
such promontories, each marking the place where a stream falls into the
lake.

[Illustration: Fig. 32.--View in the Rhone Valley, showing the slope of
a river cone.]

The Rhone itself has not only filled up what was once the upper end of
the lake, but has built out a strip of land into the water.

[Illustration: Fig. 33.--Shore of the Lake of Geneva, near Vevey.]

That the lake formerly extended some distance up the Valais no one can
doubt who looks at the flat ground about Villeneuve. The Plate
opposite, from a photograph taken above Vevey, shows this clearly. It is
quite evident that the lake must formerly have extended further up the
valley, and that it has been filled up by material brought down by the
Rhone, a process which is still continuing.

At the other end of the lake the river rushes out 15 feet deep of "not
flowing, but flying water; not water neither--melted glacier matter, one
should call it; the force of the ice is in it, and the wreathing of the
clouds, the gladness of the sky, and the countenance of time."[51]

[Illustration: VIEW UP THE VALAIS FROM THE LAKE OF GENEVA. _To face page
270._]

In flat countries the habits of rivers are very different. For instance,
in parts of Norfolk there are many small lakes or "broads" in a network
of rivers--the Bure, the Yare, the Ant, the Waveney, etc.--which do not
rush on with the haste of some rivers, or the stately flow of others
which are steadily set to reach the sea, but rather seem like rivers
wandering in the meadows on a holiday. They have often no natural banks,
but are bounded by dense growths of tall grasses, Bulrushes, Reeds, and
Sedges, interspersed with the spires of the purple Loosestrife, Willow
Herb, Hemp Agrimony, and other flowers, while the fields are very low
and protected by dykes, so that the red cattle appear to be browsing
below the level of the water; and as the rivers take most unexpected
turns, the sailing boats often seem (Fig. 34) as if they were in the
middle of the fields.

[Illustration: Fig. 34.--View in the district of the Broads, Norfolk.]

At present these rivers are restrained in their courses by banks; when
left free they are continually changing their beds. Their courses at
first sight seem to follow no rule, but, as it is termed, from a
celebrated river of Asia Minor, to "meander" along without aim or
object, though in fact they follow very definite laws.

Finally, when the river at length reaches the sea, it in many cases
spreads out in the form of a fan, forming a very flat cone or "delta,"
as it is called, from the Greek capital [Greek: Delta], a name first
applied to that of the Nile, and afterwards extended to other rivers.
This is due to the same cause, and resembles, except in size, the
comparatively minute cones of mountain streams.

[Illustration: Fig. 35.]

Fig. 35 represents the delta of the Po, and it will be observed that
Adria, once a great port, and from which the Adriatic was named, is now
more than 20 miles from the sea. Perhaps the most remarkable case is
that of the Mississippi (Fig. 36), the mouths of which project into the
sea like a hand, or like the petals of a flower. For miles the mud is
too soft to support trees, but is covered by sedges (Miegea); the banks
of mud gradually become too soft and mobile even for them. The pilots
who navigate ships up the river live in frail houses resting on planks,
and kept in place by anchors. Still further, and the banks of the
Mississippi, if banks they can be called, are mere strips of reddish
mud, intersected from time to time by transverse streams of water, which
gradually separate them into patches. These become more and more
liquid, until the land, river, and sea merge imperceptibly into one
another. The river is so muddy that it might almost be called land, and
the mud so saturated by water that it might well be called sea, so that
one can hardly say whether a given spot is on the continent, in the
river, or on the open ocean.

[Illustration: Fig. 36.]

FOOTNOTES:

[48] Leyden.

[49] Dr. Hudson, Address to the Microscopical Society, 1889.

[50] F. Davors.

[51] Ruskin.




