CHAPTER X

THE STARRY HEAVENS

     A man can hardly lift up his eyes towards the heavens without
     wonder and veneration, to see so many millions of radiant
     lights, and to observe their courses and revolutions, even
     without any respect to the common good of the
     Universe.--SENECA.




CHAPTER X

THE STARRY HEAVENS


Many years ago I paid a visit to Naples, and ascended Vesuvius to see
the sun rise from the top of the mountain. We went up to the Observatory
in the evening and spent the night outside. The sky was clear; at our
feet was the sea, and round the bay the lights of Naples formed a lovely
semicircle. Far more beautiful, however, were the moon and the stars
overhead; the moon throwing a silver path over the water, and the stars
shining in that clear atmosphere with a brilliance which I shall never
forget.

For ages and ages past men have admired the same glorious spectacle, and
yet neither the imagination of Man nor the genius of Poetry had risen to
the truer and grander conceptions of the Heavens for which we are
indebted to astronomical Science. The mechanical contrivances by which
it was attempted to explain the movements of the heavenly bodies were
clumsy and prosaic when compared with the great discovery of Newton.
Ruskin is unjust I think when he says "Science teaches us that the
clouds are a sleety mist; Art, that they are a golden throne." I should
be the last to disparage the debt we owe to Art, but for our knowledge,
and even more, for our appreciation, feeble as even yet it is, of the
overwhelming grandeur of the Heavens, we are mainly indebted to Science.

There is scarcely a form which the fancy of Man has not sometimes
detected in the clouds,--chains of mountains, splendid cities, storms at
sea, flights of birds, groups of animals, monsters of all kinds,--and
our superstitious ancestors often terrified themselves by fantastic
visions of arms and warriors and battles which they regarded as portents
of coming calamities. There is hardly a day on which Clouds do not
delight and surprise us by their forms and colours. They belong,
however, to our Earth, and I must now pass on to the heavenly bodies.

[Illustration: THE MOON.

_To face page 377._]


THE MOON

The Moon is the nearest, and being the nearest, appears to us, with the
single exception of the Sun, the largest, although it is in reality one
of the smallest, of the heavenly bodies. Just as the Earth goes round
the Sun, and the period of revolution constitutes a year, so the Moon
goes round the Earth approximately in a period of one month. But while
we turn on our axis every twenty-four hours, thus causing the
alternation of light and darkness--day and night--the Moon takes a month
to revolve on hers, so that she always presents the same, or very nearly
the same, surface to us.

Seeing her as we do, not like the Sun and Stars, by light of her own,
but by the reflected light of the Sun, her form appears to change,
because the side upon which the Sun shines is not always that which we
see. Hence the "phases" of the Moon, which add so much to her beauty
and interest.

Who is there who has not watched them with admiration? "We first see her
as an exquisite crescent of pale light in the western sky after sunset.
Night after night she moves further and further to the east, until she
becomes full, and rises about the same time that the Sun sets. From the
time of full moon the disc of light begins to diminish, until the last
quarter is reached. Then it is that the Moon is seen high in the heavens
in the morning. As the days pass by, the crescent shape is again
assumed. The crescent wanes thinner and thinner as the Moon draws closer
to the Sun. Finally, she becomes lost in the overpowering light of the
Sun, again to emerge as the new moon, and again to go through the same
cycle of changes."[66]

But although she is so small the Moon is not only, next to the Sun, by
far the most beautiful, but also for us the most important, of the
heavenly bodies. Her attraction, aided by that of the Sun, causes the
tides, which are of such essential service to navigation. They carry
our vessels in and out of port, and, indeed, but for them many of our
ports would themselves cease to exist, being silted up by the rivers
running into them. The Moon is also of invaluable service to sailors by
enabling them to determine where they are, and guiding them over the
pathless waters.

The geography of the Moon, so far as concerns the side turned towards
us, has been carefully mapped and studied, and may almost be said to be
as well known as that of our own earth. The scenery is in a high degree
weird and rugged; it is a great wilderness of extinct volcanoes, and,
seen with even a very moderate telescope, is a most beautiful object.
The mountains are of great size. Our loftiest mountain, Mount Everest,
is generally stated as about 29,000 feet in height. The mountains of the
Moon reach an altitude of over 42,000, but this reckons to the lowest
depression, and it must be remembered that we reckon the height of
mountains to the sea level only. Several of the craters on the Moon have
a diameter of 40 or 50--one of them even as much as 78--miles. Many
also have central cones, closely resembling those in our own volcanic
regions. In some cases the craters are filled nearly to the brim with
lava. The volcanoes seem, however, to be all extinct; and there is not a
single case in which we have conclusive evidence of any change in a
lunar mountain.

[Illustration: Fig. 50.--A group of Lunar Volcanoes.]

The Moon, being so much smaller than the earth, cooled, of course, much
more rapidly, and it is probable that these mountains are millions of
years old--much older than many of our mountain chains. Yet no one can
look at a map of the Moon without being struck with the very rugged
character of its mountain scenery. This is mainly due to the absence of
air and water. To these two mighty agencies, not merely "the
cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, the solemn temples," but the
very mountains themselves, are inevitable victims. Not merely storms and
hurricanes, but every gentle shower, every fall of snow, tends to soften
our scenery and lower the mountain peaks. These agencies are absent from
the Moon, and the mountains stand to-day just as they were formed
millions of years ago.

But though we find on our own globe (see, for instance, Fig. 21)
volcanic regions closely resembling those of the Moon, there are other
phenomena on the Moon's surface for which our earth presents as yet no
explanation. From Tycho, for instance, a crater 17,000 feet high and 50
miles across, a number of rays or streaks diverge, which for hundreds,
or in some cases two or three thousand, miles pass straight across
plains, craters, and mountains. The true nature of these streaks is not
yet understood.


THE SUN

The Sun is more than 400 times as distant as the Moon; a mighty glowing
globe, infinitely hotter than any earthly fiery furnace, 300,000 times
as heavy, and 1,000,000 times as large as the earth. Its diameter is
865,000 miles, and it revolves on its axis in between 25 and 26 days.
Its distance is 92,500,000 miles. And yet it is only a star, and by no
means one of the first magnitude.

The surface of the Sun is the seat of violent storms and tempests. From
it gigantic flames, consisting mainly of hydrogen, flicker and leap.
Professor Young describes one as being, when first observed, 40,000
miles high. Suddenly it became very brilliant, and in half an hour
sprang up 40,000 more. For another hour it soared higher and higher,
reaching finally an elevation of no less than 350,000 miles, after which
it slowly faded away, and in a couple of hours had entirely disappeared.
This was no doubt an exceptional case, but a height of 100,000 miles is
not unusual, and the velocity frequently reaches 100 miles in a second.

The proverbial spots on the Sun in many respects resemble the
appearances which would be presented if a comparatively dark central
mass was here and there exposed by apertures through the more brilliant
outer gases, but their true nature is still a matter of discussion.

During total eclipses it is seen that the Sun is surrounded by a
"corona," or aureola of light, consisting of radiant filaments, beams,
and sheets of light, which radiate in all directions, and the true
nature of which is still doubtful.

Another stupendous problem connected with the Sun is the fact that, as
geology teaches us, it has given off nearly the same quantity of light
and heat for millions of years. How has this come to pass? Certainly not
by any process of burning such as we are familiar with. Indeed, if the
heat of the Sun were due to combustion it would be burnt up in 6000
years. It has been suggested that the meteors, which fall in showers on
to the Sun, replace the heat which is emitted. To some slight extent
perhaps they do so, but the main cause seems to be the slow condensation
of the Sun itself. Mathematicians tell us that a contraction of about
220 feet a year would account for the whole heat emitted, and as the
present diameter of the Sun is about 860,000 miles, the potential store
of heat is still enormous.

To the Sun we owe our light and heat; it is not only the centre of our
planetary system, it is the source and ruler of our lives. It draws up
water from the ocean, and pours it down in rain to fill the rivers and
refresh the plants; it raises the winds, which purify the air and waft
our ships over the seas; it draws our carriages and drives our
steam-engines, for coal is but the heat of former ages stored up for our
use; animals live and move by the Sun's warmth; it inspires the song of
birds, paints the flowers, and ripens the fruit. Through it the trees
grow. For the beauties of nature, for our food and drink, for our
clothing, for our light and life, for the very possibility of our
existence, we are indebted to the Sun.

What is the Sun made of? Comte mentioned as a problem, which it was
impossible that man could ever solve, any attempt to determine the
chemical composition of the heavenly bodies. "Nous concevons," he said,
"la possibilité de déterminer leurs formes, leurs distances, leurs
grandeurs, et leurs mouvements, tandis que nous ne saurions jamais
étudier par aucun moyen leur composition chimique ou leur structure
minéralogique." To do so might well have seemed hopeless, and yet the
possibility has been proved, and a beginning has been made. In the early
part of this century Wollaston observed that the bright band of colours
thrown by a prism, and known as the spectrum, was traversed by dark
lines, which were also discovered, and described more in detail, by
Fraunhofer, after whom they are generally called "Fraunhofer's lines."
The next step was made by Wheatstone, who showed that the spectrum
formed by incandescent vapours was formed of bright lines, which
differed for each substance, and might, therefore, be used as a
convenient mode of analysis. In fact, by this process several new
substances have actually been discovered. These bright lines were found
on comparison to coincide with the dark lines in the spectrum, and to
Kirchhoff and Bunsen is due the credit of applying this method of
research to astronomical science. They arranged their apparatus so that
one-half was lighted by the Sun, the other by the incandescent gas they
were examining. When the vapour of sodium was treated in this way they
found that the bright line in the flame of soda exactly coincided with a
line in the Sun's spectrum. The conclusion was obvious; there is sodium
in the Sun. It must, indeed, have been a glorious moment when the
thought flashed upon them; and the discovery, with its results, is one
of the greatest triumphs of human genius.

The Sun has thus been proved to contain hydrogen, sodium, barium,
magnesium, calcium, aluminium, chromium, iron, nickle, manganese,
titanium, cobalt, lead, zinc, copper, cadmium, strontium, cerium,
uranium, potassium, etc., in all 36 of our terrestrial elements, while
as regards some others the evidence is not conclusive. We cannot as yet
say that any of our elements are absent, nor though there are various
lines which cannot as yet be certainly referred to any known substance,
have we clear proof that the Sun contains any element which does not
exist on our earth. On the whole, then, the chemical composition of the
Sun appears closely to resemble that of our earth.


THE PLANETS

The Syrian shepherds watching their flocks by night long ago
noticed--and they were probably not the first--that there were five
stars which did not follow the regular course of the rest, but,
apparently at least, moved about irregularly. These they appropriately
named Planets, or wanderers.

Further observations have shown that this irregularity of their path is
only apparent, and that, like our own Earth, they really revolve round
the Sun. To the five first observed--Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn--two large ones, Uranus and Neptune, and a group of minor bodies,
have since been added.

The following two diagrams give the relative orbits of the Planets.

[Illustration: Fig. 51.--Orbits of the inner Planets.]


MERCURY

It is possible, perhaps probable, that there may be an inner Planet,
but, so far as we know for certain, Mercury is the one nearest to the
Sun, its average distance being 36,000,000 miles. It is much smaller
than the Earth, its weight being only about 1/24th of ours. Mercury is a
shy though beautiful object, for being so near the Sun it is not easily
visible; it may, however, generally be seen at some time or other during
the year as a morning or evening star.

[Illustration: Fig. 52.--Relative distances of the Planets from the
Sun.]


VENUS

The true morning or evening star, however, is Venus--the peerless and
capricious Venus.

Venus, perhaps, "has not been noticed, not been thought of, for many
months. It is a beautifully clear evening; the sun has just set. The
lover of nature turns to admire the sunset, as every lover of nature
will. In the golden glory of the west a beauteous gem is seen to
glisten; it is the evening star, the planet Venus. A week or two later
another beautiful sunset is seen, and now the planet is no longer a
glistening point low down; it has risen high above the horizon, and
continues a brilliant object long after the shades of night have
descended. Again a little longer and Venus has gained its full
brilliancy and splendour. All the heavenly host--even Sirius and
Jupiter--must pale before the splendid lustre of Venus, the unrivalled
queen of the firmament."[67]

Venus is about as large as our Earth, and when at her brightest
outshines about fifty times the most brilliant star. Yet, like all the
other planets, she glows only with the reflected light of the Sun, and
consequently passes through phases like those of the Moon, though we
cannot see them with the naked eye. To Venus also owe we mainly the
power of determining the distance, and consequently the magnitude, of
the Sun.


THE EARTH

Our own Earth has formed the subject of previous chapters. I will now,
therefore, only call attention to her movements, in which, of course,
though unconsciously, we participate. In the first place, the Earth
revolves on her axis in 24 hours. Her circumference at the tropics is
24,000 miles. Hence a person at the tropics is moving in this respect at
the rate of 1000 miles an hour, or over 16 miles a minute.

But more than this, astronomers have ascertained that the whole solar
system is engaged in a great voyage through space, moving towards a
point on the constellation of Hercules at the rate of at least 20,000
miles an hour, or over 300 miles a minute.[68]

But even more again, we revolve annually round the Sun in a mighty orbit
580,000,000 miles in circumference. In this respect we are moving at the
rate of no less than 60,000 miles an hour, or 1000 miles a minute--a
rate far exceeding of course, in fact by some 100 times, that of a
cannon ball.

How few of us know, how little we any of us realise, that we are rushing
through space with such enormous velocity.


MARS

To the naked eye Mars appears like a ruddy star of the first magnitude.
It has two satellites, which have been happily named Phobos and
Deimos--Fear and Dismay. It is little more than half as large as the
Earth, and, though generally far more distant, it sometimes approaches
us within 35,000,000 miles. This has enabled us to study its physical
structure. It seems very probable that there is water in Mars, and the
two poles are tipped with white, as if capped by ice and snow. It
presents also a series of remarkable parallel lines, the true nature of
which is not yet understood.


THE MINOR PLANETS

A glance at Figs. 51 and 52 will show that the distances of the Planets
from the Sun follow a certain rule.

If we take the numbers 0, 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96, each one (after the
second) the double of that preceding, and add four, we have the series.

    4 7 10 16 28 52 100

Now the distances of the Planets from the Sun are as follow:--

    Mercury.   Venus.   Earth.   Mars.   Jupiter.   Saturn.
      3.9       7.2       10     15.2      52.9      95.4

For this sequence, which was first noticed by Bode, and is known as
Bode's law, no explanation can yet be given. It was of course at once
observed that between Mars and Jupiter one place is vacant, and it has
now been ascertained that this is occupied by a zone of Minor Planets,
the first of which was discovered by Piazzi on January 1, 1801, a worthy
prelude to the succession of scientific discoveries which form the glory
of our century. At present over 300 are known, but certainly these are
merely the larger among an immense number, some of them doubtless mere
dust.


JUPITER

Beyond the Minor Planets we come to the stupendous Jupiter, containing
300 times the mass, and being 1200 times the size of our Earth--larger
indeed than all the other planets put together. It is probably not
solid, and from its great size still retains a large portion of the
original heat, if we may use such an expression. Jupiter usually shows a
number of belts, supposed to be due to clouds floating over the surface,
which have a tendency to arrange themselves in belts or bands, owing to
the rotation of the planet. Jupiter has four moons or satellites.


SATURN

[Illustration: Fig. 53.--Saturn.]

Next to Jupiter in size, as in position, comes Saturn, which, though far
inferior in dimensions, is much superior in beauty. To the naked eye
Saturn appears as a brilliant star, but when Galileo first saw it
through a telescope it appeared to him to be composed of three bodies in
a line, a central globe with a small one on each side. Huyghens in 1655
first showed that in reality Saturn was surrounded by a series of rings
(see Fig. 53). Of these there are three, the inner one very faint, and
the outer one divided into two by a dark line. These rings are really
enormous shoals of minute bodies revolving round the planet, and
rendering it perhaps the most marvellous and beautiful of all the
heavenly bodies.

While we have one Moon, Mars two, and Jupiter four, Saturn has no less
than eight satellites.


URANUS

Saturn was long supposed to be the outermost body belonging to the solar
system. In 1781, however, on the 13th March, William Herschel was
examining the stars in the constellation of the Twins. One struck him
because it presented a distinct disc, while the true fixed stars,
however brilliant, are, even with the most powerful telescope, mere
points of light. At first he thought it might be a comet, but careful
observations showed that it was really a new planet. Though thus
discovered by Herschel it had often been seen before, but its true
nature was unsuspected. It has a diameter of about 31,700 miles.

Four satellites of Uranus have been discovered, and they present the
remarkable peculiarity that while all the other planets and their
satellites revolve nearly in one plane, the satellites of Uranus are
nearly at right angles, indicating the presence of some local and
exceptional influence.


NEPTUNE

The study of Uranus soon showed that it followed a path which could not
be accounted for by the influence of the Sun and the other then known
planets. It was suspected, therefore, that this was due to some other
body not yet discovered. To calculate where such a body must be so as to
account for these irregularities was a most complex and difficult, and
might have seemed almost a hopeless, task. It was, however, solved
almost simultaneously and independently by Adams in this country, and Le
Verrier in France.

Neptune, so far as we yet know the out-most of our companions, is 35,000
miles in diameter, and its mean distance from the Sun is 2,780,000,000
miles.


ORIGIN OF THE PLANETARY SYSTEM

The theory of the origin of the Planetary System known as the "Nebular
Hypothesis," which was first suggested by Kant, and developed by
Herschel and Laplace, may be fairly said to have attained a high degree
of probability. The space now occupied by the solar system is supposed
to have been filled by a rotating spheroid of extreme tenuity and
enormous heat, due perhaps to the collision of two originally separate
bodies. The heat, however, having by degrees radiated into space, the
gas cooled and contracted towards a centre, destined to become the Sun.
Through the action of centrifugal force the gaseous matter also
flattened itself at the two poles, taking somewhat the form of a disc.
For a certain time the tendency to contract, and the centrifugal force,
counterbalanced one another, but at length a time came when the latter
prevailed and the outer zone detached itself from the rest of the
sphere. One after another similar rings were thrown off, and then
breaking up, formed the planets and their satellites.

That each planet and satellite did form originally a ring we still have
evidence in the wonderful and beautiful rings of Saturn, which, however,
in all probability will eventually form spherical satellites like the
rest. Thus then our Earth was originally a part of the Sun, to which
again it is destined one day to return. M. Plateau has shown
experimentally that by rotating a globe of oil in a mixture of water and
spirit having the same density this process may be actually repeated in
miniature.

This brilliant, and yet simple, hypothesis is consistent with, and
explains many other circumstances connected with the position,
magnitude, and movements of the Planets and their satellites.

The Planets, for instance, lie more or less in the same plane, they
revolve round the Sun and rotate on their own axis in the same
direction--a series of coincidences which cannot be accidental, and for
which the theory would account. Again the rate of cooling would of
course follow the size; a small body cools more rapidly than a large
one. The Moon is cold and rigid; the Earth is solid at the surface, but
intensely hot within; Jupiter and Saturn, which are immensely larger,
still retain much of their original heat, and have a much lower density
than the Earth; and astronomers tell us on other grounds that the Sun
itself is still contracting, and that to this the maintenance of its
temperature is due.

Although, therefore, the Nebular Theory cannot be said to have been
absolutely proved, it has certainly been brought to a high state of
probability, and is, in its main features, generally accepted by
astronomers.

The question has often been asked whether any of the heavenly bodies are
inhabited, and as yet it is impossible to give any certain answer. It
seems _à priori_ probable that the millions of suns which we see as
stars must have satellites, and that some at least of them may be
inhabited. So far as our own system is concerned the Sun is of course
too hot to serve as a dwelling-place for any beings with bodies such as
ours. The same may be said of Mercury, which is at times probably ten
times as hot as our tropics. The outer planets appear to be still in a
state of vapour. The Moon has no air or water.

Mars is in a condition which most nearly resembles ours. All, however,
that can be said is that, so far as we can see, the existence of living
beings on Mars is not impossible.


COMETS

The Sun, Moon, and Stars, glorious and wonderful as they are, though
regarded with great interest, and in some cases worshipped as deities,
excited the imagination of our ancestors less than might have been
expected, and even now attract comparatively little attention, from the
fact that they are always with us. Comets, on the other hand, both as
rare and occasional visitors, from their large size and rapid changes,
were regarded in ancient times with dread and with amazement.

Some Comets revolve round the Sun in ellipses, but many, if not the
majority, are visitors indeed, for having once passed round the Sun
they pass away again into space, never to return.

The appearance which is generally regarded as characteristic of a Comet
is that of a head with a central nucleus and a long tail. Many, however,
of the smaller ones possess no tail, and in fact Comets present almost
innumerable differences. Moreover the same Comet changes rapidly, so
that when they return, they are identified not in any way by their
appearance, but by the path they pursue.

Comets may almost be regarded as the ghosts of heavenly bodies. The
heads, in some cases, may consist of separate solid fragments, though on
this astronomers are by no means agreed, but the tails at any rate are
in fact of almost inconceivable tenuity. We know that a cloud a few
hundred feet thick is sufficient to hide, not only the stars, but even
the Sun himself. A Comet is thousands of miles in thickness, and yet
even extremely minute stars can be seen through it with no appreciable
diminution of brightness. This extreme tenuity of comets is moreover
shown by their small weight. Enormous as they are I remember Sir G. Airy
saying that there was probably more matter in a cricket ball than there
is in a comet. No one, however, now doubts that the weight must be
measured in tons; but it is so small, in relation to the size, as to be
practically inappreciable. If indeed they were comparable in mass even
to the planets, we should long ago have perished. The security of our
system is due to the fact that the planets revolve round the Sun in one
direction, almost in circles, and very nearly in the same plane. Comets,
however, enter our system in all directions, and at all angles; they are
so numerous that, as Kepler said, there are probably more Comets in the
sky than there are fishes in the sea, and but for their extreme tenuity
they would long ago have driven us into the Sun.

When they first come in sight Comets have generally no tail; it grows as
they approach the Sun, from which it always points away. It is no mere
optical illusion; but while the Comet as a whole is attracted by the
Sun, the tail, how or why we know not, is repelled. When once driven
off, moreover, the attraction of the Comet is not sufficient to recall
it, and hence perhaps so many Comets have now no tails.

Donati's Comet, the great Comet of 1858, was first noticed on the 2d
June as a faint nebulous spot. For three months it remained quite
inconspicuous, and even at the end of August was scarcely visible to the
naked eye. In September it grew rapidly, and by the middle of October
the tail extended no less than 40 degrees, after which it gradually
disappeared.

Faint as is the light emitted by Comets, it is yet their own, and
spectrum analysis has detected the presence in them of carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen, sodium, and probably of iron.

Comets then remain as wonderful, and almost as mysterious, as ever, but
we need no longer regard "a comet as a sign of impending calamity; we
may rather look upon it as an interesting and a beautiful visitor, which
comes to please us and to instruct us, but never to threaten or to
destroy."[69] We are free, therefore, to admire them in peace, and
beautiful, indeed, they are.

"The most wonderful sight I remember," says Hamerton, "as an effect of
calm, was the inversion of Donati's Comet, in the year 1858, during the
nights when it was sufficiently near the horizon to approach the rugged
outline of Graiganunie, and be reflected beneath it in Loch Awe. In the
sky was an enormous aigrette of diamond fire, in the water a second
aigrette, scarcely less splendid, with its brilliant point directed
upwards, and its broad, shadowy extremity ending indefinitely in the
deep. To be out on the lake alone, in a tiny boat, and let it rest
motionless on the glassy water, with that incomparable spectacle before
one, was an experience to be remembered through a lifetime. I have seen
many a glorious sight since that now distant year, but nothing to equal
it in the association of solemnity with splendour."[70]


SHOOTING STARS

On almost any bright night, if we watch a short time some star will
suddenly seem to drop from its place, and, after a short plunge, to
disappear. This appearance is, however, partly illusory. While true
stars are immense bodies at an enormous distance, Shooting Stars are
very small, perhaps not larger than a paving stone, and are not visible
until they come within the limits of our atmosphere, by the friction
with which they are set on fire and dissipated. They are much more
numerous on some nights than others. From the 9th to the 11th August we
pass through one cluster which is known as the Perseids; and on the 13th
and 14th November a still greater group called by astronomers the
Leonids. The Leonids revolve round the Sun in a period of 33 years, and
in an elliptic orbit, one focus of which is about at the same distance
from the Sun as we are, the other at about that of Uranus. The shoal of
stars is enormous; its diameter cannot be less than 100,000 miles, and
its length many hundreds of thousands. There are, indeed, stragglers
scattered over the whole orbit, with some of which we come in contact
every year, but we pass through the main body three times in a
century--last in 1866--capturing millions on each occasion. One of these
has been graphically described by Humboldt:

"From half after two in the morning the most extraordinary luminary
meteors were seen in the direction of the east. M. Bonpland, who had
risen to enjoy the freshness of the air, perceived them first. Thousands
of bodies and falling stars succeeded each other during the space of
four hours. Their direction was very regular from north to south. They
filled a space in the sky extending from due east 30° to north and
south. In an amplitude of 60° the meteors were seen to rise above the
horizon at east-north-east, and at east, to describe arcs more or less
extended, and to fall towards the south, after having followed the
direction of the meridian. Some of them attained a height of 40°, and
all exceeded 25° or 30°. No trace of clouds was to be seen. M. Bonpland
states that, from the first appearance of the phenomenon, there was not
in the firmament a space equal in extent to three diameters of the moon
which was not filled every instant with bolides and falling stars. The
first were fewer in number, but as they were of different sizes it was
impossible to fix the limit between these two classes of phenomena. All
these meteors left luminous traces from five to ten degrees in length,
as often happens in the equinoctial regions. The phosphorescence of
these traces, or luminous bands, lasted seven or eight seconds. Many of
the falling stars had a very distinct nucleus, as large as the disc of
Jupiter, from which darted sparks of vivid light. The bodies seemed to
burst as by explosion; but the largest, those from 1° to 1° 15' in
diameter, disappeared without scintillation, leaving behind them
phosphorescent bands (trabes), exceeding in breadth fifteen or twenty
minutes. The light of these meteors was white, and not reddish, which
must doubtless be attributed to the absence of vapour and the extreme
transparency of the air."[71]

The past history of the Leonids, which Le Verrier has traced out with
great probability, if not proved, is very interesting. They did not, he
considers, approach the Sun until 126 A.D., when, in their career
through the heavens, they chanced to come near to Uranus. But for the
influence of that planet they would have passed round the Sun, and then
departed again for ever. By his attraction, however, their course was
altered, and they will now continue to revolve round the Sun.

There is a remarkable connection between star showers and comets, which,
however, is not yet thoroughly understood. Several star showers follow
paths which are also those of comets, and the conclusion appears almost
irresistible that these comets are made up of Shooting Stars.

We are told, indeed, that 150,000,000 of meteors, including only those
visible with a moderate telescope, fall on the earth annually. At any
rate, there can be no doubt that every year millions of them are
captured by the earth, thus constituting an appreciable, and in the
course of ages a constantly increasing, part of the solid substance of
the globe.


THE STARS

We have been dealing in the earlier part of this chapter with figures
and distances so enormous that it is quite impossible for us to realise
them; and yet we have still others to consider compared with which even
the solar system is insignificant.

In the first place, the number of the Stars is enormous. When we look at
the sky at night they seem, indeed, almost innumerable; so that, like
the sands of the sea, the Stars of heaven have ever been used as
effective symbols of number. The total number visible to the naked eye
is, however, in reality only about 3000, while that shown by the
telescope is about 100,000,000. Photography, however, has revealed to us
the existence of others which no telescope can show. We cannot by
looking long at the heavens see more than at first; in fact, the first
glance is the keenest. In photography, on the contrary, no light which
falls on the plate, however faint, is lost; it is taken in and stored
up. In an hour the effect is 3600 times as great as in a second. By
exposing the photographic plate, therefore, for some hours, and even on
successive nights, the effect of the light is as it were accumulated,
and stars are rendered visible, the light of which is too feeble to be
shown by any telescope.

The distances and magnitudes of the Stars are as astonishing as their
numbers, Sirius, for instance, being about twenty times as heavy as the
Sun itself, 50 times as bright, and no less than 1,000,000 times as far
away; while, though like other stars it seems to us stationary, it is in
reality sweeping through the heavens at the rate of 1000 miles a minute;
Maia, Electra, and Alcyone, three of the Pleiades, are considered to be
respectively 400, 480, and 1000 times as brilliant as the Sun, Canopus
2500 times, and Arcturus, incredible as it may seem, even 8000 times, so
that, in fact, the Sun is by no means one of the largest Stars. Even the
minute Stars not separately visible to the naked eye, and the millions
which make up the Milky Way, are considered to be on an average fully
equal to the Sun in lustre.

Arcturus is, so far as we know at present, the swiftest, brightest, and
largest of all. Its speed is over 300 miles a second, it is said to be
8000 times as bright as the Sun, and 80 times as large, while its
distance is so great that its light takes 200 years in reaching us.

The distances of the heavenly bodies are ascertained by what is known as
"parallax." Suppose the ellipse (Fig. 54), marked Jan., Apr., July,
Oct., represents the course of the Earth round the Sun, and that A B are
two stars. If in January we look at the star A, we see it projected
against the front of the sky marked 1. Three months later it would
appear to be at 2, and thus as we move round our orbit the star itself
appears to move in the ellipse 1, 2, 3, 4. The more distant star B also
appears to move in a similar, but smaller, ellipse; the difference
arising from the greater distance. The size of the ellipse is inversely
proportional to the distance, and hence as we know the magnitude of the
earth's orbit we can calculate the distance of the star. The difficulty
is that the apparent ellipses are so minute that it is in very few cases
possible to measure them.

[Illustration: Fig. 54.--The Parallactic Ellipse.]

The distances of the Fixed Stars thus tested are found to be enormous,
and indeed generally incalculable; so great that in most cases, whether
we look at them from one end of our orbit or the other--though the
difference of our position, corresponding to the points marked January
and July in Fig. 54, is 185,000,000 miles--no apparent change of
position can be observed. In some, however, the parallax, though very
minute, is yet approximately measurable. The first star to which this
test was applied with success was that known as 61 Cygni, which is thus
shown to be no less than 40 billions of miles away from us--many
thousand times as far as we are from the Sun. The nearest of the Stars,
so far as we yet know, is [Greek: alpha] Centauri, the distance of which
is about 25 billions of miles.

The Pleiades are considered to be at a distance of nearly 1500 billions
of miles.

As regards the chemical composition of the Stars, it is, moreover,
obvious that the powerful engine of investigation afforded us by the
spectroscope is by no means confined to the substances which form part
of our system. The incandescent body can thus be examined, no matter how
great its distance, so long only as the light is strong enough. That
this method was theoretically applicable to the light of the Stars is
indeed obvious, but the practical difficulties are very great. Sirius,
the brightest of all, is, in round numbers, a hundred millions of
millions of miles from us; and, though as bright as fifty of our suns,
his light when it reaches us, after a journey of sixteen years, is at
most one two-thousand-millionth part as bright. Nevertheless, as long
ago as 1815 Fraunhofer recognised the fixed lines in the light of four
of the Stars; in 1863 Miller and Huggins in our own country, and
Rutherford in America, succeeded in determining the dark lines in the
spectrum of some of the brighter Stars, thus showing that these
beautiful and mysterious lights contain many of the material substances
with which we are familiar. In Aldebaran, for instance, we may infer the
presence of hydrogen, sodium, magnesium, iron, calcium, tellurium,
antimony, bismuth, and mercury. As might have been expected, the
composition of the Stars is not uniform, and it would appear that they
may be arranged in a few well-marked classes, indicating differences of
temperature, or perhaps of age.

Thus we can make the Stars teach us their own composition with light,
which started from its source years ago, in many cases long before we
were born.

Spectrum analysis has also thrown an unexpected light on the movements
of the Stars. Ordinary observation, of course, is powerless to inform
us whether they are moving towards or away from us. Spectrum analysis,
however, enables us to solve the problem, and we know that some are
approaching, some receding.

[Illustration: Fig. 55.--Displacement of the hydrogen line in the
spectrum of Rigel.]

If a star, say for instance Sirius, were motionless, or rather if it
retained a constant distance from the earth, Fraunhofer's lines would
occupy exactly the same position in the spectrum as they do in that of
the Sun. On the contrary, if Sirius were approaching, the lines would be
slightly shifted towards the blue, or if it were receding towards the
red. Fig. 55 shows the displacement of the hydrogen line in the spectrum
of Rigel, due to the fact that it is receding from us at the rate of 39
miles a second. The Sun affords us an excellent test of this theory. As
it revolves on its axis one edge is always approaching and the other
receding from us at a known rate, and observation shows that the lines
given by the light of the two edges differ accordingly. So again as
regards the Stars, we obtain a similar test derived from the Earth's
movement. As we revolve in our orbit we approach or recede any given
star, and our rate of motion being known we thus obtain a second test.
The results thus examined have stood their ground satisfactorily, and in
Huggins' opinion may be relied on within about an English mile a second.
The effect of this movement is, moreover, independent of the distance. A
lateral motion, say of 20 miles a second, which in a nearer object would
appear to be a stupendous velocity, becomes in the Stars quite
imperceptible. A motion of the same rapidity, on the other hand, towards
or away from us, displaces the dark lines equally, whatever the distance
of the object may be. We may then affirm that Sirius, for instance, is
receding from us at the rate of about 20 miles a second. Betelgeux,
Rigel, Castor, Regulus, and others are also moving away; while
some--Vega, Arcturus, and Pollux, for example--are approaching us. By
the same process it is shown that some groups of stars are only
apparently in relation to one another. Thus in Charles' Wain some of the
stars are approaching, others receding.

I have already mentioned that Sirius, though it seems, like other stars,
so stationary that we speak of them as "fixed," is really sweeping along
at the rate of 1000 miles a minute. Even this enormous velocity is
exceeded in other cases. One, which is numbered as 1830 in Groombridge's
_Catalogue of the Stars_, and is therefore known as "Groombridge's
1830," moves no less than 12,000 miles a minute, and Arcturus 22,000
miles a minute, or 32,000,000 of miles a day; and yet the distances of
the Stars are so great that 1000 years would make hardly any difference
in the appearance of the heavens.

Changes, however, there certainly would be. Even in the short time
during which we have any observations, some are already on record. One
of the most interesting is the fading of the 7th Pleiad, due, according
to Ovid, to grief at the taking of Troy. Again, the "fiery Dogstar," as
it used to be, is now, and has been for centuries, a clear white.

The star known as Nova Cygni--the "new star in the Constellation of the
Swan"--was first observed on the 24th November 1876 by Dr. Schmidt of
Athens, who had examined that part of the heavens only four days before,
and is sure that no such star was visible then. At its brightest it was
a brilliant star of the third magnitude, but this only lasted for a few
days; in a week it had ceased to be a conspicuous object, and in a
fortnight became invisible without a telescope. Its sudden splendour was
probably due to a collision between two bodies, and was probably little,
if at all, less than that of the Sun itself. It is still a mystery how
so great a conflagration can have diminished so rapidly.

But though we speak of some stars as specially variable, they are no
doubt all undergoing slow change. There was a time when they were not,
and one will come when they will cease to shine. Each, indeed, has a
life-history of its own. Some, doubtless, represent now what others
once were, and what many will some day become.

For, in addition to the luminous heavenly bodies, we cannot doubt that
there are countless others invisible to us, some from their greater
distance or smaller size, but others, doubtless, from their feebler
light; indeed, we know that there are many dark bodies which now emit no
light, or comparatively little. Thus in the case of Procyon the
existence of an invisible body is proved by the movement of the visible
star. Again, I may refer to the curious phenomena presented by Algol, a
bright star in the head of Medusa. The star shines without change for
two days and thirteen hours; then in three hours and a half dwindles
from a star of the second to one of the fourth magnitude; and then, in
another three and a half hours, reassumes its original brilliancy. These
changes led astronomers to infer the presence of an opaque body, which
intercepts at regular intervals a part of the light emitted by Algol;
and Vogel has now shown by the aid of the spectroscope that Algol does
in fact revolve round a dark, and therefore invisible, companion. The
spectroscope, in fact, makes known to us the presence of many stars
which no telescope could reveal.

Thus the floor of heaven is not only "thick inlaid with patines of
bright gold," but studded also with extinct stars, once probably as
brilliant as our own Sun, but now dead and cold, as Helmholtz tells us
that our Sun itself will be some seventeen millions of years hence.

Such dark bodies cannot of course be seen, and their existence, though
we cannot doubt it, is a matter of calculation. In one case, however,
the conclusion has received a most interesting confirmation. The
movements of Sirius led mathematicians to conclude that it had also a
mighty and massive neighbour, the relative position of which they
calculated, though no such body had ever been seen. In February 1862,
however, the Messrs. Alvan Clark of Cambridgeport were completing their
18-inch glass for the Chicago Observatory. "'Why, father,'" exclaimed
the younger Clark, "'the star has a companion.' The father looked, and
there was a faint star due east from the bright one, and distant about
ten seconds. This was exactly the predicted direction for that time,
though the discoverers knew nothing of it. As the news went round the
world many observers turned their attention to Sirius; and it was then
found that, though it had never before been noticed, the companion was
really shown under favourable circumstances by any powerful telescope.
It is, in fact, one-half of the size of Sirius, though only 1/10000th of
the brightness."[72]

Stars are, we know, of different magnitudes and different degrees of
glory. They are also of different colours. Most, indeed, are white, but
some reddish, some ruddy, some intensely red; others, but fewer, green,
blue, or violet. It is possible that the comparative rarity of these
colours is due to the fact that our atmosphere especially absorbs green
and blue, and it is remarkable that almost all of the green, blue, or
violet stars are one of the pairs of a Double Star, and in every case
the smaller one of the two, the larger being red, orange, or yellow. One
of the most exquisite of these is [Greek: beta] Cygni, a Double Star, the
larger one being golden yellow, the smaller light blue. With a telescope
the effect is very beautiful, but it must be magnificent if one could
only see it from a lesser distance.

Double Stars occur in considerable numbers. In some cases indeed the
relation may only be apparent, one being really far in front of the
other. In very many cases, however, the association is real, and they
revolve round one another. In some cases the period may extend to
thousands of years; for the distance which separates them is enormous,
and, even when with a powerful telescope it is indicated only by a
narrow dark line, amounts to hundreds of millions of miles. The Pole
Star itself is double. Andromeda is triple, with perhaps a fourth dark
and therefore invisible companion. These dark bodies have a special
interest, since it is impossible not to ask ourselves whether some at
any rate of them may not be inhabited. In [Greek: epsilon] Lyræ there
are two, each again being itself double. [Greek: xi] Cancri, and
probably also [Greek: theta] Orionis, consist of six stars, and from
such a group we pass on to Star Clusters in which the number is very
considerable. The cluster in Hercules consists of from 1000 to 4000. A
stellar swarm in the Southern Cross contains several hundred stars of
various colours, red, green, greenish blue, and blue closely thronged
together, so that they have been compared to a "superb piece of fancy
jewellery."[73]

The cluster in the Sword Handle of Perseus contains innumerable stars,
many doubtless as brilliant as our Sun. We ourselves probably form a
part of such a cluster. The Milky Way itself, as we know, entirely
surrounds us; it is evident, therefore, that the Sun, and of course we
ourselves, actually lie in it. It is, therefore, a Star Cluster, one of
countless numbers, and containing our Sun as a single unit.

It has as yet been found impossible to determine even approximately the
distance of these Star Clusters.


NEBULÆ

From Stars we pass insensibly to Nebulæ, which are so far away that
their distance is at present quite immeasurable. All that we can do is
to fix a minimum, and this is so great that it is useless to express it
in miles. Astronomers, therefore, take the velocity of light as a unit.
It travels at the rate of 180,000 miles a second, and even at this
enormous velocity it must have taken hundreds of years to reach us, so
that we see them not as they now are but as they were hundreds of years
ago.

It is no wonder, therefore, that in many of these clusters it is
impossible to distinguish the separate stars of which they are composed.
As, however, our telescopes are improved, more and more clusters are
being resolved. Photography also comes to our aid, and, as already
mentioned, by long exposure stars can be made visible which are quite
imperceptible to the eye, even with aid of the most powerful telescope.

Spectrum analysis also seems to show that such a nebula as that in
Andromeda, which with our most powerful instruments appears only as a
mere cloud, is really a vast cluster of stellar points.

This, however, by no means applies to all the nebulæ. The spectrum of a
star is a bright band of colour crossed by dark lines; that of a gaseous
nebula consists of bright lines. This test has been made use of, and
indicates that some of the nebulæ are really immense masses of
incandescent and very attenuated gas; very possibly, however, in a
condition of which we have no experience, and arranged in discs, bands,
rings, chains, wisps, knots, rays, curves, ovals, spirals, loops,
wreaths, fans, brushes, sprays, lace, waves, and clouds. Huggins has
shown that many of them are really stupendous masses of glowing gas,
especially of hydrogen, and perhaps of nitrogen, while the spectrum also
shows other lines which perhaps may indicate some of the elements which,
so far as our Earth is concerned, appear to be missing between hydrogen
and lithium. Many of the nebulæ are exquisitely beautiful, and their
colour very varied.

In some cases, moreover, nebulæ seem to be gradually condensing into
groups of stars, and in many cases it is difficult to say whether we
should consider a given group as a cluster of stars surrounded by
nebulous matter or a gaseous nebula condensed here and there into stars.

"Besides the single Sun," says Proctor, "the universe contains groups
and systems and streams of primary suns; there are galaxies of minor
orbs; there are clustering stellar aggregations showing every variety of
richness, of figure, and of distribution; there are all the various
forms of star cloudlets, resolvable and irresolvable, circular,
elliptical, and spiral; and lastly, there are irregular masses of
luminous gas clinging in fantastic convolutions around stars and star
systems. Nor is it unsafe to assert that other forms and varieties of
structure will yet be discovered, or that hundreds more exist which we
may never hope to recognise."

Nor is it only as regards the magnitude and distances of the heavenly
bodies that we are lost in amazement and admiration. The lapse of time
is a grander element in Astronomy even than in Geology, and dates back
long before Geology begins. We must figure to ourselves a time when the
solid matter which now composes our Earth was part of a continuous and
intensely heated gaseous body, which extended from the centre of the Sun
to beyond the orbit of Neptune, and had, therefore, a diameter of more
than 6,000,000,000 miles.

As this slowly contracted, Neptune was detached, first perhaps as a
ring, and then as a spherical body. Ages after this Uranus broke away.

Then after another incalculable period Saturn followed suit, and here
the tendencies to coherence and disruption were so evenly balanced that
to this day a portion circulates as rings round the main body instead of
being broken up into satellites. Again after successive intervals
Jupiter, Mars, the Asteroids, the Earth, Venus, and Mercury all passed
through the same marvellous phases. The time which these changes would
have required must have been incalculable, and they all of course
preceded, and preceded again by another incalculable period, the very
commencement of that geological history which itself indicates a lapse
of time greater than human imagination can realise.

Thus, then, however far we penetrate in time or in space, we find
ourselves surrounded by mystery. Just as in time we can form no idea of
a commencement, no anticipation of an end, so space also extends around
us, boundless in all directions. Our little Earth revolves round the
mighty Sun; the Sun itself and the whole solar system are moving with
inconceivable velocity towards a point in the constellation of Hercules;
together with all the nearer stars it forms a cluster in the heavens,
which appears to our eyes as the Milky Way; while outside our star
cluster again are innumerable others, which far transcend, alike in
magnitude, in grandeur, and in distance, the feeble powers of our finite
imagination.

FOOTNOTES:

[66] Ball, _Story of the Heavens_.

[67] Ball, _Story of the Heavens_.

[68] Some authorities estimate it even higher.

[69] Ball.

[70] Hamerton, _Landscape_.

[71] Humboldt, _Travels_.

[72] Clarke, _System of the Stars_.

[73] Kosmos.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Beauties of Nature, by Sir John Lubbock



