CHAPTER III
SCIENCE


INTRODUCTION: The scientific outlook—Progress of the sciences—The
positivist spirit, its action on science, philosophy and literature—The
problem as presented to philosophy.

I. Comte’s positivism—Work of prominent scientists—Position maintained
by Berthelot and Bernard—Renan’s confidence—Vacherot and
Taine—Insufficiency of sciences alone.

II. Cournot and Renouvier attack the dogmatism of science.

III. The neo-spiritualist group continue and develop this attack, which
becomes a marked feature in Lachelier, Boutroux, and Bergson.

Entire change of attitude in the development of the period.

The problem of freedom opened up in the process.




CHAPTER III
SCIENCE

Having thus surveyed the main currents of our period and indicated the
general attitude adopted to knowledge by the various thinkers, we
approach more closely to the problem of the relation of science and
philosophy. The nineteenth century was a period in which this problem
was keenly felt, and France was the country in which it was tensely
discussed by the most acute minds among the philosophers and among the
scientists. French thought and culture, true to the tradition of the
great geometrician and metaphysician Descartes, have produced men whose
training has been highly scientific as well as philosophical. Her
philosophers have been keenly versed in mathematics and physical
science, while her scientists have had considerable power as
philosophical thinkers.

One of the very prominent tendencies of thought in the first half of
the nineteenth century was the growing belief and confidence in the
natural sciences. In France this was in large measure due to the
progress of those sciences themselves and to the influences of Comte,
which was supported by the foreign influences of Kant’s teaching and
that of the English School, particularly John Stuart Mill. These three
great streams of thought, widely different in many respects, had this
in common—that they tended to confuse philosophy and science to such a
degree that it seemed doubtful whether the former could be granted any
existence by itself. Science, somewhat intoxicated by the praise and
worship bestowed upon her, became proud, arrogant and overbearing. She
scorned facts which could not be adapted to her own nature, she ignored
data which were not quantitative and materialistic, and she regarded
truth as a system of laws capable of expression by strict mathematical
methods and formulae*. Hence science became characterised by a firm
belief in absolute determinism, in laws of necessity operating after
the manner of mathematical laws. This “universal mathematic”
endeavoured also to explain the complex by reference to the simple.
Difficulties were encountered all along the line, for experience, it
was found, did not quite fit into rigid formulae*, “new” elements of
experience presented a unique character and distressing discrepancy.
Confidence in science, however, was not shaken by this, for the perfect
science, it was imagined, was assured in a short time. Patience might
be needed, but no doubt was entertained of the _possibility_ of such a
construction. Doubters were told to look at the rising sciences of
psychology and sociology, which, as Auguste Comte had himself
prophesied, were approaching gradually to the “type” venerated—namely,
an exact and mathematical character. Biology, it was urged, was merely
a special branch of physico-chemistry. As for beliefs in freedom, in
art, morality and religion, these, like philosophy (metaphysics)
itself, belonged to the earlier stages (the theological and
metaphysical) of Comte’s list, stages rapidly to be replaced by the
third and final “positive” era.

Such, briefly stated, were the affirmations so confidently put forward
on behalf of science by its devoted worshippers. Confidence in science
was a marked feature of the work written by Renan in the years
1848-1849, _L’Avenir de la Science_. Yet, paradoxical as it may seem,
Renan himself played a large part in undermining this confidence. Yet
the time of his writing this work is undoubtedly the period when the
confidence in science was most marked. By this it is not implied that
an even greater confidence in science has not been professed since by
many thinkers. That is probably true, but the important point is that
at this time the confidence in science was less resisted than ever in
its history. It seemed to have a clear field and positivism seemed to
be getting unto itself a mighty victory.

The cult of facts, which is so marked a characteristic of the
scientific or positivist temper, penetrated, it is interesting to note,
into the realm of literature, where it assumed the form of “realism.”
In his Intelligence we find Taine remarking, “_de tout petits fails
bien choisis, importants, significatifs, amplement circonstanciés et
minutieusement notés, voilà aujourd’hui la matière de toute
science_.”[1] It was also, in the opinion of several writers, the
_matière de toute littérature_. The passion for minute details shows
itself in the realism of Flaubert and Zola, in the psychology of
Stendthal* and the novels of the Goncourts. It was no accident that
their works were so loved by Taine. A similar spirit of “positivism” or
“realism” animated both them and him.

 [1] Preface to _Intelligence_.


With the turn of the half century, however, a change manifested itself
by the fact that the positivist current began to turn against itself,
and our period is, in some respects, what Fouillée has called _la
réaction centre la science positive_.[2] The function of philosophy is
essentially criticism, and although at that period the vitality of
philosophy was low, it nevertheless found enough energy to criticise
the demands and credentials of Science.

 [2] Compare also Aliotta’s book, _The Idealistic Reaction against
 Science_, Eng. trans., 19l4.


The publication of Claude Bernard’s volume _Introduction à la Médecine
experimentale_[3] drew from the pen of Paul Janet, the last of the
Eclectic School dominated by Cousin, an article of criticism which
appeared in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_, and was later published in his
volume of essays entitled, _Les Problèmes du XIXe Siècle_. Although
Janet’s essay reveals all the deficiencies of the older spiritualism,
he makes a gallant attempt to combat the dogmatism and the assumed
finality of Bernard’s point of view and that of the scientists in
general. Janet regarded the sciences and their relation to philosophy
as constituting an important problem for the century and in this
judgment he was not mistaken.

 [3] _Cf_. Livre III., _Science_, chap, i., on “Method in General”;
 chap, ii., on The Experimental Method in Physiology,” pp. 213-279.

I

We have, in our Introductory Chapter, reckoned Auguste Comte among the
influential antecedents of our period. Here, in approaching the study
of the problem of science, we may note that the tendency towards the
strictly scientific attitude, and to the promotion of the scientific
_spirit_ in general, was partly due to the influence of his positivism.
Comte’s intended Religion of Humanity failed, his system of positive
philosophy has been neglected, but the SPIRIT which he inculcated has
abided and has borne fruit. We would be wrong, however, if we
attributed much to Comte as the originator of that spirit. His positive
philosophy, although it greatly stimulated and strengthened the
positive attitude adopted by the natural sciences, was itself in large
measure inspired by and based upon these sciences. Consequently much of
Comte’s glory was a reflected light, his thought was a challenge to the
old spiritualism, an assertion of the rights of the sciences to
proclaim their existence and to demand serious consideration.

Although he succeeded in calling the attention of philosophy to the
natural sciences, yet owing to the mere fact that he based himself on
the sciences of his day much of his thought has become obsolete by the
progress and extension of those very sciences themselves. He tended,
with a curious dogmatism, to assign limits to the sciences by keeping
them in separate compartments and in general by desiring knowledge to
be limited to human needs. Although there is important truth in his
doctrine of discontinuity or irreducible differences, the subsequent
development of the natural sciences has cleared away many barriers
which he imagined to be impassable. There still are, and may always be,
gaps in our knowledge of the progress from inorganic to organic, from
the living creature to self-conscious personality, but we have a
greater conception of the unity of Nature than had Comte. Many new
ideas and discoveries have transformed science since his day,
particularly the doctrines dealing with heat as a form of motion, with
light, electricity, and the radio-activity of matter, the structure of
the atom, and the inter-relation of physics and chemistry.

Comte’s claim for different methods in the different departments of
science is of considerable interest, in view of present-day biological
problems and the controversies of vitalists, mechanists and
neo-vitalists.[4] Although Comte insisted upon discontinuity, yet he
urged the necessity for an _esprit d’ensemble_, the consideration of
things synthetically, in their “togetherness.” He feared that analysis,
the _esprit de détail_ or mathematisation, was being carried out _à
l’outrance_. This opinion he first stated in 1825 in his tract entitled
_Considérations sur les Sciences et les Savants_. On the social side he
brought this point out further by insisting on the _esprit d’ensemble_
as involving the social standpoint in opposition to a purely
individualistic view of human life.

 [4] See, for example, _The Mechanism of Life_, by Dr. Johnstone,
 Professor of Oceanography in the University of Liverpool. (Arnold,
 1921.)


Comte was slow to realise the importance of Ethics as an independent
study. Psychology he never recognised as a separate discipline, deeming
it part of physiology. He gave a curious appreciation to phrenology.
Unfortunately he overlooked the important work done by the
introspectionist psychologists in England and the important work of
Maine de Biran in his own country. One is struck by Comte’s inability
to appreciate the immense place occupied by psychology in modern life
and in particular its expression in the modern novel and in much modern
poetry. An acquaintance with the works of men like De Regnier, Pierre
Loti and Anatole France is sufficient to show how large a factor the
psychological method is in French literature and life. It is to be put
down to Comte’s eternal discredit that he failed to appreciate
psychology. Here lies the greatest defect in his work, and it is in
this connection that his work is now being supplemented. Positivism in
France to-day is not a synonym for “Comtism” at all; the term is now
employed to denote the spirit and temper displayed in the methods of
the exact sciences. For Comte, we must never forget, scientific
investigation was a means and not an end in itself. His main purpose
was social and political regeneration. Positivism since Comte differs
from his philosophy by a keen attention bestowed upon psychology, and
many of Comte’s inadequate conceptions have been enriched by the
introduction of a due recognition of psychological factors.

It is to be noted that Comte died two years before Darwin’s
_chef-d’œuvre_ appeared, and that he opposed the doctrine of evolution
as put forward by Lamarck. Although Comte’s principle of discontinuity
may in general have truth in it, the problem is a far more complicated
one than he imagined it to be. Again, while Comte’s opposition to the
subjectivism of Cousin was a wholesome influence, he did not accord to
psychology its full rights, and this alone has been gravely against the
acceptance of his philosophy, and explains partly the rise and progress
of the new spiritualist doctrines. His work served a useful purpose,
but Comte never closed definitely with the problem of the precise
significance of “positivism” or with its relation to a general
conception of the universe; in short, he confined himself to increasing
the scientific spirit in thought, leaving aside the difficulty of
relating science and philosophy.

Comte stated in his _Philosophie positive_[5] that he regarded attempts
to explain all phenomena by reference to one law as futile, even when
undertaken by the most competent minds well versed in the study of the
sciences. Although he believed in discontinuity he tried to bridge some
gaps, notably by his endeavour to refer certain physiological phenomena
to the law of gravitation.

 [5] Vol. i., pp. 53-56.


The chief work which this undoubtedly great mind accomplished was the
organisation of the scientific spirit as it appeared in his time. Renan
hardly does justice to him in his sarcastic remark in his _Souvenirs
d’Enfance et de Jeunesse_. “I felt quite irritated at the idea of
Auguste Comte being dignified with the title of a great man for having
expressed in bad French what all scientific minds had seen for the last
two hundred years as clearly as he had done.” His work merits more than
dismissal in such a tone, and we may here note, as the essence of the
spirit which he tried to express, his definition of the positive or
scientific attitude to the universe given at the commencement of his
celebrated Cours de _Philosophie positive_. There, in defining the
positive stage, Comte speaks of it as that period in which “the human
spirit, recognising the impossibility of obtaining absolute
conceptions, abandons the search for the origin and the goal of the
universe and the inner causes of things, to set itself the task merely
of discovering, by reasoning and by experience combined, the effective
laws of phenomena—that is to say, their invariable relations of
succession and of similarity.”[6] This positive spirit Comte strove to
express rather than to originate, for it was already there in the
sciences. Undoubtedly his work made it more prominent, more clear, and
so we have to note an interaction between positivism in the sciences
and in philosophy.

 [6] Leçon i.


It is equally important for our purpose to notice that the period was
one rich in scientific thought. The work of Lavoisier and Bichat, both
of whom as contemporaries of Maine de Biran, belong to the former
century, was now bearing fruit. Lavoisier’s influence had been great
over chemistry, which he established on a modern basis, by formulating
the important theory of the conservation of mass and by clearing away
false and fan- tastic conceptions regarding combustion.[7] Bichat, the
great anatomist and physiologist, died in 1802, but the publication of
his works in a completed form was not accomplished until 1854. The work
and influence of the _Académie des Sciences_ are noteworthy features of
French culture at this time. There stands out prominently the highly
important work of Cuvier in anatomy, zoology and palæontology.[8] The
nineteenth century was a period of great scientists and of great
scientific theories. Leverrier, applying himself to the problem of the
motions of Uranus, found a solution in the hypothesis of another
planet, Neptune, which was actually discovered from his calculations in
1846. This was a notable victory for logical and scientific method. In
1809 Lamarck had outlined, prior to Spencer or Darwin, the scheme of
the evolutionary theory (Transformism).[9] Spencer’s work, which
appeared from 1850 onwards, has always commanded respect and attention
in France even among its critics.[10] Interest increased upon the
publication of Darwin’s _Origin of Species_ in 1859, and its
translation into French in 1862. These dates coincide with the rise of
the _Société d’Anthropologie_ de Paris, founded by Broca in the same
year that Darwin’s book appeared. Another translation from Darwin’s
work followed in 1872, _Descendance de l’Homme_, which aroused further
interest in the evolutionary theory. At the same time the work of men
such as Pasteur, Bertrand, Berthelot and Bernard gave an impetus and a
power to science. Poincare belongs rather to the twentieth century.
Pasteur (1822-1895) showed mankind how science could cure its ills by
patient labour and careful investigation, and earned the world’s
gratitude for his noble work. His various _Discours_ and his volume,
_Le Budget de la Science_ (1868), show his faith in this progressive
power of science. In Bertrand (1822-1900), his contemporary who held
the position of Professor of Mathematics at the College de France, a
similar attitude appears.

 [7] Lavoisier perished at the guillotine in 1794, and his death was a
 tragic loss to science.


 [8] Cuvier’s _Anatomie comparée_ appeared in the years 1800-1805,
 following his _Histoire naturelle_ (1798-1799). Later came his
 _Rapport sur les Sciences naturelles_ (1810) and his work _Le Regne
 animal_ (1816).He died in 1832. We may note that Cuvier opposed the
 speculative evolutionary doctrines of Lamarck, with whom he indulged
 in controversy.


 [9] In his work, _Philosophie zoologique, ou Exposition des
 Considérations relatives a l’Histoire naturelle des Animaux_, 2 vols
 Paris, Dentu, 1809.


 [10] His _Social Statics_ was published in 1850, and his _Psychology_
 five years later. His life work, _The Synthetic Philosophy_, extends
 over the period 1860-1896.


One of the foremost scientific minds, however, was Claude Bernard
(1813-1878), a friend of Renan, who held the Chair of Medicine at the
College de France, and was, in addition, the Professor of Physiology at
the Faculté des Sciences at the Sorbonne. Science, Bernard maintained,
concerns itself only with phenomena and their laws. He endeavoured in
his celebrated _Introduction à l’Etude de la Médécine expérimentale_,
published in 1865, to establish the science of physiology upon a sound
basis, having respect only to fact, not owning homage to theories of a
metaphysical character or to the authority of persons or creeds. He
desired to obtain by such a rigorous and precise method, objectivity.
“The experimental method is,” he insists, “the really scientific
method, which proclaims the freedom of the human spirit and its
intelligence. It not only shakes off the yoke of metaphysics and of
theology, in addition it refuses to admit personal considerations and
subjective standpoints.”[11]

 [11] _Introduction à l’Etude de la Médécine expérimentale_, chap. ii,
 sect. 4.


Bernard’s attitude is distinctly that of a positivist, and the general
tone of his remarks as well as his attitude on many special points
agrees with that of Comte. His conclusions regarding physiology are
akin to those expressed by Comte concerning biology. Bernard excludes
any metaphysical hypothesis such as the operation of a vital principle,
and adheres strictly to physicochemical formulas. He accepts, however,
Comte’s warning about the reduction of the higher to terms of the
lower, or, in Spencerian phraseology, the explanation of the more
complex by the less complex. Consequently, he carefully avoids the
statement that he desires to “reduce” physiology to physics and
chemistry. He makes no facile and light-hearted transition as did
Spencer; on the contrary, he claims that the living has some specific
quality which cannot be “reduced” to other terms, and which cannot be
summed up in the formulae of physics or chemistry. The physiologist and
the medical practitioner must never overlook the fact that every living
being forms an organism and an individuality. The physiologist,
continues Bernard, must take notice of this unity or harmony of the
whole, even while he penetrates the interior to know the mechanism of
each of its parts. The physicist and the chemist can ignore any notion
of final causes in the facts they observe, but the physiologist must
admit a harmonious finality, a harmony pre-established in the organism,
whose actions form and express a unity and solidarity, since they
generate one another. Life itself is _creation_; it is not capable of
expression merely in physico-chemical formulae. The creative character,
which is its essence, never can be so expressed. Bernard postulated an
abstract, _idée directrice et créatrice_, presiding over the evolution
of an organism. “_Dans tout germe vivant, il y a une idée créatrice qui
se développe et se manifeste par l’organisation. Pendant toute sa durée
l’être vivant reste sous l’influence de cette même force vitale,
créatrice, et la mort arrive lorsqu’elle ne peut plus se réaliser. Ici
comme partout, tout dérive de l’idée, qui, seule, crée et dirige_.”[12]

 [12] _Introduction à l’Etude de la Médécine expérimentale_, p.151 ff.


The positivist spirit is again very marked in the doctrines of
Berthelot (1827-1907), another very great friend of Renan, who, in
addition to being a Senator, and Minister of Education and of Foreign
Affairs, held the Chair of Organic Chemistry at the Collège de France.
In 1886 he published his volume, Science et Philosophie, which contains
some interesting and illuminating observations upon _La Science idéale
et la Science positive_. Part of this, it may be noted, was written as
early as 1863, in correspondence with Renan, and as a reply to a letter
of his of which we shall speak presently.[13] Berthelot states his case
with a clearness which merits quotation.

 [13] See the _Fragments_ of Renan, published 1876, pp 193-241.
 _Reponse de M. Berthelot_.


“Positive science,” he says, “seeks neither first causes nor the
ultimate goal of things. In order to link together a multitude of
phenomena by one single law, general in character and conformable to
the nature of things, the human spirit has followed a simple and
invariable method. It has stated the facts in accordance with
observation and experience, compared them, extracted their relations,
that is the general facts, which have in turn been verified by
observation and experience, which verification constitutes their only
guarantee of truth. A progressive generalisation, deduced from prior
facts and verified unceasingly by new observations, thus brings our
knowledge from the plane of particular and popular facts to general
laws of an abstract and universal character. But, in the construction
of this pyramid of science, everything from base to summit rests upon
observation and experience. It is one of the principles of positive
science that no reality can be established by a process of reasoning.
The universe cannot be grasped by a _priori_ methods.”

Like Comte, Berthelot believed in the progress of all knowledge through
a theological and metaphysical stage to a definitely scientific or
positive era. The sciences are as yet young, and we cannot imagine the
development and improvement, social and moral, which will accrue from
their triumph in the future. For Berthelot, as for Renan, the idea of
progress was bound up essentially with the triumph of the scientific
spirit. In a Discourse at the Sorbonne given in commemoration of the
fiftieth anniversary of his being appointed Professor at the Collège de
France, we find this faith in science reiterated. “To-day,” he remarks,
“Science claims a triple direction of societies, materially,
intellectually and morally. By this fact the role of the men of
science, both as individuals and as a class, has unceasingly come to
play a great part in modern states.”

These scientific men, Berthelot and Bernard, with whom Renan was on
terms of friendship, had a large influence in the formation of his
thought, after he had quitted the seminary and the Church. As a young
man Renan possessed the positive spirit in a marked degree, and did not
fail to disclose his enthusiasm for “Science” and for the scientific
method. His book _L’Avenir de la Science_, which we have already noted,
was written when he was only twenty-five, and under the immediate
influence of the events of 1848, particularly the socialist spirit of
Saint-Simon and the “organising” attitude of Auguste Comte. It did not,
however, see publication until 1890, when the Empire had produced a
pessimistic temper in him, later accentuated by the Commune and the
Prussian War. The dominant note of the whole work is the touching and
almost pathetic belief in Science, which leads the young writer to an
optimism both in thought and in politics. “Science” constitutes for him
the all-in-all. Although he had just previously abandoned the seminary,
his priestly style remained with him to such a degree that even his
treatment of science is characterised by a mixture of the unction of
the _curé_ and the subtilty of the dialectician. Levites were still to
be necessary to the people of Israel, but they were to be the priests
of the most High, whose name, according to Renan, was “Science.”

His ardour for Science is not confined to this one book: it runs
through all his writings. Prospero, a character who personifies
rational thought in _L’Eau de Jouvence_, one of Renan’s _Drames
philosophiques_, expresses an ardent love for science continually. In
his preface to _Souvenirs d’Enfance et de Jeunesse_ we find Renan upon
the same theme. Quaintly enough he not only praises the objectivity
which is characteristic of the scientific point of view, but seems to
delight in its abstraction. The superiority of modern science consists,
he claims, in this very abstraction. But he is aware that the very
indefatigability with which we fathom nature removes us, in a sense,
further from her. He recognises how science leads away from the
immediacy of vital and close contact with nature herself. “This is,
however, as it should be,” asserts Renan, “and let no one fear to
prosecute his researches, for out of this merciless dissection comes
life.” He does not stay to assure us, or to enlighten us, as to how
that life can be infused into the abstract facts which have resulted
from the process of dissection. Fruitful and suggestive as many of his
pages are, they fail to approach the concrete difficulties which this
passage mentions.

Writing from Dinant in Brittany in 1863 to his friend, Berthelot, Renan
gives his view of the Sciences of Nature and the Historical Sciences.
This letter, reprinted in his _Dialogues et Fragments philosophiques_,
in 1876, expresses Renan’s.views in a clear and simple form upon the
place of science in his mind and also upon the idea of progress, as for
him the two are intimately connected. Extreme confidence is expressed
in the power of science. Renan at this time had written, but not
published, his _Avenir de la Science_. In a brief manner this letter
summarises much contained in the larger work. The point of view is
similar. Science is to be the great reforming power.

The word “Science” is so constantly upon Renan’s lips that we can see
that it has become an obsession with mm to employ it, or a device.
Certainly Renan’s extensive and ill-defined usage of it conceals grave
difficulties. One is tempted frequently to regard it as a synonym for
philosophy or metaphysics, a word which he dislikes. That does not,
however, add to clearness, and Renan’s usage of “Science” as a term
confuses both science and philosophy together. Even if this were not
the case, there is another important point to note— namely, that even
on a stricter interpretation Renan, by his wide use of the term,
actually undermines the confidence in the natural sciences. For he
embraces within the term “Science” not merely those branches of
investigation which we term in general the sciences of nature, but also
the critical study of language, of history and literature. He expressly
endeavours to show in the letter to Berthelot that true science must
include the product of man’s spirit and the record of the development
of that spirit.

Renan assumed quite definitely a positivist attitude to metaphysics.
“Philosophy,” he remarks, “is not a separate science; it is one side of
every science. In the great optic pencil of human knowledge it is the
central region where the rays meet in one and the same light.”
Metaphysical speculation he scorned, but he admitted the place for a
criticism of the human mind such as had been given by Kant in _The
Critique of Pure Reason_.

Kantian also, in its professions at least, was the philosophy of
Vacherot, who stated that the aim of his work, _La Métaphysique et la
Science_, was “the reconciliation of metaphysics with science.”[14]
These dialogues between a philosopher and a man of science, for of such
discussions the book is composed, never really help us to get close to
the problem, for Vacherot’s Kantianism is a profession which merely
covers an actual positivism. His metaphysical doctrines are
superimposed on a severe and rigid naturalism, but are kept from
conflict with them, or even relation with them, by being allotted to a
distant limbo of pure ideals, outside the world which science displays
to us.

 [14] See particularly his statements to this effect in his Preface,
 pp. xxxvii-xl.


Taine, in spite of his severely positive attitude, was a strong
champion of metaphysics. The sciences needed, he claimed, a science of
first principles, a metaphysic. Without it, “the man of science is
merely a _manœuvre_ and the artist a _dilettante_.” The positive
sciences he re- garded as inferior types of analysis. Above them “is a
superior analysis which is metaphysics, and which reduces or takes up
these laws of the sciences into a universal formula.” This higher
analysis, however, does not give the lie to the others: it completes
them.

It was indeed a belief and hope of Taine that the sciences will be more
and more perfected until they can each be expressed in a kind of
generic formula, which in turn may be capable of expression in some
single formula. This single law is being sought by science and
metaphysic, although it must belong to the latter rather than to the
former. From it, as from a spring, proceeds, according to Taine, the
eternal roll of events and the infinite sea of things.

Taine’s antagonism to the purely empirical schools centres round his
conception of the law of causality. He disagrees with the assertion
that this law is a synthetic, a _posteriori_ judgment, a habit, as Hume
said, or a mechanical _attente_, as Mill thought, or a generalisation
of the sensation of effort which we feel in ourselves, as was suggested
by Maine de Biran. Yet he also opposes Kant’s doctrine, in which
causality is regarded as a synthetic _a priori_ judgment. His own
criticism of Hume and Kant was directed to denial of the elements of
heterogeneity in experience, which are so essential to Hume’s view, and
to a denial of the distinction maintained by Kant between logical and
causal relations. Taine considered that all might be explained by
logical relations, that all experience might some day be expressed in
one law, one formula. The _more geometrico_ of Spinoza and the
“universal mathematic” of Descartes reappear in Taine. He even essays
in _L’Intelligence_ to equate the principle of causality (_principe de
raison explicative_) with that of identity.

His attempt to reduce the principle of causality to that of identity
did not succeed very well, and from the nature of the case this was to
be expected. As Fouillée well points out in his criticism of Taine,
both in _La Liberté et le Déterminisme_ and the concluding pages of his
earlier work on Plato,[15] the notion of difference and heterogeneity
which arises in the action of cause and effect can never be reducible
to a mere identity, for the notion of identity has nothing in common
with that of difference. Differences cannot be ignored; variety and
change are undeniable facts of experience. Fouillée here touches the
weak spot of Taine’s doctrine. In spite of a seemingly great power of
criticism there is an underlying dogmatism in his work, and the chief
of those dogmas, which he does not submit to criticism, is the
assertion of the universal necessity of all things. To this postulate
he gives a false air of objectivity. He avoids stating why we do
objectify causality, and he diverts discussion from the position that
this postulate may itself be subjective.

 [15] Vol. 4.


The particular bearing of Taine’s psychology upon the general problem
of knowledge is interesting. He defines perception in _L’Intelligence_
as _une hallucination vraie_. His doctrine of the “double aspect,”
physical and mental, recalls to mind the Modes of Spinoza. In his
attitude to the difficult problem of movement and thought he rests in
the dualism of Spinoza, fluctuating and not enunciating his doctrine
clearly. The primacy of movement to thought he abandoned as too
mechanical a doctrine, and regarded the type of existence as mental in
character. Taine thus passes from the materialism of Hobbes to the
idealism of Leibnitz. “The physical world is reducible to a system of
signs, and no more is needed for its construction and conception than
the materials of the moral world.”

When we feel ourselves constrained to admit the necessity of certain
truths, if we are inclined to regard this as due to the character of
our minds themselves (_notre structure mentale_), as Kant maintained,
Taine reminds us that we must admit that our mind adapts itself to its
environment. He here adopts the view of Spencer, a thinker who seems to
have had far more influence upon the Continent than in his own country.
Although Taine thus reposes his epistemology upon this basis, he does
not answer the question which the Kantian can still put to him—namely,
“How do we know the structure of things?” He is unable to escape from
the difficulty of admitting either that it is from experience, an
admission which his anti-empirical attitude forbids him to make (and
which would damage his dogma of universal logical necessity), or that
our knowledge is obtained by analysing our own thoughts, in which case
he leaves us in a vicious circle of pure subjectivity from which there
is no means of escape.

The truth is that Taine vainly tried to establish a phenomenal
doctrine, not purely empirical in character like that of Hume, but a
phenomenalism wedded to a necessity which is supposed to be
self-explanatory. Such a notion of necessity, however, is formal and
abstract. Rather than accept Taine’s view of a law, a formula, an
“eternal axiom” at the basis of things, we are obliged to postulate an
activity, creative in character, of whose action universal laws are but
expressions. Law, formula, axiom without action are mere abstractions
which can of themselves produce nothing.

Taine’s positivism, however, was not so rigid as to exclude a belief in
the value of metaphysics. It is this which distinguishes him from the
Comtian School. We see in him the confidence in science complemented by
an admission of metaphysics, equivalent to a turning of “positivism” in
science and philosophy against itself. Much heavier onslaughts upon the
sovereignty of science came, however, from the thinker who is the great
logician and metaphysician of our period, Renouvier. To him and to
Cournot we now turn.

II

While Taine had indeed maintained the necessity of a metaphysic, he
shared to a large degree the general confidence in science displayed by
Comte, Bernard, Berthelot and Renan. But the second and third groups of
thinkers into which we have divided our period took up first a critical
attitude to science and, finally, a rather hostile one.

Cournot marks the transition between Comte and Renouvier. His _Essai
sur les Fondements de nos Connaissances et sur les Caractères de la
Critique philosophique_ contains some very calm and careful thought on
the relation of science and philosophy, which is the product of a
sincere and well-balanced mind.[16] He inherits from the positivists an
intense respect for scientific knowledge, and remarks at the outset
that he is hostile to any philosophy which would be so foolish as to
attempt to ignore the work of the modern sciences.

 [16] See in particular the second chapter of vol. 2, _Du Contraste de
 la Science et de la Philosophie et de la Philosophie des Sciences_,
 pp. 216-255.


His work _Matérialisme, Vitalisme, Rationalisme_ is a striking example
of this effort on Cournot’s part, being devoted to a study of the use
which can be made in philosophy of the data afforded by the sciences.
Somewhat after the manner of Comte, Cournot looks upon the various
sciences as a hierarchy ranging from mathematics to sociology. Yet he
reminds the scientists of the insufficiency of their point of view, for
the sciences, rightly pursued, lead on to philosophy. He laments,
however, the confusion of the two, and thinks that such confusion is
“partly due to the fact that in the realm of speculations which are
naturally within the domain of the philosopher, there are to be found
here and there certain theories which can actually be reduced to a
scientific form”[17] He offers, as an instance of this, the theory of
the syllogism, which has affinities to algebraical equations—but this
interpenetration should not cause us, he argues, to abandon or to lose
sight of the distinction between science and philosophy.

 [17] _Essai sur les Fondements de nos Connaissances_, vol. 2, p. 224.


This distinction, according to Cournot, lies in the fact that science
has for its object that which can be measured, and that which can be
reduced to a rigorous chain or connection. In brief, science is
characterised by quantity. Philosophy, on the other hand, concerns
itself with quality, for it endeavours not so much to measure as to
appreciate.

Cournot reminds the apostles of science that quantity, however
intimately bound up with reality it may be, is not the essence of that
reality itself. He is afraid, too, that the neglect of philosophy by
science may cause the latter to develop along purely utilitarian lines.
As an investigation of reality, science is not ultimate. It has limits
by the fact that it is concerned with measurement, and thus is excluded
from those things which are qualitative and incapable of quantitative
expression. Science, moreover, has its roots in philosophy by virtue of
the metaphysical postulates which it utilises as its basis. Physics and
geometry, Cournot maintains, both rest upon definitions which owe their
origin to speculative thought rather than to experience, yet these
sciences claim an absolute value for themselves and for those
postulates as being descriptions of reality in an ultimate sense.

Following out his distinction between philosophy and the sciences,
Cournot claims in a Kantian manner that while the latter are products
of the human understanding the former is due to the operation of
reason. This apparent dualism Cournot does not shrink from maintaining;
indeed, he makes it an argument for his doctrine of discontinuity. The
development of a science involves a certain breach with reality, for
the progress of the science involves abstraction, which ever becomes
more complicated. Cournot here brings out the point which we noticed
was stressed by Renan.[18]

 [18] See above, p. 105.


Reason produces in us the idea of order, and this “idea of order and of
reason in things is the basis of philosophic probability, of induction
and analogy.”[19] This has important bearings upon the unity of science
and upon the conception of causality which it upholds. In a careful
examination of the problems of induction and analogy, Cournot
emphasises the truth that there are facts which cannot be fitted into a
measured or logical sequence of events. Reality cannot be fitted into a
formula or into concepts, for these fail to express the infinite
variety and richness of the reality which displays itself to us.
Science can never be adequate to life, with its pulsing spontaneity and
freedom. It is philosophy with its _vue d’ensemble_ which tries to
grasp and to express this concreteness, which the sciences, bound to
their systematic connection of events within separate compartments,
fail to reach or to show us. Referring to the ideas of beauty and of
goodness, Cournot urges a “transrationalism,” as he calls it, which,
while loyal to the rational requirements of science, will enable us to
take the wider outlook assumed by philosophy.[20]

 [19] _Essai sur les Fondements de nos Connaissances_, p. 384.


 [20] The parallelism of some of Cournot’s ideas here with those
 expressed by Bergson, although they have been enunciated by the later
 thinker in a more decided manner, is so obvious as hardly to need to
 be indicated.


Like Cournot, the author of the _Essais de Critique générale_ was a
keen antagonist of all those who sought to deify Science. It was indeed
this which led Renouvier to give this title to his great work, the
first part of which was published at a time when the confidence in
Science appeared to be comparatively unassailed. We find him defending
philosophy as against the scientists and others by an insistence upon
its critical function.

In examining Comte’s positivism in his work _Histoire et Solution des
Problèmes métaphysiques_, Renouvier points out that its initial idea is
a false one—namely, that philosophy can be constituted by an assembling
together of the sciences.[21] Such an assembly does not, he objects,
make a system. Each science has its own postulates, its own data, and
Science as a whole unity of thought or knowledge does not exist. He
attacks at the same time the calm presumption of the positivist who
maintains that the scientific stage is the final and highest
development. Renouvier is considerably annoyed at this unwarranted
dogmatism and assumed air of finality.

 [21] Book X.: _De l’Etat actuel de la Philosophie en France_, chap.
 1., _De l’Aboutissement des Esprits au Positivisme_, pp. 416-417.


Owing to the excellent training he had received at the Ecole
Polytechnique, and by his own profound study, Renouvier was able on
many technical points to meet the scientists on their own ground. His
third _Essai de Critique générale_ is devoted to a study of “the
Principles of Nature,” in which he criticises many of the principles
and assumptions of mechanism, while many pages of his two previous
_Essais_ are concerned with the discussion of questions intimately
affecting the sciences.[22]

 [22] This is particularly noticeable in the matter printed as
 appendices to his chapters. (_Cf_. the _Logic_, vol 2.)


An important section of his second Essay, _Psychologie rationnelle_,
deals with the “Classification of the Sciences.”[23] Renouvier there
points out that the attempt to classify the sciences in accordance with
their degrees of certainty ends in failure. All of them, when loyal to
their own principles, endeavour to display equal certainty. By loyalty
Renouvier shows that he means adherence to an examination of certain
classes of phenomena, the observation of facts and laws, with the
proposal of hypotheses, put forward frankly as such. He draws a line
between the logical and the physical sciences—a division which he
claims is not only a division according to the nature of their data,
but also according to method. Following another division, we may draw a
line between sciences which deal with objects which are organic, living
creatures, and those which are not.

 [23] Vol. 2, chap. xviii., _De la Certitude des Sciences et leur
 Classification rationnelle_, pp. 139-186, including later observations
 on Spencer.


Renouvier’s line is not, it must be remembered in this connection, a
purely imaginary one. It is a real line, an actual gap. For him there
is a real discontinuity in the universe. Taine’s doctrine of a
universal explanation, of a rigid unity and continuity, is, for
Renouvier, anathema, _c’est la mathématisation a l’outrance_. This
appears most markedly in the pages which he devotes to the
consideration of _la synthèse totale_.

An important section of his _Traité de Logique_ (the first _Essai de
Critique générale_) deals with the problem of this Total Synthesis of
all phenomena.[24] This is a conception which Renouvier affirms to be
unwarrantable and, indeed, in the last analysis impossible. A general
synthesis, an organisation or connected hierarchy of sciences, is a
fond hope, an illusion only of a mind which can overlook the real
discontinuity which exists between things and between groups of things.

 [24] Vol. I, pp. 107-115, and also vol. 2, pp. 202-245.


He sees in it the fetish of the Absolute and the Infinite and the lure
of pantheism, a doctrine to which he opposes his “Personalism.” He
reminds the scientists that personality is the great factor to which
all knowledge is related, and that all knowledge is relative. A law is
a law, but the guarantee of its permanence is not a law. It is no more
easy, claims Renouvier, to say why phenomena do not stop than it is to
know why they have begun. Laws indeed abide, but “not apart from
conscious personalities who affirm them.”[25] Further, attacking the
self-confident and dogmatic attitude in the scientists, Renouvier
reminds them that it is impossible to demonstrate _every_ proposition;
and in an important note on “Induction and the Sciences”[26] he points
out that induction always implies a certain _croyance_. This is no
peculiar, mystical thing; it is a fact, he remarks, which colours all
the interesting acts of human personality. He here approaches Cournot
in observing that all speculation is attended by a certain coefficient
of doubt or uncertainty and so becomes really rational belief. With
Cournot, too, Renouvier senses the importance of analogy and
probability in connection with hypotheses in the world of nature and of
morals. In short, he recognises as central the problem of freedom.

 [25] _Logique_, vol. 2, p. 321.


 [26] Note B to chap. xxxv. of the _Logique_, vol. 2, p. 13.


Renouvier attacks Comte’s classification or “hierarchy” of the sciences
as mischievous and inexact. It is not based, he claims, upon any
distinction in method, nor of data. It is not true that the sciences
are arranged by Comte in an order where they successively imply one
another, nor in an order in which they have come to be constituted as
“positive”.[27]

 [27] This outburst of attack is a sample of Renouvier’s usual attitude
 to Positivism. (_Deuxième Essai_, vol. 2, pp. 166-170.)


He justifies to the scientist the formulation of hypothesis as a
necessary working method of co-ordinating in a provisional manner
varying phenomena. Many hypotheses and inductions of science are,
however, unjustifiable from a strictly logical standpoint, Renouvier
reminds us. His chief objection, however, is that those hypotheses and
inductions are put forward so frequently as certainties by a science
which is dogmatic and surpasses its limits.

Science, Renouvier claims, does not give us a knowledge of the
absolute, but an understanding of the relative. It is in the light of
his doctrine of relativity and of the application of the law of number
that he criticises many of the attitudes adopted by the scientists.
Whatever savours of the Absolute or the Infinite he opposes, and his
view of cause depends on this. He scorns the fiction of an infinite
regress, and affirms real beginnings to various classes of phenomena.
Causality is not to be explained, he urges in his _Nouvelle
Monadologie_, save by a harmony. He differs from Leibnitz, however, in
claiming in the interests of freedom that this harmony is not
pre-established. In meeting the doctrine of the reduction of the
complex to the simple, Renouvier cites the case of “reducing” sound,
heat, light and electricity to movement. This may be superficially
correct as a generality, but Renouvier aptly points out that it
overlooks the fact that, although they may all be abstractly
characterised as movement, yet there are differences between them as
movements which correspond to the differences of sensation they arouse
in us.

Renouvier upholds real differences, real beginnings, and, it must be
added, a reality behind and beyond the appearances of nature. His
_Monadologie_ admits that “we can continue to explain nature
mathematically and mechanically, provided we recognise that it is an
external appearance—that thought, mind or spirit is at the heart of
it.” This links Renouvier to the group of new spiritualists. His
attitude to science is akin to theirs. He does not fear science when it
confines itself to its proper limits and recognises these. It has no
quarrel with philosophy nor philosophy with it. Advance in science
involves, he believes, an advance also in theology and in metaphysics.

The sciences are responsible for working out the laws determining the
development of the Universe. But between Science, an ideal unachieved,
and the sciences which in themselves are so feeble, imperfect and
limited, Renouvier claims that General Criticism, or Philosophy, has
its place. “In spite of the discredit into which philosophy has fallen
in these days, it can and ought to exist. Its object has been always
the investigation of God, man, liberty, immortality, the fundamental
laws of the sciences. ‘All these intimately connected and
interpenetrating problems comprise the domain of philosophy.” In those
cases where no science is possible, this seeming impossibility must
itself be investigated, and philosophy remains as a “General Criticism”
(_Critique générale_) of our knowledge. “It is this notion,” he says,
“which I desired to indicate by banishing the word ‘Philosophy’ from
the title of my Essays. The name ought to change when the method
changes.”[28] Thus Renouvier seeks to establish a “critique” midway
between scepticism and dogmatism, and endeavours to found a philosophy
which recognises at one and the same time the demands of _science et
conscience_.

 [28] _Logique_, vol. 2, p. 352.

III

On turning to the spiritualist current of thought we find it, like the
neo-criticism, no less keen in its criticism of science. The inadequacy
of the purely scientific attitude is the recurring theme from Ravaisson
to Boutroux, Bergson and Le Roy. The attitude assumed by Ravaisson
coloured the whole of the subsequent development of the new
spiritualist doctrines, and not least their bearing upon the problem of
science and its relation to metaphysics.

Mechanism, Ravaisson pointed out, quoting the classical author upon
whom he had himself written so brilliantly (Aristotle), does not
explain itself, for it implies a “prime mover,” not itself in motion,
but which produces movement by spiritual activity. Ravaisson also
refers to the testimony of Leibnitz, who, while agreeing that all is
mechanical, carefully added to this statement one to the effect that
mechanism itself has a principle which must be looked for outside
matter and which is the object of metaphysical research. This spiritual
reality is found only, according to Ravaisson, in the power of goodness
and beauty—that is to say, in a reality which is not non-scientific but
rather ultra-scientific. There are realities, he claims, to which
science does not attain.

The explanation of nature presupposes soul or spirit. It is true,
Ravaisson admits, that the physical and chemical sciences consider
themselves independent of metaphysics; true also that the metaphysician
in ignoring the study of those sciences omits much from his estimate of
the spirit. Indeed, he cannot well dispense with the results of the
sciences. That admission, however, does not do away with the
possibility of a true “apologia” for metaphysics. To Newton’s sarcastic
remark, “Physics beware of metaphysics,” Hegel replied cogently that
this was equivalent to saying, “Physics, keep away from thought.”
Spirit, however, cannot be omitted from the account; it is the
condition of all that is, the light by which we see that there is such
a thing as a material universe. This is the central point of
Ravaisson’s philosophy. The sciences of nature may be allowed and
encouraged to work diligently upon their own principles, but the very
fact that they are individual sciences compels them to admit that they
view the whole “piecemeal”. Philosophy seeks to interpret the whole as
a whole. Ravaisson quotes Pascal’s saying, “_Il faut avoir une pensée
de derrière la tête et juger de tout par là_.” This _pensée de derrière
la tête_, says Ravaisson, while not preventing the various sciences
from speaking in their own tongue, is just the metaphysical or
philosophical idea of the whole.

It is claimed, Aristotle used to say, that mathematics have absolutely
nothing in common with the idea of the good. “But order, proportion,
symmetry, are not these great forms of beauty?” asks Ravaisson. For him
there is spirit at the heart of things, an activity, _un feu primitif
qui est l’âme_, which expresses itself in thought, in will and in love.
It is a fire which does not burn itself out, because it is enduring
spirit, an eternal cause, the absolute substance is this spiritual
reality. Where the sciences fall short is that they fail to show that
nature is but the refraction of this spirit. This is a fact, however,
which both religion and philosophy grasp and uphold.

These criticisms were disturbing for those minds who found entire
satisfaction in Science or rather in the sciences, but they were
somewhat general. Ravaisson’s work inculcated a spirit rather than
sustained a dialectic. Its chief value lay in the inspiration which it
imparted to subsequent thinkers who endeavoured to work out his general
ideas with greater precision.

It was this task which Lachelier set himself in his _Induction_. He had
keenly felt the menace of science, as had Janet;[29] he had appreciated
the challenge offered to it by Ravaisson’s ideas. Moreover, Lachelier’s
acute mind discovered the crucial points upon which the new
spiritualism could base its attack upon the purely scientific
dogmatism. Whatever Leibnitz might have said, creative spontaneity of
the spirit, as it was acclaimed by Ravaisson, could not easily be
fitted into the mechanism and determinism upheld by the sciences.
Ravaisson had admitted the action of efficient causes in so far as he
admitted the action of mechanism, which is but the outcome of these
causes. In this way he endeavoured to satisfy the essential demands of
the scientific attitude to the universe. But recognising the inadequacy
of this attitude he had upheld the reality of final causes and thus
opposed to the scientists a metaphysical doctrine akin to the religious
attitude of Hellenism and Christianity.

 [29] We refer here to the quotation from Janet’s _Problèmes du XIXe
 Siècle_, given above on p. 95. Janet himself wrote on _Final Causes_
 but not Wlth the depth or penetration of Lachelier.


Lachelier saw that the important point of Ravaisson’s doctrine lay in
the problem of these two types of causality. His thesis is therefore
devoted to the examination of efficient and final causes. This little
work of Lachelier marks a highly important advance in the development
of the spiritualist philosophy. He clarifies and re-affirms more
precisely the position indicated by Ravaisson. Lacheher tears up the
treaty of compromise which was drafted by Leibnitz to meet the rival
demands of science with its efficient causes and philosophy with its
final causes. The world of free creative spontaneity of the spirit
cannot be regarded, Lachelier claims (and this is his vital point), as
merely the complement of, or the reflex from, the world of mechanism
and determinism.

He works out in his thesis the doctrine that efficient causes can be
deduced from the formal laws of thought. This was Taine’s position, and
it was the limit of Taine’s doctrine. Lachelier goes further and
undermines Taine’s theories by upholding final causes, which he shows
depend upon the conception of a totality, a whole which is capable of
creating its parts. This view of the whole is a philosophical
conception to which the natural sciences never rise, and which they
cannot, by the very nature of their data and their methods, comprehend.
Yet it is only such a conception which can supply any rational basis
for the unity of phenomena and of experience. Only by seeing the
variety of all phenomena in the light of such an organic unity can we
find any meaning in the term universe, and only thus, continues
Lachelier, only on the principle of a rational and universal order and
on the reality of final causes, can we base our inductions. The
“uniformity of nature,” that fetish of the scientists which, as
Lachelier well points out, is merely the empirical regularity of
phenomena, offers no adequate basis for a single induction.

Lachelier developed his doctrines further in the article, _Psychologie
et Métaphysique_. We can observe in it the marks which so profoundly
distinguish the new spiritualism from the old, as once taught by
Cousin. The old spiritualism had no place between its psychology and
its metaphysics for the natural sciences. Indeed it was quite incapable
of dealing with the problem which their existence and success
presented, and so it chose to ignore them as far as possible. The new
spiritualism, of which Lachelier is perhaps the profoundest speculative
mind, not only is acquainted with the place and results of the
sciences, but it feels itself equal to a criticism of them, an advance
which marks a highly important development in philosophy.

In this article Lachelier endeavours to pass beyond the standpoint of
Cousin, and in so doing we see not only the influence of Ravaisson’s
ideas of the creative activity of the spirit, but also of the
discipline of the Kantian criticism, with which Lachelier, unlike many
of his contemporaries in France at that time, was well acquainted.

He first shows that the study of psychology reveals to us the human
powers of sensation, feeling and will. These are the immediate data of
consciousness. Another element, however, enters into consciousness, not
as these three, a definite content, but as a colouring of the whole.
This other element is “objectivity,” an awareness or belief that the
world without exists and continues to exist independently of our
observation of it. Lachelier combats, however, the Kantian conception
of the “thing-in-itself.” If, he argues, the world around us appears as
a reality which is independent of our perception, it is _not_ because
it is a “thing-in-itself,” but rather it appears as independent because
we, possessing conscious intelligence, succeed in making it an object
of our thought, and thus save it from the mere subjectivity which
characterises our sense-experience. It is upon this fact, Lachelier
rightly insists, that all our science reposes. A theory of knowledge as
proposed by Taine, based solely on sensation and professing belief in
_hallucination vraie_, is itself a contradiction and an abuse of
language. “If thought is an illusion,” remarks Lachelier, “we must
suppress all the sciences.”[30]

 [30] _Psychologie et Métaphisique_, p.151.(See especially the passages
 on pp.150-158.)


He then proceeds to show that if we admit thought to be the basis of
our knowledge of the world, that is, of our sciences, then we admit
that our sciences are themselves connstructions, based upon a
synthetic, constructive, creative activity of our mind or spirit. For
our thought is not merely another “thing” added to the world of things
outside us. Our thought is not a given and predetermined datum, it is
“a living dialectic,” a creative activity, a self-creative process,
which is synthetic, and not merely analytic in character. “Thought,” he
says, “can rest upon itself, while everything else can only rest upon
it; the ultimate _point d’appui_ of all truth and of all existence is
to be found in the absolute spontaneity of the spirit.”[31] Here,
Lachelier maintains, lies the real _a priori_; here, too, is the very
important passage from psychology to metaphysics.

 [31] _Psychologie et Métaphysique_, p. 158.


Finally his treatment of the problems of knowledge and of the
foundations of science leads him to reemphasise not only the reality of
spirit but its spontaneity. He recognises with Cournot and Renouvier
that the vital problem for science and philosophy is that of freedom.
The nature of existence is for Lachelier a manifestation of spirit, and
is seen in will, in necessity and in freedom. It is important to note
that for him it is _all_ these simultaneously. “Being,” he remarks in
concluding his brilliant essay,[32] “is not first, a blind necessity,
then a will which must be for ever bound down in advance to necessity
and, lastly, a freedom which would merely be able to recognise such
necessity and such a bound will; being is entirely free, in so far as
it is self-creative; it is entirely an expression of will, in so far as
it creates itself in the form of something concrete and real; it is
also entirely an expression of necessity, in so far as its
self-creation is intelligible and gives an account of itself.”

 [32] _Ibid_., p. 170.


At this stage something in the nature of a temporary “set-back” is
given to the flow of the spiritualist current by Fouillee’s attitude,
which takes a different line from that of Ravaisson and Lachelier. The
attitude towards Science, which we find adopted by Fouillee, is
determined by his two general principles, that of reconcilation, and
his own doctrine of _idées-forces_. His conciliatory spirit is well
seen in the fact that, although he has a great respect for science and
inherits many of the qualities contained in Taine’s philosophy,
particularly the effort to maintain a regular continuity and solidarity
in the development of reality, nevertheless he is imbued with the
spirit of idealism which characterises all this group of thinkers. The
result is a mixture of Platonism and naturalism, and to this he himself
confesses in his work, _Le Mouvement idéaliste et la Réaction contre la
Science positive_, where he expresses a desire “to bring back Plato’s
ideas from heaven to earth, and so to make idealism consonant with
naturalism.”[33]

 [33] _Le Mouvement idéaliste el la Réaction contre la Science
 positive_, p. xxi.


Fouillée claims to take up a position midway between the materialists
and the idealists. Neither standpoint is, in his view, adequate to
describe reality. He is particularly opposed to the materialistic and
mechanistic thought of the English Evolutionary School, as presented by
Spencer and Huxley, with its pretensions to be scientific. Fouillee
accepts, with them, the notion of evolution, but he disagrees entirely
with Spencer’s attempt to refer everything to mechanism, the mechanism
of matter in motion. In any case, Fouillée claims, movement is a very
slender and one-sided element of experience upon which to base our
characterisation of all reality, for the idea of motion arises only
from our visual and tactual experience. He revolts from the
epiphenomenalism of Huxley as from a dire heresy. Consciousness cannot
be regarded as a mere “flash in the pan.” Even science must admit that
all phenomena are to be defined by their relation to, and action upon,
other phenomena. Consciousness, so regarded, will be seen, he claims,
as a unique power, possessing the property of acting upon matter and of
initiating movement. It is itself a factor, and a very vital one, in
the evolutionary process. It is no mere reflex or passive
representation. On this point of the irreducibility of the mental life
and the validity of its action, Fouillée parts company with Taine. On
the other hand, he disagrees with the idealistic school of thought,
which upholds a pure intellectualism and for whom thought is the
accepted characterisation of reality. This, complains Fouillée, is as
much an abstraction and a one-sided view as that of Spencer.

In this manner Fouillée endeavours to “rectify the scientific
conception of evolution” by his doctrine of _idées-forces_. “There is,”
he says,[34] “in every idea a commencement of action, and even of
movement, which tends to persist and to increase like an _élan_. . . .
Every idea is already a force.” Psychologically it is seen in the
active, conative or appetitive aspect of consciousness. To think of a
thing involves already, in some measure, a tendency toward it, to
desire it. Physiologically considered, _idées-forces_ are found to
operate, not mechanically, but by a vital solidarity which is much more
than mere mechanism, and which unites the inner consciousness to the
outer physical fact of movement. From a general philosophical point of
view the doctrine of _idées-forces_ establishes the irreducibility of
the mental, and the fact that, so far from the mental being a kind of
phosphorescence produced as a result of the evolutionary process, it is
a prime factor in that evolution, of which mechanism is only a symbol.
Here Fouillée rises almost to the spiritualism of Ravaisson. Mechanism,
he declares, is, after all, but a manner of representing to ourselves
things in space and time. Scientists speak of forces, but the real
forces are ideas, and other so-called “forces” are merely analogies
which we have constructed, based upon the inner mental feeling of
effort, tendency, desire and will.[35]

 [34] _La Liberté et le Déterminisme_, p. 97, 4e ed.


 [35] This was a point upon which Maine de Biran had insisted. (See p.
 20.)


The scientists have too often, as Fouillée well points in his work on
_L’Evolutionnisme des Idées-forces_, regarded the concept of Evolution
as all-sufficing, as self-explanatory. Philosophy, however, cannot
accept such dogmatism from science, and asserts that evolution is
itself a result and not in itself a cause. With such a view Fouillée is
found ultimately in the line of the general development of the
spiritual philosophy continuing the hostility to science as ultimate or
all-sufficing. Further developments of this attitude are seen in
Boutroux and in Bergson.

In the work of Boutroux we find a continuation of that type of
criticism of science which was a feature in Ravaisson and Lachelier. He
has also affinities with Renouvier (and, we may add, with Comte),
because of his insistence upon the discontinuity of the sciences; upon
the element of “newness” found in each which prevents the higher being
deduced from the lower, or the superior explained by reference to the
inferior. Boutroux opposes Spencer’s doctrines and is a keen antagonist
of Taine and his claim to deduce all from one formula. Such a notion as
that of Taine is quite absurd, according to Boutroux, for there is no
necessary bond between one and another science. This is Boutroux’s main
point in _La Contingence des Lois de la Nature_.

By a survey of laws of various types, logical, mathematical,
mechanical, physical, chemical, biological, psychological and
sociological, Boutroux endeavours to show that they are constructions
built up from facts. Just as nature offers to the scientist facts for
data, so the sciences themselves offer these natural laws as data to
the philosopher, for his constructed explanation of things which is
metaphysics or philosophy.

“In the actual condition of our knowledge,” he remarks, “science is not
one, but multiple; science, conceived as embracing all the sciences, is
a mere abstraction.” This is a remark which recalls Renouvier’s witty
saying, “I should very much like to meet this person I hear so much
about, called ‘science.’” We have only sciences, each working after its
own manner upon a small portion of reality. Man has a thirst for
knowledge, and he sees, says Boutroux, in the world an “ensemble” of
facts of infinite variety. These facts man endeavours to observe,
analyse, and describe with increasing exactness. Science, he points
out, is just this description.

It is futile to attempt a resolution of all things into the principle
of identity. “The world is full of a number of things,” and, therefore,
argues Boutroux, the formula A = B can never be strictly and absolutely
true. “Nature never offers to us identities, but only resemblances.”
This has important bearing upon the law of causality, of which the
sciences make so much. For there is such a degree of heterogeneity in
the things to which the most elementary and general laws of physics and
chemistry are applied that it is impossible to say that the consequent
is proportional to the antecedent—that is to say, it is impossible to
work out absolutely the statement that an effect is the unique result
of a certain invariable cause. The fundamental link escapes us and so,
for us, there is a certain contingency in experience. There is,
further, a creativeness, a newness, which is unforeseeable. The passage
from the inorganic to the organic stresses this, for the observation of
the former would never lead us to the other, for it is a creation, a
veritable “new” thing. Boutroux is here dealing hard blows at Taine’s
conception. He continues it by showing that in the conscious living
being we are introduced to a new element which is again absolutely
irreducible to physical factors. Life, and consciousness too, are both
creators. The life of the mind is absolutely _sui generis_; it cannot
be explained by physiology, by reflex action, or looked upon as merely
an epiphenomenon. Already Boutroux finds himself facing the central
problem of Freedom. He recognises that as psychological phenomena
appear to contain qualities not given in their immediate antecedents,
the law of proportion of cause to effect does not apply to the actions
of the human mind.

The principle of causality and the principle of the conservation of
energy are m themselves scientific “shibboleths,” and neither of them,
asserts Boutroux, can be worked out so absolutely as to justify
themselves as ultimate descriptions of the universe. They are valuable
as practical maxims for the scientist, whose object is to follow the
threads of action in this varied world of ours. They are incomplete,
and have merely a relative value. Philosophy cannot permit their
application to the totality of this living, pulsing universe. For
cause, we must remember, does not in its strictly scientific meaning
imply creative power. The cause of a phenomenon is itself a phenomenon.
“The positive sciences in vain pretend to seize the divine essence or
reason behind things.”[36] They arrive at descriptive formulæ and there
they leave us. But, as Boutroux well reminds us in concluding his
thesis, formulas never explain anything because they cannot even
explain themselves. They are simply constructions made by observation
and abstraction and which themselves require explanation.

 [36] _Contingence des Lois de la Nature_, p 154.


The laws of nature are not restrictions which have been, as it were,
imposed upon her They are themselves products of freedom; they are, in
her, what habits are to the individual. Their constancy is like the
stability of a river-bed which the freely running stream at some early
time hollowed out.

The world is an assembly of beings, and its vitality and nature cannot
be expressed in a formula. It comprises a hierarchy of creatures,
rising from inorganic to organic forms, from matter to spirit, and in
man it displays an observing intelligence, rising above mere
sensibility and expressly modifying things by free will. In this
conception Boutroux follows Ravaisson, and he is also influenced by
that thinker’s belief in a spiritual Power of goodness and beauty. He
thus leads us to the sphere of religion and philosophy, both of which
endeavour, in their own manner, to complete the inadequacy of the
purely scientific standpoint. He thus stands linked up in the total
development with Cournot and Renouvier, and in his own group with
Lachelier, in regard to this question of the relation of philosophy and
the sciences.

The critique of science, which is so prominent in Boutroux, was
characteristic of a number of thinkers whom we cannot do more than
mention here in passing, for in general their work is not in line with
the spiritualist development, but is a sub-current running out and
separated from the main stream. This is shown prominently in the fact
that, while Boutroux’s critique is in the interests of idealism and the
maintenance of some spiritual values, much subsequent criticism of
science is a mere empiricism and, being divorced from the general
principles of the spiritualist philosophy, tends merely to accentuate a
vein of uncertainty—indeed, scepticism of knowledge. Such is the
general standpoint taken by Milhaud, Payot, and Duhem. Rather apart
from these stands the works of acute minds like Poincaré, Durand de
Gros, and Hannequin, whose discussion of the atomic doctrines is a work
of considerable merit. To these may be added Lalande’s criticism of the
doctrine of evolution and integration by his opposing to it that of
dissolution and disintegration. Passing references to these books must
not, however, detain us from following the main development which, from
Boutroux, is carried on by Bergson.

We find that Bergson, like Boutroux, holds no brief for science, and in
particular he opposes some of its doctrines which have been
dogmatically and uncritically accepted. His work, _Matiére et Mémoire_,
is a direct critique of the scientific postulate of psycho-physical
parallelism which Bergson regards as the crux of the problem at issue
between science and philosophy—namely, that of freedom. He shows that
this theory, which has been adopted by science because of its
convenience, ought not to be accepted by philosophy without criticism.
In his opinion it cannot stand the criticism which he brings against
it. A relation between soul and body is undeniable, but he does not
agree that that relation is one of absolute parallelism. To maintain
parallelism is to settle at once and beforehand, in an unwarrantably _a
priori_ manner, the whole problem of freedom. His intense spiritualism
sees also in such a doctrine the deadly enemy Epiphenomenalism, the
belief that the spiritual is only a product of the physical. He
maintains the unique and irreducible nature of consciousness, and
claims that the life of the soul or spirit is richer and wider than the
mere physical activity of the brain, which is really its instrument.
Bergson asks us to imagine the revolution which might have been, had
our early scientists devoted themselves to the study of mind rather
than matter, and claims that we suffer from the dogmatism of
materialistic science and the geometrical and mathematical conceptions
of “a universal science” or “mathematic” which come from the
seventeenth century, and are seen later in Taine.

The inadequacy of the scientific standpoint is a theme upon which
Bergson never tires of insisting. Not only does he regard a metaphysic
as necessary to complete this inadequacy, but he claims that our
intellect is incapable of grasping reality in its flux and change. The
true instrument of metaphysics is, according to him, intuition.
Bergson’s doctrine of intuition does not, however, amount to a pure
hostility to intellectual constructions. These are valuable, but they
are not adequate to reality. Metaphysics cannot dispense with the
natural sciences. These sciences work with concepts, abstractions, and
so suffer by being intellectual moulds. We must not mistake them for
the living, pulsing, throbbing reality of life itself which is far
wider than any intellectual construction.

By his insistence upon this point, in which he joins hands with several
of his predecessors, Bergson claims to have got over the Kantian
difficulties of admitting the value and possibility of a metaphysic.
There is nothing irrational, he insists, in his doctrine of
metaphysical intuition or “intellectual sympathy”; it is rather
super-rational, akin to the spirit of the poet and the artist. The
various sciences can supply data and, as such, are to be respected, for
they have a relative value. What Bergson is eager to do is to combat
their absolute value. His metaphysic is, however, no mere “philosophy
of the sciences” in the sense of being a mere summary of the results of
the sciences. His intuition is more than a mere generalisation of
facts; it is an “integral experience,” a penetration of reality in its
flux and change, a looking upon the world _sub specie durationis_. It
is a vision, but it is one which we cannot obtain without intellectual
or scientific labour. We can become better acquainted with reality only
by the progressive development of science _and_ philosophy. We cannot
live on the dry bread of the sciences alone, an intuitional philosophy
is necessary for our spiritual welfare. Science promises us well-being
or pleasure, but philosophy, claims Bergson, can give us joy, by its
intuitions, its super-intellectual vision, that vital contact with life
itself in its fulness, which is far grander and truer than all the
abstractions of science. This is the culmination of much already
indicated in Cournot, Renouvier, Ravaisson, Lachelier, and Boutroux,
which Bergson presents in a manner quite unique, thus closing in our
period the development of that criticism and hostility to the finality
and absoluteness of the purely scientific attitude which is so marked a
feature of both our second and third groups, the neo-critical thinkers
and the neo-spiritualists.

*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *


Beginning with a glowing confidence in the sciences as ultimate
interpretations of reality, we thus have witnessed a complete turn of
the tide during the develop-* since 1851. Also, in following out the
changes in the attitude adopted to Science, we have been enabled to
discover in a general manner that the central and vital problem which
our period presents is that of Freedom. It will be interesting to find
whether in regard to this problem, too, a similar change of front will
be noticeable as the period is followed to its close.

NOTE.—The reader may be interested to find that Einstein has brought
out some of Boutroux’s points very emphatically, and has confirmed the
view of geometry held by Poincaré. Compare the following statements:
    Boutroux: “Mathematics cannot be applied with exactness to
    reality.” “Mathematics and experience can never be exactly fitted
    into each other.”
    Poincaré: “Formulæ are not true, they are convenient.”
    Einstein: “If we deny the relation between the body of axiomatic
    Euclidean geometry or the practically rigid body of reality, we
    readily arrive at the view entertained by that acute and profound
    thinker, H. Poincaré . . . _Sub specie æterni_, Poincaré, in my
    opinion, is right” (_Sidelights on Relativity_, pp. 33-35).




