CHAPTER IV.

EMBODIED SPIRITS.


I was having a sitting one day in my own house with a lady friend, named
Miss Clark, when a female spirit came to the table and spelt out the
name "Tiny."

"Who are you?" I asked, "and for whom do you come?"

"I am a friend of Major M----" (mentioning the full name), "and I want
your help."

"Are you any relation to Major M----?"

"I am the mother of his child."

"What do you wish me to do for you?"

"Tell him he must go down to Portsmouth and look after my daughter. He
has not seen her for years. The old woman is dead, and the man is a
drunkard. She is falling into evil courses. He must save her from them."

"What is your real name?"

"I will not give it. There is no need. He always called me 'Tiny.'"

"How old is your daughter."

"Nineteen! Her name is Emily! I want her to be married. Tell him to
promise her a wedding trousseau. It may induce her to marry."

The influence divulged a great deal more on the subject which I cannot
write down here. It was an account of one of those cruel acts of
seduction by which a young girl had been led into trouble in order to
gratify a man's selfish lust, and astonished both Miss Clark and myself,
who had never heard of such a person as "Tiny" before. It was too
delicate a matter for me to broach to Major M---- (who was a married
man, and an intimate friend of mine), but the spirit came so many times
and implored me so earnestly to save her daughter, that at last I
ventured to repeat the communication to him. He was rather taken aback,
but confessed it was true, and that the child, being left to his care,
had been given over to the charge of some common people at Portsmouth,
and he had not enquired after it for some time past. Neither had he ever
heard of the death of the mother, who had subsequently married, and had
a family. He instituted inquiries, however, at once, and found the
statement to be quite true, and that the girl Emily, being left with no
better protection than that of the drunken old man, had actually gone
astray, and not long after she was had up at the police court for
stabbing a soldier in a public-house--a fit ending for the unfortunate
offspring of a man's selfish passions. But the strangest part of the
story to the uninitiated will lie in the fact that the woman whose
spirit thus manifested itself to two utter strangers, who knew neither
her history nor her name, was at the time _alive_, and living with her
husband and family, as Major M---- took pains to ascertain.

And now I have something to say on the subject of communicating with the
spirits of persons still in the flesh. This will doubtless appear the
most incomprehensible and fanatical assertion of all, that we wear our
earthly garb so loosely, that the spirits of people still living in this
world can leave the body and manifest themselves either visibly or
orally to others in their normal condition. And yet it is a fact that
spirits have so visited myself (as in the case I have just recorded),
and given me information of which I had not the slightest previous idea.
The matter has been explained to me after this fashion--that it is not
really the spirit of the living person who communicates, but the spirit,
or "control," that is nearest to him: in effect what the Church calls
his "guardian angel," and that this guardian angel, who knows his inmost
thoughts and desires better even than he knows them himself, is equally
capable of speaking in his name. This idea of the matter may shift the
marvel from one pair of shoulders to another, but it does not do away
with it. If I can receive information of events before they occur (as I
will prove that I have), I present a nut for the consideration of the
public jaw, which even the scientists will find difficult to crack. It
was at one time my annual custom to take my children to the sea-side,
and one summer, being anxious to ascertain how far the table could be
made to act without the aid of "unconscious cerebration," I arranged
with my friends, Mr. Helmore and Mrs. Colnaghi, who had been in the
habit of sitting with us at home, that _we_ should continue to sit at
the sea-side on Tuesday evenings as theretofore, and _they_ should sit
in London on the Thursdays, when I would try to send them messages
through "Charlie," the spirit I have already mentioned as being
constantly with us.

The first Tuesday my message was, "Ask them how they are getting on
without us," which was faithfully delivered at their table on the
following Thursday. The return message from them which "Charlie" spelled
out for us on the second Tuesday, was: "Tell her London is a desert
without her," to which I emphatically, if not elegantly, answered,
"Fiddle-de-dee!" A few days afterwards I received a letter from Mr.
Helmore, in which he said, "I am afraid 'Charlie' is already tired of
playing at postman, for to all our questions about you last Thursday, he
would only rap out, 'Fiddle-de-dee.'"

The circumstance to which this little episode is but an introduction
happened a few days later. Mr. Colnaghi and Mr. Helmore, sitting
together as usual on Thursday evening, were discussing the possibility
of summoning the spirits of _living persons_ to the table, when
"Charlie" rapped three times to intimate they could.

"Will you fetch some one for us, Charlie?"

"Yes."

"Whom will you bring?"

"Mrs. Ross-Church."

"How long will it take you to do so?"

"Fifteen minutes."

It was in the middle of the night when I must have been fast asleep, and
the two young men told me afterwards that they waited the results of
their experiment with much trepidation, wondering (I suppose) if I
should be conveyed bodily into their presence and box their ears well
for their impertinence. Exactly fifteen minutes afterwards, however, the
table was violently shaken and the words were spelt out. "I am Mrs.
Ross-Church. How _dared_ you send for me?" They were very penitent (or
they said they were), but they described my manner as most arbitrary,
and said I went on repeating, "Let me go back! Let me go back! There is
a great danger hanging over my children! I must go back to my children!"
(And here I would remark _par parenthese_, and in contradiction of the
guardian angel theory, that I have always found that whilst the spirits
of the departed come and go as they feel inclined, the spirits of the
living invariably _beg_ to be sent back again or permitted to go, as if
they were chained by the will of the medium.) On this occasion I was so
positive that I made a great impression on my two friends, and the next
day Mr. Helmore sent me a cautiously worded letter to find out if all
was well with us at Charmouth, but without disclosing the reason for his
curiosity.

The _facts_ are, that on the morning of _Friday_, the day _after_ the
_seance_ in London, my seven children and two nurses were all sitting in
a small lodging-house room, when my brother-in-law, Dr. Henry Norris,
came in from ball practice with the volunteers, and whilst exhibiting
his rifle to my son, accidentally discharged it in the midst of them,
the ball passing through the wall within two inches of my eldest
daughter's head. When I wrote the account of this to Mr. Helmore, he
told me of my visit to London and the words I had spelt out on the
occasion. But how did I know of the occurrence the _night before_ it
took place? And if I--being asleep and unconscious--did _not_ know of
it, "Charlie" must have done so.

My aerial visits to my friends, however, whilst my body was in quite
another place, have been made still more palpable than this. Once, when
living in the Regent's Park, I passed a very terrible and painful night.
Grief and fear kept me awake most of the time, and the morning found me
exhausted with the emotion I had gone through. About eleven o'clock
there walked in, to my surprise, Mrs. Fitzgerald (better known as a
medium under her maiden name of Bessie Williams), who lived in the
Goldhawk Road, Shepherd's Bush. "I couldn't help coming to you," she
commenced, "for I shall not be easy until I know how you are after the
terrible scene you have passed through." I stared at her. "Whom have you
seen?" I asked. "Who has told you of it?" "Yourself," she replied. "I
was waked up this morning between two and three o'clock by the sound of
sobbing and crying in the front garden. I got out of bed and opened the
window, and then I saw you standing on the grass plat in your
night-dress and crying bitterly. I asked you what was the matter, and
you told me so and so, and so and so." And here followed a detailed
account of all that had happened in my own house on the other side of
London, with the _very words_ that had been used, and every action that
had happened. I had seen no one and spoken to no one between the
occurrence and the time Mrs. Fitzgerald called upon me. If her story was
untrue, _who_ had so minutely informed her of a circumstance which it
was to the interest of all concerned to keep to themselves?

When I first joined Mr. d'Oyley Carte's "Patience" Company in the
provinces, to play the part of "Lady Jane," I understood I was to have
four days' rehearsal. However, the lady whom I succeeded, hearing I had
arrived, took herself off, and the manager requested I would appear the
same night of my arrival. This was rather an ordeal to an artist who had
never sung on the operatic stage before, and who was not note perfect.
However, as a matter of obligation, I consented to do my best, but I was
very nervous. At the end of the second act, during the balloting scene,
Lady Jane has to appear suddenly on the stage, with the word "Away!" I
forget at this distance of time whether I made a mistake in pitching the
note a third higher or lower. I know it was not out of harmony, but it
was sufficiently wrong to send the chorus astray, and bring my heart up
into my mouth. It never occurred after the first night, but I never
stood at the wings again waiting for that particular entrance but I
"girded my loins together," as it were, with a kind of dread lest I
should repeat the error. After a while I perceived a good deal of
whispering about me in the company, and I asked poor Federici (who
played the colonel) the reason of it, particularly as he had previously
asked me to stand as far from him as I could upon the stage, as I
magnetized him so strongly that he couldn't sing if I was near him.
"Well! do you know," he said to me in answer, "that a very strange thing
occurs occasionally with reference to you, Miss Marryat. While you are
standing on the stage sometimes, you appear seated in the stalls.
Several people have seen it beside myself. I assure you it is true."

"But _when_ do you see me?" I enquired with amazement.

"It's always at the same time," he answered, "just before you run on at
the end of the second act. Of course it's only an appearance, but it's
very queer." I told him then of the strange feelings of distrust of
myself I experienced each night at that very moment, when my spirit
seems to have preceded myself upon the stage.

I had a friend many years ago in India, who (like many other friends)
had permitted time and separation to come between us, and alienate us
from each other. I had not seen him nor heard from him for eleven years,
and to all appearance our friendship was at an end. One evening the
medium I have alluded to above, Mrs. Fitzgerald, who was a personal
friend of mine, was at my house, and after dinner she put her feet up on
the sofa--a very unusual thing for her--and closed her eyes. She and I
were quite alone in the drawing-room, and after a little while I
whispered softly, "Bessie, are you asleep?" The answer came from her
control "Dewdrop," a wonderfully sharp Red Indian girl. "No! she's in a
trance. There's somebody coming to speak to you! I don't want him to
come. He'll make the medium ill. But it's no use. I see him creeping
round the corner now."

"But why should it make her ill?" I argued, believing we were about to
hold an ordinary _seance_.

"Because he's a _live_ one, he hasn't passed over yet," replied Dewdrop,
"and live ones always make my medium feel sick. But it's no use. I can't
keep him out. He may as well come. But don't let him stay long."

"Who is he, Dewdrop?" I demanded curiously.

"_I_ don't know! Guess _you_ will! He's an old friend of yours, and his
name is George." Whereupon Bessie Fitzgerald laid back on the sofa
cushions, and Dewdrop ceased to speak. It was some time before there was
any result. The medium tossed and turned, and wiped the perspiration
from her forehead, and pushed back her hair, and beat up the cushions
and threw herself back upon them with a sigh, and went through all the
pantomime of a man trying to court sleep in a hot climate. Presently she
opened her eyes and glanced languidly around her. Her unmistakable
actions and the name "George" (which was that of my friend, then
resident in India) had naturally aroused my suspicions as to the
identity of the influence, and when Bessie opened her eyes, I asked
softly, "George, is that you?" At the sound of my voice the medium
started violently and sprung into a sitting posture, and then, looking
all round the room in a scared manner, she exclaimed, "Where am I? Who
brought me here?" Then catching sight of me, she continued, "Mrs.
Ross-Church!--Florence! Is this _your_ room? O! let me go! _Do_ let me
go!"

This was not complimentary, to say the least of it, from a friend whom I
had not met for eleven years, but now that I had got him I had no
intention of letting him go, until I was convinced of his identity. But
the terror of the spirit at finding himself in a strange place seemed so
real and uncontrollable that I had the greatest difficulty in persuading
him to stay, even for a few minutes. He kept on reiterating, "Who
brought me here? I did not wish to come. Do let me go back. I am so very
cold" (shivering convulsively), "so very, _very_ cold."

"Answer me a few questions," I said, "and then you shall go. Do you know
who I am?"

"Yes, yes, you are Florence."

"And what is your name?" He gave it at full length. "And do you care for
me still?"

"Very much. But let me go."

"In a minute. Why do you never write to me?"

"There are reasons. I am not a free agent. It is better as it is."

"I don't think so. I miss your letters very much. Shall I ever hear from
you again?"

"Yes!"

"And see you?"

"Yes; but not yet. Let me go now. I don't wish to stay. You are making
me very unhappy."

If I could describe the fearful manner in which, during this
conversation, he glanced every moment at the door, like a man who is
afraid of being discovered in a guilty action, it would carry with it to
my readers, as it did to me, the most convincing proof that the medium's
body was animated by a totally different influence from her own. I kept
the spirit under control until I had fully convinced myself that he knew
everything about our former friendship and his own present surroundings;
and then I let him fly back to India, and wondered if he would wake up
the next morning and imagine he had been laboring under nightmare.

These experiences with the spirits of the living are certainly amongst
the most curious I have obtained. On more than one occasion, when I
have been unable to extract the truth of a matter from my acquaintances
I have sat down alone, as soon as I believed them to be asleep, and
summoned their spirits to the table and compelled them to speak out.
Little have they imagined sometimes how I came to know things which they
had scrupulously tried to hide from me. I have heard that the power to
summons the spirits of the living is not given to all media, but I have
always possessed it. I can do so when they are awake as well as when
they are asleep, though it is not so easy. A gentleman once _dared_ me
to do this with him, and I only conceal his name because I made him look
ridiculous. I waited till I knew he was engaged at a dinner-party, and
then about nine o'clock in the evening I sat down and summoned him to
come to me. It was some little time before he obeyed, and when he did
come, he was eminently sulky. I got a piece of paper and pencil, and
from his dictation I wrote down the number and names of the guests at
the dinner-table, also the dishes of which he had partaken, and then in
pity for his earnest entreaties I let him go again. "You are making me
ridiculous," he said, "everyone is laughing at me."

"But why? What are you doing?" I urged.

"I am standing by the mantel-piece, and I have fallen fast asleep," he
answered. The next morning he came pell-mell into my presence.

"What did you do to me last night?" he demanded. "I was at the Watts
Philips, and after dinner I went fast asleep with my head upon my hand,
standing by the mantel-piece, and they were all trying to wake me and
couldn't. Have you been playing any of your tricks upon me?"

"I only made you do what you declared I couldn't," I replied. "How did
you like the white soup and the turbot, and the sweetbreads, etc., etc."

He opened his eyes at my nefariously obtained knowledge, and still more
when I produced the paper written from his dictation. This is not a
usual custom of mine--it would not be interesting enough to pursue as a
custom--but I am a dangerous person to _dare_ to do anything.

The old friend whose spirit visited me through Mrs. Fitzgerald had lost
a sister to whom he was very tenderly attached before he made my
acquaintance, and I knew little of her beyond her name. One evening,
not many months after the interview with him which I have recorded, a
spirit came to me, giving the name of my friend's sister, with this
message, "My brother has returned to England, and would like to know
your address. Write to him to the Club, Leamington, and tell him where
to find you." I replied, "Your brother has not written to me, nor
inquired after me for the last eleven years. He has lost all interest in
me, and I cannot be the first to write to him, unless I am sure that he
wishes it."

"He has _not_ lost all interest in you," said the spirit; "he thinks of
you constantly, and I hear him pray for you. He wishes to hear from
you."

"That may be true," I replied, "but I cannot accept it on your
authority. If your brother really wishes to renew our acquaintance, let
him write and tell me so."

"He does not know your address, and I cannot get near enough to him to
influence him."

"Then things must remain as they are," I replied somewhat testily. "I am
a public person. He can find out my address, if he chooses to do so."

The spirit seemed to reflect for a moment; then she rapped out, "Wait,
and I will fetch my brother. He shall come here himself and tell you
what he thinks about it." In a short time there was a different movement
of the table, and the name of my old friend was given. After we had
exchanged a few words, and I had told him I required a test of his
identity, he asked me to get a pencil and paper, and write from his
dictation. I did as he requested, and he dictated the following
sentence, "Long time, indeed, has passed since the days you call to
mind, but time, however long, does not efface the past. It has never
made me cease to think of and pray for you as I felt you, too, did think
of and pray for me. Write to the address my sister gave you. I want to
hear from you."

Notwithstanding the perspicuity and apparent genuineness of this
message, it was some time before I could make up my mind to follow the
directions it gave me. My pride stood in the way to prevent it. _Ten
days afterwards_, however, having received several more visits from the
sister, I did as she desired me, and sent a note to her brother to the
Leamington Club. The answer came by return of post, and contained
(amongst others) _the identical words_ he had told me to write down.
Will Mr. Stuart Cumberland, or any other clever man, explain to me
_what_ or _who_ it was that had visited me ten days beforehand, and
dictated words which could hardly have been in my correspondent's brain
before he received my letter? I am ready to accept any reasonable
explanation of the matter from the scientists, philosophers, chemists,
or arguists of the world, and I am open to conviction, when my sense
convinces me, that their reasoning is true. But my present belief is,
that not a single man or woman will be found able to account on any
ordinary grounds for such an extraordinary instance of "unconscious
cerebration."

Being subject to "optical illusions," I naturally had several with
regard to my spirit child, "Florence," and she always came to me clothed
in a white dress. One night, however, when I was living alone in the
Regent's Park, I saw "Florence" (as I imagined) standing in the centre
of the room, dressed in a green riding habit slashed with orange color,
with a cavalier hat of grey felt on her head, ornamented with a long
green feather and a gold buckle. She stood with her back to me, but I
could see her profile as she looked over her shoulder, with the skirt of
her habit in her hand. This being a most extraordinary attire in which
to see "Florence," I felt curious on the subject, and the next day I
questioned her about it.

"Florence!" I said, "why did you come to me last night in a green riding
habit?"

"I did not come to you last night, mother! It was my sister Eva."

"Good heavens!" I exclaimed, "is anything wrong with her?"

"No! she is quite well."

"How could she come to me then?"

"She did not come in reality, but her thoughts were much with you, and
so you saw her spirit clairvoyantly."

My daughter Eva, who was on the stage, was at that time fulfilling a
stock engagement in Glasgow, and very much employed. I had not heard
from her for a fortnight, which was a most unusual occurrence, and I had
begun to feel uneasy. This vision made me more so, and I wrote at once
to ask her if all was as it should be. Her answer was to this effect: "I
am so sorry I have had no time to write to you this week, but I have
been so awfully busy. We play 'The Colleen Bawn' here next week, and I
have had to get my dress ready for 'Anne Chute.' It's so effective. I
wish you could see it. _A green habit slashed with orange, and a grey
felt hat with a long green feather and a big gold buckle._ I tried it on
the other night, and it looked so nice, etc., etc."

Well, my darling girl had had her wish, and I _had_ seen it.




