CHAPTER III.

_THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE CALCULUS OF PROBABILITIES._


_First Principle._—The first of these principles is the definition
itself of probability, which, as has been seen, is the ratio of the
number of favorable cases to that of all the cases possible.

_Second Principle._—But that supposes the various cases equally
possible. If they are not so, we will determine first their respective
possibilities, whose exact appreciation is one of the most delicate
points of the theory of chance. Then the probability will be the sum of
the possibilities of each favorable case. Let us illustrate this
principle by an example.

Let us suppose that we throw into the air a large and very thin coin
whose two large opposite faces, which we will call heads and tails, are
perfectly similar. Let us find the probability of throwing heads at
least one time in two throws. It is clear that four equally possible
cases may arise, namely, heads at the first and at the second throw;
heads at the first throw and tails at the second; tails at the first
throw and heads at the second; finally, tails at both throws. The first
three cases are favorable to the event whose probability is sought;
consequently this probability is equal to ¾; so that it is a bet of
three to one that heads will be thrown at least once in two throws.

We can count at this game only three different cases, namely, heads at
the first throw, which dispenses with throwing a second time; tails at
the first throw and heads at the second; finally, tails at the first and
at the second throw. This would reduce the probability to ⅔ if we should
consider with d'Alembert these three cases as equally possible. But it
is apparent that the probability of throwing heads at the first throw is
½, while that of the two other cases is ¼, the first case being a simple
event which corresponds to two events combined: heads at the first and
at the second throw, and heads at the first throw, tails at the second.
If we then, conforming to the second principle, add the possibility ½ of
heads at the first throw to the possibility ¼ of tails at the first
throw and heads at the second, we shall have ¾ for the probability
sought, which agrees with what is found in the supposition when we play
the two throws. This supposition does not change at all the chance of
that one who bets on this event; it simply serves to reduce the various
cases to the cases equally possible.

_Third Principle._—One of the most important points of the theory of
probabilities and that which lends the most to illusions is the manner
in which these probabilities increase or diminish by their mutual
combination. If the events are independent of one another, the
probability of their combined existence is the product of their
respective probabilities. Thus the probability of throwing one ace with
a single die is ⅙; that of throwing two aces in throwing two dice at the
same time is 1/36. Each face of the one being able to combine with the
six faces of the other, there are in fact thirty-six equally possible
cases, among which one single case gives two aces. Generally the
probability that a simple event in the same circumstances will occur
consecutively a given number of times is equal to the probability of
this simple event raised to the power indicated by this number. Having
thus the successive powers of a fraction less than unity diminishing
without ceasing, an event which depends upon a series of very great
probabilities may become extremely improbable. Suppose then an incident
be transmitted to us by twenty witnesses in such manner that the first
has transmitted it to the second, the second to the third, and so on.
Suppose again that the probability of each testimony be equal to the
fraction 9/10; that of the incident resulting from the testimonies will
be less than ⅛. We cannot better compare this diminution of the
probability than with the extinction of the light of objects by the
interposition of several pieces of glass. A relatively small number of
pieces suffices to take away the view of an object that a single piece
allows us to perceive in a distinct manner. The historians do not appear
to have paid sufficient attention to this degradation of the probability
of events when seen across a great number of successive generations;
many historical events reputed as certain would be at least doubtful if
they were submitted to this test.

In the purely mathematical sciences the most distant consequences
participate in the certainty of the principle from which they are
derived. In the applications of analysis to physics the results have all
the certainty of facts or experiences. But in the moral sciences, where
each inference is deduced from that which precedes it only in a probable
manner, however probable these deductions may be, the chance of error
increases with their number and ultimately surpasses the chance of truth
in the consequences very remote from the principle.

_Fourth Principle._—When two events depend upon each other, the
probability of the compound event is the product of the probability of
the first event and the probability that, this event having occurred,
the second will occur. Thus in the preceding case of the three urns A,
B, C, of which two contain only white balls and one contains only black
balls, the probability of drawing a white ball from the urn C is ⅔,
since of the three urns only two contain balls of that color. But when a
white ball has been drawn from the urn C, the indecision relative to
that one of the urns which contain only black balls extends only to the
urns A and B; the probability of drawing a white ball from the urn B is
½; the product of ⅔ by ½, or ⅓, is then the probability of drawing two
white balls at one time from the urns B and C.

We see by this example the influence of past events upon the probability
of future events. For the probability of drawing a white ball from the
urn B, which primarily is ⅔, becomes ½ when a white ball has been drawn
from the urn C; it would change to certainty if a black ball had been
drawn from the same urn. We will determine this influence by means of
the following principle, which is a corollary of the preceding one.

_Fifth Principle._—If we calculate _à priori_ the probability of the
occurred event and the probability of an event composed of that one and
a second one which is expected, the second probability divided by the
first will be the probability of the event expected, drawn from the
observed event.

Here is presented the question raised by some philosophers touching the
influence of the past upon the probability of the future. Let us suppose
at the play of heads and tails that heads has occurred oftener than
tails. By this alone we shall be led to believe that in the constitution
of the coin there is a secret cause which favors it. Thus in the conduct
of life constant happiness is a proof of competency which should induce
us to employ preferably happy persons. But if by the unreliability of
circumstances we are constantly brought back to a state of absolute
indecision, if, for example, we change the coin at each throw at the
play of heads and tails, the past can shed no light upon the future and
it would be absurd to take account of it.

_Sixth Principle._—Each of the causes to which an observed event may be
attributed is indicated with just as much likelihood as there is
probability that the event will take place, supposing the event to be
constant. The probability of the existence of any one of these causes is
then a fraction whose numerator is the probability of the event
resulting from this cause and whose denominator is the sum of the
similar probabilities relative to all the causes; if these various
causes, considered _à priori_, are unequally probable, it is necessary,
in place of the probability of the event resulting from each cause, to
employ the product of this probability by the possibility of the cause
itself. This is the fundamental principle of this branch of the analysis
of chances which consists in passing from events to causes.

This principle gives the reason why we attribute regular events to a
particular cause. Some philosophers have thought that these events are
less possible than others and that at the play of heads and tails, for
example, the combination in which heads occurs twenty successive times
is less easy in its nature than those where heads and tails are mixed in
an irregular manner. But this opinion supposes that past events have an
influence on the possibility of future events, which is not at all
admissible. The regular combinations occur more rarely only because they
are less numerous. If we seek a cause wherever we perceive symmetry, it
is not that we regard a symmetrical event as less possible than the
others, but, since this event ought to be the effect of a regular cause
or that of chance, the first of these suppositions is more probable than
the second. On a table we see letters arranged in this order,

 _C o n s t a n t i n o p l e_,

and we judge that this arrangement is not the result of chance, not
because it is less possible than the others, for if this word were not
employed in any language we should not suspect it came from any
particular cause, but this word being in use among us, it is
incomparably more probable that some person has thus arranged the
aforesaid letters than that this arrangement is due to chance.

This is the place to define the word _extraordinary_. We arrange in our
thought all possible events in various classes; and we regard as
_extraordinary_ those classes which include a very small number. Thus at
the play of heads and tails the occurrence of heads a hundred successive
times appears to us extraordinary because of the almost infinite number
of combinations which may occur in a hundred throws; and if we divide
the combinations into regular series containing an order easy to
comprehend, and into irregular series, the latter are incomparably more
numerous. The drawing of a white ball from an urn which among a million
balls contains only one of this color, the others being black, would
appear to us likewise extraordinary, because we form only two classes of
events relative to the two colors. But the drawing of the number 475813,
for example, from an urn that contains a million numbers seems to us an
ordinary event; because, comparing individually the numbers with one
another without dividing them into classes, we have no reason to believe
that one of them will appear sooner than the others.

From what precedes, we ought generally to conclude that the more
extraordinary the event, the greater the need of its being supported by
strong proofs. For those who attest it, being able to deceive or to have
been deceived, these two causes are as much more probable as the reality
of the event is less. We shall see this particularly when we come to
speak of the probability of testimony.

_Seventh Principle._—The probability of a future event is the sum of the
products of the probability of each cause, drawn from the event
observed, by the probability that, this cause existing, the future event
will occur. The following example will illustrate this principle.

Let us imagine an urn which contains only two balls, each of which may
be either white or black. One of these balls is drawn and is put back
into the urn before proceeding to a new draw. Suppose that in the first
two draws white balls have been drawn; the probability of again drawing
a white ball at the third draw is required.

Only two hypotheses can be made here: either one of the balls is white
and the other black, or both are white. In the first hypothesis the
probability of the event observed is ¼; it is unity or certainty in the
second. Thus in regarding these hypotheses as so many causes, we shall
have for the sixth principle ⅕ and ⅘ for their respective probabilities.
But if the first hypothesis occurs, the probability of drawing a white
ball at the third draw is ½; it is equal to certainty in the second
hypothesis; multiplying then the last probabilities by those of the
corresponding hypotheses, the sum of the products, or 9/10, will be the
probability of drawing a white ball at the third draw.

When the probability of a single event is unknown we may suppose it
equal to any value from zero to unity. The probability of each of these
hypotheses, drawn from the event observed, is, by the sixth principle, a
fraction whose numerator is the probability of the event in this
hypothesis and whose denominator is the sum of the similar probabilities
relative to all the hypotheses. Thus the probability that the
possibility of the event is comprised within given limits is the sum of
the fractions comprised within these limits. Now if we multiply each
fraction by the probability of the future event, determined in the
corresponding hypothesis, the sum of the products relative to all the
hypotheses will be, by the seventh principle, the probability of the
future event drawn from the event observed. Thus we find that an event
having occurred successively any number of times, the probability that
it will happen again the next time is equal to this number increased by
unity divided by the same number, increased by two units. Placing the
most ancient epoch of history at five thousand years ago, or at 1826213
days, and the sun having risen constantly in the interval at each
revolution of twenty-four hours, it is a bet of 1826214 to one that it
will rise again to-morrow. But this number is incomparably greater for
him who, recognizing in the totality of phenomena the principal
regulator of days and seasons, sees that nothing at the present moment
can arrest the course of it.

Buffon in his _Political Arithmetic_ calculates differently the
preceding probability. He supposes that it differs from unity only by a
fraction whose numerator is unity and whose denominator is the number 2
raised to a power equal to the number of days which have elapsed since
the epoch. But the true manner of relating past events with the
probability of causes and of future events was unknown to this
illustrious writer.




