CHAPTER VIII.

_CONCERNING THE LAWS OF PROBABILITY WHICH RESULT FROM THE INDEFINITE
MULTIPLICATION OF EVENTS._


Amid the variable and unknown causes which we comprehend under the name
of _chance_, and which render uncertain and irregular the march of
events, we see appearing, in the measure that they multiply, a striking
regularity which seems to hold to a design and which has been considered
as a proof of Providence. But in reflecting upon this we soon recognize
that this regularity is only the development of the respective
possibilities of simple events which ought to present themselves more
often when they are more probable. Let us imagine, for example, an urn
which contains white balls and black balls; and let us suppose that each
time a ball is drawn it is put back into the urn before proceeding to a
new draw. The ratio of the number of the white balls drawn to the number
of black balls drawn will be most often very irregular in the first
drawings; but the variable causes of this irregularity produce effects
alternately favorable and unfavorable to the regular march of events
which destroy each other mutually in the totality of a great number of
draws, allowing us to perceive more and more the ratio of white balls to
the black balls contained in the urn, or the respective possibilities of
drawing a white ball or black ball at each draw. From this results the
following theorem.

The probability that the ratio of the number of white balls drawn to the
total number of balls drawn does not deviate beyond a given interval
from the ratio of the number of white balls to the total number of balls
contained in the urn, approaches indefinitely to certainty by the
indefinite multiplication of events, however small this interval.

This theorem indicated by common sense was difficult to demonstrate by
analysis. Accordingly the illustrious geometrician Jacques Bernoulli,
who first has occupied himself with it, attaches great importance to the
demonstrations he has given. The calculus of discriminant functions
applied to this matter not only demonstrates with facility this theorem,
but still more it gives the probability that the ratio of the events
observed deviates only in certain limits from the true ratio of their
respective possibilities.

One may draw from the preceding theorem this consequence which ought to
be regarded as a general law, namely, that the ratios of the acts of
nature are very nearly constant when these acts are considered in great
number. Thus in spite of the variety of years the sum of the productions
during a considerable number of years is sensibly the same; so that man
by useful foresight is able to provide against the irregularity of the
seasons by spreading out equally over all the seasons the goods which
nature distributes in an unequal manner. I do not except from the above
law results due to moral causes. The ratio of annual births to the
population, and that of marriages to births, show only small variations;
at Paris the number of annual births is almost the same, and I have
heard it said at the post-office in ordinary seasons the number of
letters thrown aside on account of defective addresses changes little
each year; this has likewise been observed at London.

It follows again from this theorem that in a series of events
indefinitely prolonged the action of regular and constant causes ought
to prevail in the long run over that of irregular causes. It is this
which renders the gains of the lotteries just as certain as the products
of agriculture; the chances which they reserve assure them a benefit in
the totality of a great number of throws. Thus favorable and numerous
chances being constantly attached to the observation of the eternal
principles of reason, of justice, and of humanity which establish and
maintain societies, there is a great advantage in conforming to these
principles and of grave inconvenience in departing from them. If one
consult histories and his own experience, one will see all the facts
come to the aid of this result of calculus. Consider the happy effects
of institutions founded upon reason and the natural rights of man among
the peoples who have known how to establish and preserve them. Consider
again the advantages which good faith has procured for the governments
who have made it the basis of their conduct and how they have been
indemnified for the sacrifices which a scrupulous exactitude in keeping
their engagements has cost them. What immense credit at home! What
preponderance abroad! On the contrary, look into what an abyss of
misfortunes nations have often been precipitated by the ambition and the
perfidy of their chiefs. Every time that a great power intoxicated by
the love of conquest aspires to universal domination the sentiment of
independence produces among the menaced nations a coalition of which it
becomes almost always the victim. Similarly in the midst of the variable
causes which extend or restrain the divers states, the natural limits
acting as constant causes ought to end by prevailing. It is important
then to the stability as well as to the happiness of empires not to
extend them beyond those limits into which they are led again without
cessation by the action of the causes; just as the waters of the seas
raised by violent tempests fall again into their basins by the force of
gravity. It is again a result of the calculus of probabilities confirmed
by numerous and melancholy experiences. History treated from the point
of view of the influence of constant causes would unite to the interest
of curiosity that of offering to man most useful lessons. Sometimes we
attribute the inevitable results of these causes to the accidental
circumstances which have produced their action. It is, for example,
against the nature of things that one people should ever be governed by
another when a vast sea or a great distance separates them. It may be
affirmed that in the long run this constant cause, joining itself
without ceasing to the variable causes which act in the same way and
which the course of time develops, will end by finding them sufficiently
strong to give to a subjugated people its natural independence or to
unite it to a powerful state which may be contiguous.

In a great number of cases, and these are the most important of the
analysis of hazards, the possibilities of simple events are unknown and
we are forced to search in past events for the indices which can guide
us in our conjectures about the causes upon which they depend. In
applying the analysis of discriminant functions to the principle
elucidated above on the probability of the causes drawn from the events
observed, we are led to the following theorem.

When a simple event or one composed of several simple events, as, for
instance, in a game, has been repeated a great number of times the
possibilities of the simple events which render most probable that which
has been observed are those that observation indicates with the greatest
probability; in the measure that the observed event is repeated this
probability increases and would end by amounting to certainty if the
numbers of repetitions should become infinite.

There are two kinds of approximations: the one is relative to the limits
taken on all sides of the possibilities which give to the past the
greatest probability; the other approximation is related to the
probability that these possibilities fall within these limits. The
repetition of the compound event increases more and more this
probability, the limits remaining the same; it reduces more and more the
interval of these limits, the probability remaining the same; in
infinity this interval becomes zero and the probability changes to
certainty.

If we apply this theorem to the ratio of the births of boys to that of
girls observed in the different countries of Europe, we find that this
ratio, which is everywhere about equal to that of 22 to 21, indicates
with an extreme probability a greater facility in the birth of boys.
Considering further that it is the same at Naples and at St. Petersburg,
we shall see that in this regard the influence of climate is without
effect. We might then suspect, contrary to the common belief, that this
predominance of masculine births exists even in the Orient. I have
consequently invited the French scholars sent to Egypt to occupy
themselves with this interesting question; but the difficulty in
obtaining exact information about the births has not permitted them to
solve it. Happily, M. de Humboldt has not neglected this matter among
the innumerable new things which he has observed and collected in
America with so much sagacity, constancy, and courage. He has found in
the tropics the same ratio of the births as we observe in Paris; this
ought to make us regard the greater number of masculine births as a
general law of the human race. The laws which the different kinds of
animals follow in this regard seem to me worthy of the attention of
naturalists.

The fact that the ratio of births of boys to that of girls differs very
little from unity even in the great number of the births observed in a
place would offer in this regard a result contrary to the general law,
without which we should be right in concluding that this law did not
exist. In order to arrive at this result it is necessary to employ great
numbers and to be sure that it is indicated by great probability. Buffon
cites, for example, in his _Political Arithmetic_ several communities of
Bourgogne where the births of girls have surpassed those of boys. Among
these communities that of Carcelle-le-Grignon presents in 2009 births
during five years 1026 girls and 983 boys. Although these numbers are
considerable, they indicate, however, only a greater possibility in the
births of girls with a probability of 9/10, and this probability,
smaller than that of not throwing heads four times in succession in the
game of heads and tails, is not sufficient to investigate the cause for
this anomaly, which, according to all probability, would disappear if
one should follow during a century the births in this community.

The registers of births, which are kept with care in order to assure the
condition of the citizens, may serve in determining the population of a
great empire without recurring to the enumeration of its inhabitants—a
laborious operation and one difficult to make with exactitude. But for
this it is necessary to know the ratio of the population to the annual
births. The most precise means of obtaining it consists, first, in
choosing in the empire districts distributed in an almost equal manner
over its whole surface, so as to render the general result independent
of local circumstances; second, in enumerating with care for a given
epoch the inhabitants of several communities in each of these districts;
third, by determining from the statement of the births during several
years which precede and follow this epoch the mean number corresponding
to the annual births. This number, divided by that of the inhabitants,
will give the ratio of the annual births to the population in a manner
more and more accurate as the enumeration becomes more considerable. The
government, convinced of the utility of a similar enumeration, has
decided at my request to order its execution. In thirty districts spread
out equally over the whole of France, communities have been chosen which
would be able to furnish the most exact information. Their enumerations
have given 2037615 individuals as the total number of their inhabitants
on the 23d of September, 1802. The statement of the births in these
communities during the years 1800, 1801, and 1802 have given:

   Births.      Marriages.        Deaths.
 110312 boys      46037         103659 men
 105287 girls                    99443 women

The ratio of the population to annual births is then 28 + (352845/1000000);
it is greater than had been estimated up to this time. Multiplying the
number of annual births in France by this ratio, we shall have the
population of this kingdom. But what is the probability that the
population thus determined will not deviate from the true population
beyond a given limit? Resolving this problem and applying to its
solution the preceding data, I have found that, the number of annual
births in France being supposed to be 1000000, which brings the
population to 28352845 inhabitants, it is a bet of almost 300000 against
1 that the error of this result is not half a million.

The ratio of the births of boys to that of girls which the preceding
statement offers is that of 22 to 21; and the marriages are to the
births as 3 is to 4.

At Paris the baptisms of children of both sexes vary a little from the
ratio of 22 to 21. Since 1745, the epoch in which one has commenced to
distinguish the sexes upon the birth-registers, up to the end of 1784,
there have been baptized in this capital 393386 boys and 377555 girls.
The ratio of the two numbers is almost that of 25 to 24; it appears then
at Paris that a particular cause approximates an equality of baptisms of
the two sexes. If we apply to this matter the calculus of probabilities,
we find that it is a bet of 238 to 1 in favor of the existence of this
cause, which is sufficient to authorize the investigation. Upon
reflection it has appeared to me that the difference observed holds to
this, that the parents in the country and the provinces, finding some
advantage in keeping the boys at home, have sent to the Hospital for
Foundlings in Paris fewer of them relative to the number of girls
according to the ratio of births of the two sexes. This is proved by the
statement of the registers of this hospital. From the beginning of 1745
to the end of 1809 there were entered 163499 boys and 159405 girls. The
first of these numbers exceeds only by 1/38 the second, which it ought
to have surpassed at least by 1/24. This confirms the existence of the
assigned cause, namely, that the ratio of births of boys to those of
girls is at Paris that of 22 to 21, no attention having been paid to
foundlings.

The preceding results suppose that we may compare the births to the
drawings of balls from an urn which contains an infinite number of white
balls and black balls so mixed that at each draw the chances of drawing
ought to be the same for each ball; but it is possible that the
variations of the same seasons in different years may have some
influence upon the annual ratio of the births of boys to those of girls.
The Bureau of Longitudes of France publishes each year in its annual the
tables of the annual movement of the population of the kingdom. The
tables already published commence in 1817; in that year and in the five
following years there were born 2962361 boys and 2781997 girls, which
gives about 16/15 for the ratio of the births of boys to that of girls.
The ratios of each year vary little from this mean result; the smallest
ratio is that of 1822, where it was only 17/16; the greatest is of the
year 1817, when it was 15/14. These ratios vary appreciably from the
ratio of 22/21 found above. Applying to this deviation the analysis of
probabilities in the hypothesis of the comparison of births to the
drawings of balls from an urn, we find that it would be scarcely
probable. It appears, then, to indicate that this hypothesis, although
closely approximated, is not rigorously exact. In the number of births
which we have just stated there are of natural children 200494 boys and
190698 girls. The ratio of masculine and feminine births was then in
this regard 20/19, smaller than the mean ratio of 16/15. This result is
in the same sense as that of the births of foundlings; and it seems to
prove that in the class of natural children the births of the two sexes
approach more nearly equality than in the class of legitimate children.
The difference of the climates from the north to the south of France
does not appear to influence appreciably the ratio of the births of boys
and girls. The thirty most southern districts have given 16/15 for this
ratio, the same as that of entire France.

The constancy of the superiority of the births of boys over girls at
Paris and at London since they have been observed has appeared to some
scholars to be a proof of Providence, without which they have thought
that the irregular causes which disturb without ceasing the course of
events ought several times to have rendered the annual births of girls
superior to those of boys.

But this proof is a new example of the abuse which has been so often
made of final causes which always disappear on a searching examination
of the questions when we have the necessary data to solve them. The
constancy in question is a result of regular causes which give the
superiority to the births of boys and which extend it to the anomalies
due to hazard when the number of annual births is considerable. The
investigation of the probability that this constancy will maintain
itself for a long time belongs to that branch of the analysis of hazards
which passes from past events to the probability of future events; and
taking as a basis the births observed from 1745 to 1784, it is a bet of
almost 4 against 1 that at Paris the annual births of boys will
constantly surpass for a century the births of girls; there is then no
reason to be astonished that this has taken place for a half-century.

Let us take another example of the development of constant ratios which
events present in the measure that they are multiplied. Let us imagine a
series of urns arranged circularly, and each containing a very great
number of white balls and black balls; the ratio of white balls to the
black in the urns being originally very different and such, for example,
that one of these urns contains only white balls, while another contains
only black balls. If one draws a ball from the first urn in order to put
it into the second, and, after having shaken the second urn in order to
mix well the new ball with the others, one draws a ball to put it into
the third urn, and so on to the last urn, from which is drawn a ball to
put into the first, and if this series is recommenced continually, the
analysis of probability shows us that the ratios of the white balls to
the black in these urns will end by being the same and equal to the
ratio of the sum of all the white balls to the sum of all the black
balls contained in the urns. Thus by this regular mode of change the
primitive irregularity of these ratios disappears eventually in order to
make room for the most simple order. Now if among these urns one
intercalate new ones in which the ratio of the sum of the white balls to
the sum of the black balls which they contain differs from the
preceding, continuing indefinitely in the totality of the urns the
drawings which we have just indicated, the simple order established in
the old urns will be at first disturbed, and the ratios of the white
balls to the black balls will become irregular; but little by little
this irregularity will disappear in order to make room for a new order,
which will finally be that of the equality of the ratios of the white
balls to the black balls contained in the urns. We may apply these
results to all the combinations of nature in which the constant forces
by which their elements are animated establish regular modes of action,
suited to bring about in the very heart of chaos systems governed by
admirable laws.

The phenomena which seem the most dependent upon hazard present, then,
when multiplied a tendency to approach without ceasing fixed ratios, in
such a manner that if we conceive on all sides of each of these ratios
an interval as small as desired, the probability that the mean result of
the observations falls within this interval will end by differing from
certainty only by a quantity greater than an assignable magnitude. Thus
by the calculations of probabilities applied to a great number of
observations we may recognize the existence of these ratios. But before
seeking the causes it is necessary, in order not to be led into vain
speculations, to assure ourselves that they are indicated by a
probability which does not permit us to regard them as anomalies due to
hazard. The theory of discriminant functions gives a very simple
expression for this probability, which is obtained by integrating the
product of the differential of the quantity of which the result deduced
from a great number of observations varies from the truth by a constant
less than unity, dependent upon the nature of the problem, and raised to
a power whose exponent is the ratio of the square of this variation to
the number of observations. The integral taken between the limits given
and divided by the same integral, applied to a positive and negative
infinity, will express the probability that the variation from the truth
is comprised between these limits. Such is the general law of the
probability of results indicated by a great number of observations.




