CHAPTER II.

_CONCERNING PROBABILITY._


All events, even those which on account of their insignificance do not
seem to follow the great laws of nature, are a result of it just as
necessarily as the revolutions of the sun. In ignorance of the ties
which unite such events to the entire system of the universe, they have
been made to depend upon final causes or upon hazard, according as they
occur and are repeated with regularity, or appear without regard to
order; but these imaginary causes have gradually receded with the
widening bounds of knowledge and disappear entirely before sound
philosophy, which sees in them only the expression of our ignorance of
the true causes.

Present events are connected with preceding ones by a tie based upon the
evident principle that a thing cannot occur without a cause which
produces it. This axiom, known by the name of _the principle of
sufficient reason_, extends even to actions which are considered
indifferent; the freest will is unable without a determinative motive to
give them birth; if we assume two positions with exactly similar
circumstances and find that the will is active in the one and inactive
in the other, we say that its choice is an effect without a cause. It is
then, says Leibnitz, the blind chance of the Epicureans. The contrary
opinion is an illusion of the mind, which, losing sight of the evasive
reasons of the choice of the will in indifferent things, believes that
choice is determined of itself and without motives.

We ought then to regard the present state of the universe as the effect
of its anterior state and as the cause of the one which is to follow.
Given for one instant an intelligence which could comprehend all the
forces by which nature is animated and the respective situation of the
beings who compose it—an intelligence sufficiently vast to submit these
data to analysis—it would embrace in the same formula the movements of
the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the lightest atom; for
it, nothing would be uncertain and the future, as the past, would be
present to its eyes. The human mind offers, in the perfection which it
has been able to give to astronomy, a feeble idea of this intelligence.
Its discoveries in mechanics and geometry, added to that of universal
gravity, have enabled it to comprehend in the same analytical
expressions the past and future states of the system of the world.
Applying the same method to some other objects of its knowledge, it has
succeeded in referring to general laws observed phenomena and in
foreseeing those which given circumstances ought to produce. All these
efforts in the search for truth tend to lead it back continually to the
vast intelligence which we have just mentioned, but from which it will
always remain infinitely removed. This tendency, peculiar to the human
race, is that which renders it superior to animals; and their progress
in this respect distinguishes nations and ages and constitutes their
true glory.

Let us recall that formerly, and at no remote epoch, an unusual rain or
an extreme drought, a comet having in train a very long tail, the
eclipses, the aurora borealis, and in general all the unusual phenomena
were regarded as so many signs of celestial wrath. Heaven was invoked in
order to avert their baneful influence. No one prayed to have the
planets and the sun arrested in their courses: observation had soon made
apparent the futility of such prayers. But as these phenomena, occurring
and disappearing at long intervals, seemed to oppose the order of
nature, it was supposed that Heaven, irritated by the crimes of the
earth, had created them to announce its vengeance. Thus the long tail of
the comet of 1456 spread terror through Europe, already thrown into
consternation by the rapid successes of the Turks, who had just
overthrown the Lower Empire. This star after four revolutions has
excited among us a very different interest. The knowledge of the laws of
the system of the world acquired in the interval had dissipated the
fears begotten by the ignorance of the true relationship of man to the
universe; and Halley, having recognized the identity of this comet with
those of the years 1531, 1607, and 1682, announced its next return for
the end of the year 1758 or the beginning of the year 1759. The learned
world awaited with impatience this return which was to confirm one of
the greatest discoveries that have been made in the sciences, and fulfil
the prediction of Seneca when he said, in speaking of the revolutions of
those stars which fall from an enormous height: "The day will come when,
by study pursued through several ages, the things now concealed will
appear with evidence; and posterity will be astonished that truths so
clear had escaped us." Clairaut then undertook to submit to analysis the
perturbations which the comet had experienced by the action of the two
great planets, Jupiter and Saturn; after immense calculations he fixed
its next passage at the perihelion toward the beginning of April, 1759,
which was actually verified by observation. The regularity which
astronomy shows us in the movements of the comets doubtless exists also
in all phenomena.

The curve described by a simple molecule of air or vapor is regulated in
a manner just as certain as the planetary orbits; the only difference
between them is that which comes from our ignorance.

Probability is relative, in part to this ignorance, in part to our
knowledge. We know that of three or a greater number of events a single
one ought to occur; but nothing induces us to believe that one of them
will occur rather than the others. In this state of indecision it is
impossible for us to announce their occurrence with certainty. It is,
however, probable that one of these events, chosen at will, will not
occur because we see several cases equally possible which exclude its
occurrence, while only a single one favors it.

The theory of chance consists in reducing all the events of the same
kind to a certain number of cases equally possible, that is to say, to
such as we may be equally undecided about in regard to their existence,
and in determining the number of cases favorable to the event whose
probability is sought. The ratio of this number to that of all the cases
possible is the measure of this probability, which is thus simply a
fraction whose numerator is the number of favorable cases and whose
denominator is the number of all the cases possible.

The preceding notion of probability supposes that, in increasing in the
same ratio the number of favorable cases and that of all the cases
possible, the probability remains the same. In order to convince
ourselves let us take two urns, A and B, the first containing four white
and two black balls, and the second containing only two white balls and
one black one. We may imagine the two black balls of the first urn
attached by a thread which breaks at the moment when one of them is
seized in order to be drawn out, and the four white balls thus forming
two similar systems. All the chances which will favor the seizure of one
of the balls of the black system will lead to a black ball. If we
conceive now that the threads which unite the balls do not break at all,
it is clear that the number of possible chances will not change any more
than that of the chances favorable to the extraction of the black balls;
but two balls will be drawn from the urn at the same time; the
probability of drawing a black ball from the urn A will then be the same
as at first. But then we have obviously the case of urn B with the
single difference that the three balls of this last urn would be
replaced by three systems of two balls invariably connected.

When all the cases are favorable to an event the probability changes to
certainty and its expression becomes equal to unity. Upon this
condition, certainty and probability are comparable, although there may
be an essential difference between the two states of the mind when a
truth is rigorously demonstrated to it, or when it still perceives a
small source of error.

In things which are only probable the difference of the data, which each
man has in regard to them, is one of the principal causes of the
diversity of opinions which prevail in regard to the same objects. Let
us suppose, for example, that we have three urns, A, B, C, one of which
contains only black balls while the two others contain only white balls;
a ball is to be drawn from the urn C and the probability is demanded
that this ball will be black. If we do not know which of the three urns
contains black balls only, so that there is no reason to believe that it
is C rather than B or A, these three hypotheses will appear equally
possible, and since a black ball can be drawn only in the first
hypothesis, the probability of drawing it is equal to one third. If it
is known that the urn A contains white balls only, the indecision then
extends only to the urns B and C, and the probability that the ball
drawn from the urn C will be black is one half. Finally this probability
changes to certainty if we are assured that the urns A and B contain
white balls only.

It is thus that an incident related to a numerous assembly finds various
degrees of credence, according to the extent of knowledge of the
auditors. If the man who reports it is fully convinced of it and if, by
his position and character, he inspires great confidence, his statement,
however extraordinary it may be, will have for the auditors who lack
information the same degree of probability as an ordinary statement made
by the same man, and they will have entire faith in it. But if some one
of them knows that the same incident is rejected by other equally
trustworthy men, he will be in doubt and the incident will be
discredited by the enlightened auditors, who will reject it whether it
be in regard to facts well averred or the immutable laws of nature.

It is to the influence of the opinion of those whom the multitude judges
best informed and to whom it has been accustomed to give its confidence
in regard to the most important matters of life that the propagation of
those errors is due which in times of ignorance have covered the face of
the earth. Magic and astrology offer us two great examples. These errors
inculcated in infancy, adopted without examination, and having for a
basis only universal credence, have maintained themselves during a very
long time; but at last the progress of science has destroyed them in the
minds of enlightened men, whose opinion consequently has caused them to
disappear even among the common people, through the power of imitation
and habit which had so generally spread them abroad. This power, the
richest resource of the moral world, establishes and conserves in a
whole nation ideas entirely contrary to those which it upholds elsewhere
with the same authority. What indulgence ought we not then to have for
opinions different from ours, when this difference often depends only
upon the various points of view where circumstances have placed us! Let
us enlighten those whom we judge insufficiently instructed; but first
let us examine critically our own opinions and weigh with impartiality
their respective probabilities.

The difference of opinions depends, however, upon the manner in which
the influence of known data is determined. The theory of probabilities
holds to considerations so delicate that it is not surprising that with
the same data two persons arrive at different results, especially in
very complicated questions. Let us examine now the general principles of
this theory.




