LETTER XI


                                    _Mrs. Pringle to Miss Mally Glencairn_

MY DEAR MISS MALLY--We have been at the counting-house, and gotten a sort
of a satisfaction; what the upshot may be, I canna take it upon myself to
prognosticate; but when the waur comes to the worst, I think that baith
Rachel and Andrew will have a nest egg, and the Doctor and me may sleep
sound on their account, if the nation doesna break, as the argle-barglers
in the House of Parliament have been threatening: for all the cornal's
fortune is sunk at present in the pesents.  Howsomever, it's our notion,
when the legacies are paid off, to lift the money out of the funds, and
place it at good interest on hairetable securitie.  But ye will hear
aften from us, before things come to that, for the delays, and the
goings, and the comings in this town of London are past all expreshon.

As yet, we have been to see no fairlies, except going in a coach from one
part of the toun to another; but the Doctor and me was at the he-kirk of
Saint Paul's for a purpose that I need not tell you, as it was adoing
with the right hand what the left should not know.  I couldna say that I
had there great pleasure, for the preacher was very cauldrife, and read
every word, and then there was such a beggary of popish prelacy, that it
was compassionate to a Christian to see.

We are to dine at Mr. Argent's, the cornal's hadgint, on Sunday, and me
and Rachel have been getting something for the okasion.  Our landlady,
Mrs. Sharkly, has recommended us to ane of the most fashionable
millinders in London, who keeps a grand shop in Cranburn Alla, and she
has brought us arteecles to look at; but I was surprised they were not
finer, for I thought them of a very inferior quality, which she said was
because they were not made for no costomer, but for the public.

The Argents seem as if they would be discreet people, which, to us who
are here in the jaws of jeopardy, would be a great confort--for I am no
overly satisfeet with many things.  What would ye think of buying coals
by the stimpert, for anything that I know, and then setting up the poker
afore the ribs, instead of blowing with the bellies to make the fire
burn?  I was of a pinion that the Englishers were naturally masterful;
but I can ashure you this is no the case at all--and I am beginning to
think that the way of leeving from hand to mouth is great frugality, when
ye consider that all is left in the logive hands of uncercumseezed
servans.

But what gives me the most concern at this time is one Captain Sabre of
the Dragoon Hozars, who come up in the smak with us from Leith, and is
looking more after our Rachel than I could wish, now that she might set
her cap to another sort of object.  But he's of a respectit family, and
the young lad himself is no to be despisid; howsomever, I never likit
officir-men of any description, and yet the thing that makes me look down
on the captain is all owing to the cornal, who was an officer of the
native poors of India, where the pay must indeed have been extraordinar,
for who ever heard either of a cornal, or any officer whomsoever, making
a hundred thousand pounds in our regiments? no that I say the cornal has
left so meikle to us.

Tell Mrs. Glibbans that I have not heard of no sound preacher as yet in
London--the want of which is no doubt the great cause of the crying sins
of the place.  What would she think to hear of newspapers selling by tout
of horn on the Lord's day? and on the Sabbath night, the change-houses
are more throng than on the Saturday!  I am told, but as yet I cannot say
that I have seen the evil myself with my own eyes, that in the summer
time there are tea-gardens, where the tradesmen go to smoke their pipes
of tobacco, and to entertain their wives and children, which can be
nothing less than a bringing of them to an untimely end.  But you will be
surprised to hear, that no such thing as whusky is to be had in the
public-houses, where they drink only a dead sort of beer; and that a
bottle of true jennyinn London porter is rarely to be seen in the whole
town--all kinds of piple getting their porter in pewter cans, and a
laddie calls for in the morning to take away what has been yoused over
night.  But what I most miss is the want of creem.  The milk here is just
skimm, and I doot not, likewise well watered--as for the water, a drink
of clear wholesome good water is not within the bounds of London; and
truly, now may I say, that I have learnt what the blessing of a cup of
cold water is.

Tell Miss Nanny Eydent, that the day of the burial is now settled, when
we are going to Windsor Castle to see the precesson--and that, by the end
of the wick, she may expect the fashions from me, with all the
particulars.  Till then, I am, my dear Miss Mally, your friend and
well-wisher,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.

_Noto Beny_.--Give my kind compliments to Mrs. Glibbans, and let her
know, that I will, after Sunday, give her an account of the state of the
Gospel in London.

                                * * * * *

Miss Mally paused when she had read the letter, and it was unanimously
agreed, that Mrs. Pringle gave a more full account of London than either
father, son, or daughter.

By this time the night was far advanced, and Mrs. Glibbans was rising to
go away, apprehensive, as she observed, that they were going to bring
"the carts" into the room.  Upon Miss Mally, however, assuring her that
no such transgression was meditated, but that she intended to treat them
with a bit nice Highland mutton ham, and eggs, of her own laying, that
worthy pillar of the Relief Kirk consented to remain.

It was past eleven o'clock when the party broke up; Mr. Snodgrass and Mr.
Micklewham walked home together, and as they were crossing the Red Burn
Bridge, at the entrance of Eglintoun Wood,--a place well noted from
ancient times for preternatural appearances, Mr. Micklewham declared that
he thought he heard something purring among the bushes; upon which Mr.
Snodgrass made a jocose observation, stating, that it could be nothing
but the effect of Lord North's strong ale in his head; and we should add,
by way of explanation, that the Lord North here spoken of was Willy
Grieve, celebrated in Irvine for the strength and flavour of his brewing,
and that, in addition to a plentiful supply of his best, Miss Mally had
entertained them with tamarind punch, constituting a natural cause
adequate to produce all the preternatural purring that terrified the
dominie.




