LETTER XXVI


                                    _Mrs. Pringle to Miss Mally Glencairn_

DEAR MISS MALLY--You will have heard, by the peppers, of the gret
hobbleshow heer aboot the queen's coming over contrary to the will of the
nation; and, that the king and parlement are so angry with her, that they
are going to put her away by giving to her a bill of divorce.  The
Doctor, who has been searchin the Scriptures on the okashon, says this is
not in their poor, although she was found guilty of the fact; but I tell
him, that as the king and parlement of old took upon them to change our
religion, I do not see how they will be hampered now by the word of God.

You may well wonder that I have no ritten to you about the king, and what
he is like, but we have never got a sight of him at all, whilk is a gret
shame, paying so dear as we do for a king, who shurely should be a publik
man.  But, we have seen her majesty, who stays not far from our house
heer in Baker Street, in dry lodgings, which, I am creditably informed,
she is obligated to pay for by the week, for nobody will trust her; so
you see what it is, Miss Mally, to have a light character.  Poor woman,
they say she might have been going from door to door, with a staff and a
meal pock, but for ane Mr. Wood, who is a baillie of London, that has
ta'en her by the hand.  She's a woman advanced in life, with a short
neck, and a pentit face; housomever, that, I suppose, she canno help,
being a queen, and obligated to set the fashons to the court, where it is
necessar to hide their faces with pent, our Andrew says, that their looks
may not betray them--there being no shurer thing than a false-hearted
courtier.

But what concerns me the most, in all this, is, that there will be no
coronashon till the queen is put out of the way--and nobody can take upon
them to say when that will be, as the law is so dootful and
endless--which I am verra sorry for, as it was my intent to rite Miss
Nanny Eydent a true account of the coronashon, in case there had been any
partiklars that might be servisable to her in her bisness.

The Doctor and me, by ourselves, since we have been settlt, go about at
our convenience, and have seen far mae farlies than baith Andrew and
Rachel, with all the acquaintance they have forgathert with--but you no
old heeds canno be expectit on young shouthers, and they have not had the
experience of the world that we have had.

The lamps in the streets here are lighted with gauze, and not with
crusies, like those that have lately been put up in your toun; and it is
brought in pips aneath the ground from the manufactors, which the Doctor
and me have been to see--an awful place--and they say as fey to a spark
as poother, which made us glad to get out o't when we heard so;--and we
have been to see a brew-house, where they mak the London porter, but it
is a sight not to be told.  In it we saw a barrel, whilk the Doctor said
was by gauging bigger than the Irvine muckle kirk, and a masking fat,
like a barn for mugnited.  But all thae were as nothing to a curiosity of
a steam-ingine, that minches minch collops as natural as life--and stuffs
the sosogees itself, in a manner past the poor of nature to consiv.  They
have, to be shure, in London, many things to help work--for in our
kitchen there is a smoking-jack to roast the meat, that gangs of its oun
free will, and the brisker the fire, the faster it runs; but a
potatoe-beetle is not to be had within the four walls of London, which is
a great want in a house; Mrs. Argent never hard of sic a thing.

Me and the Doctor have likewise been in the Houses of Parliament, and the
Doctor since has been again to heer the argol-bargoling aboot the queen.
But, cepting the king's throne, which is all gold and velvet, with a
croun on the top, and stars all round, there was nothing worth the
looking at in them baith.  Howsomever, I sat in the king's seat, and in
the preses chair of the House of Commons, which, you no, is something for
me to say; and we have been to see the printing of books, where the very
smallest dividual syllib is taken up by itself and made into words by the
hand, so as to be quite confounding how it could ever read sense.  But
there is ane piece of industry and froughgalaty I should not forget,
whilk is wives going about with whirl-barrows, selling horses' flesh to
the cats and dogs by weight, and the cats and dogs know them very well by
their voices.  In short, Miss Mally, there is nothing heer that the hand
is not turnt to; and there is, I can see, a better order and method
really among the Londoners than among our Scotch folks, notwithstanding
their advantages of edicashion, but my pepper will hold no more at
present, from your true friend,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.

There was a considerable diversity of opinion among the commentators on
this epistle.  Mrs. Craig was the first who broke silence, and displayed
a great deal of erudition on the minch-collop-engine, and the
potatoe-beetle, in which she was interrupted by the indignant Mrs.
Glibbans, who exclaimed, "I am surprised to hear you, Mrs. Craig, speak
of sic baubles, when the word of God's in danger of being controverted by
an Act of Parliament.  But, Mr. Snodgrass, dinna ye think that this
painting of the queen's face is a Jezebitical testification against her?"
Mr. Snodgrass replied, with an unwonted sobriety of manner, and with an
emphasis that showed he intended to make some impression on his
auditors--"It is impossible to judge correctly of strangers by measuring
them according to our own notions of propriety.  It has certainly long
been a practice in courts to disfigure the beauty of the human
countenance with paint; but what, in itself, may have been originally
assumed for a mask or disguise, may, by usage, have grown into a very
harmless custom.  I am not, therefore, disposed to attach any criminal
importance to the circumstance of her majesty wearing paint.  Her late
majesty did so herself."  "I do not say it was criminal," said Mrs.
Glibbans; "I only meant it was sinful, and I think it is."  The accent of
authority in which this was said, prevented Mr. Snodgrass from offering
any reply; and, a brief pause ensuing, Miss Molly Glencairn observed,
that it was a surprising thing how the Doctor and Mrs. Pringle managed
their matters so well.  "Ay," said Mrs. Craig, "but we a' ken what a
manager the mistress is--she's the bee that mak's the hincy--she does not
gang bizzing aboot, like a thriftless wasp, through her neighbours'
houses."  "I tell you, Betty, my dear," cried Mr. Craig, "that you
shouldna make comparisons--what's past is gane--and Mrs. Glibbans and you
maun now be friends."  "They're a' friends to me that's no faes, and am
very glad to see Mrs. Glibbans sociable in my house; but she needna hae
made sae light of me when she was here before."  And, in saying this, the
amiable hostess burst into a loud sob of sorrow, which induced Mr.
Snodgrass to beg Mr. Micklewham to read the Doctor's letter, by which a
happy stop was put to the further manifestation of the grudge which Mrs.
Craig harboured against Mrs. Glibbans for the lecture she had received,
on what the latter called "the incarnated effect of a more than
Potipharian claught o' the godly Mr. Craig."



