LETTER III


               _The Rev. Dr. Pringle to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk_, _Garnock_
                                                                EDINBURGH.

DEAR SIR--We have got this length through many difficulties, both in the
travel by land to, and by sea and land from Greenock, where we were
obligated, by reason of no conveyance, to stop the Sabbath, but not
without edification; for we went to hear Dr. Drystour in the forenoon,
who had a most weighty sermon on the tenth chapter of Nehemiah.  He is
surely a great orthodox divine, but rather costive in his delivery.  In
the afternoon we heard a correct moral lecture on good works, in another
church, from Dr. Eastlight--a plain man, with a genteel congregation.
The same night we took supper with a wealthy family, where we had much
pleasant communion together, although the bringing in of the toddy-bowl
after supper is a fashion that has a tendency to lengthen the sederunt to
unseasonable hours.

On the following morning, by the break of day, we took shipping in the
steam-boat for Glasgow.  I had misgivings about the engine, which is
really a thing of great docility; but saving my concern for the boiler,
we all found the place surprising comfortable.  The day was bleak and
cold; but we had a good fire in a carron grate in the middle of the
floor, and books to read, so that both body and mind are therein provided
for.

Among the books, I fell in with a _History of the Rebellion_, anent the
hand that an English gentleman of the name of Waverley had in it.  I was
grieved that I had not time to read it through, for it was wonderful
interesting, and far more particular, in many points, than any other
account of that affair I have yet met with; but it's no so friendly to
Protestant principles as I could have wished.  However, if I get my
legacy well settled, I will buy the book, and lend it to you on my
return, please God, to the manse.

We were put on shore at Glasgow by breakfast-time, and there we tarried
all day, as I had a power of attorney to get from Miss Jenny Macbride, my
cousin, to whom the colonel left the thousand pound legacy.  Miss Jenny
thought the legacy should have been more, and made some obstacle to
signing the power; but both her lawyer and Andrew Pringle, my son,
convinced her, that, as it was specified in the testament, she could not
help it by standing out; so at long and last Miss Jenny was persuaded to
put her name to the paper.

Next day we all four got into a fly coach, and, without damage or
detriment, reached this city in good time for dinner in Macgregor's
hotel, a remarkable decent inn, next door to one Mr. Blackwood, a civil
and discreet man in the bookselling line.

Really the changes in Edinburgh since I was here, thirty years ago, are
not to be told.  I am confounded; for although I have both heard and read
of the New Town in the _Edinburgh Advertiser_, and the _Scots Magazine_,
I had no notion of what has come to pass.  It's surprising to think
wherein the decay of the nation is; for at Greenock I saw nothing but
shipping and building; at Glasgow, streets spreading as if they were one
of the branches of cotton-spinning; and here, the houses grown up as if
they were sown in the seed-time with the corn, by a drill-machine, or
dibbled in rigs and furrows like beans and potatoes.

To-morrow, God willing, we embark in a smack at Leith, so that you will
not hear from me again till it please Him to take us in the hollow of His
hand to London.  In the meantime, I have only to add, that, when the
Session meets, I wish you would speak to the elders, particularly to Mr.
Craig, no to be overly hard on that poor donsie thing, Meg Milliken,
about her bairn; and tell Tam Glen, the father o't, from me, that it
would have been a sore heart to that pious woman, his mother, had she
been living, to have witnessed such a thing; and therefore I hope and
trust, he will yet confess a fault, and own Meg for his wife, though she
is but something of a tawpie.  However, you need not diminish her to Tam.
I hope Mr. Snodgrass will give as much satisfaction to the parish as can
reasonably be expected in my absence; and I remain, dear sir, your friend
and pastor,

                                                        ZACHARIAH PRINGLE.

Mr. Micklewham received the Doctor's letter about an hour before the
Session met on the case of Tam Glen and Meg Milliken, and took it with
him to the session-house, to read it to the elders before going into the
investigation.  Such a long and particular letter from the Doctor was, as
they all justly remarked, kind and dutiful to his people, and a great
pleasure to them.

Mr. Daff observed, "Truly the Doctor's a vera funny man, and wonderfu'
jocose about the toddy-bowl."  But Mr. Craig said, that "sic a thing on
the Lord's night gi'es me no pleasure; and I am for setting my face
against Waverley's _History of the Rebellion_, whilk I hae heard spoken
of among the ungodly, both at Kilwinning and Dalry; and if it has no
respect to Protestant principles, I doubt it's but another dose o' the
radical poison in a new guise."  Mr. Icenor, however, thought that "the
observe on the great Doctor Drystour was very edifying; and that they
should see about getting him to help at the summer Occasion." {1}

While they were thus reviewing, in their way, the first epistle of the
Doctor, the betherel came in to say that Meg and Tam were at the door.
"Oh, man," said Mr. Daff, slyly, "ye shouldna hae left them at the door
by themselves."  Mr. Craig looked at him austerely, and muttered
something about the growing immorality of this backsliding age; but
before the smoke of his indignation had kindled into eloquence, the
delinquents were admitted.  However, as we have nothing to do with the
business, we shall leave them to their own deliberations.




