LETTER XXVIII


                                _Miss Rachel Pringle to Miss Isabella Tod_

MY DEAR BELL--I am much obliged by your kind expressions for my little
present.  I hope soon to send you something better, and gloves at the
same time; for Sabre has been brought to the point by an alarm for the
Yorkshire baronet that I mentioned, as showing symptoms of the tender
passion for my fortune.  The friends on both sides being satisfied with
the match, it will take place as soon as some preliminary arrangements
are made.  When we are settled, I hope your mother will allow you to come
and spend some time with us at our country-seat in Berkshire; and I shall
be happy to repay all the expenses of your journey, as a jaunt to England
is what your mother would, I know, never consent to pay for.

It is proposed that, immediately after the ceremony, we shall set out for
France, accompanied by my brother, where we are to be soon after joined
at Paris by some of the Argents, who, I can see, think Andrew worth the
catching for Miss.  My father and mother will then return to Scotland;
but whether the Doctor will continue to keep his parish, or give it up to
Mr. Snodgrass, will depend greatly on the circumstances in which he finds
his parishioners.  This is all the domestic intelligence I have got to
give, but its importance will make up for other deficiencies.

As to the continuance of our discoveries in London, I know not well what
to say.  Every day brings something new, but we lose the sense of
novelty.  Were a fire in the same street where we live, it would no
longer alarm me.  A few nights ago, as we were sitting in the parlour
after supper, the noise of an engine passing startled us all; we ran to
the windows--there was haste and torches, and the sound of other engines,
and all the horrors of a conflagration reddening the skies.  My father
sent out the footboy to inquire where it was; and when the boy came back,
he made us laugh, by snapping his fingers, and saying the fire was not
worth so much--although, upon further inquiry, we learnt that the house
in which it originated was burnt to the ground.  You see, therefore, how
the bustle of this great world hardens the sensibilities, but I trust its
influence will never extend to my heart.

The principal topic of conversation at present is about the queen.  The
Argents, who are our main instructors in the proprieties of London life,
say that it would be very vulgar in me to go to look at her, which I am
sorry for, as I wish above all things to see a personage so illustrious
by birth, and renowned by misfortune.  The Doctor and my mother, who are
less scrupulous, and who, in consequence, somehow, by themselves,
contrive to see, and get into places that are inaccessible to all
gentility, have had a full view of her majesty.  My father has since
become her declared partisan, and my mother too has acquired a leaning
likewise towards her side of the question; but neither of them will
permit the subject to be spoken of before me, as they consider it
detrimental to good morals.  I, however, read the newspapers.

What my brother thinks of her majesty's case is not easy to divine; but
Sabre is convinced of the queen's guilt, upon some private and authentic
information which a friend of his, who has returned from Italy, heard
when travelling in that country.  This information he has not, however,
repeated to me, so that it must be very bad.  We shall know all when the
trial comes on.  In the meantime, his majesty, who has lived in dignified
retirement since he came to the throne, has taken up his abode, with
rural felicity, in a cottage in Windsor Forest; where he now, contemning
all the pomp and follies of his youth, and this metropolis, passes his
days amidst his cabbages, like Dioclesian, with innocence and
tranquillity, far from the intrigues of courtiers, and insensible to the
murmuring waves of the fluctuating populace, that set in with so strong a
current towards "the mob-led queen," as the divine Shakespeare has so
beautifully expressed it.

You ask me about Vauxhall Gardens;--I have not seen them--they are no
longer in fashion--the theatres are quite vulgar--even the opera-house
has sunk into a second-rate place of resort.  Almack's balls, the
Argyle-rooms, and the Philharmonic concerts, are the only public
entertainments frequented by people of fashion; and this high superiority
they owe entirely to the difficulty of gaining admission.  London, as my
brother says, is too rich, and grown too luxurious, to have any exclusive
place of fashionable resort, where price alone is the obstacle.  Hence,
the institution of these select aristocratic assemblies.  The
Philharmonic concerts, however, are rather professional than fashionable
entertainments; but everybody is fond of music, and, therefore,
everybody, that can be called anybody, is anxious to get tickets to them;
and this anxiety has given them a degree of _eclat_, which I am persuaded
the performance would never have excited had the tickets been purchasable
at any price.  The great thing here is, either to be somebody, or to be
patronised by a person that is a somebody; without this, though you were
as rich as Croesus, your golden chariots, like the comets of a season,
blazing and amazing, would speedily roll away into the obscurity from
which they came, and be remembered no more.

At first when we came here, and when the amount of our legacy was first
promulgated, we were in a terrible flutter.  Andrew became a man of
fashion, with all the haste that tailors, and horses, and dinners, could
make him.  My father, honest man, was equally inspired with lofty ideas,
and began a career that promised a liberal benefaction of good things to
the poor--and my mother was almost distracted with calculations about
laying out the money to the best advantage, and the sum she would allow
to be spent.  I alone preserved my natural equanimity; and foreseeing the
necessity of new accomplishments to suit my altered circumstances,
applied myself to the instructions of my masters, with an assiduity that
won their applause.  The advantages of this I now experience--my brother
is sobered from his champaign fumes--my father has found out that charity
begins at home--and my mother, though her establishment is enlarged,
finds her happiness, notwithstanding the legacy, still lies within the
little circle of her household cares.  Thus, my dear Bell, have I proved
the sweets of a true philosophy; and, unseduced by the blandishments of
rank, rejected Sir Marmaduke Towler, and accepted the humbler but more
disinterested swain, Captain Sabre, who requests me to send you his
compliments, not altogether content that you should occupy so much of the
bosom of your affectionate

                                                           RACHEL PRINGLE.

"Rachel had ay a gude roose of hersel'," said Becky Glibbans, as Miss
Isabella concluded.  In the same moment, Mr. Snodgrass took his leave,
saying to Mr. Micklewham, that he had something particular to mention to
him.  "What can it be about?" inquired Mrs. Glibbans at Mr. Craig, as
soon as the helper and schoolmaster had left the room: "Do you think it
can be concerning the Doctor's resignation of the parish in his favour?"
"I'm sure," interposed Mrs. Craig, before her husband could reply, "it
winna be wi' my gudewill that he shall come in upon us--a pridefu' wight,
whose saft words, and a' his politeness, are but lip-deep; na, na, Mrs.
Glibbans, we maun hae another on the leet forbye him."

"And wha would ye put on the leet noo, Mrs. Craig, you that's sic a
judge?" said Mrs. Glibbans, with the most ineffable consequentiality.

"I'll be for young Mr. Dirlton, who is baith a sappy preacher of the
word, and a substantial hand at every kind of civility."

"Young Dirlton!--young Deevilton!" cried the orthodox Deborah of Irvine;
"a fallow that knows no more of a gospel dispensation than I do of the
Arian heresy, which I hold in utter abomination.  No, Mrs. Craig, you
have a godly man for your husband--a sound and true follower; tread ye in
his footsteps, and no try to set up yoursel' on points of doctrine.  But
it's time, Miss Mally, that we were taking the road; Becky and Miss
Isabella, make yourselves ready.  Noo, Mrs. Craig, ye'll no be a
stranger; you see I have no been lang of coming to give you my
countenance; but, my leddy, ca' canny, it's no easy to carry a fu' cup;
ye hae gotten a great gift in your gudeman.  Mr. Craig, I wish you a
good-night; I would fain have stopped for your evening exercise, but Miss
Mally was beginning, I saw, to weary--so good-night; and, Mrs. Craig,
ye'll take tent of what I have said--it's for your gude."  So exeunt Mrs.
Glibbans, Miss Mally, and the two young ladies.  "Her bark's waur than
her bite," said Mrs. Craig, as she returned to her husband, who felt
already some of the ourie symptoms of a henpecked destiny.




