CHAPTER IX--THE MARRIAGE


Mr. Snodgrass was obliged to walk into Irvine one evening, to get rid of
a raging tooth, which had tormented him for more than a week.  The
operation was so delicately and cleverly performed by the surgeon to whom
he applied--one of those young medical gentlemen, who, after having been
educated for the army or navy, are obliged, in this weak piping time of
peace, to glean what practice they can amid their native shades--that the
amiable divine found himself in a condition to call on Miss Isabella Tod.

During this visit, Saunders Dickie, the postman, brought a London letter
to the door, for Miss Isabella; and Mr. Snodgrass having desired the
servant to inquire if there were any for him, had the good fortune to get
the following from Mr. Andrew Pringle:--



LETTER XXIX


                _Andrew Pringle Esq._, _to the Rev. Mr. Charles Snodgrass_

My Dear Friend--I never receive a letter from you without experiencing a
strong emotion of regret, that talents like yours should be wilfully
consigned to the sequestered vegetation of a country pastor's life.  But
we have so often discussed this point, that I shall only offend your
delicacy if I now revert to it more particularly.  I cannot, however, but
remark, that although a private station may be the happiest, a public is
the proper sphere of virtue and talent, so clear, superior, and decided
as yours.  I say this with the more confidence, as I have really, from
your letter, obtained a better conception of the queen's case, than from
all that I have been able to read and hear upon the subject in London.
The rule you lay down is excellent.  Public safety is certainly the only
principle which can justify mankind in agreeing to observe and enforce
penal statutes; and, therefore, I think with you, that unless it could be
proved in a very simple manner, that it was requisite for the public
safety to institute proceedings against the queen--her sins or
indiscretions should have been allowed to remain in the obscurity of her
private circle.

I have attended the trial several times.  For a judicial proceeding, it
seems to me too long--and for a legislative, too technical.  Brougham, it
is allowed, has displayed even greater talent than was expected; but he
is too sharp; he seems to me more anxious to gain a triumph, than to
establish truth.  I do not like the tone of his proceedings, while I
cannot sufficiently admire his dexterity.  The style of Denman is more
lofty, and impressed with stronger lineaments of sincerity.  As for their
opponents, I really cannot endure the Attorney-General as an orator; his
whole mind consists, as it were, of a number of little hands and
claws--each of which holds some scrap or portion of his subject; but you
might as well expect to get an idea of the form and character of a tree,
by looking at the fallen leaves, the fruit, the seeds, and the blossoms,
as anything like a comprehensive view of a subject, from an intellect so
constituted as that of Sir Robert Gifford.  He is a man of application,
but of meagre abilities, and seems never to have read a book of travels
in his life.  The Solicitor-General is somewhat better; but he is one of
those who think a certain artificial gravity requisite to professional
consequence; and which renders him somewhat obtuse in the tact of
propriety.

Within the bar, the talent is superior to what it is without; and I have
been often delighted with the amazing fineness, if I may use the
expression, with which the Chancellor discriminates the shades of
difference in the various points on which he is called to deliver his
opinion.  I consider his mind as a curiosity of no ordinary kind.  It
deceives itself by its own acuteness.  The edge is too sharp; and,
instead of cutting straight through, it often diverges--alarming his
conscience with the dread of doing wrong.  This singular subtlety has the
effect of impairing the reverence which the endowments and high
professional accomplishments of this great man are otherwise calculated
to inspire.  His eloquence is not effective--it touches no feeling nor
affects any passion; but still it affords wonderful displays of a lucid
intellect.  I can compare it to nothing but a pencil of sunshine; in
which, although one sees countless motes flickering and fluctuating, it
yet illuminates, and steadily brings into the most satisfactory
distinctness, every object on which it directly falls.

Lord Erskine is a character of another class, and whatever difference of
opinion may exist with respect to their professional abilities and
attainments, it will be allowed by those who contend that Eldon is the
better lawyer--that Erskine is the greater genius.  Nature herself, with
a constellation in her hand, playfully illuminates his path to the temple
of reasonable justice; while Precedence with her guide-book, and Study
with a lantern, cautiously show the road in which the Chancellor warily
plods his weary way to that of legal Equity.  The sedateness of Eldon is
so remarkable, that it is difficult to conceive that he was ever young;
but Erskine cannot grow old; his spirit is still glowing and flushed with
the enthusiasm of youth.  When impassioned, his voice acquires a
singularly elevated and pathetic accent; and I can easily conceive the
irresistible effect he must have had on the minds of a jury, when he was
in the vigour of his physical powers, and the case required appeals of
tenderness or generosity.  As a parliamentary orator, Earl Grey is
undoubtedly his superior; but there is something much less popular and
conciliating in his manner.  His eloquence is heard to most advantage
when he is contemptuous; and he is then certainly dignified, ardent, and
emphatic; but it is apt, I should think, to impress those who hear him,
for the first time, with an idea that he is a very supercilious
personage, and this unfavourable impression is liable to be strengthened
by the elegant aristocratic languor of his appearance.

I think that you once told me you had some knowledge of the Marquis of
Lansdowne, when he was Lord Henry Petty.  I can hardly hope that, after
an interval of so many years, you will recognise him in the following
sketch:--His appearance is much more that of a Whig than Lord Grey--stout
and sturdy--but still withal gentlemanly; and there is a pleasing
simplicity, with somewhat of good-nature, in the expression of his
countenance, that renders him, in a quiescent state, the more agreeable
character of the two.  He speaks exceedingly well--clear, methodical, and
argumentative; but his eloquence, like himself, is not so graceful as it
is upon the whole manly; and there is a little tendency to verbosity in
his language, as there is to corpulency in his figure; but nothing
turgid, while it is entirely free from affectation.  The character of
respectable is very legibly impressed, in everything about the mind and
manner of his lordship.  I should, now that I have seen and heard him, be
astonished to hear such a man represented as capable of being factious.

I should say something about Lord Liverpool, not only on account of his
rank as a minister, but also on account of the talents which have
qualified him for that high situation.  The greatest objection that I
have to him as a speaker, is owing to the loudness of his voice--in other
respects, what he does say is well digested.  But I do not think that he
embraces his subject with so much power and comprehension as some of his
opponents; and he has evidently less actual experience of the world.
This may doubtless be attributed to his having been almost constantly in
office since he came into public life; than which nothing is more
detrimental to the unfolding of natural ability, while it induces a sort
of artificial talent, connected with forms and technicalities, which,
though useful in business, is but of minor consequence in a comparative
estimate of moral and intellectual qualities.  I am told that in his
manner he resembles Mr. Pitt; be this, however, as it may, he is
evidently a speaker, formed more by habit and imitation, than one whom
nature prompts to be eloquent.  He lacks that occasional accent of
passion, the melody of oratory; and I doubt if, on any occasion, he could
at all approximate to that magnificent intrepidity which was admired as
one of the noblest characteristics of his master's style.

But all the display of learning and eloquence, and intellectual power and
majesty of the House of Lords, shrinks into insignificance when compared
with the moral attitude which the people have taken on this occasion.
You know how much I have ever admired the attributes of the English
national character--that boundless generosity, which can only be compared
to the impartial benevolence of the sunshine--that heroic magnanimity,
which makes the hand ever ready to succour a fallen foe; and that sublime
courage, which rises with the energy of a conflagration roused by a
tempest, at every insult or menace of an enemy.  The compassionate
interest taken by the populace in the future condition of the queen is
worthy of this extraordinary people.  There may be many among them
actuated by what is called the radical spirit; but malignity alone would
dare to ascribe the bravery of their compassion to a less noble feeling
than that which has placed the kingdom so proudly in the van of all
modern nations.  There may be an amiable delusion, as my Lord Castlereagh
has said, in the popular sentiments with respect to the queen.  Upon
that, as upon her case, I offer no opinion.  It is enough for me to have
seen, with the admiration of a worshipper, the manner in which the
multitude have espoused her cause.

But my paper is filled, and I must conclude.  I should, however, mention
that my sister's marriage is appointed to take place to-morrow, and that
I accompany the happy pair to France.--Yours truly,

                                                           ANDREW PRINGLE.

"This is a dry letter," said Mr. Snodgrass, and he handed it to Miss
Isabella, who, in exchange, presented the one which she had herself at
the same time received; but just as Mr. Snodgrass was on the point of
reading it, Miss Becky Glibbans was announced.  "How lucky this is,"
exclaimed Miss Becky, "to find you both thegither!  Now you maun tell me
all the particulars; for Miss Mally Glencairn is no in, and her letter
lies unopened.  I am just gasping to hear how Rachel conducted herself at
being married in the kirk before all the folk--married to the hussar
captain, too, after all! who would have thought it?"

"How, have you heard of the marriage already?" said Miss Isabella.  "Oh,
it's in the newspapers," replied the amiable inquisitant,--"Like ony
tailor or weaver's--a' weddings maun nowadays gang into the papers.  The
whole toun, by this time, has got it; and I wouldna wonder if Rachel
Pringle's marriage ding the queen's divorce out of folk's heads for the
next nine days to come.  But only to think of her being married in a
public kirk.  Surely her father would never submit to hae't done by a
bishop?  And then to put it in the London paper, as if Rachel Pringle had
been somebody of distinction.  Perhaps it might have been more to the
purpose, considering what dragoon officers are, if she had got the doited
Doctor, her father, to publish the intended marriage in the papers
beforehand."

"Haud that condumacious tongue of yours," cried a voice, panting with
haste as the door opened, and Mrs. Glibbans entered.  "Becky, will you
never devawl wi' your backbiting.  I wonder frae whom the misleart lassie
takes a' this passion of clashing."

The authority of her parent's tongue silenced Miss Becky, and Mrs.
Glibbans having seated herself, continued,--"Is it your opinion, Mr.
Snodgrass, that this marriage can hold good, contracted, as I am told it
is mentioned in the papers to hae been, at the horns of the altar of
Episcopalian apostacy?"

"I can set you right as to that," said Miss Isabella.  "Rachel mentions,
that, after returning from the church, the Doctor himself performed the
ceremony anew, according to the Presbyterian usage."  "I am glad to
heart, very glad indeed," said Mrs. Glibbans.  "It would have been a
judgment-like thing, had a bairn of Dr. Pringle's--than whom, although
there may be abler, there is not a sounder man in a' the West of
Scotland--been sacrificed to Moloch, like the victims of prelatic
idolatry."

At this juncture, Miss Mally Glencairn was announced: she entered,
holding a letter from Mrs. Pringle in her hand, with the seal unbroken.
Having heard of the marriage from an acquaintance in the street, she had
hurried home, in the well-founded expectation of hearing from her friend
and well-wisher, and taking up the letter, which she found on her table,
came with all speed to Miss Isabella Tod to commune with her on the
tidings.

Never was any confluence of visitors more remarkable than on this
occasion.  Before Miss Mally had well explained the cause of her abrupt
intrusion, Mr. Micklewham made his appearance.  He had come to Irvine to
be measured for a new coat, and meeting by accident with Saunders Dickie,
got the Doctor's letter from him, which, after reading, he thought he
could do no less than call at Mrs. Tod's, to let Miss Isabella know the
change which had taken place in the condition of her friend.

Thus were all the correspondents of the Pringles assembled, by the merest
chance, like the _dramatis personae_ at the end of a play.  After a
little harmless bantering, it was agreed that Miss Mally should read her
communication first--as all the others were previously acquainted with
the contents of their respective letters, and Miss Mally read as
follows:--



