LETTER XIV


                                _Miss Rachel Pringle to Miss Isabella Tod_
                                                                   LONDON.

MY DEAR BELL--I take up my pen with a feeling of disappointment such as I
never felt before.  Yesterday was the day appointed for the funeral of
the good old king, and it was agreed that we should go to Windsor, to
pour the tribute of our tears upon the royal hearse.  Captain Sabre
promised to go with us, as he is well acquainted with the town, and the
interesting objects around the Castle, so dear to chivalry, and embalmed
by the genius of Shakespeare and many a minor bard, and I promised myself
a day of unclouded felicity--but the captain was ordered to be on
duty,--and the crowd was so rude and riotous, that I had no enjoyment
whatever; but, pining with chagrin at the little respect paid by the
rabble to the virtues of the departed monarch, I would fainly have
retired into some solemn and sequestered grove, and breathed my sorrows
to the listening waste.  Nor was the loss of the captain, to explain and
illuminate the different baronial circumstances around the Castle, the
only thing I had to regret in this ever-memorable excursion--my tender
and affectionate mother was so desirous to see everything in the most
particular manner, in order that she might give an account of the funeral
to Nanny Eydent, that she had no mercy either upon me or my father, but
obliged us to go with her to the most difficult and inaccessible places.
How vain was all this meritorious assiduity! for of what avail can the
ceremonies of a royal funeral be to Miss Nanny, at Irvine, where kings
never die, and where, if they did, it is not at all probable that Miss
Nanny would be employed to direct their solemn obsequies?  As for my
brother, he was so entranced with his own enthusiasm, that he paid but
little attention to us, which made me the more sensible of the want we
suffered from the absence of Captain Sabre.  In a word, my dear Bell,
never did I pass a more unsatisfactory day, and I wish it blotted for
ever from my remembrance.  Let it therefore be consigned to the abysses
of oblivion, while I recall the more pleasing incidents that have
happened since I wrote you last.

On Sunday, according to invitation, as I told you, we dined with the
Argents--and were entertained by them in a style at once most splendid,
and on the most easy footing.  I shall not attempt to describe the
consumable materials of the table, but call your attention, my dear
friend, to the intellectual portion of the entertainment, a subject much
more congenial to your delicate and refined character.

Mrs. Argent is a lady of considerable personal magnitude, of an open and
affable disposition.  In this respect, indeed, she bears a striking
resemblance to her nephew, Captain Sabre, with whose relationship to her
we were unacquainted before that day.  She received us as friends in whom
she felt a peculiar interest; for when she heard that my mother had got
her dress and mine from Cranbury Alley, she expressed the greatest
astonishment, and told us, that it was not at all a place where persons
of fashion could expect to be properly served.  Nor can I disguise the
fact, that the flounced and gorgeous garniture of our dresses was in
shocking contrast to the amiable simplicity of hers and the fair
Arabella, her daughter, a charming girl, who, notwithstanding the
fashionable splendour in which she has been educated, displays a
delightful sprightliness of manner, that, I have some notion, has not
been altogether lost on the heart of my brother.

When we returned upstairs to the drawing-room, after dinner, Miss
Arabella took her harp, and was on the point of favouring us with a
Mozart; but her mother, recollecting that we were Presbyterians, thought
it might not be agreeable, and she desisted, which I was sinful enough to
regret; but my mother was so evidently alarmed at the idea of playing on
the harp on a Sunday night, that I suppressed my own wishes, in filial
veneration for those of that respected parent.  Indeed, fortunate it was
that the music was not performed; for, when we returned home, my father
remarked with great solemnity, that such a way of passing the Lord's
night as we had passed it, would have been a great sin in Scotland.

Captain Sabre, who called on us next morning, was so delighted when he
understood that we were acquainted with his aunt, that he lamented he had
not happened to know it before, as he would, in that case, have met us
there.  He is indeed very attentive, but I assure you that I feel no
particular interest about him; for although he is certainly a very
handsome young man, he is not such a genius as my brother, and has no
literary partialities.  But literary accomplishments are, you know,
foreign to the military profession, and if the captain has not
distinguished himself by cutting up authors in the reviews, he has
acquired an honourable medal, by overcoming the enemies of the civilised
world at Waterloo.

To-night the playhouses open again, and we are going to the Oratorio, and
the captain goes with us, a circumstance which I am the more pleased at,
as we are strangers, and he will tell us the names of the performers.  My
father made some scruple of consenting to be of the party; but when he
heard that an Oratorio was a concert of sacred music, he thought it would
be only a sinless deviation if he did, so he goes likewise.  The captain,
therefore, takes an early dinner with us at five o'clock.  Alas! to what
changes am I doomed,--that was the tea hour at the manse of Garnock.  Oh,
when shall I revisit the primitive simplicities of my native scenes
again!  But neither time nor distance, my dear Bell, can change the
affection with which I subscribe myself, ever affectionately, yours,

                                                           RACHEL PRINGLE.

At the conclusion of this letter, the countenance of Mrs. Glibbans was
evidently so darkened, that it daunted the company, like an eclipse of
the sun, when all nature is saddened.  "What think you, Mr. Snodgrass,"
said that spirit-stricken lady,--"what think you of this dining on the
Lord's day,--this playing on the harp; the carnal Mozarting of that
ungodly family, with whom the corrupt human nature of our friends has
been chambering?"  Mr. Snodgrass was at some loss for an answer, and
hesitated, but Miss Mally Glencairn relieved him from his embarrassment,
by remarking, that "the harp was a holy instrument," which somewhat
troubled the settled orthodoxy of Mrs. Glibbans's visage.  "Had it been
an organ," said Mr. Snodgrass, dryly, "there might have been, perhaps,
more reason to doubt; but, as Miss Mally justly remarks, the harp has
been used from the days of King David in the performances of sacred
music, together with the psalter, the timbrel, the sackbut, and the
cymbal."  The wrath of the polemical Deborah of the Relief-Kirk was
somewhat appeased by this explanation, and she inquired in a more
diffident tone, whether a Mozart was not a metrical paraphrase of the
song of Moses after the overthrow of the Egyptians in the Red Sea; "in
which case, I must own," she observed, "that the sin and guilt of the
thing is less grievous in the sight of HIM before whom all the actions of
men are abominations."  Miss Isabella Tod, availing herself of this break
in the conversation, turned round to Miss Nanny Eydent, and begged that
she would read her letter from Mrs. Pringle.  We should do injustice,
however, to honest worth and patient industry were we, in thus
introducing Miss Nanny to our readers, not to give them some account of
her lowly and virtuous character.

Miss Nanny was the eldest of three sisters, the daughters of a
shipmaster, who was lost at sea when they were very young; and his all
having perished with him, they were indeed, as their mother said, the
children of Poverty and Sorrow.  By the help of a little credit, the
widow contrived, in a small shop, to eke out her days till Nanny was able
to assist her.  It was the intention of the poor woman to take up a
girl's school for reading and knitting, and Nanny was destined to
instruct the pupils in that higher branch of accomplishment--the
different stitches of the sampler.  But about the time that Nanny was
advancing to the requisite degree of perfection in chain-steek and
pie-holes--indeed had made some progress in the Lord's prayer between two
yew trees--tambouring was introduced at Irvine, and Nanny was sent to
acquire a competent knowledge of that classic art, honoured by the fair
hands of the beautiful Helen and the chaste and domestic Andromache.  In
this she instructed her sisters; and such was the fruit of their
application and constant industry, that her mother abandoned the design
of keeping school, and continued to ply her little huxtry in more easy
circumstances.  The fluctuations of trade in time taught them that it
would not be wise to trust to the loom, and accordingly Nanny was at some
pains to learn mantua-making; and it was fortunate that she did so--for
the tambouring gradually went out of fashion, and the flowering which
followed suited less the infirm constitution of poor Nanny.  The making
of gowns for ordinary occasions led to the making of mournings, and the
making of mournings naturally often caused Nanny to be called in at
deaths, which, in process of time, promoted her to have the management of
burials; and in this line of business she has now a large proportion of
the genteelest in Irvine and its vicinity; and in all her various
engagements her behaviour has been as blameless and obliging as her
assiduity has been uniform; insomuch, that the numerous ladies to whom
she is known take a particular pleasure in supplying her with the newest
patterns, and earliest information, respecting the varieties and changes
of fashions; and to the influence of the same good feelings in the breast
of Mrs. Pringle, Nanny was indebted for the following letter.  How far
the information which it contains may be deemed exactly suitable to the
circumstances in which Miss Nanny's lot is cast, our readers may judge
for themselves; but we are happy to state, that it has proved of no small
advantage to her: for since it has been known that she had received a
full, true, and particular account, of all manner of London fashions,
from so managing and notable a woman as the minister's wife of Garnock,
her consideration has been so augmented in the opinion of the
neighbouring gentlewomen, that she is not only consulted as to funerals,
but is often called in to assist in the decoration and arrangement of
wedding-dinners, and other occasions of sumptuous banqueting; by which
she is enabled, during the suspension of the flowering trade, to earn a
lowly but a respected livelihood.



