LETTER XIX


                                _Miss Rachel Pringle to Miss Isabella Tod_
                                                                   LONDON.

MY DEAR BELL--How delusive are the flatteries of fortune!  The wealth
that has been showered upon us, beyond all our hopes, has brought no
pleasure to my heart, and I pour my unavailing sighs for your absence,
when I would communicate the cause of my unhappiness.  Captain Sabre has
been most assiduous in his attentions, and I must confess to your
sympathising bosom, that I do begin to find that he has an interest in
mine.  But my mother will not listen to his proposals, nor allow me to
give him any encouragement, till the fatal legacy is settled.  What can
be her motive for this, I am unable to divine; for the captain's fortune
is far beyond what I could ever have expected without the legacy, and
equal to all I could hope for with it.  If, therefore, there is any doubt
of the legacy being paid, she should allow me to accept him; and if there
is none, what can I do better?  In the meantime, we are going about
seeing the sights; but the general mourning is a great drawback on the
splendour of gaiety.  It ends, however, next Sunday; and then the ladies,
like the spring flowers, will be all in full blossom.  I was with the
Argents at the opera on Saturday last, and it far surpassed my ideas of
grandeur.  But the singing was not good--I never could make out the end
or the beginning of a song, and it was drowned with the violins; the
scenery, however, was lovely; but I must not say a word about the
dancers, only that the females behaved in a manner so shocking, that I
could scarcely believe it was possible for the delicacy of our sex to do.
They are, however, all foreigners, who are, you know, naturally of a
licentious character, especially the French women.

We have taken an elegant house in Baker Street, where we go on Monday
next, and our own new carriage is to be home in the course of the week.
All this, which has been done by the advice of Mrs. Argent, gives my
mother great uneasiness, in case anything should yet happen to the
legacy.  My brother, however, who knows the law better than her, only
laughs at her fears, and my father has found such a wonderful deal to do
in religion here, that he is quite delighted, and is busy from morning to
night in writing letters, and giving charitable donations.  I am soon to
be no less busy, but in another manner.  Mrs. Argent has advised us to
get in accomplished masters for me, so that, as soon as we are removed
into our own local habitation, I am to begin with drawing and music, and
the foreign languages.  I am not, however, to learn much of the piano;
Mrs. A. thinks it would take up more time than I can now afford; but I am
to be cultivated in my singing, and she is to try if the master that
taught Miss Stephens has an hour to spare--and to use her influence to
persuade him to give it to me, although he only receives pupils for
perfectioning, except they belong to families of distinction.

My brother had a hankering to be made a member of Parliament, and got Mr.
Charles Argent to speak to my father about it, but neither he nor my
mother would hear of such a thing, which I was very sorry for, as it
would have been so convenient to me for getting franks; and I wonder my
mother did not think of that, as she grudges nothing so much as the price
of postage.  But nothing do I grudge so little, especially when it is a
letter from you.  Why do you not write me oftener, and tell me what is
saying about us, particularly by that spiteful toad, Becky Glibbans, who
never could hear of any good happening to her acquaintance, without being
as angry as if it was obtained at her own expense?

I do not like Miss Argent so well on acquaintance as I did at first; not
that she is not a very fine lassie, but she gives herself such airs at
the harp and piano--because she can play every sort of music at the first
sight, and sing, by looking at the notes, any song, although she never
heard it, which may be very well in a play-actor, or a governess, that
has to win her bread by music; but I think the education of a modest
young lady might have been better conducted.

Through the civility of the Argents, we have been introduced to a great
number of families, and been much invited; but all the parties are so
ceremonious, that I am never at my ease, which my brother says is owing
to my rustic education, which I cannot understand; for, although the
people are finer dressed, and the dinners and rooms grander than what I
have seen, either at Irvine or Kilmarnock, the company are no wiser; and
I have not met with a single literary character among them.  And what are
ladies and gentlemen without mind, but a well-dressed mob!  It is to mind
alone that I am at all disposed to pay the homage of diffidence.

The acquaintance of the Argents are all of the first circle, and we have
got an invitation to a route from the Countess of J---y, in consequence
of meeting her with them.  She is a charming woman, and I anticipate
great pleasure.  Miss Argent says, however, she is ignorant and
presuming; but how is it possible that she can be so, as she was an
earl's daughter, and bred up for distinction?  Miss Argent may be
presuming, but a countess is necessarily above that, at least it would
only become a duchess or marchioness to say so.  This, however, is not
the only occasion in which I have seen the detractive disposition of that
young lady, who, with all her simplicity of manners and great
accomplishments, is, you will perceive, just like ourselves, rustic as
she doubtless thinks our breeding has been.

I have observed that nobody in London inquires about who another is; and
that in company everyone is treated on an equality, unless when there is
some remarkable personal peculiarity, so that one really knows nothing of
those whom one meets.  But my paper is full, and I must not take another
sheet, as my mother has a letter to send in the same frank to Miss Mally
Glencairn.  Believe me, ever affectionately yours,

                                                           RACHEL PRINGLE.

The three ladies knew not very well what to make of this letter.  They
thought there was a change in Rachel's ideas, and that it was not for the
better; and Miss Isabella expressed, with a sentiment of sincere sorrow,
that the acquisition of fortune seemed to have brought out some unamiable
traits in her character, which, perhaps, had she not been exposed to the
companions and temptations of the great world, would have slumbered,
unfelt by herself, and unknown to her friends.

Mrs. Glibbans declared, that it was a waking of original sin, which the
iniquity of London was bringing forth, as the heat of summer causes the
rosin and sap to issue from the bark of the tree.  In the meantime, Miss
Mally had opened her letter, of which we subjoin a copy.



