LETTER XXXI


                                         _Mrs. Sabre to Miss Isabella Tod_

MY DEAREST BELL--Rachel Pringle is no more!  My heart flutters as I write
the fatal words.  This morning, at nine o'clock precisely, she was
conducted in bridal array to the new church of Mary-le-bone; and there,
with ring and book, sacrificed to the Minotaur, Matrimony, who devours so
many of our bravest youths and fairest maidens.

My mind is too agitated to allow me to describe the scene.  The office of
handmaid to the victim, which, in our young simplicity, we had fondly
thought one of us would perform for the other, was gracefully sustained
by Miss Argent.

On returning from church to my father's residence in Baker Street, where
we breakfasted, he declared himself not satisfied with the formalities of
the English ritual, and obliged us to undergo a second ceremony from
himself, according to the wonted forms of the Scottish Church.  All the
advantages and pleasures of which, my dear Bell, I hope you will soon
enjoy.

But I have no time to enter into particulars.  The captain and his lady,
by themselves, in their own carriage, set off for Brighton in the course
of less than an hour.  On Friday they are to be followed by a large party
of their friends and relations; and, after spending a few days in that
emporium of salt-water pleasures, they embark, accompanied with their
beloved brother, Mr. Andrew Pringle, for Paris; where they are afterwards
to be joined by the Argents.  It is our intention to remain about a month
in the French capital; whether we shall extend our tour, will depend on
subsequent circumstances: in the meantime, however, you will hear
frequently from me.

My mother, who has a thousand times during these important transactions
wished for the assistance of Nanny Eydent, transmits to Miss Mally
Glencairn a box containing all the requisite bridal recognisances for our
Irvine friends.  I need not say that the best is for the faithful
companion of my happiest years.  As I had made a vow in my heart that
Becky Glibbans should never wear gloves for my marriage, I was averse to
sending her any at all, but my mother insisted that no exceptions should
be made.  I secretly took care, however, to mark a pair for her, so much
too large, that I am sure she will never put them on.  The asp will be
not a little vexed at the disappointment.  Adieu for a time, and believe
that, although your affectionate Rachel Pringle be gone that way in which
she hopes you will soon follow, one not less sincerely attached to you,
though it be the first time she has so subscribed herself, remains in

                                                             RACHEL SABRE.

Before the ladies had time to say a word on the subject, the prudent
young clergyman called immediately on Mr. Micklewham to read the letter
which he had received from the Doctor; and which the worthy dominie did
without delay, in that rich and full voice with which he is accustomed to
teach his scholars elocution by example.



LETTER XXXII


     _The Rev. Z. Pringle_, _D.D._, _to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk_, _Garnock_
                                                                   LONDON.

Dear Sir--I have been much longer of replying to your letter of the 3rd
of last month, than I ought in civility to have been, but really time, in
this town of London, runs at a fast rate, and the day passes before the
dark's done.  What with Mrs. Pringle and her daughter's concernments,
anent the marriage to Captain Sabre, and the trouble I felt myself
obliged to take in the queen's affair, I assure you, Mr. Micklewham, that
it's no to be expressed how I have been occupied for the last four weeks.
But all things must come to a conclusion in this world.  Rachel Pringle
is married, and the queen's weary trial is brought to an end--upon the
subject and motion of the same, I offer no opinion, for I made it a point
never to read the evidence, being resolved to stand by THE WORD from the
first, which is clearly and plainly written in the queen's favour, and it
does not do in a case of conscience to stand on trifles; putting,
therefore, out of consideration the fact libelled, and looking both at
the head and the tail of the proceeding, I was of a firm persuasion, that
all the sculduddery of the business might have been well spared from the
eye of the public, which is of itself sufficiently prone to keek and
kook, in every possible way, for a glimpse of a black story; and,
therefore, I thought it my duty to stand up in all places against the
trafficking that was attempted with a divine institution.  And I think,
when my people read how their prelatic enemies, the bishops (the heavens
defend the poor Church of Scotland from being subjected to the weight of
their paws), have been visited with a constipation of the understanding
on that point, it must to them be a great satisfaction to know how clear
and collected their minister was on this fundamental of society.  For it
has turned out, as I said to Mrs. Pringle, as well as others, it would
do, that a sense of grace and religion would be manifested in some
quarter before all was done, by which the devices for an unsanctified
repudiation or divorce would be set at nought.

As often as I could, deeming it my duty as a minister of the word and
gospel, I got into the House of Lords, and heard the trial; and I cannot
think how ever it was expected that justice could be done yonder; for
although no man could be more attentive than I was, every time I came
away I was more confounded than when I went; and when the trial was done,
it seemed to me just to be clearing up for a proper beginning--all which
is a proof that there was a foul conspiracy.  Indeed, when I saw Duke
Hamilton's daughter coming out of the coach with the queen, I never could
think after, that a lady of her degree would have countenanced the queen
had the matter laid to her charge been as it was said.  Not but in any
circumstance it behoved a lady of that ancient and royal blood, to be
seen beside the queen in such a great historical case as a trial.

I hope, in the part I have taken, my people will be satisfied; but
whether they are satisfied or not, my own conscience is content with me.
I was in the House of Lords when her majesty came down for the last time,
and saw her handed up the stairs by the usher of the black-rod, a little
stumpy man, wonderful particular about the rules of the House, insomuch
that he was almost angry with me for stopping at the stair-head.  The
afflicted woman was then in great spirits, and I saw no symptoms of the
swelled legs that Lord Lauderdale, that jooking man, spoke about, for she
skippit up the steps like a lassie.  But my heart was wae for her when
all was over, for she came out like an astonished creature, with a wild
steadfast look, and a sort of something in the face that was as if the
rational spirit had fled away; and she went down to her coach as if she
had submitted to be led to a doleful destiny.  Then the shouting of the
people began, and I saw and shouted too in spite of my decorum, which I
marvel at sometimes, thinking it could be nothing less than an
involuntary testification of the spirit within me.

Anent the marriage of Rachel Pringle, it may be needful in me to state,
for the satisfaction of my people, that although by stress of law we were
obligated to conform to the practice of the Episcopalians, by taking out
a bishop's license, and going to their church, and vowing, in a pagan
fashion, before their altars, which are an abomination to the Lord; yet,
when the young folk came home, I made them stand up, and be married again
before me, according to all regular marriages in our national Church.
For this I had two reasons: first, to satisfy myself that there had been
a true and real marriage; and, secondly, to remove the doubt of the
former ceremony being sufficient; for marriage being of divine
appointment, and the English form and ritual being a thing established by
Act of Parliament, which is of human ordination, I was not sure that
marriage performed according to a human enactment could be a fulfilment
of a divine ordinance.  I therefore hope that my people will approve what
I have done; and in order that there may be a sympathising with me, you
will go over to Banker M---y, and get what he will give you, as ordered
by me, and distribute it among the poorest of the parish, according to
the best of your discretion, my long absence having taken from me the
power of judgment in a matter of this sort.  I wish indeed for the glad
sympathy of my people, for I think that our Saviour turning water into
wine at the wedding, was an example set that we should rejoice and be
merry at the fulfilment of one of the great obligations imposed on us as
social creatures; and I have ever regarded the unhonoured treatment of a
marriage occasion as a thing of evil bodement, betokening heavy hearts
and light purses to the lot of the bride and bridegroom.  You will hear
more from me by and by; in the meantime, all I can say is, that when we
have taken our leave of the young folks, who are going to France, it is
Mrs. Pringle's intent, as well as mine, to turn our horses' heads
northward, and make our way with what speed we can, for our own quiet
home, among you.  So no more at present from your friend and pastor,

                                                               Z. PRINGLE.

Mrs. Tod, the mother of Miss Isabella, a respectable widow lady, who had
quiescently joined the company, proposed that they should now drink
health, happiness, and all manner of prosperity, to the young couple; and
that nothing might be wanting to secure the favourable auspices of good
omens to the toast, she desired Miss Isabella to draw fresh bottles of
white and red.  When all manner of felicity was duly wished in wine to
the captain and his lady, the party rose to seek their respective homes.
But a bustle at the street-door occasioned a pause.  Mrs. Tod inquired
the matter; and three or four voices at once replied, that an express had
come from Garnock for Nanse Swaddle the midwife, Mrs. Craig being taken
with her pains.  "Mr. Snodgrass," said Mrs. Glibbans, instantly and
emphatically, "ye maun let me go with you, and we can spiritualise on the
road; for I hae promis't Mrs. Craig to be wi' her at the crying, to see
the upshot--so I hope you will come awa."

It would be impossible in us to suppose, that Mr. Snodgrass had any
objections to spiritualise with Mrs. Glibbans on the road between Irvine
and Garnock; but, notwithstanding her urgency, he excused himself from
going with her; however, he recommended her to the special care and
protection of Mr. Micklewham, who was at that time on his legs to return
home.  "Oh!  Mr. Snodgrass," said the lady, looking slyly, as she
adjusted her cloak, at him and Miss Isabella, "there will be marrying and
giving in marriage till the day of judgment."  And with these oracular
words she took her departure.




