LETTER XIII


     _The Rev. Z. Pringle_, _D.D._, _to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk of Garnock_
                                                                   LONDON.

DEAR SIR--I have received your letter, and it is a great pleasure to me
to hear that my people were all so much concerned at our distress in the
Leith smack; but what gave me the most contentment was the repentance of
Tam Glen.  I hope, poor fellow, he will prove a good husband; but I have
my doubts; for the wife has really but a small share of common sense, and
no married man can do well unless his wife will let him.  I am, however,
not overly pleased with Mr. Craig on the occasion, for he should have
considered frail human nature, and accepted of poor Tam's confession of a
fault, and allowed the bairn to be baptized without any more ado.  I
think honest Mr. Daff has acted like himself, and I trust and hope there
will be a great gathering at the christening, and, that my mite may not
be wanting, you will slip in a guinea note when the dish goes round, but
in such a manner, that it may not be jealoused from whose hand it comes.

Since my last letter, we have been very thrang in the way of seeing the
curiosities of London; but I must go on regular, and tell you all, which,
I think, it is my duty to do, that you may let my people know.  First,
then, we have been at Windsor Castle, to see the king lying in state,
and, afterwards, his interment; and sorry am I to say, it was not a sight
that could satisfy any godly mind on such an occasion.  We went in a
coach of our own, by ourselves, and found the town of Windsor like a
cried fair.  We were then directed to the Castle gate, where a terrible
crowd was gathered together; and we had not been long in that crowd, till
a pocket-picker, as I thought, cutted off the tail of my coat, with my
pocket-book in my pocket, which I never missed at the time.  But it seems
the coat tail was found, and a policeman got it, and held it up on the
end of his stick, and cried, whose pocket is this? showing the book that
was therein in his hand.  I was confounded to see my pocket-book there,
and could scarcely believe my own eyes; but Mrs. Pringle knew it at the
first glance, and said, "It's my gudeman's"; at the which, there was a
great shout of derision among the multitude, and we would baith have then
been glad to disown the pocket-book, but it was returned to us, I may
almost say, against our will; but the scorners, when they saw our
confusion, behaved with great civility towards us, so that we got into
the Castle-yard with no other damage than the loss of the flap of my coat
tail.

Being in the Castle-yard, we followed the crowd into another gate, and up
a stair, and saw the king lying in state, which was a very dismal
sight--and I thought of Solomon in all his glory, when I saw the coffin,
and the mutes, and the mourners; and reflecting on the long infirmity of
mind of the good old king, I said to myself, in the words of the book of
Job, 'Doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die even
without wisdom!'

When we had seen the sight, we came out of the Castle, and went to an inn
to get a chack of dinner; but there was such a crowd, that no
resting-place could for a time be found for us.  Gentle and semple were
there, all mingled, and no respect of persons; only there was, at a table
nigh unto ours, a fat Glasgow manufacturer, who ordered a bottle of
champaign wine, and did all he could in the drinking of it by himself, to
show that he was a man in well-doing circumstances.  While he was talking
over his wine, a great peer of the realm, with a star on his breast, came
into the room, and ordered a glass of brandy and water; and I could see,
when he saw the Glasgow manufacturer drinking champaign wine on that
occasion, that he greatly marvelled thereat.

When we had taken our dinner, we went out to walk and see the town of
Windsor; but there was such a mob of coaches going and coming, and men
and horses, that we left the streets, and went to inspect the king's
policy, which is of great compass, but in a careless order, though it
costs a world of money to keep it up.  Afterwards, we went back to the
inns, to get tea for Mrs. Pringle and her daughter, while Andrew Pringle,
my son, was seeing if he could get tickets to buy, to let us into the
inside of the Castle, to see the burial--but he came back without luck,
and I went out myself, being more experienced in the world, and I saw a
gentleman's servant with a ticket in his hand, and I asked him to sell it
to me, which the man did with thankfulness, for five shillings, although
the price was said to be golden guineas.  But as this ticket admitted
only one person, it was hard to say what should be done with it when I
got back to my family.  However, as by this time we were all very much
fatigued, I gave it to Andrew Pringle, my son, and Mrs. Pringle, and her
daughter Rachel, agreed to bide with me in the inns.

Andrew Pringle, my son, having got the ticket, left us sitting, when
shortly after in came a nobleman, high in the cabinet, as I think he must
have been, and he having politely asked leave to take his tea at our
table, because of the great throng in the house, we fell into a
conversation together, and he, understanding thereby that I was a
minister of the Church of Scotland, said he thought he could help us into
a place to see the funeral; so, after he had drank his tea, he took us
with him, and got us into the Castle-yard, where we had an excellent
place, near to the Glasgow manufacturer that drank the champaign.  The
drink by this time, however, had got into that poor man's head, and he
talked so loud, and so little to the purpose, that the soldiers who were
guarding were obliged to make him hold his peace, at which he was not a
little nettled, and told the soldiers that he had himself been a soldier,
and served the king without pay, having been a volunteer officer.  But
this had no more effect than to make the soldiers laugh at him, which was
not a decent thing at the interment of their master, our most gracious
Sovereign that was.

However, in this situation we saw all; and I can assure you it was a very
edifying sight; and the people demeaned themselves with so much
propriety, that there was no need for any guards at all; indeed, for that
matter, of the two, the guards, who had eaten the king's bread, were the
only ones there, saving and excepting the Glasgow manufacturer, that
manifested an irreverent spirit towards the royal obsequies.  But they
are men familiar with the king of terrors on the field of battle, and it
was not to be expected that their hearts would be daunted like those of
others by a doing of a civil character.

When all was over, we returned to the inns, to get our chaise, to go back
to London that night, for beds were not to be had for love or money at
Windsor, and we reached our temporary home in Norfolk Street about four
o'clock in the morning, well satisfied with what we had seen,--but all
the meantime I had forgotten the loss of the flap of my coat, which
caused no little sport when I came to recollect what a pookit like body I
must have been, walking about in the king's policy like a peacock without
my tail.  But I must conclude, for Mrs. Pringle has a letter to put in
the frank for Miss Nanny Eydent, which you will send to her by one of
your scholars, as it contains information that may be serviceable to Miss
Nanny in her business, both as a mantua-maker and a superintendent of the
genteeler sort of burials at Irvine and our vicinity.  So that this is
all from your friend and pastor,

                                                        ZACHARIAH PRINGLE.

"I think," said Miss Isabella Tod, as Mr. Micklewham finished the reading
of the Doctor's epistle, "that my friend Rachel might have given me some
account of the ceremony; but Captain Sabre seems to have been a much more
interesting object to her than the pride and pomp to her brother, or even
the Glasgow manufacturer to her father."  In saying these words, the
young lady took the following letter from her pocket, and was on the
point of beginning to read it, when Miss Becky Glibbans exclaimed, "I had
aye my fears that Rachel was but light-headed, and I'll no be surprised
to hear more about her and the dragoon or a's done."  Mr. Snodgrass
looked at Becky, as if he had been afflicted at the moment with
unpleasant ideas; and perhaps he would have rebuked the spitefulness of
her insinuations, had not her mother sharply snubbed the uncongenial
maiden, in terms at least as pungent as any which the reverend gentleman
would have employed.  "I'm sure," replied Miss Becky, pertly, "I meant no
ill; but if Rachel Pringle can write about nothing but this Captain
Sabre, she might as well let it alone, and her letter canna be worth the
hearing."  "Upon that," said the clergyman, "we can form a judgment when
we have heard it, and I beg that Miss Isabella may proceed,"--which she
did accordingly.



