LETTER IX


     _The Rev. Z. Pringle_, _D.D._, _to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk of Garnock_
                                                                   LONDON.

DEAR SIR--I have written by the post that will take this to hand, a
letter to Banker M---y, at Irvine, concerning some small matters of money
that I may stand in need of his opinion anent; and as there is a prospect
now of a settlement of the legacy business, I wish you to take a step
over to the banker, and he will give you ten pounds, which you will
administer to the poor, by putting a twenty-shilling note in the plate on
Sunday, as a public testimony from me of thankfulness for the hope that
is before us; the other nine pounds you will quietly, and in your own
canny way, divide after the following manner, letting none of the
partakers thereof know from what other hand than the Lord's the help
comes, for, indeed, from whom but HIS does any good befall us!

You will give to auld Mizy Eccles ten shillings.  She's a careful
creature, and it will go as far with her thrift as twenty will do with
Effy Hopkirk; so you will give Effy twenty.  Mrs. Binnacle, who lost her
husband, the sailor, last winter, is, I am sure, with her two sickly
bairns, very ill off; I would therefore like if you will lend her a note,
and ye may put half-a-crown in the hand of each of the poor weans for a
playock, for she's a proud spirit, and will bear much before she
complain.  Thomas Dowy has been long unable to do a turn of work, so you
may give him a note too.  I promised that donsie body, Willy Shachle, the
betherel, that when I got my legacy, he should get a guinea, which would
be more to him than if the colonel had died at home, and he had had the
howking of his grave; you may therefore, in the meantime, give Willy a
crown, and be sure to warn him well no to get fou with it, for I'll be
very angry if he does.  But what in this matter will need all your skill,
is the giving of the remaining five pounds to auld Miss Betty Peerie;
being a gentlewoman both by blood and education, she's a very slimmer
affair to handle in a doing of this kind.  But I am persuaded she's in as
great necessity as many that seem far poorer, especially since the muslin
flowering has gone so down.  Her bits of brats are sairly worn, though
she keeps out an apparition of gentility.  Now, for all this trouble, I
will give you an account of what we have been doing since my last.

When we had gotten ourselves made up in order, we went, with Andrew
Pringle, my son, to the counting-house, and had a satisfactory vista of
the residue; but it will be some time before things can be
settled--indeed, I fear, not for months to come--so that I have been
thinking, if the parish was pleased with Mr. Snodgrass, it might be my
duty to my people to give up to him my stipend, and let him be appointed
not only helper, but successor likewise.  It would not be right of me to
give the manse, both because he's a young and inexperienced man, and
cannot, in the course of nature, have got into the way of visiting the
sick-beds of the frail, which is the main part of a pastor's duty, and
likewise, because I wish to die, as I have lived, among my people.  But,
when all's settled, I will know better what to do.

When we had got an inkling from Mr. Argent of what the colonel has
left,--and I do assure you, that money is not to be got, even in the way
of legacy, without anxiety,--Mrs. Pringle and I consulted together, and
resolved, that it was our first duty, as a token of our gratitude to the
Giver of all Good, to make our first outlay to the poor.  So, without
saying a word either to Rachel, or to Andrew Pringle, my son, knowing
that there was a daily worship in the Church of England, we slipped out
of the house by ourselves, and, hiring a hackney conveyance, told the
driver thereof to drive us to the high church of St. Paul's.  This was
out of no respect to the pomp and pride of prelacy, but to Him before
whom both pope and presbyter are equal, as they are seen through the
merits of Christ Jesus.  We had taken a gold guinea in our hand, but
there was no broad at the door; and, instead of a venerable elder,
lending sanctity to his office by reason of his age, such as we see in
the effectual institutions of our own national church--the door was kept
by a young man, much more like a writer's whipper-snapper-clerk, than one
qualified to fill that station, which good King David would have
preferred to dwelling in tents of sin.  However, we were not come to spy
the nakedness of the land, so we went up the outside stairs, and I asked
at him for the plate; "Plate!" says he; "why, it's on the altar!"  I
should have known this--the custom of old being to lay the offerings on
the altar, but I had forgot; such is the force, you see, of habit, that
the Church of England is not so well reformed and purged as ours is from
the abominations of the leaven of idolatry.  We were then stepping
forward, when he said to me, as sharply as if I was going to take an
advantage, "You must pay here."  "Very well, wherever it is customary,"
said I, in a meek manner, and gave him the guinea.  Mrs. Pringle did the
same.  "I cannot give you change," cried he, with as little decorum as if
we had been paying at a playhouse.  "It makes no odds," said I; "keep it
all."  Whereupon he was so converted by the mammon of iniquity, that he
could not be civil enough, he thought--but conducted us in, and showed us
the marble monuments, and the French colours that were taken in the war,
till the time of worship--nothing could surpass his discretion.

At last the organ began to sound, and we went into the place of worship;
but oh, Mr. Micklewham, yon is a thin kirk.  There was not a hearer forby
Mrs. Pringle and me, saving and excepting the relics of popery that
assisted at the service.  What was said, I must, however, in verity
confess, was not far from the point.  But it's still a comfort to see
that prelatical usurpations are on the downfall; no wonder that there is
no broad at the door to receive the collection for the poor, when no
congregation entereth in.  You may, therefore, tell Mr. Craig, and it
will gladden his heart to hear the tidings, that the great Babylonian
madam is now, indeed, but a very little cutty.

On our return home to our lodgings, we found Andrew Pringle, my son, and
Rachel, in great consternation about our absence.  When we told them that
we had been at worship, I saw they were both deeply affected; and I was
pleased with my children, the more so, as you know I have had my doubts
that Andrew Pringle's principles have not been strengthened by the
reading of the _Edinburgh Review_.  Nothing more passed at that time, for
we were disturbed by a Captain Sabre that came up with us in the smack,
calling to see how we were after our journey; and as he was a civil
well-bred young man, which I marvel at, considering he's a Hussar
dragoon, we took a coach, and went to see the lions, as he said; but,
instead of taking us to the Tower of London, as I expected, he ordered
the man to drive us round the town.  In our way through the city he
showed us the Temple Bar, where Lord Kilmarnock's head was placed after
the Rebellion, and pointed out the Bank of England and Royal Exchange.
He said the steeple of the Exchange was taken down shortly ago--and that
the late improvements at the Bank were very grand.  I remembered having
read in the _Edinburgh Advertiser_, some years past, that there was a
great deal said in Parliament about the state of the Exchange, and the
condition of the Bank, which I could never thoroughly understand.  And,
no doubt, the taking own of an old building, and the building up of a new
one so near together, must, in such a crowded city as this, be not only a
great detriment to business, but dangerous to the community at large.

After we had driven about for more than two hours, and neither seen lions
nor any other curiosity, but only the outside of houses, we returned
home, where we found a copperplate card left by Mr. Argent, the colonel's
agent, with the name of his private dwelling-house.  Both me and Mrs.
Pringle were confounded at the sight of this thing, and could not but
think that it prognosticated no good; for we had seen the gentleman
himself in the forenoon.  Andrew Pringle, my son, could give no
satisfactory reason for such an extraordinary manifestation of anxiety to
see us; so that, after sitting on thorns at our dinner, I thought that we
should see to the bottom of the business.  Accordingly, a hackney was
summoned to the door, and me and Andrew Pringle, my son, got into it, and
told the man to drive to second in the street where Mr. Argent lived, and
which was the number of his house.  The man got up, and away we went;
but, after he had driven an awful time, and stopping and inquiring at
different places, he said there was no such house as Second's in the
street; whereupon Andrew Pringle, my son, asked him what he meant, and
the man said that he supposed it was one Second's Hotel, or Coffee-house,
that we wanted.  Now, only think of the craftiness of the ne'er-da-weel;
it was with some difficulty that I could get him to understand, that
second was just as good as number two; for Andrew Pringle, my son, would
not interfere, but lay back in the coach, and was like to split his sides
at my confabulating with the hackney man.  At long and length we got to
the house, and were admitted to Mr. Argent, who was sitting by himself in
his library reading, with a plate of oranges, and two decanters with wine
before him.  I explained to him, as well as I could, my surprise and
anxiety at seeing his card, at which he smiled, and said, it was merely a
sort of practice that had come into fashion of late years, and that,
although we had been at his counting-house in the morning, he considered
it requisite that he should call on his return from the city.  I made the
best excuse I could for the mistake; and the servant having placed
glasses on the table, we were invited to take wine.  But I was grieved to
think that so respectable a man should have had the bottles before him by
himself, the more especially as he said his wife and daughters had gone
to a party, and that he did not much like such sort of things.  But for
all that, we found him a wonderful conversible man; and Andrew Pringle,
my son, having read all the new books put out at Edinburgh, could speak
with him on any subject.  In the course of conversation they touched upon
politick economy, and Andrew Pringle, my son, in speaking about cash in
the Bank of England, told him what I had said concerning the alterations
of the Royal Exchange steeple, with which Mr. Argent seemed greatly
pleased, and jocosely proposed as a toast,--"May the country never suffer
more from the alterations in the Exchange, than the taking down of the
steeple."  But as Mrs. Pringle is wanting to send a bit line under the
same frank to her cousin, Miss Mally Glencairn, I must draw to a
conclusion, assuring you, that I am, dear sir, your sincere friend and
pastor,

                                                        ZACHARIAH PRINGLE.

The impression which this letter made on the auditors of Mr. Micklewham
was highly favourable to the Doctor--all bore testimony to his
benevolence and piety; and Mrs. Glibbans expressed, in very loquacious
terms, her satisfaction at the neglect to which prelacy was consigned.
The only person who seemed to be affected by other than the most sedate
feelings on the occasion was the Rev. Mr. Snodgrass, who was observed to
smile in a very unbecoming manner at some parts of the Doctor's account
of his reception at St. Paul's.  Indeed, it was apparently with the
utmost difficulty that the young clergyman could restrain himself from
giving liberty to his risible faculties.  It is really surprising how
differently the same thing affects different people.  "The Doctor and
Mrs. Pringle giving a guinea at the door of St. Paul's for the poor need
not make folk laugh," said Mrs. Glibbans; "for is it not written, that
whosoever giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord?"  "True, my dear
madam," replied Mr. Snodgrass, "but the Lord to whom our friends in this
case gave their money is the Lord Bishop of London; all the collection
made at the doors of St. Paul's Cathedral is, I understand, a perquisite
of the Bishop's."  In this the reverend gentleman was not very correctly
informed, for, in the first place, it is not a collection, but an
exaction; and, in the second place, it is only sanctioned by the Bishop,
who allows the inferior clergy to share the gains among themselves.  Mrs.
Glibbans, however, on hearing his explanation, exclaimed, "Gude be about
us!" and pushing back her chair with a bounce, streaking down her gown at
the same time with both her hands, added, "No wonder that a judgment is
upon the land, when we hear of money-changers in the temple."  Miss Mally
Glencairn, to appease her gathering wrath and holy indignation, said
facetiously, "Na, na, Mrs. Glibbans, ye forget, there was nae changing of
money there.  The man took the whole guineas.  But not to make a
controversy on the subject, Mr. Snodgrass will now let us hear what
Andrew Pringle, 'my son,' has said to him":--And the reverend gentleman
read the following letter with due circumspection, and in his best
manner:--



