The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Ayrshire Legatees; Or, The Pringle Family
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Ayrshire Legatees; Or, The Pringle Family

Author: John Galt


        
Release date: July 1, 1998 [eBook #1384]
                Most recently updated: August 4, 2008

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1384

Credits: Transcribed from the 1895 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price




Transcribed from the 1895 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





The Ayrshire Legatees


CHAPTER I--THE DEPARTURE


On New Year's day Dr. Pringle received a letter from India, informing him
that his cousin, Colonel Armour, had died at Hydrabad, and left him his
residuary legatee.  The same post brought other letters on the same
subject from the agent of the deceased in London, by which it was evident
to the whole family that no time should be lost in looking after their
interests in the hands of such brief and abrupt correspondents.  "To say
the least of it," as the Doctor himself sedately remarked, "considering
the greatness of the forth-coming property, Messieurs Richard Argent and
Company, of New Broad Street, might have given a notion as to the
particulars of the residue."  It was therefore determined that, as soon
as the requisite arrangements could be made, the Doctor and Mrs. Pringle
should set out for the metropolis, to obtain a speedy settlement with the
agents, and, as Rachel had now, to use an expression of her mother's, "a
prospect before her," that she also should accompany them: Andrew, who
had just been called to the Bar, and who had come to the manse to spend a
few days after attaining that distinction, modestly suggested, that,
considering the various professional points which might be involved in
the objects of his father's journey, and considering also the retired
life which his father had led in the rural village of Garnock, it might
be of importance to have the advantage of legal advice.

Mrs. Pringle interrupted this harangue, by saying, "We see what you would
be at, Andrew; ye're just wanting to come with us, and on this occasion
I'm no for making step-bairns, so we'll a' gang thegither."

The Doctor had been for many years the incumbent of Garnock, which is
pleasantly situated between Irvine and Kilwinning, and, on account of the
benevolence of his disposition, was much beloved by his parishioners.
Some of the pawkie among them used indeed to say, in answer to the godly
of Kilmarnock, and other admirers of the late great John Russel, of that
formerly orthodox town, by whom Dr. Pringle's powers as a preacher were
held in no particular estimation,--"He kens our pu'pit's frail, and
spar'st to save outlay to the heritors."  As for Mrs. Pringle, there is
not such another minister's wife, both for economy and management, within
the jurisdiction of the Synod of Glasgow and Ayr, and to this fact the
following letter to Miss Mally Glencairn, a maiden lady residing in the
Kirkgate of Irvine, a street that has been likened unto the Kingdom of
Heaven, where there is neither marriage nor giving in marriage, will
abundantly testify.



LETTER I


                                    _Mrs. Pringle to Miss Mally Glencairn_
                                                            GARNOCK MANSE.

DEAR MISS MALLY--The Doctor has had extraordinar news from India and
London, where we are all going, as soon as me and Rachel can get
ourselves in order, so I beg you will go to Bailie Delap's shop, and get
swatches of his best black bombaseen, and crape, and muslin, and bring
them over to the manse the morn's morning.  If you cannot come yourself,
and the day should be wat, send Nanny Eydent, the mantua-maker, with
them; you'll be sure to send Nanny, onyhow, and I requeesht that, on this
okasion, ye'll get the very best the Bailie has, and I'll tell you all
about it when you come.  You will get, likewise, swatches of mourning
print, with the lowest prices.  I'll no be so particular about them, as
they are for the servan lasses, and there's no need, for all the
greatness of God's gifts, that we should be wasterful.  Let Mrs. Glibbans
know, that the Doctor's second cousin, the colonel, that was in the East
Indies, is no more;--I am sure she will sympatheese with our loss on this
melancholy okasion.  Tell her, as I'll no be out till our mournings are
made, I would take it kind if she would come over and eate a bit of
dinner on Sunday.  The Doctor will no preach himself, but there's to be
an excellent young man, an acquaintance of Andrew's, that has the repute
of being both sound and hellaquaint.  But no more at present, and looking
for you and Nanny Eydent, with the swatches,--I am, dear Miss Mally, your
sinsare friend,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.

The Doctor being of opinion that, until they had something in hand from
the legacy, they should walk in the paths of moderation, it was resolved
to proceed by the coach from Irvine to Greenock, there embark in a
steam-boat for Glasgow, and, crossing the country to Edinburgh, take
their passage at Leith in one of the smacks for London.  But we must let
the parties speak for themselves.



