LETTER XXIV


                                _Miss Rachel Pringle to Miss Isabella Tod_

MY DEAR BELL--Since my last, we have undergone great changes and
vicissitudes.  Last week we removed to our present house, which is
exceedingly handsome and elegantly furnished; and on Saturday there was
an insurrection of the servants, on account of my mother not allowing
them to have their dinners served up at the usual hour for servants at
other genteel houses.  We have also had the legacy in the funds
transferred to my father, and only now wait the settling of the final
accounts, which will yet take some time.  On the day that the transfer
took place, my mother made me a present of a twenty pound note, to lay
out in any way I thought fit, and in so doing, I could not but think of
you; I have, therefore, in a box which she is sending to Miss Mally
Glencairn, sent you an evening dress from Mrs. Bean's, one of the most
fashionable and tasteful dressmakers in town, which I hope you will wear
with pleasure for my sake.  I have got one exactly like it, so that when
you see yourself in the glass, you will behold in what state I appeared
at Lady ---'s route.

Ah! my dear Bell, how much are our expectations disappointed!  How often
have we, with admiration and longing wonder, read the descriptions in the
newspapers of the fashionable parties in this great metropolis, and
thought of the Grecian lamps, the ottomans, the promenades, the
ornamented floors, the cut glass, the _coup d'oeil_, and the _tout
ensemble_.  "Alas!" as Young the poet says, "the things unseen do not
deceive us."  I have seen more beauty at an Irvine ball, than all the
fashionable world could bring to market at my Lady ---'s emporium for the
disposal of young ladies, for indeed I can consider it as nothing else.

I went with the Argents.  The hall door was open, and filled with the
servants in their state liveries; but although the door was open, the
porter, as each carriage came up, rung a peal upon the knocker, to
announce to all the square the successive arrival of the guests.  We were
shown upstairs to the drawing-rooms.  They were very well, but neither so
grand nor so great as I expected.  As for the company, it was a
suffocating crowd of fat elderly gentlewomen, and misses that stood in
need of all the charms of their fortunes.  One thing I could notice--for
the press was so great, little could be seen--it was, that the old ladies
wore rouge.  The white satin sleeve of my dress was entirely ruined by
coming in contact with a little round, dumpling duchess's cheek--as
vulgar a body as could well be.  She seemed to me to have spent all her
days behind a counter, smirking thankfulness to bawbee customers.

When we had been shown in the drawing-rooms to the men for some time, we
then adjourned to the lower apartments, where the refreshments were set
out.  This, I suppose, is arranged to afford an opportunity to the beaux
to be civil to the belles, and thereby to scrape acquaintance with those
whom they approve, by assisting them to the delicacies.  Altogether, it
was a very dull well-dressed affair, and yet I ought to have been in good
spirits, for Sir Marmaduke Towler, a great Yorkshire baronet, was most
particular in his attentions to me; indeed so much so, that I saw it made
poor Sabre very uneasy.  I do not know why it should, for I have given
him no positive encouragement to hope for anything; not that I have the
least idea that the baronet's attentions were more than commonplace
politeness, but he has since called.  I cannot, however, say that my
vanity is at all flattered by this circumstance.  At the same time, there
surely could be no harm in Sir Marmaduke making me an offer, for you know
I am not bound to accept it.  Besides, my father does not like him, and
my mother thinks he's a fortune-hunter; but I cannot conceive how that
may be, for, on the contrary, he is said to be rather extravagant.

Before we return to Scotland, it is intended that we shall visit some of
the watering-places; and, perhaps, if Andrew can manage it with my
father, we may even take a trip to Paris.  The Doctor himself is not
averse to it, but my mother is afraid that a new war may break out, and
that we may be detained prisoners.  This fantastical fear we shall,
however, try to overcome.  But I am interrupted.  Sir Marmaduke is in the
drawing-room, and I am summoned.--Yours truly,

                                                           RACHEL PRINGLE.

When Mr. Snodgrass had read this letter, he paused for a moment, and then
said dryly, in handing it to Miss Isabella, "Miss Pringle is improving in
the ways of the world."

The evening by this time was far advanced, and the young clergyman was
not desirous to renew the conversation; he therefore almost immediately
took his leave, and walked sedately towards Garnock, debating with
himself as he went along, whether Dr. Pringle's family were likely to be
benefited by their legacy.  But he had scarcely passed the minister's
carse, when he met with Mrs. Glibbans returning.  "Mr. Snodgrass!  Mr.
Snodgrass!" cried that ardent matron from her side of the road to the
other where he was walking, and he obeyed her call; "yon's no sic a black
story as I thought.  Mrs. Craig is to be sure far gane! but they were
married in December; and it was only because she was his servan' lass
that the worthy man didna like to own her at first for his wife.  It
would have been dreadful had the matter been jealoused at the first.  She
gaed to Glasgow to see an auntie that she has there, and he gaed in to
fetch her out, and it was then the marriage was made up, which I was glad
to hear; for, oh, Mr. Snodgrass, it would have been an awfu' judgment had
a man like Mr. Craig turn't out no better than a Tam Pain or a Major
Weir.  But a's for the best; and Him that has the power of salvation can
blot out all our iniquities.  So good-night--ye'll have a lang walk."




