LETTER XV


      _Mrs. Pringle to Miss Nanny Eydent_, _Mantua-maker_, _Seagate Head_,
                                                                  _Irvine_
                                                                   LONDON.

DEAR MISS NANNY--Miss Mally Glencairn would tell you all how it happent
that I was disabled, by our misfortunes in the ship, from riting to you
konserning the London fashons as I promist; for I wantit to be
partikylor, and to say nothing but what I saw with my own eyes, that it
might be servisable to you in your bizness--so now I will begin with the
old king's burial, as you have sometimes okashon to lend a helping hand
in that way at Irvine, and nothing could be more genteeler of the kind
than a royal obsakew for a patron; but no living sole can give a distink
account of this matter, for you know the old king was the father of his
piple, and the croud was so great.  Howsomever we got into our oun hired
shaze at daylight; and when we were let out at the castel yett of
Windsor, we went into the mob, and by and by we got within the castel
walls, when great was the lamentation for the purdition of shawls and
shoos, and the Doctor's coat pouch was clippit off by a pocket-picker.
We then ran to a wicket-gate, and up an old timber-stair with a rope
ravel, and then we got to a great pentit chamber called King George's
Hall: After that we were allowt to go into another room full of guns and
guards, that told us all to be silent: so then we all went like sawlies,
holding our tongues in an awful manner, into a dysmal room hung with
black cloth, and lighted with dum wax-candles in silver skonses, and men
in a row all in mulancholic posters.  At length and at last we came to
the coffin; but although I was as partikylar as possoble, I could see
nothing that I would recommend.  As for the interment, there was nothing
but even-down wastrie--wax-candles blowing away in the wind, and flunkies
as fou as pipers, and an unreverent mob that scarsely could demean
themselves with decency as the body was going by; only the Duke of York,
who carrit the head, had on no hat, which I think was the newest
identical thing in the affair: but really there was nothing that could be
recommended.  Howsomever I understood that there was no draigie, which
was a saving; for the bread and wine for such a multitude would have been
a destruction to a lord's living: and this is the only point that the
fashon set in the king's feunoral may be follot in Irvine.

Since the burial, we have been to see the play, where the leddies were
all in deep murning; but excepting that some had black gum-floors on
their heads, I saw leetil for admiration--only that bugles, I can ashure
you, are not worn at all this season; and surely this murning must be a
vast detrimint to bizness--for where there is no verietie, there can be
but leetil to do in your line.  But one thing I should not forget, and
that is, that in the vera best houses, after tea and coffee after dinner,
a cordial dram is handed about; but likewise I could observe, that the
fruit is not set on with the cheese, as in our part of the country, but
comes, after the cloth is drawn, with the wine; and no such a thing as a
punch-bowl is to be heard of within the four walls of London.
Howsomever, what I principally notised was, that the tea and coffee is
not made by the lady of the house, but out of the room, and brought in
without sugar or milk, on servors, every one helping himself, and only
plain flimsy loaf and butter is served--no such thing as shortbread,
seed-cake, bun, marmlet, or jeelly to be seen, which is an okonomical
plan, and well worthy of adaptation in ginteel families with narrow
incomes, in Irvine or elsewhere.

But when I tell you what I am now going to say, you will not be surprizt
at the great wealth in London.  I paid for a bumbeseen gown, not a bit
better than the one that was made by you that the sore calamity befell,
and no so fine neither, more than three times the price; so you see, Miss
Nanny, if you were going to pouse your fortune, you could not do better
than pack up your ends and your awls and come to London.  But ye're far
better at home--for this is not a town for any creditable young woman
like you, to live in by herself, and I am wearying to be back, though
it's hard to say when the Doctor will get his counts settlet.  I wish
you, howsomever, to mind the patches for the bed-cover that I was going
to patch, for a licht afternoon seam, as the murning for the king will no
be so general with you, and the spring fashons will be coming on to help
my gathering--so no more at present from your friend and well-wisher,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.




CHAPTER VI--PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION


On Sunday morning, before going to church, Mr. Micklewham called at the
manse, and said that he wished particularly to speak to Mr. Snodgrass.
Upon being admitted, he found the young helper engaged at breakfast, with
a book lying on his table, very like a volume of a new novel called
_Ivanhoe_, in its appearance, but of course it must have been sermons
done up in that manner to attract fashionable readers.  As soon, however,
as Mr. Snodgrass saw his visitor, he hastily removed the book, and put it
into the table-drawer.

The precentor having taken a seat at the opposite side of the fire, began
somewhat diffidently to mention, that he had received a letter from the
Doctor, that made him at a loss whether or not he ought to read it to the
elders, as usual, after worship, and therefore was desirous of consulting
Mr. Snodgrass on the subject, for it recorded, among other things, that
the Doctor had been at the playhouse, and Mr. Micklewham was quite sure
that Mr. Craig would be neither to bind nor to hold when he heard that,
although the transgression was certainly mollified by the nature of the
performance.  As the clergyman, however, could offer no opinion until he
saw the letter, the precentor took it out of his pocket, and Mr.
Snodgrass found the contents as follows:--



