LETTER XX


                                    _Mrs. Pringle to Miss Mally Glencairn_
                                                                   LONDON.

DEAR MISS MALLY--I greatly stand in need of your advise and counsel at
this time.  The Doctor's affair comes on at a fearful slow rate, and the
money goes like snow off a dyke.  It is not to be told what has been paid
for legacy-duty, and no legacy yet in hand; and we have been obligated to
lift a whole hundred pounds out of the residue, and what that is to be
the Lord only knows.  But Miss Jenny Macbride, she has got her thousand
pound, all in one bank bill, sent to her; Thomas Bowie, the doctor in
Ayr, he has got his five hundred pounds; and auld Nanse Sorrel, that was
nurse to the cornal, she has got the first year of her twenty pounds a
year; but we have gotten nothing, and I jealouse, that if things go on at
this rate, there will be nothing to get; and what will become of us then,
after all the trubble and outlay that we have been pot too by this coming
to London?

Howsomever, this is the black side of the story; for Mr. Charles Argent,
in a jocose way, proposed to get Andrew made a Parliament member for
three thousand pounds, which he said was cheap; and surely he would not
have thought of such a thing, had he not known that Andrew would have the
money to pay for't; and, over and above this, Mrs. Argent has been
recommending Captain Sabre to me for Rachel, and she says he is a stated
gentleman, with two thousand pounds rental, and her nephew; and surely
she would not think Rachel a match for him, unless she had an inkling
from her gudeman of what Rachel's to get.  But I have told her that we
would think of nothing of the sort till the counts war settled, which she
may tell to her gudeman, and if he approves the match, it will make him
hasten on the settlement, for really I am growing tired of this London,
whar I am just like a fish out of the water.  The Englishers are sae
obstinate in their own way, that I can get them to do nothing like
Christians; and, what is most provoking of all, their ways are very good
when you know them; but they have no instink to teach a body how to learn
them.  Just this very morning, I told the lass to get a jiggot of mutton
for the morn's dinner, and she said there was not such a thing to be had
in London, and threeppit it till I couldna stand her; and, had it not
been that Mr. Argent's French servan' man happened to come with a cart,
inviting us to a ball, and who understood what a jiggot was, I might have
reasoned till the day of doom without redress.  As for the Doctor, I
declare he's like an enchantit person, for he has falling in with a party
of the elect here, as he says, and they have a kilfud yoking every
Thursday at the house of Mr. W---, where the Doctor has been, and was
asked to pray, and did it with great effec, which has made him so up in
the buckle, that he does nothing but go to Bible soceeyetis, and
mishonary meetings, and cherity sarmons, which cost a poor of money.

But what consarns me more than all is, that the temptations of this
vanity fair have turnt the head of Andrew, and he has bought two horses,
with an English man-servan', which you know is an eating moth.  But how
he payt for them, and whar he is to keep them, is past the compass of my
understanding.  In short, if the legacy does not cast up soon, I see
nothing left for us but to leave the world as a legacy to you all, for my
heart will be broken--and I often wish that the cornel hadna made us his
residees, but only given us a clean scorn, like Miss Jenny Macbride,
although it had been no more; for, my dear Miss Mally, it does not doo
for a woman of my time of life to be taken out of her element, and,
instead of looking after her family with a thrifty eye, to be sitting
dressed all day seeing the money fleeing like sclate stanes.  But what I
have to tell is worse than all this; we have been persuaded to take a
furnisht house, where we go on Monday; and we are to pay for it, for
three months, no less than a hundred and fifty pounds, which is more than
the half of the Doctor's whole stipend is, when the meal is twenty-pence
the peck; and we are to have three servan' lassies, besides Andrew's man,
and the coachman that we have hired altogether for ourselves, having been
persuaded to trist a new carriage of our own by the Argents, which I
trust the Argents will find money to pay for; and masters are to come in
to teach Rachel the fasionable accomplishments, Mrs. Argent thinking she
was rather old now to be sent to a boarding-school.  But what I am to get
to do for so many vorashous servants, is dreadful to think, there being
no such thing as a wheel within the four walls of London; and, if there
was, the Englishers no nothing about spinning.  In short, Miss Mally, I
am driven dimentit, and I wish I could get the Doctor to come home with
me to our manse, and leave all to Andrew and Rachel, with kurators; but,
as I said, he's as mickle bye himself as onybody, and says that his
candle has been hidden under a bushel at Garnock more than thirty years,
which looks as if the poor man was fey; howsomever, he's happy in his
delooshon, for if he was afflictit with that forethought and wisdom that
I have, I know not what would be the upshot of all this calamity.  But we
maun hope for the best; and, happen what will, I am, dear Miss Mally,
your sincere friend,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.

Miss Mally sighed as she concluded, and said, "Riches do not always bring
happiness, and poor Mrs. Pringle would have been far better looking after
her cows and her butter, and keeping her lassies at their wark, than with
all this galravitching and grandeur."  "Ah!" added Mrs. Glibbans, "she's
now a testifyer to the truth--she's now a testifyer; happy it will be for
her if she's enabled to make a sanctified use of the dispensation."




CHAPTER VII--DISCOVERIES AND REBELLIONS


One evening as Mr. Snodgrass was taking a solitary walk towards Irvine,
for the purpose of calling on Miss Mally Glencairn, to inquire what had
been her latest accounts from their mutual friends in London, and to read
to her a letter, which he had received two days before, from Mr. Andrew
Pringle, he met, near Eglintoun Gates, that pious woman, Mrs. Glibbans,
coming to Garnock, brimful of some most extraordinary intelligence.  The
air was raw and humid, and the ways were deep and foul; she was, however,
protected without, and tempered within, against the dangers of both.
Over her venerable satin mantle, lined with cat-skin, she wore a scarlet
duffle Bath cloak, with which she was wont to attend the tent sermons of
the Kilwinning and Dreghorn preachings in cold and inclement weather.
Her black silk petticoat was pinned up, that it might not receive injury
from the nimble paddling of her short steps in the mire; and she carried
her best shoes and stockings in a handkerchief to be changed at the
manse, and had fortified her feet for the road in coarse worsted hose,
and thick plain-soled leather shoes.

Mr. Snodgrass proposed to turn back with her, but she would not permit
him.  "No, sir," said she, "what I am about you cannot meddle in.  You
are here but a stranger--come to-day, and gane to-morrow;--and it does
not pertain to you to sift into the doings that have been done before
your time.  Oh dear; but this is a sad thing--nothing like it since the
silencing of M'Auly of Greenock.  What will the worthy Doctor say when he
hears tell o't?  Had it fa'n out with that neighering body, James Daff, I
wouldna hae car't a snuff of tobacco, but wi' Mr. Craig, a man so gifted
wi' the power of the Spirit, as I hae often had a delightful experience!
Ay, ay, Mr. Snodgrass, take heed lest ye fall; we maun all lay it to
heart; but I hope the trooper is still within the jurisdiction of church
censures.  She shouldna be spairt.  Nae doubt, the fault lies with her,
and it is that I am going to search; yea, as with a lighted candle."

Mr. Snodgrass expressed his inability to understand to what Mrs. Glibbans
alluded, and a very long and interesting disclosure took place, the
substance of which may be gathered from the following letter; the
immediate and instigating cause of the lady's journey to Garnock being
the alarming intelligence which she had that day received of Mr. Craig's
servant-damsel Betty having, by the style and title of Mrs. Craig, sent
for Nanse Swaddle, the midwife, to come to her in her own case, which
seemed to Mrs. Glibbans nothing short of a miracle, Betty having, the
very Sunday before, helped the kettle when she drank tea with Mr. Craig,
and sat at the room door, on a buffet-stool brought from the kitchen,
while he performed family worship, to the great solace and edification of
his visitor.



