CHAPTER II--THE VOYAGE


On the fourteenth day after the departure of the family from the manse,
the Rev. Mr. Charles Snodgrass, who was appointed to officiate during the
absence of the Doctor, received the following letter from his old chum,
Mr. Andrew Pringle.  It would appear that the young advocate is not so
solid in the head as some of his elder brethren at the Bar; and therefore
many of his flights and observations must be taken with an allowance on
the score of his youth.



LETTER IV


     _Andrew Pringle_, _Esq._, _Advocate_, _to the Rev. Charles Snodgrass_
                                                                   LONDON.

MY DEAR FRIEND--We have at last reached London, after a stormy passage of
seven days.  The accommodation in the smacks looks extremely inviting in
port, and in fine weather, I doubt not, is comfortable, even at sea; but
in February, and in such visitations of the powers of the air as we have
endured, a balloon must be a far better vehicle than all the vessels that
have been constructed for passengers since the time of Noah.  In the
first place, the waves of the atmosphere cannot be so dangerous as those
of the ocean, being but "thin air"; and I am sure they are not so
disagreeable; then the speed of the balloon is so much greater,--and it
would puzzle Professor Leslie to demonstrate that its motions are more
unsteady; besides, who ever heard of sea-sickness in a balloon? the
consideration of which alone would, to any reasonable person actually
suffering under the pains of that calamity, be deemed more than an
equivalent for all the little fractional difference of danger between the
two modes of travelling.  I shall henceforth regard it as a fine
characteristic trait of our national prudence, that, in their journies to
France and Flanders, the Scottish witches always went by air on
broom-sticks and benweeds, instead of venturing by water in sieves, like
those of England.  But the English are under the influence of a maritime
genius.

When we had got as far up the Thames as Gravesend, the wind and tide came
against us, so that the vessel was obliged to anchor, and I availed
myself of the circumstance, to induce the family to disembark and go to
London by LAND; and I esteem it a fortunate circumstance that we did so,
the day, for the season, being uncommonly fine.  After we had taken some
refreshment, I procured places in a stage-coach for my mother and sister,
and, with the Doctor, mounted myself on the outside.  My father's
old-fashioned notions boggled a little at first to this arrangement,
which he thought somewhat derogatory to his ministerial dignity; but his
scruples were in the end overruled.

The country in this season is, of course, seen to disadvantage, but still
it exhibits beauty enough to convince us what England must be when in
leaf.  The old gentleman's admiration of the increasing signs of what he
called civilisation, as we approached London, became quite eloquent; but
the first view of the city from Blackheath (which, by the bye, is a fine
common, surrounded with villas and handsome houses) overpowered his
faculties, and I shall never forget the impression it made on myself.
The sun was declined towards the horizon; vast masses of dark low-hung
clouds were mingled with the smoky canopy, and the dome of St. Paul's,
like the enormous idol of some terrible deity, throned amidst the smoke
of sacrifices and magnificence, darkness, and mystery, presented
altogether an object of vast sublimity.  I felt touched with reverence,
as if I was indeed approaching the city of THE HUMAN POWERS.

The distant view of Edinburgh is picturesque and romantic, but it affects
a lower class of our associations.  It is, compared to that of London,
what the poem of the _Seasons_ is with respect to _Paradise Lost_--the
castellated descriptions of Walter Scott to the _Darkness_ of Byron--the
_Sabbath_ of Grahame to the _Robbers_ of Schiller.  In the approach to
Edinburgh, leisure and cheerfulness are on the road; large spaces of
rural and pastoral nature are spread openly around, and mountains, and
seas, and headlands, and vessels passing beyond them, going like those
that die, we know not whither, while the sun is bright on their sails,
and hope with them; but, in coming to this Babylon, there is an eager
haste and a hurrying on from all quarters, towards that stupendous pile
of gloom, through which no eye can penetrate; an unceasing sound, like
the enginery of an earthquake at work, rolls from the heart of that
profound and indefinable obscurity--sometimes a faint and yellow beam of
the sun strikes here and there on the vast expanse of edifices; and
churches, and holy asylums, are dimly seen lifting up their countless
steeples and spires, like so many lightning rods to avert the wrath of
Heaven.

The entrance to Edinburgh also awakens feelings of a more pleasing
character.  The rugged veteran aspect of the Old Town is agreeably
contrasted with the bright smooth forehead of the New, and there is not
such an overwhelming torrent of animal life, as to make you pause before
venturing to stem it; the noises are not so deafening, and the occasional
sound of a ballad-singer, or a Highland piper, varies and enriches the
discords; but here, a multitudinous assemblage of harsh alarms, of
selfish contentions, and of furious carriages, driven by a fierce and
insolent race, shatter the very hearing, till you partake of the activity
with which all seem as much possessed as if a general apprehension
prevailed, that the great clock of Time would strike the doom-hour before
their tasks were done.  But I must stop, for the postman with his bell,
like the betherel of some ancient "borough's town" summoning to a burial,
is in the street, and warns me to conclude.--Yours,

                                                           ANDREW PRINGLE.



