LETTER XVI


     _The Rev. Z. Pringle_, _D.D._, _to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk_, _Garnock_
                                                                   LONDON.

DEAR SIR--You will recollect that, about twenty years ago, there was a
great sound throughout all the West that a playhouse in Glasgow had been
converted into a tabernacle of religion.  I remember it was glad tidings
to our ears in the parish of Garnock; and that Mr. Craig, who had just
been ta'en on for an elder that fall, was for having a thanksgiving-day
on the account thereof, holding it to be a signal manifestation of a new
birth in the of-old-godly town of Glasgow, which had become slack in the
way of well-doing, and the church therein lukewarm, like that of
Laodicea.  It was then said, as I well remember, that when the Tabernacle
was opened, there had not been seen, since the Kaimslang wark, such a
congregation as was there assembled, which was a great proof that it's
the matter handled, and not the place, that maketh pure; so that when you
and the elders hear that I have been at the theatre of Drury Lane, in
London, you must not think that I was there to see a carnal stage play,
whether tragical or comical, or that I would so far demean myself and my
cloth, as to be a witness to the chambering and wantonness of
ne'er-du-weel play-actors.  No, Mr. Micklewham, what I went to see was an
Oratorio, a most edifying exercise of psalmody and prayer, under the
management of a pious gentleman, of the name of Sir George Smart, who is,
as I am informed, at the greatest pains to instruct the exhibitioners,
they being, for the most part, before they get into his hands, poor
uncultivated creatures, from Italy, France, and Germany, and other
atheistical and popish countries.

They first sung a hymn together very decently, and really with as much
civilised harmony as could be expected from novices; indeed so well, that
I thought them almost as melodious as your own singing class of the
trades lads from Kilwinning.  Then there was one Mr. Braham, a Jewish
proselyte, that was set forth to show us a specimen of his proficiency.
In the praying part, what he said was no objectionable as to the matter;
but he drawled in his manner to such a pitch, that I thought he would
have broken out into an even-down song, as I sometimes think of yourself
when you spin out the last word in reading out the line in a warm summer
afternoon.  In the hymn by himself, he did better; he was, however,
sometimes like to lose the tune, but the people gave him great
encouragement when he got back again.  Upon the whole, I had no notion
that there was any such Christianity in practice among the Londoners, and
I am happy to tell you, that the house was very well filled, and the
congregation wonderful attentive.  No doubt that excellent man, Mr. W---,
has a hand in these public strainings after grace, but he was not there
that night; for I have seen him; and surely at the sight I could not but
say to myself, that it's beyond the compass of the understanding of man
to see what great things Providence worketh with small means, for Mr.
W--- is a small creature.  When I beheld his diminutive stature, and
thought of what he had achieved for the poor negroes and others in the
house of bondage, I said to myself, that here the hand of Wisdom is
visible, for the load of perishable mortality is laid lightly on his
spirit, by which it is enabled to clap its wings and crow so crously on
the dunghill top of this world; yea even in the House of Parliament.

I was taken last Thursday morning to breakfast with him his house at
Kensington, by an East India man, who is likewise surely a great saint.
It was a heart-healing meeting of many of the godly, which he holds
weekly in the season; and we had such a warsle of the spirit among us
that the like cannot be told.  I was called upon to pray, and a worthy
gentleman said, when I was done, that he never had met with more
apostolic simplicity--indeed, I could see with the tail of my eye, while
I was praying, that the chief saint himself was listening with a curious
pleasant satisfaction.

As for our doings here anent the legacy, things are going forward in the
regular manner; but the expense is terrible, and I have been obliged to
take up money on account; but, as it was freely given by the agents, I am
in hopes all will end well; for, considering that we are but strangers to
them, they would not have assisted us in this matter had they not been
sure of the means of payment in their own hands.

The people of London are surprising kind to us; we need not, if we
thought proper ourselves, eat a dinner in our own lodgings; but it would
ill become me, at my time of life, and with the character for sobriety
that I have maintained, to show an example in my latter days of riotous
living; therefore, Mrs. Pringle, and her daughter, and me, have made a
point of going nowhere three times in the week; but as for Andrew
Pringle, my son, he has forgathered with some acquaintance, and I fancy
we will be obliged to let him take the length of his tether for a while.
But not altogether without a curb neither, for the agent's son, young Mr.
Argent, had almost persuaded him to become a member of Parliament, which
he said he could get him made, for more than a thousand pounds less than
the common price--the state of the new king's health having lowered the
commodity of seats.  But this I would by no means hear of; he is not yet
come to years of discretion enough to sit in council; and, moreover, he
has not been tried; and no man, till he has out of doors shown something
of what he is, should be entitled to power and honour within.  Mrs.
Pringle, however, thought he might do as well as young Dunure; but Andrew
Pringle, my son, has not the solidity of head that Mr. K---dy has, and is
over free and outspoken, and cannot take such pains to make his little go
a great way, like that well-behaved young gentleman.  But you will be
grieved to hear that Mr. K---dy is in opposition to the government; and
truly I am at a loss to understand how a man of Whig principles can be an
adversary to the House of Hanover.  But I never meddled much in politick
affairs, except at this time, when I prohibited Andrew Pringle, my son,
from offering to be a member of Parliament, notwithstanding the great
bargain that he would have had of the place.

And since we are on public concerns, I should tell you, that I was minded
to send you a newspaper at the second-hand, every day when we were done
with it.  But when we came to inquire, we found that we could get the
newspaper for a shilling a week every morning but Sunday, to our
breakfast, which was so much cheaper than buying a whole paper, that Mrs.
Pringle thought it would be a great extravagance; and, indeed, when I
came to think of the loss of time a newspaper every day would occasion to
my people, I considered it would be very wrong of me to send you any at
all.  For I do think that honest folks in a far-off country parish should
not make or meddle with the things that pertain to government,--the more
especially, as it is well known, that there is as much falsehood as truth
in newspapers, and they have not the means of testing their statements.
Not, however, that I am an advocate for passive obedience; God forbid.
On the contrary, if ever the time should come, in my day, of a
saint-slaying tyrant attempting to bind the burden of prelatic
abominations on our backs, such a blast of the gospel trumpet would be
heard in Garnock, as it does not become me to say, but I leave it to you
and others, who have experienced my capacity as a soldier of the word so
long, to think what it would then be.  Meanwhile, I remain, my dear sir,
your friend and pastor,

                                                               Z. PRINGLE.

When Mr. Snodgrass had perused this epistle, he paused some time,
seemingly in doubt, and then he said to Mr. Micklewham, that, considering
the view which the Doctor had taken of the matter, and that he had not
gone to the playhouse for the motives which usually take bad people to
such places, he thought there could be no possible harm in reading the
letter to the elders, and that Mr. Craig, so far from being displeased,
would doubtless be exceedingly rejoiced to learn that the playhouses of
London were occasionally so well employed as on the night when the Doctor
was there.

Mr. Micklewham then inquired if Mr. Snodgrass had heard from Mr. Andrew,
and was answered in the affirmative; but the letter was not read.  Why it
was withheld our readers must guess for themselves; but we have been
fortunate enough to obtain the following copy.



