LETTER II


                                _Miss Rachel Pringle to Miss Isabella Tod_
                                                                 GREENOCK.

MY DEAR ISABELLA--I know not why the dejection with which I parted from
you still hangs upon my heart, and grows heavier as I am drawn farther
and farther away.  The uncertainty of the future--the dangers of the
sea--all combine to sadden my too sensitive spirit.  Still, however, I
will exert myself, and try to give you some account of our momentous
journey.

The morning on which we bade farewell for a time--alas! it was to me as
if for ever, to my native shades of Garnock--the weather was cold, bleak,
and boisterous, and the waves came rolling in majestic fury towards the
shore, when we arrived at the Tontine Inn of Ardrossan.  What a monument
has the late Earl of Eglinton left there of his public spirit!  It should
embalm his memory in the hearts of future ages, as I doubt not but in
time Ardrossan will become a grand emporium; but the people of Saltcoats,
a sordid race, complain that it will be their ruin; and the Paisley
subscribers to his lordship's canal grow pale when they think of profit.

The road, after leaving Ardrossan, lies along the shore.  The blast came
dark from the waters, and the clouds lay piled in every form of grandeur
on the lofty peaks of Arran.  The view on the right hand is limited to
the foot of a range of abrupt mean hills, and on the left it meets the
sea--as we were obliged to keep the glasses up, our drive for several
miles was objectless and dreary.  When we had ascended a hill, leaving
Kilbride on the left, we passed under the walls of an ancient tower.
What delightful ideas are associated with the sight of such venerable
remains of antiquity!

Leaving that lofty relic of our warlike ancestors, we descended again
towards the shore.  On the one side lay the Cumbra Islands, and Bute,
dear to departed royalty.  Afar beyond them, in the hoary magnificence of
nature, rise the mountains of Argyllshire; the cairns, as my brother
says, of a former world.  On the other side of the road, we saw the
cloistered ruins of the religious house of Southenan, a nunnery in those
days of romantic adventure, when to live was to enjoy a poetical element.
In such a sweet sequestered retreat, how much more pleasing to the soul
it would have been, for you and I, like two captive birds in one cage, to
have sung away our hours in innocence, than for me to be thus torn from
you by fate, and all on account of that mercenary legacy, perchance the
spoils of some unfortunate Hindoo Rajah!

At Largs we halted to change horses, and saw the barrows of those who
fell in the great battle.  We then continued our journey along the foot
of stupendous precipices; and high, sublime, and darkened with the shadow
of antiquity, we saw, upon its lofty station, the ancient Castle of
Skelmorlie, where the Montgomeries of other days held their gorgeous
banquets, and that brave knight who fell at Chevy-Chace came pricking
forth on his milk-white steed, as Sir Walter Scott would have described
him.  But the age of chivalry is past, and the glory of Europe departed
for ever!

When we crossed the stream that divides the counties of Ayr and Renfrew,
we beheld, in all the apart and consequentiality of pride, the house of
Kelly overlooking the social villas of Wemyss Bay.  My brother compared
it to a sugar hogshead, and them to cotton-bags; for the lofty thane of
Kelly is but a West India planter, and the inhabitants of the villas on
the shore are Glasgow manufacturers.

To this succeeded a dull drive of about two miles, and then at once we
entered the pretty village of Inverkip.  A slight snow-shower had given
to the landscape a sort of copperplate effect, but still the forms of
things, though but sketched, as it were, with China ink, were calculated
to produce interesting impressions.  After ascending, by a gentle
acclivity, into a picturesque and romantic pass, we entered a spacious
valley, and, in the course of little more than half an hour, reached this
town; the largest, the most populous, and the most superb that I have yet
seen.  But what are all its warehouses, ships, and smell of tar, and
other odoriferous circumstances of fishery and the sea, compared with the
green swelling hills, the fragrant bean-fields, and the peaceful groves
of my native Garnock!

The people of this town are a very busy and clever race, but much given
to litigation.  My brother says, that they are the greatest benefactors
to the Outer House, and that their lawsuits are the most amusing and
profitable before the courts, being less for the purpose of determining
what is right than what is lawful.  The chambermaid of the inn where we
lodge pointed out to me, on the opposite side of the street, a
magnificent edifice erected for balls; but the subscribers have resolved
not to allow any dancing till it is determined by the Court of Session to
whom the seats and chairs belong, as they were brought from another house
where the assemblies were formerly held.  I have heard a lawsuit compared
to a country-dance, in which, after a great bustle and regular confusion,
the parties stand still, all tired, just on the spot where they began;
but this is the first time that the judges of the land have been called
on to decide when a dance may begin.

We arrived too late for the steam-boat, and are obliged to wait till
Monday morning; but to-morrow we shall go to church, where I expect to
see what sort of creatures the beaux are.  The Greenock ladies have a
great name for beauty, but those that I have seen are perfect frights.
Such of the gentlemen as I have observed passing the windows of the inn
may do, but I declare the ladies have nothing of which any woman ought to
be proud.  Had we known that we ran a risk of not getting a steam-boat,
my mother would have provided an introductory letter or two from some of
her Irvine friends; but here we are almost entire strangers: my father,
however, is acquainted with one of the magistrates, and has gone to see
him.  I hope he will be civil enough to ask us to his house, for an inn
is a shocking place to live in, and my mother is terrified at the
expense.  My brother, however, has great confidence in our prospects, and
orders and directs with a high hand.  But my paper is full, and I am
compelled to conclude with scarcely room to say how affectionately I am
yours,

                                                           RACHEL PRINGLE.



