LETTER X


             _Andrew Pringle_, _Esq._, _to the Reverend Charles Snodgrass_

MY DEAR FRIEND--I have heard it alleged, as the observation of a great
traveller, that the manners of the higher classes of society throughout
Christendom are so much alike, that national peculiarities among them are
scarcely perceptible.  This is not correct; the differences between those
of London and Edinburgh are to me very striking.  It is not that they
talk and perform the little etiquettes of social intercourse differently;
for, in these respects, they are apparently as similar as it is possible
for imitation to make them; but the difference to which I refer is an
indescribable something, which can only be compared to peculiarities of
accent.  They both speak the same language; perhaps in classical purity
of phraseology the fashionable Scotchman is even superior to the
Englishman; but there is a flatness of tone in his accent--a lack of what
the musicians call expression, which gives a local and provincial effect
to his conversation, however, in other respects, learned and intelligent.
It is so with his manners; he conducts himself with equal ease,
self-possession, and discernment, but the flavour of the metropolitan
style is wanting.

I have been led to make these remarks by what I noticed in the guests
whom I met on Friday at young Argent's.  It was a small party, only five
strangers; but they seemed to be all particular friends of our host, and
yet none of them appeared to be on any terms of intimacy with each other.
In Edinburgh, such a party would have been at first a little cold; each
of the guests would there have paused to estimate the characters of the
several strangers before committing himself with any topic of
conversation.  But here, the circumstance of being brought together by a
mutual friend, produced at once the purest gentlemanly confidence; each,
as it were, took it for granted, that the persons whom he had come among
were men of education and good-breeding, and, without deeming it at all
necessary that he should know something of their respective political and
philosophical principles, before venturing to speak on such subjects,
discussed frankly, and as things unconnected with party feelings,
incidental occurrences which, in Edinburgh, would have been avoided as
calculated to awaken animosities.

But the most remarkable feature of the company, small as it was,
consisted of the difference in the condition and character of the guests.
In Edinburgh the landlord, with the scrupulous care of a herald or
genealogist, would, for a party, previously unacquainted with each other,
have chosen his guests as nearly as possible from the same rank of life;
the London host had paid no respect to any such consideration--all the
strangers were as dissimilar in fortune, profession, connections, and
politics, as any four men in the class of gentlemen could well be.  I
never spent a more delightful evening.

The ablest, the most eloquent, and the most elegant man present, without
question, was the son of a saddler.  No expense had been spared on his
education.  His father, proud of his talents, had intended him for a seat
in Parliament; but Mr. T--- himself prefers the easy enjoyments of
private life, and has kept himself aloof from politics and parties.  Were
I to form an estimate of his qualifications to excel in public speaking,
by the clearness and beautiful propriety of his colloquial language, I
should conclude that he was still destined to perform a distinguished
part.  But he is content with the liberty of a private station, as a
spectator only, and, perhaps, in that he shows his wisdom; for
undoubtedly such men are not cordially received among hereditary
statesmen, unless they evince a certain suppleness of principle, such as
we have seen in the conduct of more than one political adventurer.

The next in point of effect was young C--- G---.  He evidently languished
under the influence of indisposition, which, while it added to the
natural gentleness of his manners, diminished the impression his
accomplishments would otherwise have made.  I was greatly struck with the
modesty with which he offered his opinions, and could scarcely credit
that he was the same individual whose eloquence in Parliament is by many
compared even to Mr. Canning's, and whose firmness of principle is so
universally acknowledged, that no one ever suspects him of being liable
to change.  You may have heard of his poem "On the Restoration of
Learning in the East," the most magnificent prize essay that the English
Universities have produced for many years.  The passage in which he
describes the talents, the researches, and learning of Sir William Jones,
is worthy of the imagination of Burke; and yet, with all this oriental
splendour of fancy, he has the reputation of being a patient and
methodical man of business.  He looks, however, much more like a poet or
a student, than an orator and a statesman; and were statesmen the sort of
personages which the spirit of the age attempts to represent them, I, for
one, should lament that a young man, possessed of so many amiable
qualities, all so tinted with the bright lights of a fine enthusiasm,
should ever have been removed from the moon-lighted groves and peaceful
cloisters of Magdalen College, to the lamp-smelling passages and factious
debates of St. Stephen's Chapel.  Mr. G--- certainly belongs to that high
class of gifted men who, to the honour of the age, have redeemed the
literary character from the charge of unfitness for the concerns of
public business; and he has shown that talents for affairs of state,
connected with literary predilections, are not limited to mere reviewers,
as some of your old class-fellows would have the world to believe.  When
I contrast the quiet unobtrusive development of Mr. G---'s character with
that bustling and obstreperous elbowing into notice of some of those to
whom the _Edinburgh Review_ owes half its fame, and compare the pure and
steady lustre of his elevation, to the rocket-like aberrations and
perturbed blaze of their still uncertain course, I cannot but think that
we have overrated, if not their ability, at least their wisdom in the
management of public affairs.

The third of the party was a little Yorkshire baronet.  He was formerly
in Parliament, but left it, as he says, on account of its irregularities,
and the bad hours it kept.  He is a Whig, I understand, in politics, and
indeed one might guess as much by looking at him; for I have always
remarked, that your Whigs have something odd and particular about them.
On making the same sort of remark to Argent, who, by the way, is a high
ministerial man, he observed, the thing was not to be wondered at,
considering that the Whigs are exceptions to the generality of mankind,
which naturally accounts for their being always in the minority.  Mr.
T---, the saddler's son, who overheard us, said slyly, "That it might be
so; but if it be true that the wise are few compared to the multitude of
the foolish, things would be better managed by the minority than as they
are at present."

The fourth guest was a stock-broker, a shrewd compound, with all charity
be it spoken, of knavery and humour.  He is by profession an epicure, but
I suspect his accomplishments in that capacity are not very well founded;
I would almost say, judging by the evident traces of craft and
dissimulation in his physiognomy, that they have been assumed as part of
the means of getting into good company, to drive the more earnest trade
of money-making.  Argent evidently understood his true character, though
he treated him with jocular familiarity.  I thought it a fine example of
the intellectual tact and superiority of T---, that he seemed to view him
with dislike and contempt.  But I must not give you my reasons for so
thinking, as you set no value on my own particular philosophy; besides,
my paper tells me, that I have only room left to say, that it would be
difficult in Edinburgh to bring such a party together; and yet they
affect there to have a metropolitan character.  In saying this, I mean
only with reference to manners; the methods of behaviour in each of the
company were precisely similar--there was no eccentricity, but only that
distinct and decided individuality which nature gives, and which no
acquired habits can change.  Each, however, was the representative of a
class; and Edinburgh has no classes exactly of the same kind as those to
which they belonged.--Yours truly,

                                                           ANDREW PRINGLE.

Just as Mr. Snodgrass concluded the last sentence, one of the Clyde
skippers, who had fallen asleep, gave such an extravagant snore, followed
by a groan, that it set the whole company a-laughing, and interrupted the
critical strictures which would otherwise have been made on Mr. Andrew
Pringle's epistle.  "Damn it," said he, "I thought myself in a fog, and
could not tell whether the land ahead was Plada or the Lady Isle."  Some
of the company thought the observation not inapplicable to what they had
been hearing.

Miss Isabella Tod then begged that Miss Mally, their hostess, would
favour the company with Mrs. Pringle's communication.  To this request
that considerate maiden ornament of the Kirkgate deemed it necessary, by
way of preface to the letter, to say, "Ye a' ken that Mrs. Pringle's a
managing woman, and ye maunna expect any metaphysical philosophy from
her."  In the meantime, having taken the letter from her pocket, and
placed her spectacles on that functionary of the face which was destined
to wear spectacles, she began as follows:--



