LETTER XVIII


                                           _Mrs. Pringle to Mrs. Glibbans_
                                                                   LONDON.

MY DEAR MRS. GLIBBANS--The breking up of the old Parlament has been the
cause why I did not right you before, it having taken it out of my poor
to get a frank for my letter till yesterday; and I do ashure you, that I
was most extraordinar uneasy at the great delay, wishing much to let you
know the decayt state of the Gospel in thir perts, which is the pleasure
of your life to study by day, and meditate on in the watches of the
night.

There is no want of going to church, and, if that was a sign of grease
and peese in the kingdom of Christ, the toun of London might hold a high
head in the tabernacles of the faithful and true witnesses.  But saving
Dr. Nichol of Swallo-Street, and Dr. Manuel of London-Wall, there is
nothing sound in the way of preaching here; and when I tell you that Mr.
John Gant, your friend, and some other flea-lugged fallows, have set up a
Heelon congregation, and got a young man to preach Erse to the English,
ye maun think in what a state sinful souls are left in London.  But what
I have been the most consarned about is the state of the dead.  I am no
meaning those who are dead in trespasses and sins, but the true dead.  Ye
will hardly think, that they are buried in a popish-like manner, with
prayers, and white gowns, and ministers, and spadefuls of yerd cast upon
them, and laid in vauts, like kists of orangers in a grocery seller--and
I am told that, after a time, they are taken out when the vaut is
shurfeeted, and their bones brunt, if they are no made into lamp-black by
a secret wark--which is a clean proof to me that a right doctrine cannot
be established in this land--there being so little respec shone to the
dead.

The worst point, howsomever, of all is, what is done with the
prayers--and I have heard you say, that although there was nothing more
to objec to the wonderful Doctor Chammers of Glasgou, that his reading of
his sermons was testimony against him in the great controversy of sound
doctrine; but what will you say to reading of prayers, and no only
reading of prayers, but printed prayers, as if the contreet heart of the
sinner had no more to say to the Lord in the hour of fasting and
humiliation, than what a bishop can indite, and a book-seller make profit
o'.  "Verily," as I may say, in a word of scripter, I doobt if the glad
tidings of salvation have yet been preeched in this land of London; but
the ministers have good stipends, and where the ground is well manured,
it may in time bring forth fruit meet for repentance.

There is another thing that behoves me to mention, and that is, that an
elder is not to be seen in the churches of London, which is a sore signal
that the piple are left to themselves; and in what state the morality can
be, you may guess with an eye of pity.  But on the Sabbath nights, there
is such a going and coming, that it's more like a cried fair than the
Lord's night--all sorts of poor people, instead of meditating on their
bygane toil and misery of the week, making the Sunday their own day, as
if they had not a greater Master to serve on that day, than the earthly
man whom they served in the week-days.  It is, howsomever, past the poor
of nature to tell you of the sinfulness of London; and you may we think
what is to be the end of all things, when I ashure you, that there is a
newspaper sold every Sabbath morning, and read by those that never look
at their Bibles.  Our landlady asked us if we would take one; but I
thought the Doctor would have fired the house, and you know it is not a
small thing that kindles his passion.  In short, London is not a place to
come to hear the tidings of salvation preeched,--no that I mean to deny
that there is not herine more than five righteous persons in it, and I
trust the cornal's hagent is one; for if he is not, we are undone, having
been obligated to take on already more than a hundred pounds of debt, to
the account of our living, and the legacy yet in the dead thraws.  But as
I mean this for a spiritual letter, I will say no more about the root of
all evil, as it is called in the words of truth and holiness; so
referring you to what I have told Miss Mally Glencairn about the legacy
and other things nearest my heart, I remain, my dear Mrs. Glibbans, your
fellou Christian and sinner,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.

Mrs. Glibbans received this letter between the preachings, and it was
observed by all her acquaintance during the afternoon service, that she
was a laden woman.  Instead of standing up at the prayers, as her wont
was, she kept her seat, sitting with downcast eyes, and ever and anon her
left hand, which was laid over her book on the reading-board of the pew,
was raised and allowed to drop with a particular moral emphasis,
bespeaking the mournful cogitations of her spirit.  On leaving the
church, somebody whispered to the minister, that surely Mrs. Glibbans had
heard some sore news; upon which that meek, mild, and modest good soul
hastened towards her, and inquired, with more than his usual kindness,
How she was?  Her answer was brief and mysterious; and she shook her head
in such a manner that showed him all was not right.  "Have you heard
lately of your friends the Pringles?" said he, in his sedate
manner--"when do they think of leaving London?'

"I wish they may ever get out o't," was the agitated reply of the
afflicted lady.

"I am very sorry to hear you say so," responded the minister.  "I thought
all was in a fair way to an issue of the settlement.  I'm very sorry to
hear this."

"Oh, sir," said the mourner, "don't think that I am grieved for them and
their legacy--filthy lucre--no, sir; but I have had a letter that has
made my hair stand on end.  Be none surprised if you hear of the earth
opening, and London swallowed up, and a voice crying in the wilderness,
'Woe, woe.'"

The gentle priest was much surprised by this information; it was evident
that Mrs. Glibbans had received a terrible account of the wickedness of
London; and that the weight upon her pious spirit was owing to that
cause.  He, therefore, accompanied her home, and administered all the
consolation he was able to give; assuring her, that it was in the power
of Omnipotence to convert the stony heart into one of flesh and
tenderness, and to raise the British metropolis out of the miry clay, and
place it on a hill, as a city that could not be hid; which Mrs. Glibbans
was so thankful to hear, that, as soon as he had left her, she took her
tea in a satisfactory frame of mind, and went the same night to Miss
Mally Glencairn to hear what Mrs. Pringle had said to her.  No visit ever
happened more opportunely; for just as Mrs. Glibbans knocked at the door,
Miss Isabella Tod made her appearance.  She had also received a letter
from Rachel, in which it will be seen that reference was made likewise to
Mrs. Pringle's epistle to Miss Mally.



