CHAPTER VIII--THE QUEEN'S TRIAL


As the spring advanced, the beauty of the country around Garnock was
gradually unfolded; the blossom was unclosed, while the church was
embraced within the foliage of more umbrageous boughs.  The schoolboys
from the adjacent villages were, on the Saturday afternoons, frequently
seen angling along the banks of the Lugton, which ran clearer beneath the
churchyard wall, and the hedge of the minister's glebe; and the evenings
were so much lengthened, that the occasional visitors at the manse could
prolong their walk after tea.  These, however, were less numerous than
when the family were at home; but still Mr. Snodgrass, when the weather
was fine, had no reason to deplore the loneliness of his bachelor's
court.

It happened that, one fair and sunny afternoon, Miss Mally Glencairn and
Miss Isabella Tod came to the manse.  Mrs. Glibbans and her daughter
Becky were the same day paying their first ceremonious visit, as the
matron called it, to Mr. and Mrs. Craig, with whom the whole party were
invited to take tea; and, for lack of more amusing chit-chat, the
Reverend young gentleman read to them the last letter which he had
received from Mr. Andrew Pringle.  It was conjured naturally enough out
of his pocket, by an observation of Miss Mally's "Nothing surprises me,"
said that amiable maiden lady, "so much as the health and good-humour of
the commonality.  It is a joyous refutation of the opinion, that the
comfort and happiness of this life depends on the wealth of worldly
possessions."

"It is so," replied Mr. Snodgrass, "and I do often wonder, when I see the
blithe and hearty children of the cottars, frolicking in the abundance of
health and hilarity, where the means come from to enable their poor
industrious parents to supply their wants."

"How can you wonder at ony sic things, Mr. Snodgrass?  Do they not come
from on high," said Mrs. Glibbans, "whence cometh every good and perfect
gift?  Is there not the flowers of the field, which neither card nor
spin, and yet Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
these?"

"I was not speaking in a spiritual sense," interrupted the other, "but
merely made the remark, as introductory to a letter which I have received
from Mr. Andrew Pringle, respecting some of the ways of living in
London."

Mrs. Craig, who had been so recently translated from the kitchen to the
parlour, pricked up her ears at this, not doubting that the letter would
contain something very grand and wonderful, and exclaimed, "Gude safe's,
let's hear't--I'm unco fond to ken about London, and the king and the
queen; but I believe they are baith dead noo."

Miss Becky Glibbans gave a satirical keckle at this, and showed her
superior learning, by explaining to Mrs. Craig the unbroken nature of the
kingly office.  Mr. Snodgrass then read as follows:--



LETTER XXV


                 _Andrew Pringle_, _Esq._, _to the Rev. Charles Snodgrass_

MY DEAR FRIEND--You are not aware of the task you impose, when you
request me to send you some account of the general way of living in
London.  Unless you come here, and actually experience yourself what I
would call the London ache, it is impossible to supply you with any
adequate idea of the necessity that exists in this wilderness of mankind,
to seek refuge in society, without being over fastidious with respect to
the intellectual qualifications of your occasional associates.  In a
remote desart, the solitary traveller is subject to apprehensions of
danger; but still he is the most important thing "within the circle of
that lonely waste"; and the sense of his own dignity enables him to
sustain the shock of considerable hazard with spirit and fortitude.  But,
in London, the feeling of self-importance is totally lost and suppressed
in the bosom of a stranger.  A painful conviction of insignificance--of
nothingness, I may say--is sunk upon his heart, and murmured in his ear
by the million, who divide with him that consequence which he
unconsciously before supposed he possessed in a general estimate of the
world.  While elbowing my way through the unknown multitude that flows
between Charing Cross and the Royal Exchange, this mortifying sense of my
own insignificance has often come upon me with the energy of a pang; and
I have thought, that, after all we can say of any man, the effect of the
greatest influence of an individual on society at large, is but as that
of a pebble thrown into the sea.  Mathematically speaking, the
undulations which the pebble causes, continue until the whole mass of the
ocean has been disturbed to the bottom of its most secret depths and
farthest shores; and, perhaps, with equal truth it may be affirmed, that
the sentiments of the man of genius are also infinitely propagated; but
how soon is the physical impression of the one lost to every sensible
perception, and the moral impulse of the other swallowed up from all
practical effect.

But though London, in the general, may be justly compared to the vast and
restless ocean, or to any other thing that is either sublime,
incomprehensible, or affecting, it loses all its influence over the
solemn associations of the mind when it is examined in its details.  For
example, living on the town, as it is slangishly called, the most
friendless and isolated condition possible, is yet fraught with an
amazing diversity of enjoyment.  Thousands of gentlemen, who have
survived the relish of active fashionable pursuits, pass their life in
that state without tasting the delight of one new sensation.  They rise
in the morning merely because Nature will not allow them to remain longer
in bed.  They begin the day without motive or purpose, and close it after
having performed the same unvaried round as the most thoroughbred
domestic animal that ever dwelt in manse or manor-house.  If you ask them
at three o'clock where they are to dine, they cannot tell you; but about
the wonted dinner-hour, batches of these forlorn bachelors find
themselves diurnally congregated, as if by instinct, around a cozy table
in some snug coffee-house, where, after inspecting the contents of the
bill of fare, they discuss the news of the day, reserving the scandal, by
way of dessert, for their wine.  Day after day their respective political
opinions give rise to keen encounters, but without producing the
slightest shade of change in any of their old ingrained and particular
sentiments.

Some of their haunts, I mean those frequented by the elderly race, are
shabby enough in their appearance and circumstances, except perhaps in
the quality of the wine.  Everything in them is regulated by an ancient
and precise economy, and you perceive, at the first glance, that all is
calculated on the principle of the house giving as much for the money as
it can possibly afford, without infringing those little etiquettes which
persons of gentlemanly habits regard as essentials.  At half price the
junior members of these unorganised or natural clubs retire to the
theatres, while the elder brethren mend their potations till it is time
to go home.  This seems a very comfortless way of life, but I have no
doubt it is the preferred result of a long experience of the world, and
that the parties, upon the whole, find it superior, according to their
early formed habits of dissipation and gaiety, to the sedate but not more
regular course of a domestic circle.

The chief pleasure, however, of living on the town, consists in
accidentally falling in with persons whom it might be otherwise difficult
to meet in private life.  I have several times enjoyed this.  The other
day I fell in with an old gentleman, evidently a man of some consequence,
for he came to the coffee-house in his own carriage.  It happened that we
were the only guests, and he proposed that we should therefore dine
together.  In the course of conversation it came out, that he had been
familiarly acquainted with Garrick, and had frequented the Literary Club
in the days of Johnson and Goldsmith.  In his youth, I conceive, he must
have been an amusing companion; for his fancy was exceedingly lively, and
his manners altogether afforded a very favourable specimen of the old,
the gentlemanly school.  At an appointed hour his carriage came for him,
and we parted, perhaps never to meet again.

Such agreeable incidents, however, are not common, as the frequenters of
the coffee-houses are, I think, usually taciturn characters, and averse
to conversation.  I may, however, be myself in fault.  Our countrymen in
general, whatever may be their address in improving acquaintance to the
promotion of their own interests, have not the best way, in the first
instance, of introducing themselves.  A raw Scotchman, contrasted with a
sharp Londoner, is very inadroit and awkward, be his talents what they
may; and I suspect, that even the most brilliant of your old
class-fellows have, in their professional visits to this metropolis, had
some experience of what I mean.

                                                           ANDREW PRINGLE.

When Mr. Snodgrass paused, and was folding up the letter, Mrs. Craig,
bending with her hands on her knees, said, emphatically, "Noo, sir, what
think you of that?"  He was not, however, quite prepared to give an
answer to a question so abruptly propounded, nor indeed did he exactly
understand to what particular the lady referred.  "For my part," she
resumed, recovering her previous posture--"for my part, it's a very
caldrife way of life to dine every day on coffee; broth and beef would
put mair smeddum in the men; they're just a whin auld fogies that Mr.
Andrew describes, an' no wurth a single woman's pains."  "Wheesht,
wheesht, mistress," cried Mr. Craig; "ye mauna let your tongue rin awa
with your sense in that gait."  "It has but a light load," said Miss
Becky, whispering Isabella Tod.  In this juncture, Mr. Micklewham
happened to come in, and Mrs. Craig, on seeing him, cried out, "I hope,
Mr. Micklewham, ye have brought the Doctor's letter.  He's such a funny
man! and touches off the Londoners to the nines."

"He's a good man," said Mrs. Glibbans, in a tone calculated to repress
the forwardness of Mrs. Craig; but Miss Mally Glencairn having, in the
meanwhile, taken from her pocket an epistle which she had received the
preceding day from Mrs. Pringle, Mr. Snodgrass silenced all controversy
on that score by requesting her to proceed with the reading.  "She's a
clever woman, Mrs. Pringle," said Mrs. Craig, who was resolved to cut a
figure in the conversation in her own house.  "She's a discreet woman,
and may be as godly, too, as some that make mair wark about the elect."
Whether Mrs. Glibbans thought this had any allusion to herself is not
susceptible of legal proof; but she turned round and looked at their
"most kind hostess" with a sneer that might almost merit the appellation
of a snort.  Mrs. Craig, however, pacified her, by proposing, "that,
before hearing the letter, they should take a dram of wine, or pree her
cherry bounce"--adding, "our maister likes a been house, and ye a' ken
that we are providing for a handling."  The wine was accordingly served,
and, in due time, Miss Mally Glencairn edified and instructed the party
with the contents of Mrs. Pringle's letter.



