LETTER XXVII


     _The Rev. Z. Pringle_, _D.D._, _to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk of Garnock_

DEAR SIR--I had a great satisfaction in hearing that Mr. Snodgrass, in my
place, prays for the queen on the Lord's Day, which liberty, to do in our
national church, is a thing to be upholden with a fearless spirit, even
with the spirit of martyrdom, that we may not bow down in Scotland to the
prelatic Baal of an order in Council, whereof the Archbishop of
Canterbury, that is cousin-german to the Pope of Rome, is art and part.
Verily, the sending forth of that order to the General Assembly was
treachery to the solemn oath of the new king, whereby he took the vows
upon him, conform to the Articles of the Union, to maintain the Church of
Scotland as by law established, so that for the Archbishop of Canterbury
to meddle therein was a shooting out of the horns of aggressive
domination.

I think it is right of me to testify thus much, through you, to the
Session, that the elders may stand on their posts to bar all such
breaking in of the Episcopalian boar into our corner of the vineyard.

Anent the queen's case and condition, I say nothing; for be she guilty,
or be she innocent, we all know that she was born in sin, and brought
forth in iniquity--prone to evil, as the sparks fly upwards--and
desperately wicked, like you and me, or any other poor Christian sinner,
which is reason enough to make us think of her in the remembering prayer.

Since she came over, there has been a wonderful work doing here; and it
is thought that the crown will be taken off her head by a strong handling
of the Parliament; and really, when I think of the bishops sitting high
in the peerage, like owls and rooks in the bartisans of an old tower, I
have my fears that they can bode her no good.  I have seen them in the
House of Lords, clothed in their idolatrous robes; and when I looked at
them so proudly placed at the right hand of the king's throne, and on the
side of the powerful, egging on, as I saw one of them doing in a whisper,
the Lord Liverpool, before he rose to speak against the queen, the blood
ran cold in my veins, and I thought of their woeful persecutions of our
national church, and prayed inwardly that I might be keepit in the
humility of a zealous presbyter, and that the corruption of the frail
human nature within me might never be tempted by the pampered whoredoms
of prelacy.

Saving the Lord Chancellor, all the other temporal peers were just as
they had come in from the crown of the causeway--none of them having a
judicial garment, which was a shame; and as for the Chancellor's long
robe, it was not so good as my own gown; but he is said to be a very
narrow man.  What he spoke, however, was no doubt sound law; yet I could
observe he has a bad custom of taking the name of God in vain, which I
wonder at, considering he has such a kittle conscience, which, on less
occasions, causes him often to shed tears.

Mrs. Pringle and me, by ourselves, had a fine quiet canny sight of the
queen, out of the window of a pastry baxter's shop, opposite to where her
majesty stays.  She seems to be a plump and jocose little woman; gleg,
blithe, and throwgaun for her years, and on an easy footing with the
lower orders--coming to the window when they call for her, and becking to
them, which is very civil of her, and gets them to take her part against
the government.

The baxter in whose shop we saw this told us that her majesty said, on
being invited to take her dinner at an inn on the road from Dover, that
she would be content with a mutton-chop at the King's Arms in London, {2}
which shows that she is a lady of a very hamely disposition.  Mrs.
Pringle thought her not big enough for a queen; but we cannot expect
every one to be like that bright accidental star, Queen Elizabeth, whose
effigy we have seen preserved in armour in the Tower of London, and in
wax in Westminster Abbey, where they have a living-like likeness of Lord
Nelson, in the very identical regimentals that he was killed in.  They
are both wonderful places, but it costs a power of money to get through
them, and all the folk about them think of nothing but money; for when I
inquired, with a reverent spirit, seeing around me the tombs of great and
famous men, the mighty and wise of their day, what department it was of
the Abbey--"It's the eighteenpence department," said an uncircumcised
Philistine, with as little respect as if we had been treading the courts
of the darling Dagon.

Our concerns here are now drawing to a close; but before we return, we
are going for a short time to a town on the seaside, which they call
Brighton.  We had a notion of taking a trip to Paris, but that we must
leave to Andrew Pringle, my son, and his sister Rachel, if the bit lassie
could get a decent gudeman, which maybe will cast up for her before we
leave London.  Nothing, however, is settled as yet upon that head, so I
can say no more at present anent the same.

Since the affair of the sermon, I have withdrawn myself from trafficking
so much as I did in the missionary and charitable ploys that are so in
vogue with the pious here, which will be all the better for my own
people, as I will keep for them what I was giving to the unknown; and it
is my design to write a book on almsgiving, to show in what manner that
Christian duty may be best fulfilled, which I doubt not will have the
effect of opening the eyes of many in London to the true nature of the
thing by which I was myself beguiled in this Vanity Fair, like a bird
ensnared by the fowler.

I was concerned to hear of poor Mr. Witherspoon's accident, in falling
from his horse in coming from the Dalmailing occasion.  How thankful he
must be, that the Lord made his head of a durability to withstand the
shock, which might otherwise have fractured his skull.  What you say
about the promise of the braird gives me pleasure on account of the poor;
but what will be done with the farmers and their high rents, if the
harvest turn out so abundant?  Great reason have I to be thankful that
the legacy has put me out of the reverence of my stipend; for when the
meal was cheap, I own to you that I felt my carnality grudging the horn
of abundance that the Lord was then pouring into the lap of the earth.
In short, Mr. Micklewham, I doubt it is o'er true with us all, that the
less we are tempted, the better we are; so with my sincere prayers that
you may be delivered from all evil, and led out of the paths of
temptation, whether it is on the highway, or on the footpaths, or beneath
the hedges, I remain, dear sir, your friend and pastor,

                                                        ZACHARIAH PRINGLE.

"The Doctor," said Mrs. Glibbans, as the schoolmaster concluded, "is
there like himself--a true orthodox Christian, standing up for the word,
and overflowing with charity even for the sinner.  But, Mr. Snodgrass, I
did not ken before that the bishops had a hand in the making of the Acts
of the Parliament; I think, Mr. Snodgrass, if that be the case, there
should be some doubt in Scotland about obeying them.  However that may
be, sure am I that the queen, though she was a perfect Deliah, has
nothing to fear from them; for have we not read in the Book of Martyrs,
and other church histories, of their concubines and indulgences, in the
papist times, to all manner of carnal iniquity?  But if she be that
noghty woman that they say"--"Gude safe's," cried Mrs. Craig, "if she be
a noghty woman, awa' wi' her, awa' wi' her--wha kens the cantrips she may
play us?"

Here Miss Mally Glencairn interposed, and informed Mrs. Craig, that a
noghty woman was not, as she seemed to think, a witch wife.  "I am sure,"
said Miss Becky Glibbans, "that Mrs. Craig might have known that."  "Oh,
ye're a spiteful deevil," whispered Miss Mally, with a smile to her; and
turning in the same moment to Miss Isabella Tod, begged her to read Miss
Pringle's letter--a motion which Mr. Snodgrass seconded chiefly to
abridge the conversation, during which, though he wore a serene
countenance, he often suffered much.



