CHAPTER V--THE ROYAL FUNERAL


Tam Glen having, in consequence of the exhortations of Mr. Micklewham,
and the earnest entreaties of Mr. Daff, backed by the pious
animadversions of the rigidly righteous Mr. Craig, confessed a fault, and
acknowledged an irregular marriage with Meg Milliken, their child was
admitted to church privileges.  But before the day of baptism, Mr. Daff,
who thought Tam had given but sullen symptoms of penitence, said, to put
him in better humour with his fate,--"Noo, Tam, since ye hae beguiled us
of the infare, we maun mak up for't at the christening; so I'll speak to
Mr. Snodgrass to bid the Doctor's friens and acquaintance to the ploy,
that we may get as meikle amang us as will pay for the bairn's baptismal
frock."

Mr. Craig, who was present, and who never lost an opportunity of
testifying, as he said, his "discountenance of the crying iniquity,"
remonstrated with Mr. Daff on the unchristian nature of the proposal,
stigmatising it with good emphasis "as a sinful nourishing of carnality
in his day and generation."  Mr. Micklewham, however, interfered, and
said, "It was a matter of weight and concernment, and therefore it
behoves you to consult Mr. Snodgrass on the fitness of the thing.  For if
the thing itself is not fit and proper, it cannot expect his countenance;
and, on that account, before we reckon on his compliance with what Mr.
Daff has propounded, we should first learn whether he approves of it at
all."  Whereupon the two elders and the session-clerk adjourned to the
manse, in which Mr. Snodgrass, during the absence of the incumbent, had
taken up his abode.

The heads of the previous conversation were recapitulated by Mr.
Micklewham, with as much brevity as was consistent with perspicuity; and
the matter being duly digested by Mr. Snodgrass, that orthodox young
man--as Mrs. Glibbans denominated him, on hearing him for the first
time--declared that the notion of a pay-christening was a benevolent and
kind thought: "For, is not the order to increase and multiply one of the
first commands in the Scriptures of truth?" said Mr. Snodgrass,
addressing himself to Mr. Craig.  "Surely, then, when children are
brought into the world, a great law of our nature has been fulfilled, and
there is cause for rejoicing and gladness!  And is it not an obligation
imposed upon all Christians, to welcome the stranger, and to feed the
hungry, and to clothe the naked; and what greater stranger can there be
than a helpless babe?  Who more in need of sustenance than the infant,
that knows not the way even to its mother's bosom?  And whom shall we
clothe, if we do not the wailing innocent, that the hand of Providence
places in poverty and nakedness before us, to try, as it were, the depth
of our Christian principles, and to awaken the sympathy of our humane
feelings?"

Mr. Craig replied, "It's a' very true and sound what Mr. Snodgrass has
observed; but Tam Glen's wean is neither a stranger, nor hungry, nor
naked, but a sturdy brat, that has been rinning its lane for mair than
sax weeks."  "Ah!" said Mr. Snodgrass familiarly, "I fear, Mr. Craig,
ye're a Malthusian in your heart."  The sanctimonious elder was
thunderstruck at the word.  Of many a various shade and modification of
sectarianism he had heard, but the Malthusian heresy was new to his ears,
and awful to his conscience, and he begged Mr. Snodgrass to tell him in
what it chiefly consisted, protesting his innocence of that, and of every
erroneous doctrine.

Mr. Snodgrass happened to regard the opinions of Malthus on Population as
equally contrary to religion and nature, and not at all founded in truth.
"It is evident, that the reproductive principle in the earth and
vegetables, and all things and animals which constitute the means of
subsistence, is much more vigorous than in man.  It may be therefore
affirmed, that the multiplication of the means of subsistence is an
effect of the multiplication of population, for the one is augmented in
quantity, by the skill and care of the other," said Mr. Snodgrass,
seizing with avidity this opportunity of stating what he thought on the
subject, although his auditors were but the session-clerk, and two elders
of a country parish.  We cannot pursue the train of his argument, but we
should do injustice to the philosophy of Malthus, if we suppressed the
observation which Mr. Daff made at the conclusion.  "Gude safe's!" said
the good-natured elder, "if it's true that we breed faster than the Lord
provides for us, we maun drown the poor folks' weans like kittlings."
"Na, na!" exclaimed Mr. Craig, "ye're a' out, neighbour; I see now the
utility of church-censures."  "True!" said Mr. Micklewham; "and the
ordination of the stool of repentance, the horrors of which, in the
opinion of the fifteen Lords at Edinburgh, palliated child-murder, is
doubtless a Malthusian institution."  But Mr. Snodgrass put an end to the
controversy, by fixing a day for the christening, and telling he would do
his best to procure a good collection, according to the benevolent
suggestion of Mr. Daff.  To this cause we are indebted for the next
series of the Pringle correspondence; for, on the day appointed, Miss
Mally Glencairn, Miss Isabella Tod, Mrs. Glibbans and her daughter Becky,
with Miss Nanny Eydent, together with other friends of the minister's
family, dined at the manse, and the conversation being chiefly about the
concerns of the family, the letters were produced and read.



LETTER XII


                 _Andrew Pringle_, _Esq._, _to the Rev. Charles Snodgrass_
                                                      WINDSOR, CASTLE-INN.

MY DEAR FRIEND--I have all my life been strangely susceptible of pleasing
impressions from public spectacles where great crowds are assembled.
This, perhaps, you will say, is but another way of confessing, that, like
the common vulgar, I am fond of sights and shows.  It may be so, but it
is not from the pageants that I derive my enjoyment.  A multitude, in
fact, is to me as it were a strain of music, which, with an irresistible
and magical influence, calls up from the unknown abyss of the feelings
new combinations of fancy, which, though vague and obscure, as those
nebulae of light that astronomers have supposed to be the rudiments of
unformed stars, afterwards become distinct and brilliant acquisitions.
In a crowd, I am like the somnambulist in the highest degree of the
luminous crisis, when it is said a new world is unfolded to his
contemplation, wherein all things have an intimate affinity with the
state of man, and yet bear no resemblance to the objects that address
themselves to his corporeal faculties.  This delightful experience, as it
may be called, I have enjoyed this evening, to an exquisite degree, at
the funeral of the king; but, although the whole succession of incidents
is indelibly imprinted on my recollection, I am still so much affected by
the emotion excited, as to be incapable of conveying to you any
intelligible description of what I saw.  It was indeed a scene witnessed
through the medium of the feelings, and the effect partakes of the nature
of a dream.

I was within the walls of an ancient castle,

    "So old as if they had for ever stood,
    So strong as if they would for ever stand,"

and it was almost midnight.  The towers, like the vast spectres of
departed ages, raised their embattled heads to the skies, monumental
witnesses of the strength and antiquity of a great monarchy.  A
prodigious multitude filled the courts of that venerable edifice,
surrounding on all sides a dark embossed structure, the sarcophagus, as
it seemed to me at the moment, of the heroism of chivalry.

"A change came o'er the spirit of my dream," and I beheld the scene
suddenly illuminated, and the blaze of torches, the glimmering of arms,
and warriors and horses, while a mosaic of human faces covered like a
pavement the courts.  A deep low under sound pealed from a distance; in
the same moment, a trumpet answered with a single mournful note from the
stateliest and darkest portion of the fabric, and it was whispered in
every ear, "It is coming."  Then an awful cadence of solemn music, that
affected the heart like silence, was heard at intervals, and a numerous
retinue of grave and venerable men,

    "The fathers of their time,
    Those mighty master spirits, that withstood
    The fall of monarchies, and high upheld
    Their country's standard, glorious in the storm,"

passed slowly before me, bearing the emblems and trophies of a king.
They were as a series of great historical events, and I beheld behind
them, following and followed, an awful and indistinct image, like the
vision of Job.  It moved on, and I could not discern the form thereof,
but there were honours and heraldries, and sorrow, and silence, and I
heard the stir of a profound homage performing within the breasts of all
the witnesses.  But I must not indulge myself farther on this subject.  I
cannot hope to excite in you the emotions with which I was so profoundly
affected.  In the visible objects of the funeral of George the Third
there was but little magnificence; all its sublimity was derived from the
trains of thought and currents of feeling, which the sight of so many
illustrious characters, surrounded by circumstances associated with the
greatness and antiquity of the kingdom, was necessarily calculated to
call forth.  In this respect, however, it was perhaps the sublimest
spectacle ever witnessed in this island; and I am sure, that I cannot
live so long as ever again to behold another, that will equally interest
me to the same depth and extent.--Yours,

                                                           ANDREW PRINGLE.

We should ill perform the part of faithful historians, did we omit to
record the sentiments expressed by the company on this occasion.  Mrs.
Glibbans, whose knowledge of the points of orthodoxy had not their equal
in the three adjacent parishes, roundly declared, that Mr. Andrew
Pringle's letter was nothing but a peesemeal of clishmaclavers; that
there was no sense in it; and that it was just like the writer, a canary
idiot, a touch here and a touch there, without anything in the shape of
cordiality or satisfaction.

Miss Isabella Tod answered this objection with that sweetness of manner
and virgin diffidence, which so well becomes a youthful member of the
establishment, controverting the dogmas of a stoop of the Relief
persuasion, by saying, that she thought Mr. Andrew had shown a fine
sensibility.  "What is sensibility without judgment," cried her
adversary, "but a thrashing in the water, and a raising of bells?
Couldna the fallow, without a' his parleyvoos, have said, that such and
such was the case, and that the Lord giveth and the Lord taketh
away?--but his clouds, and his spectres, and his visions of Job!--Oh, an
he could but think like Job!--Oh, an he would but think like the patient
man!--and was obliged to claut his flesh with a bit of a broken crock, we
might have some hope of repentance unto life.  But Andrew Pringle, he's a
gone dick; I never had comfort or expectation of the free-thinker, since
I heard that he was infected with the blue and yellow calamity of the
_Edinburgh Review_; in which, I am credibly told, it is set forth, that
women have nae souls, but only a gut, and a gaw, and a gizzard, like a
pigeon-dove, or a raven-crow, or any other outcast and abominated
quadruped."

Here Miss Mally Glencairn interposed her effectual mediation, and said,
"It is very true that Andrew deals in the diplomatics of obscurity; but
it's well known that he has a nerve for genius, and that, in his own way,
he kens the loan from the crown of the causeway, as well as the duck does
the midden from the adle dib."  To this proverb, which we never heard
before, a learned friend, whom we consulted on the subject, has enabled
us to state, that middens were formerly of great magnitude, and often of
no less antiquity in the west of Scotland; in so much, that the Trongate
of Glasgow owes all its spacious grandeur to them.  It being within the
recollection of persons yet living, that the said magnificent street was
at one time an open road, or highway, leading to the Trone, or
market-cross, with thatched houses on each side, such as may still be
seen in the pure and immaculate royal borough of Rutherglen; and that
before each house stood a luxuriant midden, by the removal of which, in
the progress of modern degeneracy, the stately architecture of Argyle
Street was formed.  But not to insist at too great a length on such
topics of antiquarian lore, we shall now insert Dr. Pringle's account of
the funeral, and which, patly enough, follows our digression concerning
the middens and magnificence of Glasgow, as it contains an authentic
anecdote of a manufacturer from that city, drinking champaign at the
king's dirgie.



