LETTER XXX


                                    _Mrs. Pringle to Miss Mally Glencairn_

DEAR MISS MALLY--I hav a cro to pik with you conserning yoor comishon
aboot the partickels for your friends.  You can hav no noshon what the
Doctor and me suffert on the head of the flooring shrubs.  We took your
Nota Beny as it was spilt, and went from shop to shop enquirin in a most
partiklar manner for "a Gardner's Bell, or the least of all flowering
plants"; but sorrow a gardner in the whole tot here in London ever had
heard of sic a thing; so we gave the porshoot up in despare.  Howsomever,
one of Andrew's acquaintance--a decent lad, who is only son to a saddler
in a been way, that keeps his own carriage, and his son a coryikel,
happent to call, and the Doctor told him what ill socsess we had in our
serch for the gardner's bell; upon which he sought a sight of your
yepissle, and read it as a thing that was just wonderful for its
whorsogroffie; and then he sayid, that looking at the prinsipol of your
spilling, he thought we should reed, "a gardner's bill, or a list of all
flooring plants"; whilk being no doot your intent, I have proqurt the
same, and it is included heerin.  But, Miss Mally, I would advize you to
be more exac in your inditing, that no sic torbolashon may hippen on a
future okashon.

What I hav to say for the present is, that you will, by a smak, get a
bocks of kumoddities, whilk you will destraboot as derekit on every on of
them, and you will before have resievit by the post-offis, an account of
what has been don.  I need say no forther at this time, knowin your
discreshon and prooduns, septs that our Rachel and Captain Sabor will, if
it pleese the Lord, be off to Parish, by way of Bryton, as man and wife,
the morn's morning.  What her father the Doctor gives for tocher, what is
settlt on her for jontor, I will tell you all aboot when we meet; for
it's our dishire noo to lose no tim in retorning to the manse, this being
the last of our diplomaticals in London, where we have found the Argents
a most discrit family, payin to the last farding the Cornal's legacy, and
most seevil, and well bred to us.

As I am naterally gretly okypt with this matteromoneal afair, you cannot
expect ony news; but the queen is going on with a dreadful rat, by which
the pesents hav falen more than a whole entirr pesent.  I wish our fonds
were well oot of them, and in yird and stane, which is a constansie.  But
what is to become of the poor donsie woman, no one can expound.  Some
think she will be pot in the Toor of London, and her head chappit off;
others think she will raise sic a stramash, that she will send the whole
government into the air, like peelings of ingons, by a gunpoother plot.
But it's my opinion, and I have weighed the matter well in my
understanding, that she will hav to fight with sword in hand, be she ill,
or be she good.  How els can she hop to get the better of more than two
hundred lords, as the Doctor, who has seen them, tells me, with princes
of the blood-royal, and the prelatic bishops, whom, I need not tell you,
are the worst of all.

But the thing I grudge most, is to be so long in Lundon, and no to see
the king.  Is it not a hard thing to come to London, and no to see the
king?  I am not pleesed with him, I assure you, becose he does not set
himself out to public view, like ony other curiosity, but stays in his
palis, they say, like one of the anshent wooden images of idolatry, the
which is a great peety, he beeing, as I am told, a beautiful man, and
more the gentleman than all the coortiers of his court.

The Doctor has been minting to me that there is an address from Irvine to
the queen; and he, being so near a neighbour to your toun, has been
thinking to pay his respecs with it, to see her near at hand.  But I will
say nothing; he may take his own way in matters of gospel and
spiritualety; yet I have my scroopols of conshence, how this may not turn
out a rebellyon against the king; and I would hav him to sift and see who
are at the address, before he pits his han to it.  For, if it's a radikol
job, as I jealoos it is, what will the Doctor then say? who is an
orthodox man, as the world nose.

In the maitre of our dumesticks, no new axsident has cast up; but I have
seen such a wonder as could not have been forethocht.  Having a washin, I
went down to see how the lassies were doing; but judge of my feelings,
when I saw them triomphing on the top of pattons, standing upright before
the boyns on chairs, rubbin the clothes to juggins between their hands,
above the sapples, with their gouns and stays on, and round-cared
mutches.  What would you think of such a miracle at the washing-house in
the Goffields, or the Gallows-knows of Irvine?  The cook, howsomever, has
shown me a way to make rice-puddings without eggs, by putting in a bit of
shoohet, which is as good--and this you will tell Miss Nanny Eydent;
likewise, that the most fashionable way of boiling green pis, is to pit a
blade of spearmint in the pot, which gives a fine flavour.  But this is a
long letter, and my pepper is done; so no more, but remains your friend
and well-wisher,

                                                            JANET PRINGLE.

"A great legacy, and her dochtir married, in ae journey to London, is
doing business," said Mrs. Glibbans, with a sigh, as she looked to her
only get, Miss Becky; "but the Lord's will is to be done in a'
thing;--sooner or later something of the same kind will come, I trust, to
all our families."  "Ay," replied Miss Mally Glencairn, "marriage is like
death--it's what we are a' to come to."

"I have my doubts of that," said Miss Becky with a sneer.  "Ye have been
lang spair't from it, Miss Mally."

"Ye're a spiteful puddock; and if the men hae the e'en and lugs they used
to hae, gude pity him whose lot is cast with thine, Becky Glibbans,"
replied the elderly maiden ornament of the Kirkgate, somewhat tartly.

Here Mr. Snodgrass interposed, and said, he would read to them the letter
which Miss Isabella had received from the bride; and without waiting for
their concurrence, opened and read as follows:--



