LETTER V


               _The Rev. Dr. Pringle to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk_, _Garnock_
                                        LONDON, 49 NORFOLK STREET, STRAND.

DEAR SIR--On the first Sunday forthcoming after the receiving hereof, you
will not fail to recollect in the remembering prayer, that we return
thanks for our safe arrival in London, after a dangerous voyage.  Well,
indeed, is it ordained that we should pray for those who go down to the
sea in ships, and do business on the great deep; for what me and mine
have come through is unspeakable, and the hand of Providence was visibly
manifested.

On the day of our embarkation at Leith, a fair wind took us onward at a
blithe rate for some time; but in the course of that night the bridle of
the tempest was slackened, and the curb of the billows loosened, and the
ship reeled to and fro like a drunken man, and no one could stand
therein.  My wife and daughter lay at the point of death; Andrew Pringle,
my son, also was prostrated with the grievous affliction; and the very
soul within me was as if it would have been cast out of the body.

On the following day the storm abated, and the wind blew favourable; but
towards the heel of the evening it again came vehement, and there was no
help unto our distress.  About midnight, however, it pleased HIM, whose
breath is the tempest, to be more sparing with the whip of His
displeasure on our poor bark, as she hirpled on in her toilsome journey
through the waters; and I was enabled, through His strength, to lift my
head from the pillow of sickness, and ascend the deck, where I thought of
Noah looking out of the window in the ark, upon the face of the desolate
flood, and of Peter walking on the sea; and I said to myself, it matters
not where we are, for we can be in no place where Jehovah is not there
likewise, whether it be on the waves of the ocean, or the mountain tops,
or in the valley and shadow of death.

The third day the wind came contrary, and in the fourth, and the fifth,
and the sixth, we were also sorely buffeted; but on the night of the
sixth we entered the mouth of the river Thames, and on the morning of the
seventh day of our departure, we cast anchor near a town called
Gravesend, where, to our exceeding great joy, it pleased Him, in whom
alone there is salvation, to allow us once more to put our foot on the
dry land.

When we had partaken of a repast, the first blessed with the blessing of
an appetite, from the day of our leaving our native land, we got two
vacancies in a stage-coach for my wife and daughter; but with Andrew
Pringle, my son, I was obligated to mount aloft on the outside.  I had
some scruple of conscience about this, for I was afraid of my decorum.  I
met, however, with nothing but the height of discretion from the other
outside passengers, although I jealoused that one of them was a light
woman.  Really I had no notion that the English were so civilised; they
were so well bred, and the very duddiest of them spoke such a fine style
of language, that when I looked around on the country, I thought myself
in the land of Canaan.  But it's extraordinary what a power of drink the
coachmen drink, stopping and going into every change-house, and yet
behaving themselves with the greatest sobriety.  And then they are all so
well dressed, which is no doubt owing to the poor rates.  I am thinking,
however, that for all they cry against them, the poor rates are but a
small evil, since they keep the poor folk in such food and raiment, and
out of the temptations to thievery; indeed, such a thing as a common
beggar is not to be seen in this land, excepting here and there a sorner
or a ne'er-do-weel.

When we had got to the outskirts of London, I began to be ashamed of the
sin of high places, and would gladly have got into the inside of the
coach, for fear of anybody knowing me; but although the multitude of
by-goers was like the kirk scailing at the Sacrament, I saw not a kent
face, nor one that took the least notice of my situation.  At last we got
to an inn, called _The White Horse_, Fetter-Lane, where we hired a
hackney to take us to the lodgings provided for us here in Norfolk
Street, by Mr. Pawkie, the Scotch solicitor, a friend of Andrew Pringle,
my son.  Now it was that we began to experience the sharpers of London;
for it seems that there are divers Norfolk Streets.  Ours was in the
Strand (mind that when you direct), not very far from Fetter-Lane; but
the hackney driver took us away to one afar off, and when we knocked at
the number we thought was ours, we found ourselves at a house that should
not be told.  I was so mortified, that I did not know what to say; and
when Andrew Pringle, my son, rebuked the man for the mistake, he only
gave a cunning laugh, and said we should have told him whatna Norfolk
Street we wanted.  Andrew stormed at this--but I discerned it was all
owing to our own inexperience, and put an end to the contention, by
telling the man to take us to Norfolk Street in the Strand, which was the
direction we had got.  But when we got to the door, the coachman was so
extortionate, that another hobbleshaw arose.  Mrs. Pringle had been told
that, in such disputes, the best way of getting redress was to take the
number of the coach; but, in trying to do so, we found it fastened on,
and I thought the hackneyman would have gone by himself with laughter.
Andrew, who had not observed what we were doing, when he saw us trying to
take off the number, went like one demented, and paid the man, I cannot
tell what, to get us out, and into the house, for fear we should have
been mobbit.

I have not yet seen the colonel's agents, so can say nothing as to the
business of our coming; for, landing at Gravesend, we did not bring our
trunks with us, and Andrew has gone to the wharf this morning to get
them, and, until we get them, we can go nowhere, which is the occasion of
my writing so soon, knowing also how you and the whole parish would be
anxious to hear what had become of us; and I remain, dear sir, your
friend and pastor,

                                                        ZACHARIAH PRINGLE.

On Saturday evening, Saunders Dickie, the Irvine postman, suspecting that
this letter was from the Doctor, went with it himself, on his own feet,
to Mr. Micklewham, although the distance is more than two miles, but
Saunders, in addition to the customary _twal pennies_ on the postage, had
a dram for his pains.  The next morning being wet, Mr. Micklewham had not
an opportunity of telling any of the parishioners in the churchyard of
the Doctor's safe arrival, so that when he read out the request to return
thanks (for he was not only school-master and session-clerk, but also
precentor), there was a murmur of pleasure diffused throughout the
congregation, and the greatest curiosity was excited to know what the
dangers were, from which their worthy pastor and his whole family had so
thankfully escaped in their voyage to London; so that, when the service
was over, the elders adjourned to the session-house to hear the letter
read; and many of the heads of families, and other respectable
parishioners, were admitted to the honours of the sitting, who all
sympathised, with the greatest sincerity, in the sufferings which their
minister and his family had endured.  Mr. Daff, however, was justly
chided by Mr. Craig, for rubbing his hands, and giving a sort of
sniggering laugh, at the Doctor's sitting on high with a light woman.
But even Mr. Snodgrass was seen to smile at the incident of taking the
number off the coach, the meaning of which none but himself seemed to
understand.

When the epistle had been thus duly read, Mr. Micklewham promised, for
the satisfaction of some of the congregation, that he would get two or
three copies made by the best writers in his school, to be handed about
the parish, and Mr. Icenor remarked, that truly it was a thing to be held
in remembrance, for he had not heard of greater tribulation by the waters
since the shipwreck of the Apostle Paul.




