LETTER XXI


     _The Rev. Z. Pringle_, _D.D._, _to Mr. Micklewham_, _Schoolmaster and
                                                 Session-Clerk_, _Garnock_

DEAR SIR--I have received your letter of the 24th, which has given me a
great surprise to hear, that Mr. Craig was married as far back as
Christmas, to his own servant lass Betty, and me to know nothing of it,
nor you neither, until it was time to be speaking to the midwife.  To be
sure, Mr. Craig, who is an elder, and a very rigid man, in his
animadversions on the immoralities that come before the session, must
have had his own good reasons for keeping his marriage so long a secret.
Tell him, however, from me, that I wish both him and Mrs. Craig much joy
and felicity; but he should be milder for the future on the
thoughtlessness of youth and headstrong passions.  Not that I insinuate
that there has been any occasion in the conduct of such a godly man to
cause a suspicion; but it's wonderful how he was married in December, and
I cannot say that I am altogether so proud to hear it as I am at all
times of the well-doing of my people.  Really the way that Mr. Daff has
comported himself in this matter is greatly to his credit; and I doubt if
the thing had happened with him, that Mr. Craig would have sifted with a
sharp eye how he came to be married in December, and without bridal and
banquet.  For my part, I could not have thought it of Mr. Craig, but it's
done now, and the less we say about it the better; so I think with Mr.
Daff, that it must be looked over; but when I return, I will speak both
to the husband and wife, and not without letting them have an inkling of
what I think about their being married in December, which was a great
shame, even if there was no sin in it.  But I will say no more; for
truly, Mr. Micklewham, the longer we live in this world, and the farther
we go, and the better we know ourselves, the less reason have we to think
slightingly of our neighbours; but the more to convince our hearts and
understandings, that we are all prone to evil, and desperately wicked.
For where does hypocrisy not abound? and I have had my own experience
here, that what a man is to the world, and to his own heart, is a very
different thing.

In my last letter, I gave you a pleasing notification of the growth, as I
thought, of spirituality in this Babylon of deceitfulness, thinking that
you and my people would be gladdened with the tidings of the repute and
estimation in which your minister was held, and I have dealt largely in
the way of public charity.  But I doubt that I have been governed by a
spirit of ostentation, and not with that lowly-mindedness, without which
all almsgiving is but a serving of the altars of Belzebub; for the
chastening hand has been laid upon me, but with the kindness and pity
which a tender father hath for his dear children.

I was requested by those who come so cordially to me with their
subscription papers, for schools and suffering worth, to preach a sermon
to get a collection.  I have no occasion to tell you, that when I exert
myself, what effect I can produce; and I never made so great an exertion
before, which in itself was a proof that it was with the two bladders,
pomp and vanity, that I had committed myself to swim on the uncertain
waters of London; for surely my best exertions were due to my people.
But when the Sabbath came upon which I was to hold forth, how were my
hopes withered, and my expectations frustrated.  Oh, Mr. Micklewham, what
an inattentive congregation was yonder! many slumbered and slept, and I
sowed the words of truth and holiness in vain upon their barren and
stoney hearts.  There is no true grace among some that I shall not name,
for I saw them whispering and smiling like the scorners, and altogether
heedless unto the precious things of my discourse, which could not have
been the case had they been sincere in their professions, for I never
preached more to my own satisfaction on any occasion whatsoever--and,
when I return to my own parish, you shall hear what I said, as I will
preach the same sermon over again, for I am not going now to print it, as
I did once think of doing, and to have dedicated it to Mr. W---.

We are going about in an easy way, seeing what is to be seen in the shape
of curiosities; but the whole town is in a state of ferment with the
election of members to Parliament.  I have been to see't, both in the
Guildhall and at Covent Garden, and it's a frightful thing to see how the
Radicals roar like bulls of Bashan, and put down the speakers in behalf
of the government.  I hope no harm will come of yon, but I must say, that
I prefer our own quiet canny Scotch way at Irvine.  Well do I remember,
for it happened in the year I was licensed, that the town council, the
Lord Eglinton that was shot being then provost, took in the late Thomas
Bowet to be a counsellor; and Thomas, not being versed in election
matters, yet minding to please his lordship (for, like the rest of the
council, he had always a proper veneration for those in power), he, as I
was saying, consulted Joseph Boyd the weaver, who was then Dean of Guild,
as to the way of voting; whereupon Joseph, who was a discreet man, said
to him, "Ye'll just say as I say, and I'll say what Bailie Shaw says, for
he will do what my lord bids him"; which was as peaceful a way of sending
up a member to Parliament as could well be devised.

But you know that politics are far from my hand--they belong to the
temporalities of the community; and the ministers of peace and goodwill
to man should neither make nor meddle with them.  I wish, however, that
these tumultuous elections were well over, for they have had an effect on
the per cents, where our bit legacy is funded; and it would terrify you
to hear what we have thereby already lost.  We have not, however, lost so
much but that I can spare a little to the poor among my people; so you
will, in the dry weather, after the seed-time, hire two-three thackers to
mend the thack on the roofs of such of the cottars' houses as stand in
need of mending, and banker M---y will pay the expense; and I beg you to
go to him on receipt hereof, for he has a line for yourself, which you
will be sure to accept as a testimony from me for the great trouble that
my absence from the parish has given to you among my people, and I am,
dear sir, your friend and pastor,

                                                               Z. PRINGLE.

As Mrs. Glibbans would not permit Mr. Snodgrass to return with her to the
manse, he pursued his journey alone to the Kirkgate of Irvine, where he
found Miss Mally Glencairn on the eve of sitting down to her solitary
tea.  On seeing her visitor enter, after the first compliments on the
state of health and weather were over, she expressed her hopes that he
had not drank tea; and, on receiving a negative, which she did not quite
expect, as she thought he had been perhaps invited by some of her
neighbours, she put in an additional spoonful on his account; and brought
from her corner cupboard with the glass door, an ancient French
pickle-bottle, in which she had preserved, since the great tea-drinking
formerly mentioned, the remainder of the two ounces of carvey, the best,
Mrs. Nanse bought for that memorable occasion.  A short conversation then
took place relative to the Pringles; and, while the tea was masking, for
Miss Mally said it took a long time to draw, she read to him the
following letter:--



