CHAPTER IV--THE TOWN


There was a great tea-drinking held in the Kirkgate of Irvine, at the
house of Miss Mally Glencairn; and at that assemblage of rank, beauty,
and fashion, among other delicacies of the season, several new-come-home
Clyde skippers, roaring from Greenock and Port-Glasgow, were served
up--but nothing contributed more to the entertainment of the evening than
a proposal, on the part of Miss Mally, that those present who had
received letters from the Pringles should read them for the benefit of
the company.  This was, no doubt, a preconcerted scheme between her and
Miss Isabella Tod, to hear what Mr. Andrew Pringle had said to his friend
Mr. Snodgrass, and likewise what the Doctor himself had indited to Mr.
Micklewham; some rumour having spread of the wonderful escapes and
adventures of the family in their journey and voyage to London.  Had
there not been some prethought of this kind, it was not indeed probable,
that both the helper and session-clerk of Garnock could have been there
together, in a party, where it was an understood thing, that not only
Whist and Catch Honours were to be played, but even obstreperous Birky
itself, for the diversion of such of the company as were not used to
gambling games.  It was in consequence of what took place at this Irvine
route, that we were originally led to think of collecting the letters.



LETTER VIII


                                _Miss Rachel Pringle to Miss Isabella Tod_
                                                                   LONDON.

MY DEAR BELL--It was my heartfelt intention to keep a regular journal of
all our proceedings, from the sad day on which I bade a long adieu to my
native shades--and I persevered with a constancy becoming our dear and
youthful friendship, in writing down everything that I saw, either rare
or beautiful, till the hour of our departure from Leith.  In that
faithful register of my feelings and reflections as a traveller, I
described our embarkation at Greenock, on board the steam-boat,--our
sailing past Port-Glasgow, an insignificant town, with a steeple;--the
stupendous rock of Dumbarton Castle, that Gibraltar of antiquity;--our
landing at Glasgow;--my astonishment at the magnificence of that opulent
metropolis of the muslin manufacturers; my brother's remark, that the
punch-bowls on the roofs of the Infirmary, the Museum, and the Trades
Hall, were emblematic of the universal estimation in which that
celebrated mixture is held by all ranks and degrees--learned, commercial,
and even medical, of the inhabitants;--our arrival at Edinburgh--my
emotion on beholding the Castle, and the visionary lake which may be
nightly seen from the windows of Princes Street, between the Old and New
Town, reflecting the lights of the lofty city beyond--with a thousand
other delightful and romantic circumstances, which render it no longer
surprising that the Edinburgh folk should be, as they think themselves,
the most accomplished people in the world.  But, alas! from the moment I
placed my foot on board that cruel vessel, of which the very idea is
anguish, all thoughts were swallowed up in suffering-swallowed, did I
say?  Ah, my dear Bell, it was the odious reverse--but imagination alone
can do justice to the subject.  Not, however, to dwell on what is past,
during the whole time of our passage from Leith, I was unable to think,
far less to write; and, although there was a handsome young Hussar
officer also a passenger, I could not even listen to the elegant
compliments which he seemed disposed to offer by way of consolation, when
he had got the better of his own sickness.  Neither love nor valour can
withstand the influence of that sea-demon.  The interruption thus
occasioned to my observations made me destroy my journal, and I have now
to write to you only about London--only about London!  What an expression
for this human universe, as my brother calls it, as if my weak feminine
pen were equal to the stupendous theme!

But, before entering on the subject, let me first satisfy the anxiety of
your faithful bosom with respect to my father's legacy.  All the
accounts, I am happy to tell you, are likely to be amicably settled; but
the exact amount is not known as yet, only I can see, by my brother's
manner, that it is not less than we expected, and my mother speaks about
sending me to a boarding-school to learn accomplishments.  Nothing,
however, is to be done until something is actually in hand.  But what
does it all avail to me?  Here am I, a solitary being in the midst of
this wilderness of mankind, far from your sympathising affection, with
the dismal prospect before me of going a second time to school, and
without the prospect of enjoying, with my own sweet companions, that
light and bounding gaiety we were wont to share, in skipping from tomb to
tomb in the breezy churchyard of Irvine, like butterflies in spring
flying from flower to flower, as a Wordsworth or a Wilson would express
it.

We have got elegant lodgings at present in Norfolk Street, but my brother
is trying, with all his address, to get us removed to a more fashionable
part of the town, which, if the accounts were once settled, I think will
take place; and he proposes to hire a carriage for a whole month.
Indeed, he has given hints about the saving that might be made by buying
one of our own; but my mother shakes her head, and says, "Andrew, dinna
be carri't."  From all which it is very plain, though they don't allow me
to know their secrets, that the legacy is worth the coming for.  But to
return to the lodgings;--we have what is called a first and second floor,
a drawing-room, and three handsome bedchambers.  The drawing-room is very
elegant; and the carpet is the exact same pattern of the one in the
dress-drawing-room of Eglintoun Castle.  Our landlady is indeed a lady,
and I am surprised how she should think of letting lodgings, for she
dresses better, and wears finer lace, than ever I saw in Irvine.  But I
am interrupted.--

I now resume my pen.  We have just had a call from Mrs. and Miss Argent,
the wife and daughter of the colonel's man of business.  They seem great
people, and came in their own chariot, with two grand footmen behind; but
they are pleasant and easy, and the object of their visit was to invite
us to a family dinner to-morrow, Sunday.  I hope we may become better
acquainted; but the two livery servants make such a difference in our
degrees, that I fear this is a vain expectation.  Miss Argent was,
however, very frank, and told me that she was herself only just come to
London for the first time since she was a child, having been for the last
seven years at a school in the country.  I shall, however, be better able
to say more about her in my next letter.  Do not, however, be afraid that
she shall ever supplant you in my heart.  No, my dear friend, companion
of my days of innocence,--that can never be.  But this call from such
persons of fashion looks as if the legacy had given us some
consideration; so that I think my father and mother may as well let me
know at once what my prospects are, that I might show you how
disinterestedly and truly I am, my dear Bell, yours,

                                                           RACHEL PRINGLE.

When Miss Isabella Tod had read the letter, there was a solemn pause for
some time--all present knew something, more or less, of the fair writer;
but a carriage, a carpet like the best at Eglintoun, a Hussar officer,
and two footmen in livery, were phantoms of such high import, that no one
could distinctly express the feelings with which the intelligence
affected them.  It was, however, unanimously agreed, that the Doctor's
legacy had every symptom of being equal to what it was at first expected
to be, namely, twenty thousand pounds;--a sum which, by some occult or
recondite moral influence of the Lottery, is the common maximum, in
popular estimation, of any extraordinary and indefinite windfall of
fortune.  Miss Becky Glibbans, from the purest motives of charity,
devoutly wished that poor Rachel might be able to carry her full cup with
a steady hand; and the Rev. Mr. Snodgrass, that so commendable an
expression might not lose its edifying effect by any lighter talk,
requested Mr. Micklewham to read his letter from the Doctor.



