LETTER XVII


             _Andrew Pringle_, _Esq._, _to the Rev. Mr. Charles Snodgrass_
                                                                   LONDON.

MY DEAR FRIEND--As the season advances, London gradually unfolds, like
Nature, all the variety of her powers and pleasures.  By the Argents we
have been introduced effectually into society, and have now only to
choose our acquaintance among those whom we like best.  I should employ
another word than choose, for I am convinced that there is no choice in
the matter.  In his friendships and affections, man is subject to some
inscrutable moral law, similar in its effects to what the chemists call
affinity.  While under the blind influence of this sympathy, we,
forsooth, suppose ourselves free agents!  But a truce with philosophy.

The amount of the legacy is now ascertained.  The stock, however, in
which a great part of the money is vested being shut, the transfer to my
father cannot be made for some time; and till this is done, my mother
cannot be persuaded that we have yet got anything to trust to--an
unfortunate notion which renders her very unhappy.  The old gentleman
himself takes no interest now in the business.  He has got his mind at
ease by the payment of all the legacies; and having fallen in with some
of the members of that political junto, the Saints, who are worldly
enough to link, as often as they can, into their association, the
powerful by wealth or talent, his whole time is occupied in assisting to
promote their humbug; and he has absolutely taken it into his head, that
the attention he receives from them for his subscriptions is on account
of his eloquence as a preacher, and that hitherto he has been altogether
in an error with respect to his own abilities.  The effect of this is
abundantly amusing; but the source of it is very evident.  Like most
people who pass a sequestered life, he had formed an exaggerated opinion
of public characters; and on seeing them in reality so little superior to
the generality of mankind, he imagines that he was all the time nearer to
their level than he had ventured to suppose; and the discovery has placed
him on the happiest terms with himself.  It is impossible that I can
respect his manifold excellent qualities and goodness of heart more than
I do; but there is an innocency in this simplicity, which, while it often
compels me to smile, makes me feel towards him a degree of tenderness,
somewhat too familiar for that filial reverence that is due from a son.

Perhaps, however, you will think me scarcely less under the influence of
a similar delusion when I tell you, that I have been somehow or other
drawn also into an association, not indeed so public or potent as that of
the Saints, but equally persevering in the objects for which it has been
formed.  The drift of the Saints, as far as I can comprehend the matter,
is to procure the advancement to political power of men distinguished for
the purity of their lives, and the integrity of their conduct; and in
that way, I presume, they expect to effect the accomplishment of that
blessed epoch, the Millennium, when the Saints are to rule the whole
earth.  I do not mean to say that this is their decided and determined
object; I only infer, that it is the necessary tendency of their
proceedings; and I say it with all possible respect and sincerity, that,
as a public party, the Saints are not only perhaps the most powerful, but
the party which, at present, best deserves power.

The association, however, with which I have happened to become connected,
is of a very different description.  Their object is, to pass through
life with as much pleasure as they can obtain, without doing anything
unbecoming the rank of gentlemen, and the character of men of honour.  We
do not assemble such numerous meetings as the Saints, the Whigs, or the
Radicals, nor are our speeches delivered with so much vehemence.  We
even, I think, tacitly exclude oratory.  In a word, our meetings seldom
exceed the perfect number of the muses; and our object on these occasions
is not so much to deliberate on plans of prospective benefits to mankind,
as to enjoy the present time for ourselves, under the temperate
inspiration of a well-cooked dinner, flavoured with elegant wine, and
just so much of mind as suits the fleeting topics of the day.  T---, whom
I formerly mentioned, introduced me to this delightful society.  The
members consist of about fifty gentlemen, who dine occasionally at each
other's houses; the company being chiefly selected from the brotherhood,
if that term can be applied to a circle of acquaintance, who, without any
formal institution of rules, have gradually acquired a consistency that
approximates to organisation.  But the universe of this vast city
contains a plurality of systems; and the one into which I have been
attracted may be described as that of the idle intellects.  In general
society, the members of our party are looked up to as men of taste and
refinement, and are received with a degree of deference that bears some
resemblance to the respect paid to the hereditary endowment of rank.
They consist either of young men who have acquired distinction at
college, or gentlemen of fortune who have a relish for intellectual
pleasures, free from the acerbities of politics, or the dull formalities
which so many of the pious think essential to their religious
pretensions.  The wealthy furnish the entertainments, which are always in
a superior style, and the ingredient of birth is not requisite in the
qualifications of a member, although some jealousy is entertained of
professional men, and not a little of merchants.  T---, to whom I am also
indebted for this view of that circle of which he is the brightest
ornament, gives a felicitous explanation of the reason.  He says,
professional men, who are worth anything at all, are always ambitious,
and endeavour to make their acquaintance subservient to their own
advancement; while merchants are liable to such casualties, that their
friends are constantly exposed to the risk of being obliged to sink them
below their wonted equality, by granting them favours in times of
difficulty, or, what is worse, by refusing to grant them.

I am much indebted to you for the introduction to your friend G---.  He
is one of us; or rather, he moves in an eccentric sphere of his own,
which crosses, I believe, almost all the orbits of all the classed and
classifiable systems of London.  I found him exactly what you described;
and we were on the frankest footing of old friends in the course of the
first quarter of an hour.  He did me the honour to fancy that I belonged,
as a matter of course, to some one of the literary fraternities of
Edinburgh, and that I would be curious to see the associations of the
learned here.  What he said respecting them was highly characteristic of
the man.  "They are," said he, "the dullest things possible.  On my
return from abroad, I visited them all, expecting to find something of
that easy disengaged mind which constitutes the charm of those of France
and Italy.  But in London, among those who have a character to keep up,
there is such a vigilant circumspection, that I should as soon expect to
find nature in the ballets of the Opera-house, as genius at the
established haunts of authors, artists, and men of science.  Bankes
gives, I suppose officially, a public breakfast weekly, and opens his
house for conversations on the Sundays.  I found at his breakfasts, tea
and coffee, with hot rolls, and men of celebrity afraid to speak.  At the
conversations, there was something even worse.  A few plausible talking
fellows created a buzz in the room, and the merits of some paltry
nick-nack of mechanism or science was discussed.  The party consisted
undoubtedly of the most eminent men of their respective lines in the
world; but they were each and all so apprehensive of having their ideas
purloined, that they took the most guarded care never to speak of
anything that they deemed of the slightest consequence, or to hazard an
opinion that might be called in question.  The man who either wishes to
augment his knowledge, or to pass his time agreeably, will never expose
himself to a repetition of the fastidious exhibitions of engineers and
artists who have their talents at market.  But such things are among the
curiosities of London; and if you have any inclination to undergo the
initiating mortification of being treated as a young man who may be
likely to interfere with their professional interests, I can easily get
you introduced."

I do not know whether to ascribe these strictures of your friend to
humour or misanthropy; but they were said without bitterness; indeed so
much as matters of course, that, at the moment, I could not but feel
persuaded they were just.  I spoke of them to T---, who says, that
undoubtedly G---'s account of the exhibitions is true in substance, but
that it is his own sharp-sightedness which causes him to see them so
offensively; for that ninety-nine out of the hundred in the world would
deem an evening spent at the conversations of Sir Joseph Bankes a very
high intellectual treat.

G--- has invited me to dinner, and I expect some amusement; for T---, who
is acquainted with him, says, that it is his fault to employ his mind too
much on all occasions; and that, in all probability, there will be
something, either in the fare or the company, that I shall remember as
long as I live.  However, you shall hear all about it in my next.--Yours,

                                                           ANDREW PRINGLE.

On the same Sunday on which Mr. Micklewham consulted Mr. Snodgrass as to
the propriety of reading the Doctor's letter to the elders, the following
epistle reached the post-office of Irvine, and was delivered by Saunders
Dickie himself, at the door of Mrs. Glibbans to her servan lassie, who,
as her mistress had gone to the Relief Church, told him, that he would
have to come for the postage the morn's morning.  "Oh," said Saunders,
"there's naething to pay but my ain trouble, for it's frankit; but
aiblins the mistress will gie me a bit drappie, and so I'll come betimes
i' the morning."



