XV

1905-1907

     _The Last Period (II)--Italy and Greece--Philosophical Congress in
     Rome--Stanford University--The Earthquake--Resignation of
     Professorship_


In the spring of 1905 an escape from influenza, from Cambridge duties,
and from correspondents, became imperative. James had long wanted to see
Athens with his own eyes, and he sailed on April 3 for a short southern
holiday. During the journey he wrote letters to almost no one except his
wife. On his way back from Athens he stopped in Rome with the purpose of
seeing certain young Italian philosophers. A Philosophical Congress was
being held there at the time; and James, though he had originally
declined the invitation to attend it, inevitably became involved in its
proceedings and ended by seizing the occasion to discuss his theory of
consciousness. It was obvious that the appropriate language in which to
address a full meeting of the Congress would be French, and so he shut
himself up in his hotel and composed "La Notion de Conscience." His
experience in writing this paper threw an instructive sidelight on his
process of composition. Ordinarily--when he was writing in
English--twenty-five sheets of manuscript, written in a large hand and
corrected, were a maximum achievement for one day. The address in Rome
was not composed in English and then translated, but was written out in
French. When he had finished the last lines of one day's work, James
found to his astonishment that he had completed and corrected over forty
pages of manuscript. The inhibitions which a habit of careful attention
to points of style ordinarily called into play were largely inoperative
when he wrote in a language which presented to his mind a smaller
variety of possible expressions, and thus imposed limits upon his
self-criticism.

In the following year (1906), James took leave of absence from Harvard
in January and accepted an invitation from Stanford University to give a
course during its spring term. He planned the course as a general
introduction to Philosophy. Had he not been interrupted by the San
Francisco earthquake, he would have rehearsed much of the projected
"Introductory Textbook of Philosophy," in which he meant to outline his
metaphysical system. But the earthquake put an end to the Stanford
lectures in April, as the reader will learn more fully. In the ensuing
autumn and winter (1907), James made the same material the basis of a
half-year's work with his last Harvard class.

In November, 1906, the lectures which compose the volume called
"Pragmatism" were written out and delivered in November at the Lowell
Institute in Boston. In January, 1907, they were repeated at Columbia
University, and then James published them in the spring.

The time had now come for him to stop regular teaching altogether. He
had been continuing to teach, partly in deference to the wishes of the
College; but it had become evident that he must have complete freedom to
use his strength and time for writing when he could write, for special
lectures, like the series on Pragmatism, when such might serve his ends,
and for rest and change when recuperation became necessary. So, in
February, 1907, he sent his resignation to the Harvard Corporation. The
last meeting of his class ended in a way for which he was quite
unprepared. His undergraduate students presented him with a silver
loving-cup, the graduate students and assistants with an inkwell. There
were a couple of short speeches, and words were spoken by which he was
very much moved. Unfortunately there was no record of what was said.




_To Mrs. James._


AMALFI, _Mar. 30, 1905_.

...It is good to get something in full measure, without haggling or
stint, and today I have had the picturesque ladled out in buckets full,
heaped up and running over. I never realized the beauties of this shore,
and forget (in my habit of never noticing proper names till I have been
there) whether you have ever told me of the drive from Sorrento to this
place. Anyhow, I wish that you could have taken it with me this day.
"Thank God for this day!" We came to Sorrento by steamer, and at 10:30
got away in a carriage, lunching at the half-way village of Positano;
and proceeding through Amalfi to Ravello, high up on the mountain side,
whence back here in time for a 7:15 o'clock dinner. Practically six
hours driving through a scenery of which I had never realized the
beauty, or rather the interest, from previous descriptions. The
lime-stone mountains are as _strong_ as anything in Switzerland, though
of course much smaller. The road, a _Cornice_ affair cut for the most
part on the face of cliffs, and crossing little ravines (with beaches)
on the side of which nestle hamlets, is positively ferocious in its
grandeur, and on the side of it the azure sea, dreaming and blooming
like a bed of violets. I didn't look for such Swiss strength, having
heard of naught but beauty. It seems as if this were a race such that,
when anyone wished to express an emotion of any kind, he went and built
a bit of stone-wall and limed it onto the rock, so that now, when they
have accumulated, the works of God and man are inextricably mixed, and
it is as if mankind had been a kind of immemorial coral insect. Every
possible square yard is terraced up, reclaimed and planted, and the
human dwellings are the fiercest examples of cliff-building,
cave-habitation, staircase and foot-path you can imagine. How I do wish
that you could have been along today....


_Mar. 31, 1905_.

From half-past four to half-past six I walked alone through the _old_
Naples, hilly streets, paved from house to house and swarming with the
very poor, vocal with them too (their voices carry so that every child
seems to be calling to the whole street, goats, donkeys, chickens, and
an occasional cow mixed in), and no light of heaven getting indoors. The
street floor composed of cave-like shops, the people doing their work on
chairs in the street for the sake of light, and in the black inside,
beds and a stove visible among the implements of trade. Such light and
shade, and grease and grime, and swarm, and apparent amiability would be
hard to match. I have come here too late in life, when the picturesque
has lost its serious reality. Time was when hunger for it haunted me
like a passion, and such sights would have then been the solidest of
mental food. I put up then with such inferior substitutional suggestions
as Geneva and Paris afforded--but these black old Naples streets are not
suggestions, they are the reality itself--full orchestra. I have got
such an impression of the essential sociability of this race, especially
in the country. A smile will go so far with them--even without the
accompanying copper. And the children are so sweet. Tell Aleck to drop
his other studies, learn _Italian_ (real Italian, not the awful
gibberish I try to speak), cultivate his beautiful smile, learn a
sentimental song or two, bring a tambourine or banjo, and come down
here and fraternize with the common people along the coast--he can go
far, and make friends, and be a social success, even if he should go
back to a clean hotel of some sort for sleep every night....




_To his Daughter._


On board S.S. Orénogne, approaching
PIRÆUS, GREECE, _Apr. 3, 1905_.

DARLING PEG,--Your loving Dad is surely in luck sailing over this almost
oily sea, under the awning on deck, past the coast of Greece (whose
snow-capped mountains can be seen on the horizon), towards the Piræus,
where we are due to arrive at about two. I had some misgivings about the
steamer from Marseilles, but she has turned out splendid, and the voyage
perfect. A 4000-ton boat, bran new as to all her surface equipment,
stateroom all to myself, by a happy stroke of luck (the boat being
full), clean absolutely, large open window, sea like Lake Champlain,
with the color of Lake Leman, about a hundred and twenty first-class
passengers of the most interesting description, one sixth English
archeologists, one sixth English tourists, one third French
archeologists, etc.,--an international archeological congress opens at
Athens this week,--the rest Dagoes _quelconques_, many distinguished
men, almost all educated and pronounced individualities, and so much
acquaintance and sociability, that the somewhat small upper deck on
which I write resounds with conversation like an afternoon tea. The
meals are tip-top, and the whole thing almost absurdly ideal in its
kind. I only wish your mother could be wafted here for one hour, to sit
by my side and enjoy the scene. The best feature of the boat is little
Miss Boyd, the Cretan excavatress, from Smith College, a perfect little
trump of a thing, who has been through the Greco-Turkish war as nurse
(as well as being nurse at Tampa during our Cuban war), and is the
simplest, most generally intelligent little thing, who knows Greece by
heart and can smooth one's path beautifully. Waldstein of Cambridge is
on board, also M. Sylvain of the Théâtre Français, and his
daughter--going to recite prologues or something at the representation
of Sophocles's "Antigone," which is to take place--he looking just like
your uncle Henry--both eminent comedians--I mean the two Sylvains. On
the bench opposite me is the most beautiful woman on board, a sort of
Mary Salter translated into French, though she is with rather common
men. Well, now I will stop, and use my Zeiss glass on the land, which is
getting nearer. My heart wells over with love and gratitude at having
such a family--meaning Alice, you, Harry, Bill, Aleck, and
Mother-in-law--and resolutions to live so as to be more worthy of them.
I will finish this on land.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, dear family,--We got in duly in an indescribable _embrouillement_
of small boats (our boatman, by the way, when Miss Boyd asked him his
name, replied "Dionysos"; our wine-bottle was labelled "John Solon and
Co."), sailing past the Island of Ægina and the Bay of Salamis, with the
Parthenon visible ahead--a worthy termination to a delightful voyage. We
drove the three miles from the Piræus in a carriage, common and very
dusty country road, also close by the Parthenon, through the cheap
little town to this hotel, after which George Putnam and I, washing our
hands, strolled forth to see what we could, the first thing being Mrs.
Sam Hoar at the theatre of Bacchus. Then the rest of the Acropolis,
which is all and more than all the talk. There is a mystery of
_rightness_ about that Parthenon that I cannot understand. It sets a
standard for other human things, showing that absolute rightness is not
out of reach. But I am not in descriptive mood, so I spare you. Suffice
it that I couldn't keep the tears from welling into my eyes. "J'ai vu la
beauté parfaite." Santayana is in a neighboring hotel, but we have
missed each other thrice. The Forbeses are on the Peloponnesus, but
expected back tomorrow. Well, dear ones all, good-night! Thus far, and
no farther! Hence I turn westward again. The Greek lower orders seem far
less avid and rapacious than the Southern Italians. God bless you all. I
must get to another hotel, and be more to myself. Good and dear as the
Putnams are and extremely helpful as they've been, it keeps me too much
in company. Good-night again. Your loving father, _respective_ husband,

W. J.




_To Mrs. James._


ROME, _Apr. 25, 1905_.

...Strong telegraphed me yesterday from Lausanne that he ... expected to
be at Cannes on the 4th of May. I was glad of this, for I had been
feeling more and more as if I ought to stay here, and it makes
everything square out well. This morning I went to the meeting-place of
the Congress to inscribe myself definitely, and when I gave my name, the
lady who was taking them almost fainted, saying that all Italy loved me,
or words to that effect, and called in poor Professor de Sanctis, the
Vice President or Secretary or whatever, who treated me in the same
manner, and finally got me to consent to make an address at one of the
general meetings, of which there are four, in place of Sully, Flournoy,
Richet, Lipps, and Brentano, who were announced but are not to come. I
fancy they have been pretty unscrupulous with their program here,
printing conditional futures as categorical ones. So I'm in for it
again, having no power to resist flattery. I shall try to express my
"Does Consciousness Exist?" in twenty minutes--and possibly in the
French tongue! Strange after the deep sense of nothingness that has been
besetting me the last two weeks (mere fatigue symptom) to be told that
_my_ name was attracting many of the young professors to the Congress!

Then I went to the Museum in the baths of Diocletian or whatever it is,
off there by the R. R., then to the Capitol, and then to lunch off the
Corso, at a restaurant, after buying a French book whose author says in
his preface that Sully, W. J., and Bergson are his masters. And I am
absolute 0 in my own home!...


_Apr. 30, 1905._ 7 P.M.

...If you never had a tired husband, at least you've got one now! The
_ideer_ of being in such delightful conditions and interesting
surroundings, and being conscious of nothing but one's preposterous
physical distress, is too ridiculous! I have just said good-bye to my
circle of admirers, relatively youthful, at the hotel door, under the
pretext (a truth until this morning) that I had to get ready to go to
Lausanne tonight, and I taper off my activity by subsiding upon you.
Yesterday till three, and the day before till five, I was writing my
address, which this morning I gave--in French. I wrote it carefully and
surprised myself by the ease with which I slung the Gallic accent and
intonation, being excited by the occasion.[58] Janet expressed himself
as _stupéfait_, from the linguistic point of view. The thing lasted 40
minutes, and was followed by a discussion which showed that the critics
with one exception had wholly failed to catch the point of view; but
that was quite _en régle_, so I don't care; and I have given the thing
to Claparède to print in Flournoy's "Archives." The Congress was far
too vast, but filled with strange and interesting creatures of all
sorts, and socially _very_ nutritious to anyone who can stand
sociability without distress. A fête of some sort every day--this P.M. I
have just returned from a great afternoon tea given us by some
"Minister" at the Borghese Palace--in the Museum. (The King, you know,
has bought the splendid Borghese park and given it to the City of Rome
as a democratic possession _in perpetuo_. A splendid gift.) The pictures
too! Tonight there is a great banquet with speeches, to which of course
I can't go. I lunched at the da Vitis,--a big table full, she very
simple and nice,--and I have been having this afternoon a very good and
rather intimate talk with the little band of "pragmatists," Papini,
Vailati, Calderoni, Amendola, etc., most of whom inhabit Florence,
publish the monthly journal "Leonardo" at their own expense, and carry
on a very serious philosophic movement, apparently _really_ inspired by
Schiller and myself (I never could believe it before, although Ferrari
had assured me), and show an enthusiasm, and also a literary swing and
activity that I know nothing of in our own land, and that probably our
damned academic technics and Ph.D.-machinery and university organization
prevents from ever coming to a birth. These men, of whom Ferrari is one,
are none of them _Fach-philosophers_, and few of them teachers at all.
It has given me a certain new idea of the way in which truth ought to
find its way into the world.

I have seen such a lot of _important_-looking faces,--probably
everything in the stock in the shop-window,--and witnessed such
charmingly gracious manners, that it is a lesson. The woodenness of our
Anglo-Saxon social ways! I had a really splendid audience for quality
this A.M. (about 200), even though they didn't understand....




_To George Santayana._


ORVIETO, _May 2, 1905_.

DEAR SANTAYANA,--I came here yesterday from Rome and have been enjoying
the solitude. I stayed at the exquisite Albergo de Russie, and didn't
shirk the Congress--in fact they stuck me for a "general" address, to
fill the vacuum left by Flournoy and Sully, who had been announced and
came not (I spoke _agin_ "consciousness," but nobody understood) and I
got _fearfully tired_. On the whole it was an agreeable
nightmare--agreeable on account of the perfectly charming _gentillezza_
of the bloody Dagoes, the way they caress and flatter you--"il piu grand
psicologo del mondo," etc., and of the elaborate provisions for general
entertainment--nightmare, because of my absurd bodily fatigue. However,
these things are "neither here nor there." What I really write to you
for is to tell you to send (if not sent already) your "Life of Reason"
to the "Revue de Philosophie," or rather to its editor, M. Peillaube,
Rue des Revues 160, and to the editor of "Leonardo" (the great little
Florentine philosophical journal), Sig. Giovanni Papini, 14 Borgo
Albizi, Florence. The most interesting, and in fact genuinely edifying,
part of my trip has been meeting this little _cénacle_, who have taken
my own writings, _entre autres, au grand sérieux_, but who are carrying
on their philosophical mission in anything but a technically serious
way, inasmuch as "Leonardo" (of which I have hitherto only known a few
odd numbers) is devoted to good and lively literary form. The sight of
their belligerent young enthusiasm has given me a queer sense of the
gray-plaster temperament of our bald-headed young Ph.D.'s, boring each
other at seminaries, writing those direful reports of literature in the
"Philosophical Review" and elsewhere, fed on "books of reference," and
never confounding "Æsthetik" with "Erkentnisstheorie." Faugh! I shall
never deal with them again--on _those_ terms! Can't you and I, who in
spite of such divergence have yet so much in common in our
_Weltanschauung_, start a systematic movement at Harvard against the
desiccating and pedantifying process? I have been cracking you up
greatly to both Peillaube and Papini, and quoted you twice in my speech,
which was in French and will be published in Flournoy's "Archives de
Psychologie." I hope you're enjoying the Eastern Empire to the full, and
that you had some Grecian "country life." Münsterberg has been called to
Koenigsberg and has refused. Better be America's ancestor than Kant's
successor! Ostwald, to my great delight, is coming to us next year, not
as your replacer, but in exchange with Germany for F. G. Peabody. I go
now to Cannes, to meet Strong, back from his operation. Ever truly
yours,

Wm. James.




_To Mrs. James._


CANNES, _May 13, 1905_.

...I came Sunday night, and this is Saturday. The six days have been
busy ones in one sense, but have rested me very much in another. No
sight-seeing fatigues, but more usual, and therefore more normal
occupations.... I have written some 25 letters, long and short, to
European correspondents since being here, have walked and driven with
Strong, and have had philosophy hot and heavy with him almost all the
time. I never knew such an unremitting, untiring, monotonous addiction
as that of his mind to truth. He goes by points, pinning each one
definitely, and has, I think, the very clearest mind I ever knew. Add to
it his absolute sincerity and candor and it is no wonder that he is a
"growing" man. I suspect that he will outgrow us all, for his rate
accelerates, and he never stands still. He is an admirable philosophic
figure, and I am glad to say that in most things he and I are fully in
accord. He gains a great deal from such talks, noting every point down
afterwards, and I gain great stimulation, though in a vaguer way. I
shall be glad, however, on Monday afternoon, to relax....




_To Mrs. James._


[Post-card]

GENEVA, _May 17, 1905_.

So far, thank Heaven, on my way towards home! A rather useful time with
the superior, but sticky X----, at Marseilles, and as far as Lyons in
the train, into which an hour beyond Lyons there came (till then I was
alone in my compartment) a Spanish bishop, canon and "familar," an aged
holy woman, sister of the bishop, a lay-brother and sister, a dog, and
more baggage than I ever saw before, including a feather-bed. They spoke
no French--the bishop about as much Italian as I, and the lay-sister as
much of English as I of Spanish. They took out their rosaries and began
mumbling their litanies forthwith, whereon I took off my hat, which
seemed to touch them so, when they discovered I was a Protestant, that
we all grew very affectionate and I soon felt ashamed of the way in
which I had at first regarded their black and superstitious invasion of
my privacy. Good, saintly people on their way to Rome. I go now to our
old haunts and to the Flournoys'....

W.




_To H. G. Wells._


S. S. CEDRIC, _June 6, 1905_.

MY DEAR MR. WELLS,--I have just read your "Utopia" (given me by F. C. S.
Schiller on the one day that I spent in Oxford on my way back to
Cambridge, Mass., after a few weeks on the Continent), and
"Anticipations," and "Mankind in the Making" having duly preceded,
together with numerous other lighter volumes of yours, the "summation of
stimuli" reaches the threshold of discharge and I can't help overflowing
in a note of gratitude. You "have your faults, as who has not?" but your
virtues are unparalleled and transcendent, and I believe that you will
prove to have given a shove to the practical thought of the next
generation that will be amongst the greatest of its influences for good.
All in the line of the English genius too, no wire-drawn French
doctrines, and no German shop technicalities inflicted in an
_unerbittlich consequent_ manner, but everywhere the sense of the full
concrete, and the air of freedom playing through all the joints of your
argument. You have a tri-dimensional human heart, and to use your own
metaphor, don't see different levels projected on one plane. In this
last book you beautifully soften cocksureness by the penumbra of the
outlines--in fact you're a trump and a jewel, and for human perception
you beat Kipling, and for hitting off a thing with the right word, you
are unique. Heaven bless and preserve you!--You are now an eccentric;
perhaps 50 years hence you will figure as a classic! Your Samurai
chapter is magnificent, though I find myself wondering what developments
in the way of partisan politics those same Samurai would develop, when
it came to questions of appointment and running this or that man in.
_That_ I believe to be human nature's ruling passion. Live long! and
keep writing; and believe me, yours admiringly and sincerely,

Wm. James.




_To Henry L. Higginson._


Cambridge, _July 18 [1905]_.

DEAR H.,--You asked me how rich I was getting by my own (as
distinguished from _your_) exertions....

I find on reaching home today a letter from Longmans, Green & Co. with a
check ... which I have mailed to your house in State Street....

This ought to please you slightly; but don't reply! Instead, think of
the virtues of Roosevelt, either as permanent sovereign of this great
country, or as President of Harvard University. I've been having a
discussion with Fanny Morse about him, which has resulted in making me
his faithful henchman for life, Fanny was so violent. Think of the
mighty good-will of him, of his enjoyment of his post, of his power as a
preacher, of the number of things to which he gives his attention, of
the safety of his second thoughts, of the increased courage he is
showing, and above all of the fact that he is an open, instead of an
underground leader, whom the voters can control once in four years, when
he runs away, whose heart is in the right place, who is an enemy of red
tape and quibbling and everything that in general the word "politician"
stands for. That significance of him in the popular mind is a great
national asset, and it would be a shame to let it run to waste until it
has done a lot more work for us. His ambitions are not selfish--he wants
to do good only! Bless him--and damn all his detractors like you and F.
M.![59]

Don't reply, but vote! Your affectionately

Wm. James.




_To T. S. Perry._


Cambridge, _Aug. 24, 1905_.

DEAR THOS!--You're a _philosophe sans le savoir_ and, when you write
your treatise against philosophy, you will be classed as the
arch-metaphysician. Every philosopher (W. J., _e.g._) pretends that all
the others are metaphysicians against whom he is simply defending the
rights of common sense. As for Nietzsche, the worst break of his I
recall was in a posthumous article in one of the French reviews a few
months back. In his high and mighty way he was laying down the law about
all the European countries. Russia, he said, is "the only one that has
any possible future--and that she owes to the strength of the principle
of autocracy to which she alone remains faithful," Unfortunately one
can't appeal to the principle of democracy to explain Japan's recent
successes.

I am very glad you've done something about poor dear old John Fiske, and
I should think that you would have no difficulty in swelling it up to
the full "Beacon Biography" size. If you want an extra anecdote, you
might tell how, when Chauncey Wright, Chas. Peirce, St. John Green,
Warner and I appointed an evening to discuss the "Cosmic Philosophy,"
just out, J. F. went to sleep under our noses.

I hope that life as a farmer agrees with you, and that your "womenkind"
wish nothing better than to be farmers' wives, daughters or other
relatives. Unluckily we let our farm this summer; so I am here in
Cambridge with Alice, both of us a prey to as bad an attack of grippe as
the winter solstice ever brought forth. Today, the 10th day, I am weaker
than any kitten. Don't ever let _your_ farm! Affectionately,

W. J.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


Cambridge, _Nov. 10, 1905_.

DEAR MILLER,--W. R. Warren has just been here and says he has just seen
you; the which precipitates me into a letter to you which has long hung
fire. I hope that all goes well. You must be in a rather cheerful
quarter of the City. Do you go home Sundays, or not? I hope that the
work is congenial. How do you like your students as compared with those
here? I reckon you get more out of your colleagues than you did
here--barring of course _der Einzige_. We are all such old stories to
each other that we say nothing. Santayana is the only [one] about whom
we had any curiosity, and he has now quenched that. Perry and Holt have
some ideas in reserve.... The fact is that the classroom exhausts our
powers of speech. Royce has never made a syllable of reference to all
the stuff I wrote last year--to me, I mean. He may have spoken of it to
others, if he has read, it, which I doubt. So we live in parallel
trenches and hardly show our heads.

Santayana's book[60] is a great one, if the inclusion of opposites is a
measure of greatness. I think it will probably be reckoned great by
posterity. It has no _rational_ foundation, being merely one man's way
of viewing things: so much of experience admitted and no more, so much
criticism and questioning admitted and no more. He is a paragon of
Emersonianism.--declare your intuitions, though no other man share them;
and the integrity with which he does it is as fine as it is rare. And
his naturalism, materialism, Platonism, and atheism form a combination
of which the centre of gravity is, I think, very deep. But there is
something profoundly alienating in his unsympathetic tone, his
"preciousness" and superciliousness. The book is Emerson's first rival
and successor, but how different the reader's feeling! The same things
in Emerson's mouth would sound entirely different. E. receptive,
expansive, as if handling life through a wide funnel with a great
indraught; S. as if through a pin-point orifice that emits his cooling
spray outward over the universe like a nose-disinfectant from an
"atomizer." ... I fear that the real originality of the book will be
lost on nineteen-twentieths of the members of the Philosophical and
Psychological Association!! The enemies of Harvard will find lots of
blasphemous texts in him to injure us withal. But it is a great feather
in our cap to harbor such an absolutely free expresser of individual
convictions. But enough!

"Phil. 9" is going well. I think I _lecture_ better than I ever did; in
fact I know I do. But this professional evolution goes with an
involution of all miscellaneous faculty. I am well, and efficient
enough, but purposely going slow so as to keep efficient into the Palo
Alto summer, which means that I have written nothing. I am pestered by
doubts as to whether to put my resignation through this year, in spite
of opposition, or to drag along another year or two. I think it is
inertia against energy, energy in my case meaning being my own man
absolutely. American philosophers, young and old, seem scratching where
the wool is short. Important things are being published; but all of them
too technical. The thing will never clear up satisfactorily till someone
writes out its resultant in decent English....

       *       *       *       *       *

The reader will have understood "the Palo Alto summer" to refer to the
lectures to be delivered at Stanford University during the coming
spring. The Stanford engagement was again in James's mind when he spoke,
in the next letter, of "dreading the prospect of lecturing till
mid-May."




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


Cambridge, _Dec. 6, 1905_.

DEAR MILLER,-- ...You seem to take radical empiricism more simply than I
can. What I mean by it is the thesis that there is no fact "not
actually experienced to be such." In other words, the concept of "being"
or "fact" is not wider than or prior to the concept "content of
experience"; and you can't talk of _experiences being_ this or that, but
only of _things experienced as being_ this or that. But such a thesis
would, it seems to me, if literally taken, force one to drop the notion
that in point of fact one experience is _ex_ another, so long as the
_ex_-ness is not itself a "content" of experience. In the matter of two
minds not having the same content, it seems to me that your view commits
you to an assertion _about their experiences_; and such an assertion
assumes a realm in which the experiences lie, which overlaps and
surrounds the "content" of them. This, it seems to me, breaks down
radical empiricism, which I hate to do; and I can't yet clearly see my
way out of the quandary. I am much boggled and muddled; and the total
upshot with me is to see that all the hoary errors and prejudices of man
in matters philosophical are based on something pretty inevitable in the
structure of our thinking, and to distrust summary executions by
conviction of contradiction. I suspect your execution of being too
summary; but I have copied the last paragraph of the sheets (which I
return with heartiest thanks) for the extraordinarily neat statement....

I dread the prospect of lecturing till mid-May, but the wine being
ordered, I must drink it. I dislike lecturing more and more. Have just
definitely withdrawn my candidacy for the Sorbonne job, with great
internal relief, and wish I could withdraw from the whole business, and
get at writing.[61] Not a line of writing possible this year--except of
course occasional note-making. All the things that one is really
concerned with are too nice and fine to use in lectures. You remember
the definition of T. H. Greene's student: "The universe is a thick
complexus of intelligible relations." Yesterday I got _my_ system
similarly defined in an examination-book, by a student whom I appear to
have converted to the view that "the Universe is a vague pulsating mass
of next-to-next movement, always feeling its way along to a good
purpose, or trying to." That is about as far as lectures can carry them.
I particularly like the "trying to."

I wish I could have been at your recent discussion. I am getting
impatient with the awful abstract rigmarole in which our American
philosophers obscure the truth. It will be fatal. It revives the palmy
days of Hegelianism. It means utter relaxation of intellectual duty, and
God will smite it. If there's anything he hates, it is that kind of oozy
writing.

I have just read Busse's book, in which I find a lot of reality by the
way, but a pathetic waste of work on side issues--for against the
Strong-Heymans view of things, it seems to me that he brings no solid
objection whatever. Heymans's book is a wonder.[62] Good-bye, dear
Miller. _Come to us_, if you can, as soon as your lectures are over.

Your affectionate

W. J.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


[Post-card]

Cambridge, _Dec. 9. 1905_.

"My idea of Algebra," says a non-mathematically-minded student, "is that
it is a sort of form of low cunning."

W. J.




_To Daniel Merriman._


Cambridge, _Dec. 9, 1905_.

No, dear Merriman, not "e'en for thy sake." After an unblemished record
of declining to give addresses, successfully maintained for four years
(I have certainly declined 100 in the past twelve-month), I am not going
to break down now, for Abbot Academy, and go dishonored to my grave. It
is better, as the "Bhagavat-Gita" says, to lead your own life, however
bad, than to lead another's, however good. Emerson teaches the same
doctrine, and I live by it as bad and congenial a life as I can. If
there is anything that God despises more than a man who is constantly
making speeches, it is another man who is constantly accepting
invitations. What must he think, when they are both rolled into one? Get
thee behind me, Merriman,--I 'm sure that your saintly partner would
never have sent me such a request,--and believe me, as ever, fondly
yours,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Pauline Goldmark._


EL TOVAR,
GRAND CANYON, ARIZONA, _Jan. 3, 1906_.

DEAR PAOLINA,--I am breaking my journey by a day here, and it seems a
good place from which to date my New Year's greeting to you. But we
correspond so rarely that when it comes to the point of tracing actual
words with the pen, the last impressions of one's day and the more
permanent interest of one's life block the way for each other. I think,
however, that a word about the Canyon may fitly take precedence. It
certainly is equal to the brag; and, like so many of the more stupendous
freaks of nature, seems at first-sight smaller and more manageable than
one had supposed. But it grows in immensity as the eye penetrates it
more intimately. It is so entirely alone in character, that one has no
habits of association with "the likes" of it, and at first it seems a
foreign curiosity; but already in this one day I am feeling myself grow
nearer, and can well imagine that, with greater intimacy, it might
become the passion of one's life--so far as "Nature" goes. The
conditions have been unfavorable for intimate communion. Three degrees
above zero, and a spring overcoat, prevent that forgetting of "self"
which is said to be indispensable to absorption in Beauty. Moreover, I
have kept upon the "rim," seeing the Canyon from several points some
miles apart. I meant to go down, having but this day; but they couldn't
send me or any one today; and I confess that, with my precipice-disliking
soul, I was relieved, though it very likely would have proved less
uncomfortable than I have been told. (I resolved to go, in order to be
worthy of being your correspondent.) As Chas. Lamb says, there is
nothing so nice as doing good by stealth and being found out by
accident, so I now say it is even nicer to make heroic decisions and to
be prevented by "circumstances beyond your control" from even trying to
execute them. But if ever I get here in summer, I shall go straight down
and live there. I'm sure that it is indispensable. But it is vain to
waste descriptive words on the wondrous apparition, with its symphonies
of architecture and of color. I have just been watching its peaks blush
in the setting sun, and slowly lose their fire. Night nestling in the
depths. Solemn, solemn! And a unity of design that makes it seem like an
individual, an animated being. Good-night, old chasm!...




_To Henry James._


STANFORD UNIVERSITY, _Feb. 1, 1906_.

BELOVED H.,--Verily 'tis long since I have written to thee, but I have
had many and mighty things to do, and lately many business letters to
write, so I came not at it. Your last was your delightful reply to my
remarks about your "third manner," wherein you said that you would
consider your bald head dishonored if you ever came to pleasing _me_ by
what you wrote, so shocking was my taste.[63] Well! only write _for_ me,
and leave the question of pleasing open! I have to admit that in "The
Golden Bowl" and "The Wings of the Dove," you have succeeded _in getting
there_ after a fashion, in spite of the perversity of the method and its
_longness_, which I am not the only one to deplore.

But enough! let me tell you of my own fortunes!

I got here (after five pestilentially close-aired days in the train, and
one entrancing one off at the Grand Canyon of the Colorado) on the 8th,
and have now given nine lectures, to 300 enrolled students and about 150
visitors, partly colleagues. I take great pains, prepare a printed
syllabus, very fully; and really feel for the first time in my life, as
if I were lecturing _well_. High time, after 30 years of practice! It
earns me $5000, if I can keep it up till May 27th; but apart from that,
I think it is a bad way of expending energy. I ought to be writing my
everlastingly postponed book, which this job again absolutely adjourns.
I can't write a line of it while doing this other thing. (A propos to
which, I got a telegram from Eliot this A.M., asking if I would be
Harvard Professor for the first half of next year at the University of
Berlin. I had no difficulty in declining that, but I probably shall not
decline _Paris_, if they offer it to me year after next.) I am expecting
Alice to arrive in a fortnight. I have got a very decent little second
story, just enough for the two of us, or rather amply enough, sunny,
good fire-place, bathroom, little kitchen, etc., on one of the three
residential streets of the University land, and with a boarding-house
for meals just opposite, we shall have a sort of honeymoon picnic time.
And, sooth to say, Alice must need the simplification....

You've seen this wonderful spot, so I needn't describe it. It is really
a miracle; and so simple the life and so benign the elements, that for a
young ambitious professor who wishes to leave his mark on Pacific
civilization while it is most plastic, or for _any one_ who wants to
teach and work under the most perfect conditions for eight or nine
months, and _who is able to get to the East, or Europe, for the
remaining three_, I can't imagine anything finer. It is Utopian.
Perfection of weather. Cold nights, though above freezing. Fire pleasant
until 10 o'clock A.M., then unpleasant. In short, the "simple life" with
all the essential higher elements thrown in as communal possessions. The
drawback is, of course, the great surrounding human vacuum--the historic
silence fairly rings in your ears when you listen--and the social
insipidity. I'm glad I came, and with God's blessing I may pull through.
One calendar month is over, anyway. Do you know aught of G. K.
Chesterton? I've just read his "Heretics." A tremendously strong writer
and true thinker, despite his mannerism of paradox. Wells's "Kipps" is
good. Good-bye. Of course you 're breathing the fog of London while I am
bathed in warmest lucency. Keep well. Your loving,

W. J.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


STANFORD UNIVERSITY, _Feb. 9, 1906_.

DEAR FLOURNOY.--Your post-card of Jan. 22nd arrives and reminds me how
little I have communicated with you during the past twelve months....

Let me begin by congratulating Mlle. Alice, but more particularly Mr.
Werner, on the engagement which you announce. Surely she is a splendid
prize for anyone to capture. I hope that it has been a romantic
love-affair, and will remain so to the end. May her paternal and
maternal example be the model which their married life will follow! They
could find no better model. You do not tell the day of the
wedding--probably it is not yet appointed.

Yes! [Richard] Hodgson's death was ultra-sudden. He fell dead while
playing a violent game of "hand-ball." He was tremendously athletic and
had said to a friend only a week before that he thought he could
reasonably count on twenty-five years more of life. None of his work was
finished, vast materials amassed, which no one can ever get acquainted
with as he had gradually got acquainted; so now good-bye forever to at
least two unusually solid and instructive books which he would have soon
begun to write on "psychic" subjects. As a _man_, Hodgson was splendid,
a real man; as an investigator, it is my private impression that he
lately got into a sort of obsession about Mrs. Piper, cared too little
for other clues, and continued working with her when all the sides of
her mediumship were amply exhibited. I suspect that our American Branch
of the S.P.R. will have to dissolve this year, for lack of a competent
secretary. Hodgson was our only worker, except Hyslop, and _he_ is
engaged in founding an "Institute" of his own, which will employ more
popular methods. To tell the truth, I 'm rather glad of the prospect of
the Branch ending, for the Piper-investigation--and nothing else--had
begun to bore me to extinction....

To change the subject--you ought to see this extraordinary little
University. It was founded only fourteen years ago in the absolute
wilderness, by a pair of rich Californians named Stanford, as a memorial
to their only child, a son who died at 16. Endowed with I know not how
many square miles of land, which some day will come into the market and
yield a big income, it has already funds that yield $750,000 yearly, and
buildings, of really _beautiful_ architecture, that have been paid for
out of income, and have cost over $5,000,000. (I mention the cost to let
you see that they must be solid.) There are now 1500 students of both
sexes, who pay nothing for tuition, and a town of 15,000 inhabitants has
grown up a mile away, beyond the gates. The landscape is exquisite and
classical, San Francisco only an hour and a quarter away by train; the
climate is one of the most perfect in the world, life is absolutely
simple, no one being rich, servants almost unattainable (most of the
house-work being done by students who come in at odd hours), many of
them Japanese, and the professors' wives, I fear, having in great
measure to do their own cooking. No social excesses or complications
therefore. In fact, nothing but essentials, and _all_ the essentials.
Fine music, for example, every afternoon, in the Church of the
University. There couldn't be imagined a better environment for an
intellectual man to teach and work in, for eight or nine months in the
year, if he were then free to spend three or four months in the crowded
centres of civilization--for the social insipidity is great here, and
the historic vacuum and silence appalling, and one ought to be free to
change.

Unfortunately the authorities of the University seem not to be gifted
with imagination enough to see its proper rôle. Its geographical
environment and material basis being unique, they ought to aim at unique
quality all through, and get _sommités_ to come here to work and teach,
by offering large stipends. They might, I think, thus easily build up
something very distinguished. Instead of which, they pay small sums to
young men who chafe at not being able to travel, and whose wives get
worn out with domestic drudgery. The whole thing _might_ be Utopian; it
_is_ only half-Utopian. A characteristic American affair! But the
half-success is great enough to make one see the great advantages that
come to this country from encouraging public-spirited millionaires to
indulge their freaks, however eccentric. In what the Stanfords have
already done, there is an assured potentiality of great things of _some_
sort for all future time. My coming here is an exception. They have had
psychology well represented from the first by Frank Angell and Miss
Martin; but no philosophy except for a year at a time. I start a new
régime--next year they will have two good professors.

I lecture three times a week to 400 listeners, printing a syllabus
daily, and making them read Paulsen's textbook for examinations. I find
it hard work,[64] and only pray that I may have strength to run till
June without collapsing. The students, though rustic, are very earnest
and wholesome.

I am pleased, but also amused, by what you say of Woodbridge's Journal:
"la palme est maintenant à l'Amérique." It is true that a lot of
youngsters in that Journal are doing some real thinking, but of all the
_bad writing_ that the world has seen, I think that our American writing
is getting to be the worst. X----'s ideas have unchained formlessness of
expression that beats the bad writing of the Hegelian epoch in Germany.
I can hardly believe you sincere when you praise that journal as you do.
I am so busy teaching that I do no writing and but little reading this
year. I have declined to go to Paris next year, and also declined an
invitation to Berlin, as "International Exchange" [Professor]. The year
after, if asked, I _may_ go to Paris--but never to Berlin. We have had
Ostwald, a most delightful human _Erscheinung_, as international
exchange at Harvard this year. But I don't believe in the system....




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


HOTEL DEL MONTE,
MONTEREY, CAL., _Apr. 7, 1906_.

...What I really want to write about is Papini, the concluding chapter
of his "Crepuscolo dei Filosofi," and the February number of the
"Leonardo." Likewise Dewey's "Beliefs and Realities," in the
"Philosophical Review" for March. I must be very damp powder, slow to
burn, and I must be terribly respectful of other people, for I confess
that it is only after reading these things (in spite of all you have
written to the same effect, and in spite of your tone of announcing
judgment to a sinful world), that I seem to have grasped the full import
for life and regeneration, the _great_ perspective of the programme, and
the renovating character for _all things_, of Humanism; and the
outwornness as of a scarecrow's garments, simulating life by flapping in
the wind of nightfall, of all intellectualism, and the blindness and
deadness of all who worship intellectualist idols, the Royces and
Taylors, and, worse than all, their followers, who, with no inward
excuse of nature (being too unoriginal really to _prefer_ anything),
just blunder on to the wrong scent, when it is so easy to catch the
right one, and then stick to it with the fidelity of inorganic matter.
Ha! ha! would that I were young again with this inspiration! Papini is a
jewel! To think of that little Dago putting himself ahead of every one
of us (even of you, with his _Uomo-Dio_) at a single stride. And what a
writer! and what fecundity! and what courage (careless of nicknames, for
it is so easy to call him now the Cyrano de Bergerac of Philosophy)! and
what humor and what truth! Dewey's powerful stuff seems also to ring the
death-knell of a sentenced world. Yet none of _them_ will see it--Taylor
will still write his refutations, etc., etc., when the living world will
all be drifting after _us_. It is queer to be assisting at the
_éclosion_ of a great new mental epoch, life, religion, and philosophy
in one--I wish I didn't have to lecture, so that I might bear some part
of the burden of writing it all out, as we must do, pushing it into all
sort of details. But I must for one year longer. We don't get back till
June, but pray tell Wells (whose address _fehlt mir_) to make our house
his headquarters if he gets to Boston and finds it the least convenient
to do so. Our boys will hug him to their bosoms. Ever thine,

W. J.

The San Francisco earthquake occurred at about five o'clock in the
morning on April 18. Rumors of the destruction wrought in the city
reached Stanford within a couple of hours and were easily credited, for
buildings had been shaken down at Stanford. Miss L. J. Martin, a member
of the philosophical department, was thrown into great anxiety about
relatives of hers who were in the city, and James offered to accompany
her in a search for them, and left Stanford with her by an early morning
train. He also promised Mrs. Wm. F. Snow to try to get her news of her
husband. Miss Martin found her relatives, and James met Dr. Snow early
in the afternoon, and then spent several hours in wandering about the
stricken city. He subsequently wrote an account of the disaster, which
may be found in "Memories and Studies."[65]




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


STANFORD UNIVERSITY, _Apr. 22, 1906_.

DEAREST FANNY,--Three letters from you and nary one from us in all these
weeks! Well, I have been heavily burdened, and although disposed to
write, have kept postponing; and with Alice--cooking, washing dishes and
doing housework, as well as keeping up a large social life--it has been
very much the same. All is now over, since the earthquake; I mean that
lectures and syllabuses are called off, and no more exams to be held
("ill-wind," etc.), so one can write. We shall get East again as soon as
we can manage it, and tell you face to face. We can now pose as experts
on Earthquakes--pardon the egotistic form of talking about the latter,
but it makes it more real. The last thing Bakewell said to me, while I
was leaving Cambridge, was: "I hope they'll treat you to a little bit of
an earthquake while you're there. It's a pity you shouldn't have that
local experience." Well, when I lay in bed at about half-past five that
morning, wide-awake, and the room began to sway, my first thought was,
"Here's Bakewell's earthquake, after all"; and when it went crescendo
and reached fortissimo in less than half a minute, and the room was
shaken like a rat by a terrier, with the most vicious expression you can
possibly imagine, it was to my mind absolutely an _entity_ that had been
waiting all this time holding back its activity, but at last saying,
"Now, _go_ it!" and it was impossible not to conceive it as animated by
a will, so vicious was the temper displayed--everything _down_, in the
room, that could go down, bureaus, etc., etc., and the shaking so rapid
and vehement. All the while no fear, only admiration for the way a
wooden house could prove its elasticity, and glee over the vividness of
the manner in which such an "abstract idea" as "earthquake" could verify
itself into sensible reality. In a couple of minutes everybody was in
the street, and then we saw, what I hadn't suspected in my room, the
extent of the damage. Wooden houses almost all intact, but every chimney
down but one or two, and the higher University buildings largely piles
of ruins. Gabble and babble, till at last automobiles brought the
dreadful news from San Francisco.

I boarded the only train that went to the City, and got out in the
evening on the only train that left. I shouldn't have done it, but that
our co-habitant here, Miss Martin, became obsessed by the idea that she
_must_ see what had become of her sister, and I had to stand by her. Was
very glad I did; for the spectacle was memorable, of a whole population
in the streets with what baggage they could rescue from their houses
about to burn, while the flames and the explosions were steadily
advancing and making everyone move farther. The fires most beautiful in
the effulgent sunshine. Every vacant space was occupied by trunks and
furniture and people, and thousands have been sitting by them now for
four nights and will have to longer. The fire seems now controlled, but
the city is practically wiped out (thank Heaven, as to much of its
architecture!). The order has been wonderful, even the criminals struck
solemn by the disaster, and the military has done great service.

But you will know all these details by the papers better than I know
them now, before this reaches you, and in three weeks we shall be back.

I am very glad that Jim's [Putnam] lectures went off so well. He wrote
me himself a good letter--won't you, by the way, send him this one as a
partial answer?--and his syllabus was first-rate and the stuff must have
been helpful. It is jolly to think of both him and Marian really getting
off together to enjoy themselves! But between Vesuvius and San Francisco
enjoyment has small elbow-room. Love to your mother, dearest Fanny, to
Mary and the men folks, from us both. Your ever affectionate,

W. J.

A few days after the earthquake, train-service from Stanford to the East
was reëstablished and James and his wife returned to Cambridge. The
reader will infer correctly from the next letter that Henry James (and
William James, Jr., who was staying with him in Rye) had been in great
anxiety and had been by no means reassured by the brief cablegram which
was the only personal communication that it was possible to send them
during the days immediately following the disaster.




_To Henry James and William James, Jr._


Cambridge, _May 9, 1906_.

DEAREST BROTHER AND SON,--Your cablegram of response was duly received,
and we have been also "joyous" in the thought of your being together. I
knew, of course, Henry, that you would be solicitous about us in the
earthquake, but didn't reckon at all on the extremity of your anguish as
evinced by your frequent cablegrams home, and finally by the letter to
Harry which arrived a couple of days ago and told how you were unable to
settle down to any other occupation, the thought of our mangled forms,
hollow eyes, starving bodies, minds insane with fear, haunting you so.
We never reckoned on this extremity of anxiety on your part, I say, and
so never thought of cabling you direct, as we might well have done from
Oakland on the day we left, namely April 27th. I much regret this
callousness on our part. For _all_ the anguish was yours; and in general
this experience only rubs in what I have always known, that in battles,
sieges and other great calamities, the pathos and agony is in general
solely felt by those at a distance; and although physical pain is
suffered most by its immediate victims, those at the _scene of action_
have no _sentimental_ suffering whatever. Everyone at San Francisco
seemed in a good hearty frame of mind; there was work for every moment
of the day and a kind of uplift in the sense of a "common lot" that took
away the sense of loneliness that (I imagine) gives the sharpest edge to
the more usual kind of misfortune that may befall a man. But it was a
queer sight, on our journey through the City on the 26th (eight days
after the disaster), to see the inmates of the houses of the quarter
left standing, all cooking their dinners at little brick camp-fires in
the middle of the streets, the chimneys being condemned. If such a
disaster had to happen, somehow it couldn't have chosen a better place
than San Francisco (where everyone knew about camping, and was familiar
with the creation of civilizations out of the bare ground), and at
five-thirty in the morning, when few fires were lighted and everyone,
after a good sleep, was in bed. Later, there would have been great loss
of life in the streets, and the more numerous foci of conflagration
would have burned the city in one day instead of four, and made things
vastly worse.

In general you may be sure that when any disaster befalls our country it
will be _you_ only who are wringing of hands, and we who are smiling
with "interest or laughing with gleeful excitement." I didn't hear one
pathetic word uttered at the scene of disaster, though of course the
crop of "nervous wrecks" is very likely to come in a month or so.

Although we have been home six days, such has been the stream of broken
occupations, people to see, and small urgent jobs to attend to, that I
have written no letter till now. Today, one sees more clearly and begins
to rest. "Home" looks extraordinarily pleasant, and though damp and
chilly, it is the divine budding moment of the year. Not, however, the
lustrous light and sky of Stanford University....

I have just read your paper on Boston in the "North American Review." I
am glad you threw away the scabbard and made your critical remarks so
straight. What you say about "pay" here being the easily won "salve" for
privations, in view of which we cease to "mind" them, is as true as it
is strikingly pat. _Les intellectuels_, wedged between the millionaires
and the handworkers, are the really pinched class here. They feel the
frustrations and they can't get the salve. _My_ attainment of so much
pay in the past few years brings home to me what an all-benumbing salve
it is. That whole article is of your best. We long to hear from W., Jr.
No word yet. Your ever loving,

W. J.

In "The Energies of Men" there is a long quotation from an unnamed
European correspondent who had been subjecting himself to Yoga
disciplinary exercise. What follows is a comment written upon the first
receipt of the report quoted in the "Energies."




_To W. Lutoslawski._


Cambridge, _May 6, 1906_.

...Your long and beautiful letter about Yoga, etc., greets me on my
return from California. It is a most precious human document, and some
day, along with that sketch of your religious evolution and other
shorter letters of yours, it must see the light of day. What strikes me
first in it is the evidence of improved moral "tone"--a calm, firm,
sustained joyousness, hard to describe, and striking a new note in your
epistles--which is already a convincing argument of the genuineness of
the improvement wrought in you by Yoga practices....

You are mistaken about my having tried Yoga discipline--I never meant to
suggest that. I have read several books (A. B., by the way, used to be a
student of mine, but in spite of many noble qualities, he always had an
unbalanced mind--obsessed by certain morbid ideas, etc.), and in the
slightest possible way tried breathing exercises. These go terribly
against the grain with me, are extremely disagreeable, and, even when
tried this winter (somewhat perseveringly), to put myself asleep, after
lying awake at night, failed to have any soporific effect. What
impresses me most in your narrative is the obstinate strength of will
shown by yourself and your chela in your methodical abstentions and
exercises. When could I hope for such will-power? I find, when my
general energy is _in Anspruch genommen_ by hard lecturing and other
professional work, that then particularly what little _ascetic_ energy I
have has to be remitted, because the exertion of inhibitory and
stimulative will required increases my general fatigue instead of
"tonifying" me.

But your sober experience gives me new hopes. Your whole narrative
suggests in me the wonder whether the Yoga discipline may not be, after
all, in all its phases, simply a methodical way of _waking up deeper
levels of will-power than are habitually used_, and thereby increasing
the individual's vital tone and energy. I have no doubt whatever that
most people live, whether physically, intellectually or morally, in a
very restricted circle of their potential being. They _make use_ of a
very small portion of their possible consciousness, and of their soul's
resources in general, much like a man who, out of his whole bodily
organism, should get into a habit of using and moving only his little
finger. Great emergencies and crises show us how much greater our vital
resources are than we had supposed. Pierre Janet discussed lately some
cases of pathological impulsion or obsession in what he has called the
"psychasthenic" type of individual, bulimia, exaggerated walking, morbid
love of feeling pain, and explains the phenomenon as based on the
underlying _sentiment d'incomplétude_, as he calls it, or _sentiment de
l'irréel_ with which these patients are habitually afflicted, and which
they find is abolished by the violent appeal to some exaggerated
activity or other, discovered accidentally perhaps, and then used
habitually. I was reminded of his article in reading your descriptions
and prescriptions. May the Yoga practices not be, after all, methods of
getting at our deeper functional levels? And thus only be substitutes
for entirely different crises that may occur in other individuals,
religious crises, indignation-crises, love-crises, etc.?

What you say of diet is in striking accordance with the views lately
made popular by Horace Fletcher--I dare say you have heard of them. You
see I am trying to generalize the Yoga idea, and redeem it from the
pretension that, for example, there is something intrinsically holy in
the various grotesque postures of Hatha Yoga. I have spoken with various
Hindus, particularly with three last winter, one a Yogi and apostle of
Vedanta; one a "Christian" of scientific training; one a Bramo-Somaj
professor. The former made great claims of increase of "power," but
admitted that those who had it could in no way demonstrate it _ad
oculos_, to outsiders. The other two both said that Yoga was less and
less frequently practised by the more intellectual, and that the
old-fashioned _Guru_ was becoming quite a rarity.

I believe with you, fully, that the so-called "normal man" of commerce,
so to speak, the healthy philistine, is a mere extract from the
potentially realizable individual whom he represents, and that we all
have reservoirs of life to draw upon, of which we do not dream. The
practical problem is "how to get at them." And the answer varies with
the individual. Most of us never can, or never do get at them. _You_
have indubitably got at your own deeper levels by the Yoga methods. I
hope that what you have gained will never again be lost to you. You must
keep there! _My_ deeper levels seem very hard to find--I am so
rebellious at all formal and prescriptive methods--a dry and bony
_individual_, repelling fusion, and avoiding voluntary exertion. No
matter, art is long! and _qui vivra verra_. I shall try fasting and
again try breathing--discovering perhaps some individual rhythm that is
more tolerable....




_To John Jay Chapman._


Cambridge, _May 18, 1906_.

DEAR OLD JACK C.,--Having this minute come into the possession of a new
type-writer, what can I do better than express my pride in the same by
writing to you?[66]

I spent last night at George Dorr's and he read me several letters from
you, telling me also of your visit, and of how well you seemed. For
years past I have been on the point of writing to you to assure [you] of
my continued love and to express my commiseration for your poor wife,
who has had so long to bear the brunt of your temper--you see I have
been there already and I know how one's irritability is exasperated by
conditions of nervous prostration--but now I can write and congratulate
you on having recovered, temper and all. (As I write, it bethinks me
that in a previous letter I have made identical jokes about your temper
which, I fear, will give Mrs. Chapman a very low opinion of my
humoristic resources, and in sooth they are small; but we are as God
makes us and must not try to be anything else, so pray condone the
silliness and let it pass.) The main thing is that you seem practically
to have recovered, in spite of everything; and I am heartily glad.

I too am well enough for all practical purposes, but I have to go slow
and not try to do too many things in a day. Simplification of life and
consciousness I find to be the great thing, but a hard thing to compass
when one lives in city conditions. How our dear Sarah Whitman lived in
the sort of railroad station she made of her life--I confess it's a
mystery to me. If I lived at a place called Barrytown, it would probably
go better--don't you ever go back to New York to live!

Alice and I had a jovial time at sweet little Stanford University. It
was the simple life in the best sense of the term. I am glad for once to
have been part of the working machine of California, and a pretty deep
part too, as it afterwards turned out. The earthquake also was a
memorable bit of experience, and altogether we have found it
mind-enlarging and are very glad we ben there. But the whole
intermediate West is awful--a sort of penal doom to have to live there;
and in general the result with me of having lived 65 years in America is
to make me feel as if I had at least bought the right to a certain
capriciousness, and were free now to live for the remainder of my days
wherever I prefer and can make my wife and children consent--it is more
likely to be in rural than in urban surroundings, and in the maturer
than in the _rawrer_ parts of the world. But the first thing is to get
out of the treadmill of teaching, which I hate and shall resign from
next year. After that, I can use my small available store of energy in
writing, which is not only a much more economical way of working it, but
more satisfactory in point of quality, and more lucrative as well.

Now, J. C., when are you going to get at writing again? The world is
hungry for your wares. No one touches certain deep notes of moral truth
as you do, and your humor is _köstlich_ and _impayable_. You ought to
join the band of "pragmatistic" or "humanistic" philosophers. I almost
fear that Barrytown may not yet have begun to be disturbed by the rumor
of their achievements, the which are of the greatest, and seriously I du
think that the world of thought is on the eve of a renovation no less
important than that contributed by Locke. The leaders of the new
movement are Dewey, Schiller of Oxford, in a sense Bergson of Paris, a
young Florentine named Papini, and last and least worthy, W. J. H. G.
Wells ought to be counted in, and if I mistake not G. K. Chesterton as
well.[67] I hope you know and love the last-named writer, who seems to
me a great teller of the truth. His systematic preference for
contradictions and paradoxical forms of statement seems to me a
mannerism somewhat to be regretted in so wealthy a mind; but that is a
blemish from which some of our very greatest intellects are not
altogether free--the philosopher of Barrytown himself being not wholly
exempt. Join us, O Jack, and in the historic and perspective sense your
fame will be secure. All future Histories of Philosophy will print your
name.

But although my love for you is not exhausted, my type-writing energy
is. It communicates stiffness and cramps, both to the body and the mind.
Nevertheless I think I have been doing pretty well for a first attempt,
don't you? If you return me a good long letter telling me more
particularly about the process of your recovery, I will write again,
even if I have to take a pen to do it, and in any case I will do it much
better than this time.

Believe me, dear old J. C., with hearty affection and delight at your
recovery--all these months I have been on the brink of writing to find
out how you were--and with very best regards to your wife, whom some day
I wish we may be permitted to know better. Yours very truly,

Wm. James.

Everyone dead! Hodgson, Shaler, James Peirce this winter--to go no
further afield! _Resserrons les rangs!_




_To Henry James._


Cambridge, _Sept. 10, 1906_.

DEAREST H.,--I got back from the Adirondacks, where I had spent a
fortnight, the night before last, and in three or four hours Alice,
Aleck and I will be spinning towards Chocorua, it being now five A.M.
Elly [Temple] Hunter will join us, with Grenville, in a few days; but
for the most part, thank Heaven, we shall be alone till the end of the
month. I found two letters from you awaiting me, and two from Bill. They
all breathed a spirit of happiness, and brought a waft of the beautiful
European summer with them. It has been a beautiful summer here too; and
now, sad to say, it is counting the last beads of its chaplet of hot
days out--the hot days which are really the absolutely friendly ones to
man--you wish they would get cooler when you have them, and when they
are departed, you wish you could have their exquisite gentleness again.
I have just been reading in the volume by Richard Jefferies called the
"Life of the Fields" a wonderful rhapsody, "The Pageant of Summer." It
needs to be read twice over and very attentively, being nothing but an
enumeration of all the details visible in the corner of an old field
with a hedge and ditch. But rightly taken in, it is probably the highest
flight of human genius in the direction of nature-worship. I don't see
why it should not count as an immortal thing. You missed it, when here,
in not getting to Keene Valley, where I have just been, and of which the
sylvan beauty, especially by moonlight, is probably unlike aught that
Europe has to show. Imperishable freshness!...

This is definitely my last year of lecturing, but I wish it were my
first of non-lecturing. Simplification of the field of duties I find
more and more to be the _summum bonum_ for me; and I live in
apprehension lest the Avenger should cut me off before I get my message
out. Not that the message is particularly needed by the human race,
which can live along perfectly well without any one philosopher; but
objectively I hate to leave the volumes I have already published without
their logical complement. It is an esthetic tragedy to have a bridge
begun, and stopped in the middle of an arch.

But I hear Alice stirring upstairs, so I must go up and finish packing.
I hope that you and W. J., Jr., will again form a harmonious
combination. I hope also that he will stop painting for a time. He will
do all the better, when he gets home, for having had a fallow interval.

Good-bye! and my blessing upon both of you. Your ever loving,

W. J.




_To H. G. Wells._


CHOCORUA, _Sept. 11, 1906_.

DEAR MR. WELLS,--I've read your "Two Studies in Disappointment" in
"Harper's Weekly," and must thank you from the bottom of my heart. _Rem
acu tetegisti!_ Exactly that callousness to abstract justice is _the_
sinister feature and, to me as well as to you, the incomprehensible
feature, of our U. S. civilization. How you hit upon it so neatly and
singled it out so truly (and talked of it so tactfully!) God only knows:
He evidently created you to do such things! I never heard of the
MacQueen case before, but I've known of plenty of others. When the
ordinary American hears of them, instead of the idealist within him
beginning to "see red" with the higher indignation, instead of the
spirit of English history growing alive in his breast, he begins to
pooh-pooh and minimize and tone down the thing, and breed excuses from
his general fund of optimism and respect for expediency. "It's probably
right enough"; "Scoundrelly, as you say," but understandable, "from the
point of view of parties interested"--but understandable in onlooking
citizens only as a symptom of the moral flabbiness born of the exclusive
worship of the bitch-goddess SUCCESS. That--with the squalid cash
interpretation put on the word success--is our national disease. Hit it
hard! Your book _must_ have a great effect. Do you remember the glorious
remarks about success in Chesterton's "Heretics"? You will undoubtedly
have written _the_ medicinal book about America. And what good humor!
and what tact! Sincerely yours,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Theodora Sedgwick._


CHOCORUA, _Sept. 13, 1906_.

DEAR THEODORA,--Here we are in this sweet delicate little place, after a
pretty agitated summer, and the quiet seems very nice. Likewise the
stillness. I have thought often of you, and _almost_ written; but there
never seemed exactly to be time or place for it, so I let the sally of
the heart to-you-ward suffice. A week ago, I spent a night with H. L.
Higginson, whom I found all alone at his house by the Lake, and he told
me your improvement had been continuous and great, which I heartily hope
has really been the case. I don't see why it should not have been the
case, under such delightful conditions. What good things friends are!
And what better thing than lend it, can one do with one's house? I was
struck by Henry Higginson's high level of mental tension, so to call it,
which made him talk, incessantly and passionately about one subject
after another, never running dry, and reminding me more of myself when I
was twenty years old. It isn't so much a man's eminence of elementary
faculties that pulls him through. They may be rare, and he do nothing.
It is the steam pressure to the square inch behind that moves the
machine. The amount of that is what makes the great difference between
us. Henry has it high. Previous to seeing him I had spent ten days in
beautiful Keene Valley, dividing them between the two ends. The St.
Hubert's end is, I verily believe, one of the most beautiful things in
this beautiful world--too dissimilar to anything in Europe to be
compared therewith, and consequently able to stand on its merits all
alone. But the great [forest] fire of four years ago came to the very
edge of wiping it out! And any year it may go.

I also had a delightful week all alone on the Maine Coast, among the
islands.

Back here, one is oppressed by sadness at the amount of work waiting to
be done on the place and no one to be hired to do it. The entire meaning
and essence of "land" is something to be worked over--even if it be only
a wood-lot, it must be kept trimmed and cleaned. And for one who _can_
work and who _likes_ work with his arms and hands, there is nothing so
delightful as a piece of land to work over--it responds to every hour
you give it, and smiles with the "improvement" year by year. I neither
can work now, nor do I like it, so an irremediable bad conscience
afflicts my ownership of this place. With Cambridge as headquarters for
August, and a little lot of land there, I think I could almost be ready
to give up this place, and trust to the luck of hotels, and other
opportunities of rustication without responsibility. But perhaps we can
get this place [taken care of?] some day!

I don't know how much you read. I've taken great pleasure this summer in
Bielshowski's "Life of Goethe" (a wonderful piece of art) and in
Birukoff's "Life of Tolstoy."

Alice is very well and happy in the stillness here. Elly Hunter is
coming this evening, tomorrow the Merrimans for a day, and then Mrs.
Hodder till the end of the month.

Faithful love from both of us, dear Theodora. Your affectionate

W. J.




_To his Daughter._


Cambridge, _Jan. 20, 1907_, 6.15 P.M.

SWEET PEGLEIN,--Just before tea! and your Grandam, Mar, and I going to
hear the Revd. Percy Grant in the College chapel just after. We are
getting to be great church-goers. 'T will have to be Crothers next. He,
sweet man, is staying with the Brookses. After him, the Christian
Science Church, and after that the deluge!

I have spent all day preparing next Tuesday's lecture, which is my last
before a class in Harvard University, so help me God amen! I am almost
_afraid_ at so much freedom. Three quarters of an hour ago Aleck and I
went for a walk in Somerville; warm, young moon, bare trees, clearing in
the west, stars out, old-fashioned streets, not sordid--a beautiful
walk. Last night to Bernard Shaw's ex-_quis_-ite play of "Cæsar and
Cleopatra"--exquisitely acted too, by F. Robertson and Maxine Elliot's
sister Gert. Your Mar will have told you that, after these weeks of
persistent labor, culminating in New York, I am going to take sanctuary
on Saturday the 2nd of Feb. in your arms at Bryn Mawr. I do not want,
wish, or desire to "talk" to the crowd, but your mother pushing so, if
you and the philosophy club also pull, I mean pull _hard_, Jimmy[68]
will try to articulate something not too technical. But it will have to
be, if ever, on that Saturday night. It will also have to be very short;
and the less of a "reception," the better, after it.

Your two last letters were tiptop. I never seen such _growth_!

I go to N. Y., to be at the Harvard Club, on Monday the 28th. Kühnemann
left yesterday. A most dear man. Your loving

DAD.




_To Henry James and William James, Jr._


Cambridge, _Feb. 14, 1907_.

DEAR BROTHER AND SON,--I dare say that you will be together in Paris
when you get this, but I address it to Lamb House all the same. You
twain are more "blessed" than I, in the way of correspondence this
winter, for you give more than you receive, Bill's letters being as
remarkable for wit and humor as Henry's are for copiousness, considering
that the market value of what he either writes or types is so many
shillings a word. When _I_ write other things, I find it almost
impossible to write letters. I've been at it _stiddy_, however, for
three days, since my return from New York, finding, as I did, a great
stack of correspondence to attend to. The first impression of New York,
if you stay there not more than 36 hours, which has been my limit for
twenty years past, is one of repulsion at the clangor, disorder, and
permanent earthquake conditions. But this time, installed as I was at
the Harvard Club (44th St.) in the centre of the cyclone, I caught the
pulse of the machine, took up the rhythm, and vibrated _mit_, and found
it simply magnificent. I'm surprised at you, Henry, not having been more
enthusiastic, but perhaps that superbly powerful and beautiful subway
was not opened when you were there. It is an _entirely_ new New York, in
soul as well as in body, from the old one, which looks like a village in
retrospect. The courage, the heaven-scaling audacity of it all, and the
_lightness_ withal, as if there was nothing that was not easy, and the
great pulses and bounds of progress, so many in directions all
simultaneous that the coördination is indefinitely future, give a kind
of _drumming background_ of life that I never felt before. I'm sure that
once _in_ that movement, and at home, all other places would seem
insipid. I observe that your book,--"The American Scene,"--dear H., is
just out. I must get it and devour again the chapters relative to New
York. On my last night, I dined with Norman Hapgood, along with men who
were successfully and happily in the vibration. H. and his most
winning-faced young partner, Collier, Jerome, Peter Dunne, F. M. Colby,
and Mark Twain. (The latter, poor man, is only good for monologue, in
his old age, or for dialogue at best, but he's a dear little genius all
the same.) I got such an impression of easy efficiency in the midst of
their bewildering conditions of speed and complexity of adjustment.
Jerome, particularly, with the world's eyes on his court-room, in the
very crux of the Thaw trial, as if he had nothing serious to do. Balzac
ought to come to life again. His Rastignac imagination sketched the
possibility of it long ago. I lunched, dined, and sometimes breakfasted,
out, every day of my stay, vibrated between 44th St., seldom going
lower, and 149th, with Columbia University at 116th as my chief relay
station, the magnificent space-devouring Subway roaring me back and
forth, lecturing to a thousand daily,[69] and having four separate
dinners at the Columbia Faculty Club, where colleagues severally
compassed me about, many of them being old students of mine, wagged
their tongues at me and made me explain.[70] It was certainly the high
tide of my existence, so far as _energizing_ and being "recognized" were
concerned, but I took it all very "easy" and am hardly a bit tired.
Total abstinence from every stimulant whatever is the one condition of
living at a rapid pace. I am now going whack at the writing of the rest
of the lectures, which will be more original and (I believe) important
than my previous works....




_To Moorfield Storey._


Cambridge, _Feb._ 21, 1907.

DEAR MOORFIELD,--Your letter of three weeks ago has inadvertently lain
unnoticed--not because it didn't do me good, but because I went to New
York for a fortnight, and since coming home have been too druv to pay
any tributes to friendship. I haven't got many letters either of
condolence or congratulation on my retirement,--which, by the way,
doesn't take place till the end of the year,--the papers have railroaded
me out too soon.[71] But I confess that the thought is sweet to me of
being able to hear the College bell ring without any tendency to "move"
in consequence, and of seeing the last Thursday in September go by, and
remaining in the country careless of what becomes of its youth. It's the
_harness_ and the _hours_ that are so galling! I expect to shed truths
in dazzling profusion on the world for many years.

As for you, retire too! Let you, Eliot, Roosevelt and me, first relax;
then take to landscape painting, which has a very soothing effect; then
write out all the truths which a long life of intimacy with mankind has
recommended to each of us as most useful. I think we can use the ebb
tide of our energies best in that way. I'm sure that _your_
contributions would be the most useful of all. Affectionately yours,

WM. JAMES.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


Cambridge, _Mar._ 26, 1907.

DEAR FLOURNOY,--Your dilectissime letter of the 16th arrived this
morning and I must scribble a word of reply. That's the way to write to
a man! Caress him! flatter him! tell him that all Switzerland is hanging
on his lips! You have made me really _happy_ for at least twenty-four
hours! My dry and businesslike compatriots never write letters like
that. They write about themselves--you write about _me_. You know the
definition of an egotist: "a person who insists on talking about
_himself_, when you want to talk about _yourself_." Reverdin has told me
of the success of your lectures on pragmatism, and if you have been
communing in spirit with me this winter, so have I with you. I have
grown more and more deeply into pragmatism, and I rejoice immensely to
hear you say, "je m'y sens tout gagné." It is absolutely the only
philosophy with _no_ humbug in it, and I am certain that it is _your_
philosophy. Have you read Papini's article in the February "Leonardo"?
That seems to me really splendid. You say that my ideas have formed the
real _centre de ralliment_ of the pragmatist tendencies. To me it is the
youthful and _empanaché_ Papini who has best put himself at the centre
of equilibrium whence all the motor tendencies start. He (and Schiller)
has given me great confidence and courage. I shall dedicate my book,
however, to the memory of J. S. Mill.

I hope that you are careful to distinguish in my own work between the
pragmatism and the "radical empiricism" (Conception de Conscience,[72]
etc.) which to my own mind have no necessary connexion with each other.
My first proofs came in this morning, along with your letter, and the
little book ought to be out by the first of June. You shall have a very
early copy. It is exceedingly untechnical, and I can't help suspecting
that it will make a real impression. Münsterberg, who hitherto has been
rather pooh-poohing my thought, now, after reading the lecture on truth
which I sent you a while ago, says I seem to be ignorant that Kant ever
wrote, Kant having already said all that I say. I regard this as a very
good symptom. The third stage of opinion about a new idea, already
arrived: _1st_: absurd! _2nd_: trivial! _3rd_: _we_ discovered it! I
don't suppose you mean to print these lectures of yours, but I wish you
would. If you would translate my lectures, what could make me happier?
But, as I said apropos of the "Varieties," I hate to think of you doing
that drudgery when you might be formulating your own ideas. But, in one
way or the other, I hope you will join in the great strategic
combination against the forces of rationalism and bad abstractionism! A
good _coup de collier_ all round, and I verily believe that a new
philosophic movement will begin....

I thank you for your congratulations on my retirement. It makes me very
happy. A professor has two functions: (1) to be learned and distribute
bibliographical information; (2) to communicate truth. The _1st_
function is the essential one, officially considered. The _2nd_ is the
only one I care for. Hitherto I have always felt like a humbug as a
professor, for I am weak in the first requirement. Now I can live for
the second with a free conscience. I envy you now at the Italian Lakes!
But good-bye! I have already written you a long letter, though I only
_meant_ to write a line! Love to you all from

W. J.




_To Charles A. Strong._


Cambridge, _Apr._ 9, 1907.

DEAR STRONG,--Your tightly woven little letter reached me this A.M.,
just as I was about writing to you to find out how you are. Your long
silence had made me apprehensive about your condition, and this news
cheers me up very much. Rome is great; and I like to think of you there;
if I spend another winter in Europe, it shall be mainly in Rome. You
don't say where you're staying, however, so my imagination is at fault,
I hope it may be at the _Russie_, that most delightful of hotels. I am
overwhelmed with duties, so I must be very brief _in re religionis_.
Your warnings against my superstitious tendencies, for such I suppose
they are,--this is the second heavy one I remember,--touch me, but not
in the prophetic way, for they don't weaken my trust in the healthiness
of my own attitude, which in part (I fancy) is less remote from your own
than you suppose. For instance, my "God of things as they are," being
part of a pluralistic system, is responsible for only such of them as he
knows enough and has enough power to have accomplished. For the rest he
is identical with your "ideal" God. The "omniscient" and "omnipotent"
God of theology I regard as a disease of the philosophy-shop. But,
having thrown away so much of the philosophy-shop, you may ask me why I
don't throw away the whole? That would mean too strong a negative
will-to-believe for me. It would mean a dogmatic disbelief in any extant
consciousness higher than that of the "normal" human mind; and this in
the teeth of the extraordinary vivacity of man's psychological commerce
with something ideal that _feels as if it_ were also actual (I have no
such commerce--I wish I had, but I can't close my eyes to its vitality
in others); and in the teeth of such analogies as Fechner uses to show
that there may be other-consciousness than man's. If other, then why not
higher and bigger? Why _may_ we not be in the universe as our dogs and
cats are in our drawing-rooms and libraries? It's a will-to-believe on
both sides: I am perfectly willing that others should disbelieve: why
should you not be tolerantly interested in the spectacle of my belief?
What harm does the little residuum or germ of actuality that I leave in
God do? If ideal, why (except on epiphenomenist principles) may he not
have got himself at least partly real by this time? I do not believe it
to be healthy-minded to nurse the notion that ideals are self-sufficient
and require no actualization to make us content. It is a quite
unnecessarily heroic form of resignation and sour grapes. Ideals ought
to aim at the _transformation of reality_--no less! When you defer to
what you suppose a certain authority in scientists as confirming these
negations, I am surprised. Of all insufficient authorities as to the
total nature of reality, give me the "scientists," from Münsterberg up,
or down. Their interests are most incomplete and their professional
conceit and bigotry immense. I know no narrower sect or club, in spite
of their excellent authority in the lines of fact they have explored,
and their splendid achievement there. Their only authority _at large_ is
for _method_--and the pragmatic method completes and enlarges them
there. When you shall have read my whole set of lectures (now with the
printer, to be out by June 1st) I doubt whether you will find any great
harm in the God I patronize--the poor thing is so largely an ideal
possibility. Meanwhile I take delight, or _shall_ take delight, in any
efforts you may make to negate all superhuman consciousness, for only by
these counter-attempts can a finally satisfactory modus vivendi be
reached. I don't feel sure that I know just what you mean by
"freedom,"--but no matter. Have you read in Schiller's new Studies in
Humanism what seem to me two excellent chapters, one on "Freedom," and
the other on the "making of reality"?...




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


Cambridge, _Apr._ 19, 1907.

DEAR SCHILLER,--Two letters and a card from you within ten days is
pretty good. I have been in New York for a week, so haven't written as
promptly as I should have done.

All right for the Gilbert Murrays! We shall be glad to see them.

Too late for "humanism" in my book--all in type! I dislike "pragmatism,"
but it seems to have the _international_ right of way at present. Let's
both go ahead--God will know his own!

When your book first came I lent it to my student Kallen (who was
writing a thesis on the subject), thereby losing it for three weeks.
Then the grippe, and my own proofs followed, along with much other
business, so that I've only read about a quarter of it even now. The
essays on Freedom and the Making of Reality seem to be written with my
own heart's blood--it's startling that two people should be found to
think so exactly alike. A great argument for the truth of what they say,
too! I find that my own chapter on Truth printed in the J. of P.
already,[73] convinces no one as yet, not even my most _gleichgesinnten_
cronies. It will have to be worked in by much future labor, for I _know_
that I see all round the subject and they don't, and I think that the
theory of truth is the key to all the rest of our positions.

You ask what I am going to "reply" to Bradley. But why need one reply to
everything and everybody? B.'s article is constructive rather than
polemic, is evidently sincere, softens much of his old outline, is
difficult to read, and ought, I should think, to be left to its own
destiny. How sweetly, by the way, he feels towards me as compared with
you! All because you have been too bumptious. I confess I think that
your _gaudium certaminis_ injures your influence. _We_'ve got a thing
big enough to set forth now affirmatively, and I think that readers
generally hate _minute_ polemics and recriminations. All polemic of ours
should, I believe, be either very broad statements of contrast, or fine
points treated singly, and as far as possible impersonally. Inborn
rationalists and inborn pragmatists will never convert each other. We
shall always look on them as spectral and they on us as
trashy--irredeemably both! As far as the rising generation goes, why not
simply express ourselves positively, and trust that the truer view
quietly will displace the other. Here again "God will know his own."
False views don't need much direct refutation--they get superseded, and
I feel absolutely certain of the supersessive power of pragmato-humanism,
if persuasively enough set forth.... The world is wide enough to harbor
various ways of thinking, and the present Bradley's units of mental
operation are so diverse from ours that the labor of reckoning over from
one set of terms to the other doesn't bring reward enough to pay for it.
Of course his way of treating "truth" as an entity trying all the while
to identify herself with reality, while reality is equally trying to
identify herself with the more ideal entity truth, isn't _false_. It's
one way, very remote and allegorical, of stating the facts, and it
"agrees" with a good deal of reality, but it has so little pragmatic
value that its tottering form can be left for time to deal with. The
good it does him is small, for it leaves him in this queer, surly,
grumbling state about the best that can be done by it for philosophy.
His great vice seems to me his perversity in logical activities, his bad
reasonings. I vote to go on, from now on, not trying to keep account of
the relations of his with our system. He can't be influencing disciples,
being himself nowadays so difficult. And once for all, there _will_ be
minds who _cannot_ _help_ regarding our growing universe as _sheer
trash_, metaphysically considered. Yours ever,

W. J.

The next letter is addressed to an active promoter of reform in the
treatment of the insane, the author of "A Mind that Found Itself." The
Connecticut Society for Mental Hygiene and the National Committee for
Mental Hygiene have already performed so great a public service, that
anyone may now see that in 1907 the time had come to employ such
instrumentalities in improving the care of the insane. But when Mr.
Beers, just out of an asylum himself, appeared with the manuscript of
his own story in his hands, it was not so clear that these agencies were
needed, nor yet evident to anyone that he was a person who could bring
about their organization.

James's own opinion as to the treatment of the insane is not in the
least overstated in the following letter. He recognized the genuineness
of Mr. Beers's personal experience and its value for propaganda, and he
immediately helped to get it published. From his first acquaintance with
Mr. Beers, he gave time, counsel, and money to further the organization
of the Mental Hygiene Committee; and he even departed, in its interest,
from his fixed policy of "keeping out of Committees and Societies." He
lived long enough to know that the movement had begun to gather
momentum; and he drew great satisfaction from the knowledge.




_To Clifford W. Beers._


Cambridge, _Apr. 21, 1907_.

DEAR MR. BEERS,--You ask for my opinion as to the advisability and
feasibility of a National Society, such as you propose, for the
improvement of conditions among the insane.

I have never ceased to believe that such improvement is one of the most
"crying" needs of civilization; and the functions of such a Society seem
to me to be well drawn up by you. Your plea for its being founded
before your book appears is well grounded, you being an author who
naturally would like to cast seed upon a ground already prepared for it
to germinate practically without delay.

I have to confess to being myself a very impractical man, with no
experience whatever in the details, difficulties, etc., of philanthropic
or charity organization, so my opinion as to the _feasibility_ of your
plan is worth nothing, and is undecided. Of course the first
consideration is to get your money, the second, your Secretary and
Trustees. All that _I_ wish to bear witness to is the great need of a
National Society such as you describe, or failing that, of a State
Society somewhere that might serve as a model in other States.

Nowhere is there massed together as much suffering as in the asylums.
Nowhere is there so much sodden routine, and fatalistic insensibility in
those who have to treat it. Nowhere is an ideal treatment more costly.
The officials in charge grow resigned to the conditions under which they
have to labor. They cannot plead their cause as an auxiliary
organization can plead it for them. Public opinion is too glad to remain
ignorant. As mediator between officials, patients, and the public
conscience, a society such as you sketch is absolutely required, and the
sooner it gets under way the better.[74] Sincerely yours,

WILLIAM JAMES.

At the date of the next letter William James, Jr., was studying painting
in Paris.




_To his Son William._


Cambridge, _Apr. 24, 1907_.

DEAREST BILL,--I haven't written to you for ages, yet you keep showering
the most masterly and charming epistles upon all of us in turn,
including the fair Rosamund.[75] Be sure they are appreciated! Your Ma
and I dined last night at Ellen and Loulie Hooper's to meet Rosalind
Huidekoper and her swain. Loulie had heard from Bancel [La Farge] of
your getting a "mention"--if for the model, I'm not surprised; if for
the composition, I'm immensely pleased. Of course you'll tell us of it!
We've had a very raw cold April, and today it's blowing great guns from
all quarters of the sky, preparatory to clearing from the N.W., I think.
We are rooting up the entire lawn to a depth of 18 inches to try to
regenerate it. Four diggers and two carts have been at it for a week,
with your mother, bareheaded and cloaked, and ruddy-cheeked, sticking to
them like a burr. She doesn't handle pick or shovel, but she stands
there all day long in a way it would do your heart good to see; and so
democratic and hearty withal that I'm sure they like it, though working
under such a great taskmaster's eye deprives them of those intervals of
stolen leisure so dear to "workers" of every description. She makes it
up to them by inviting them to an afternoon tea daily, with piles of
cake and doughnuts. I fancy they like her well.

We've let Chocorua to the Goldmarks. Aleck took his April recess along
with his schoolmate Henderson and Gerald Thayer, partly on the summit,
partly around the base, of Monadnock. The weather was fiercely wintry,
and your mother and I said "poor blind little Aleck--he's got to learn
thru experience." [She said "through"!] He came back happier and more
exultant than I've ever seen him, and six months older morally and
intellectually for the week with Gerald and Abbott Thayer. A great step
forward. They burglarized the Thayer house, and were tracked and
arrested by the posse, and had a paragraph in the Boston "Globe" about
the robbery. As the thing involved an ascent of Monadnock after dark,
with their packs, in deep snow, a day and a night there in snowstorm, a
16-mile walk and out of bed till 2 A.M.. the night of the burglary, a
"lying low" indoors all the next day at the Hendersons' empty house,
three in a bed and the police waking them at dawn, I ventured to suggest
a doubt as to whether the Thayer household were the greatest victims of
the illustrious practical joke. "What," cries Aleck, starting to his
feet, "nine men with revolvers and guns around your bed, and a revolver
pointed close to your ear as you wake--don't you call that a success, I
should like to know?" The Tom Sawyer phase of evolution is immortal!
Gerald, who is staying with us now, is really a splendid fellow. I'm so
glad he's taken to Aleck, who now is aflame with plans for being an
artist. I wish he might--it would certainly suit his temperament better
than "business."

There 's the lunch bell.

I have got my "Pragmatism" proofs all corrected. The most important
thing I've written yet, and bound, I am sure, to stir up a lot of
attention. But I'm dog-tired; and, in order to escape the social
engagements that at this time of year grow more frequent than ever, I'm
going off on Friday (this is Wednesday) to the country somewhere for ten
days. If only there might be warm weather! We've just backed out from a
dinner to William Leonard Darwin and his wife, and the Geo. Hodgeses,
etc. W. T. Stead spent three hours here on Sunday and lectured in the
Union on Monday--a splendid fellow whom I could get along with after a
fashion. Let no one run him down to you. I've been to New York to the
Peace Congress. Interesting but tiresome.

Mary Salter is with us. Margaret and Rosamund just arrived at 107. No
news else! Yours,

W. J.




_To Henry James._


SALISBURY, CONN., _May 4, 1907_.

DEAREST H.-- ...I've been so overwhelmed with work, and the mountain of
the _Unread_ has piled up so, that only in these days here have I really
been able to settle down to your "American Scene," which in its peculiar
way seems to me _supremely great_. You know how opposed your whole
"third manner" of execution is to the literary ideals which animate my
crude and Orson-like breast, mine being to say a thing in one sentence
as straight and explicit as it can be made, and then to drop it forever;
yours being to avoid naming it straight, but by dint of breathing and
sighing all round and round it, to arouse in the reader who may have had
a similar perception already (Heaven help him if he hasn't!) the
illusion of a solid object, made (like the "ghost" at the Polytechnic)
wholly out of impalpable materials, air, and the prismatic interferences
of light, ingeniously focused by mirrors upon empty space. But you _do_
it, that's the queerness! And the complication of innuendo and
associative reference on the enormous scale to which you give way to it
does so _build out_ the matter for the reader that the result is to
solidify, by the mere bulk of the process, the like perception from
which _he_ has to start. As air, by dint of its volume, will weigh like
a corporeal body; so his own poor little initial perception, swathed in
this gigantic envelopment of suggestive atmosphere, grows like a germ
into something vastly bigger and more substantial. But it's the rummest
method for one to employ systematically as you do nowadays; and you
employ it at your peril. In this crowded and hurried reading age, pages
that require such close attention remain unread and neglected. You can't
skip a word if you are to get the effect, and 19 out of 20 worthy
readers grow intolerant. The method seems perverse: "Say it _out_, for
God's sake," they cry, "and have done with it." And so I say now, give
us _one_ thing in your older directer manner, just to show that, in
spite of your paradoxical success in this unheard-of method, you _can_
still write according to accepted canons. Give us that interlude; and
then continue like the "curiosity of literature" which you have become.
For gleams and innuendoes and felicitous verbal insinuations you are
unapproachable, but the _core_ of literature is solid. Give it to us
_once_ again! The bare perfume of things will not support existence, and
the effect of solidity you reach is but perfume and simulacrum.

For God's sake don't _answer_ these remarks, which (as Uncle Howard used
to say of Father's writings) are but the peristaltic belchings of my own
crabbed organism. For one thing, your account of America is largely one
of its omissions, silences, vacancies. You work them up like solids, for
those readers who already germinally perceive them (to others you are
_totally_ incomprehensible). I said to myself over and over in reading:
"How much greater the triumph, if instead of dwelling thus only upon
America's vacuities, he could make positive suggestion of what in
'Europe' or Asia may exist to fill them." That would be nutritious to so
many American readers whose souls are only too ready to leap to
suggestion, but who are now too inexperienced to know what is meant by
the contrast-effect from which alone your book is written. If you could
supply the background which is the foil, in terms more full and
positive! At present it is supplied only by the abstract geographic term
"Europe." But of course anything of that kind is excessively difficult;
and you will probably say that you _are_ supplying it all along by your
novels. Well, the verve and animal spirits with which you can keep your
method going, first on one place then on another, through all those
tightly printed pages is something marvelous; and there are pages surely
doomed to be immortal, those on the "drummers," _e.g._, at the beginning
of "Florida." They are in the best sense Rabelaisian.

But a truce, a truce! I had no idea, when I sat down, of pouring such a
bath of my own subjectivity over you. Forgive! forgive! and don't reply,
don't at any rate in the sense of defending yourself, but only in that
of attacking _me_, if you feel so minded. I have just finished the
proofs of a little book called "Pragmatism" which even you _may_ enjoy
reading. It is a very "sincere" and, from the point of view of ordinary
philosophy-professorial manners, a very unconventional utterance, not
particularly original at any one point, yet, in the midst of the
literature of the way of thinking which it represents, with just that
amount of squeak or shrillness in the voice that enables one book to
_tell_, when others don't, to supersede its brethren, and be treated
later as "representative." I shouldn't be surprised if ten years hence
it should be rated as "epoch-making," for of the definitive triumph of
that general way of thinking I can entertain no doubt whatever--I
believe it to be something quite like the protestant reformation.

You can't tell how happy I am at having thrown off the nightmare of my
"professorship." As a "professor" I always felt myself a sham, with its
chief duties of being a walking encyclopedia of erudition. I am now at
liberty to be a _reality_, and the comfort is unspeakable--literally
unspeakable, to be my own man, after 35 years of being owned by others.
I can now live for truth pure and simple, instead of for truth
accommodated to the most unheard-of requirements set by others.... Your
affectionate

W. J.

This letter appears never to have been answered, although Henry James
wrote on May 31, 1907: "You shall have, after a little more patience, a
reply to your so rich and luminous reflections on my book--a reply
almost as interesting as, and far more illuminating than, your letter
itself."




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


Cambridge, _May 18, 1907_.

...One word about the said proof [of your article]. It convinces me that
you ought to be an academic personage, a "professor." For thirty-five
years I have been suffering from the exigencies of being one, the
pretension and the duty, namely, of meeting the mental needs and
difficulties of other persons, needs that I couldn't possibly imagine
and difficulties that I couldn't possibly understand; and now that I
have shuffled off the professorial coil, the sense of freedom that comes
to me is as surprising as it is exquisite. I wake up every morning with
it. What! not to have to accommodate myself to this mass of alien and
recalcitrant humanity, not to think under resistance, not to have to
square myself with others at every step I make--hurrah! it is too good
to be true. To be alone with truth and God! _Es ist nicht zu glauben!_
What a future! What a vision of ease! But here you are loving it and
courting it unnecessarily. You're fit to continue a professor in all
your successive reincarnations, with never a release. It was so easy to
let Bradley with his approximations and grumblings alone. So few people
would find these last statements of his seductive enough to build them
into their own thought. But you, for the pure pleasure of the operation,
chase him up and down his windings, flog him into and out of his
corners, stop him and cross-reference him and counter on him, as if
required to do so by your office. It makes very difficult reading, it
obliges one to re-read Bradley, and I don't believe there are three
persons living who will take it in with the pains required to estimate
its value. B. himself will very likely not read it with any care. It is
subtle and clear, like everything you write, but it is too minute. And
where a few broad comments would have sufficed, it is too complex, and
too much like a criminal conviction in tone and temper. Leave him in his
_dunklem Drange_--he is drifting in the right direction evidently, and
when a certain amount of positive construction on our side has been
added, he will say that that was what he had meant all along--and the
world will be the better for containing so much difficult polemic
reading the less.

I admit that your remarks are penetrating, and let air into the joints
of the subject; but I respectfully submit that they are not _called for_
in the interests of the final triumph of truth. That will come by the
way of displacement of error, quite effortlessly. I can't help
suspecting that you unduly magnify the influence of Bradleyan Absolutism
on the undergraduate mind. Taylor is the only fruit so far--at least
within my purview. One practical point: I don't quite like your first
paragraph, and wonder if it be too late to have the references to me at
least expunged. I can't recognize the truth of the ten-years' change of
opinion about my "Will to Believe." I don't find anyone--not even my
dearest friends, as Miller and Strong--one whit persuaded. Taylor's and
Hobhouse's attacks are of recent date, etc. Moreover, the reference to
Bradley's relation to me in this article is too ironical not to seem a
little "nasty" to some readers; therefore out with it, if it be not too
late.

See how different our methods are! All that Humanism needs now is to
make applications of itself to special problems. Get a school of
youngsters at work. Refutations of error should be left to the
rationalists alone. They are a stock function of that school....

I'm fearfully _tired_, but expect the summer to get me right again.
Affectionately thine,

W. J.




