XIV

1902-1905

_The Last Period (I)--Philosophical Writing--Statements of Religious
Relief_


JAMES now limited his teaching in Harvard University, as has been said,
to half a course a year and tried to devote his working energies to
formulating a statement of his philosophical conceptions. For two years
he published almost nothing; then the essays which were subsequently
collected in the volumes called "Pragmatism," "The Pluralistic
Universe," "The Meaning of Truth," and "Essays in Radical Empiricism,"
began to appear in the philosophic journals, or were delivered as
special lectures. Whenever he accepted invitations to lecture outside
the College, as he still did occasionally, it was with the purpose of
getting these conceptions expressed and of throwing them into the arena
of discussion. But demands which correspondents and callers from all
parts of the globe now made on his time and sympathy were formidable,
for he could not rid himself of the habit of treating the most trivial
of these with consideration, or acquire the habit of using a secretary.
In this way there continued to be a constant drain on his strength. "It
is probably difficult [thus he wrote wearily to Mr. Lutoslawski, who had
begged him to collaborate with him on a book in 1904] for a man whose
cerebral machine works with such facility as yours does to imagine the
kind of consciousness of men like Flournoy and myself. The background of
my consciousness, so far as my own achievements go, is composed of a
_sense of impossibility_--a sense well warranted by the facts. For
instance, two years ago, the 'Varieties' being published, I decided
that everything was cleared and that my duty was immediately to begin
writing my metaphysical system. Up to last October, when the academic
year began, I had written some 200 pages of _notes_, _i.e._ disconnected
_brouillons_. I hoped this year to write 400 or 500 pages of straight
composition, and could have done so without the interruptions. As a
matter of fact, with the best will in the world, I have written exactly
32 pages! For an academic year's work, that is not brilliant! You see
that, when I refuse your request, it is, after a fashion, in order to
save my own life. My working day is anyhow, _at best_, only three hours
long--by working I mean writing and reading philosophy." This estimate
of his "notes" was, as always, self-deprecatory; but there was no
denying a great measure of truth to the statement. Frequently his health
made it necessary for him to escape from Cambridge and his desk. These
incidents will be noted separately wherever the context requires.

Yet in spite of these difficulties and notwithstanding his complaints of
constant frustration, the spirit with which James still did his work
emerges from the essays of this time as well as from his letters. It was
as if the years that had preceded had been years of preparation for just
what he was now doing. At the age of sixty-three he turned to the
formulation of his empirical philosophy with the eagerness of a
schoolboy let out to play. Misunderstanding disturbed him only
momentarily, opposition stimulated him, he rejoiced openly in the
controversies which he provoked, and engaged in polemics with the good
humor and vigor that were the essence of his genius. His "truth" must
prevail! the Absolute should suffer its death-blow! Flournoy, Bergson,
Schiller, Papini, and others too were "on his side." He made merry at
the expense of his critics, or bewailed the perversity of their
opposition; but he always encouraged them to "lay on." The imagery of
contest and battle appeared in the letters which he threw off, and he
expressed himself as freely as only a man can who has outgrown the
reserves of his youth.




_To Henry L. Higginson._


CHOCORUA, _July 3, 1902_.

DEAR HENRY,--Thanks for your letter of the other day, etc. Alice tells
me of a queer conversation you and she had upon the cars. I am not
anxious about money, beyond wishing not to live on capital.... As I have
frequently said, I mean to support you in your old age. In fact the hope
of that is about all that I now live for, being surfeited with the glory
of academic degrees just escaped, like this last one which, in the
friendliness of its heart, your [Harvard] Corporation designed sponging
upon me at Commencement.[41] Boil it and solder it up from the microbes,
and it may do for another year, if I am not in prison! The friendliness
of such recognition is a delightful thing to a man about to graduate
from the season of his usefulness. "La renommé vient," as I have heard
John La Farge quote, "à ceux qui ont la patience d'attendre, et
s'accroit à raison de leur imbecillité." Best wishes to you all. Yours
ever,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Grace Norton._


CHOCORUA, _Aug. 29, 1902_.

MY DEAR GRACE,--Will you kindly let me know, by the method of
effacement, on the accompanying post-card, whether the box from Germany
of which I wrote you some time ago has or has not yet been left at your
house. I paid the express, over twenty dollars, on it three weeks ago,
directing it to be left with you.

The ice being thus broken, let me ramble on! How do-ist thou? And how is
the moist and cool summer suiting thee? I hope, well! It has certainly
been a boon to most people. Our house has been full of company of which
tomorrow the last boys will leave, and I confess I shall enjoy the
change to no responsibility. The scourge of life is _responsibility_--always
there with its scowling face, and when it ceases to someone else, it
begins to yourself, or to your God, if you have one. Consider the
lilies, how free they are from it, and yet how beautiful the expression
of their face. Especially should those emerging from "nervous
prostration" be suffered to be without it--they have trouble enough in
any case. I am getting on famously, but for that drawback, on which my
temper is liable to break; but I _walk_ somewhat as in old times, and
that is the main corner to have turned. The country seems as beautiful
as ever--it is good that, when age takes away the zest from so many
things, it seems to make no difference at all in one's capacity for
enjoying landscape and the aspects of Nature. We are all well, and shall
very soon be buzzing about Irving Street as of yore. Keep well yourself,
dear Grace; and believe me ever your friend,

Wm. James.

To this word about enjoying the aspects of nature may be added a few
lines from a letter to his son William, which James wrote from Europe in
1900:--

"Scenery seems to wear in one's consciousness better than any other
element in life. In this year of much solemn and idle meditation, I
have often been surprised to find what a predominant part in my own
spiritual experience it has played, and how it stands out as almost the
only thing the memory of which I should like to carry over with me
beyond the veil, unamended and unaltered. From the midst of every thing
else, almost, _surgit amari aliquid_; but from the days in the open air,
never any bitter whiff, save that they are gone forever."




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


STONEHURST,
INTERVALE, N. H., _Sept. 18, 1902_.

DEAREST FANNY,--How long it is since we have exchanged salutations and
reported progress! Happy the country which is without a history! _I_
have had no history to communicate, and I hope that you have had none
either, and that the summer has glided away as happily for you as it has
for us. Now it begins to fade towards the horizon over which so many
ancient summers have slipped, and our household is on the point of
"breaking up" just when the season invites one most imperiously to stay.
_Dang_ all schools and colleges, say I. Alice goes down tomorrow (I
being up here with the Merrimans only for one day) to start Billy for
Europe--he will spend the winter at Geneva University--and to get "the
house" ready for our general reception on the 26th. I may possibly make
out to stay up here till the Monday following, and spend the interval of
a few days by myself among the mountains, having stuck to the domestic
hearth unusually tight all summer....

We have had guests--too many of them, rather, at one time, for me--and a
little reading has been done, mostly philosophical technics, which, by
the strange curse laid upon Adam, certain of his descendants have been
doomed to invent and others, still more damned, to learn. But I've also
read Stevenson's letters, which everybody ought to read just to know how
charming a human being can be, and I've read a good part of Goethe's
_Gedichte_ once again, which are also to be read, so that one may
realize how absolutely healthy an organization may every now and then
eventuate into this world. To have such a lyrical gift and to treat it
with so little solemnity, so that most of the output consists of mere
escape of the over-tension into bits of occasional verse, irresponsible,
unchained, like smoke-wreaths!--it _du_ give one a great impression of
personal power. In general, though I'm a traitor for saying so, it seems
to me that the German race has been a more massive organ of expression
for the travail of the Almighty than the Anglo-Saxon, though we did seem
to have something more like it in Elizabethan times. Or are clearness
and dapperness the absolutely final shape of creation? Good-bye! dear
Fanny--you see how mouldy I am temporarily become. The moment I take my
pen, I can write in no other way. Write thou, and let me know that
things are greener and more vernal where you are. Alice would send much
love to you, were she here. Give mine to your mother, brother, and
sister-in-law, and all. Your loving,

W. J.




_To Henry L. Higginson._


CAMBRIDGE, MASS., _Nov. 1, 1902_.

DEAR HENRY,--I am emboldened to the step I am taking by the
consciousness that though we are both at least sixty years old and have
known each other from the cradle, I have never but once (or possibly
twice) traded on your well-known lavishness of disposition to swell any
"subscription" which I was trying to raise.

Now the doomful hour has struck. The altar is ready, and I take the
victim by the ear. I choose you for a victim because you still have some
undesiccated human feeling about you and can think in terms of pure
charity--for the love of God, without ulterior hopes of returns from the
investment.

The subject is a man of fifty who can be recommended to no other kind of
a benefactor. His story is a long one, but it amounts to this, that
Heaven made him with no other power than that of thinking and writing,
and he has proved by this time a truly pathological inability to keep
body and soul together. He is abstemious to an incredible degree, is the
most innocent and harmless of human beings, isn't propagating his kind,
has never had a dime to spend except for vital necessities, and never
has had in his life an hour of what such as _we_ call freedom from care
or of "pleasure" in the ordinary exuberant sense of the term. He is
refinement itself mentally and morally; and his writings have all been
printed in first-rate periodicals, but are too scanty to "pay." There's
no excuse for him, I admit. But God made him; and after kicking and
cuffing and prodding him for twenty years, I have now come to believe
that he ought to be treated in charity pure and simple (even though that
be a vice) and I want to guarantee him $350 a year as a pension to be
paid to the Mills Hotel in Bleecker Street, New York, for board and
lodging and a few cents weekly over and above. I will put in $150. I
have secured $100 more. Can I squeeze £50 a year out of you for such a
non-public cause? If not, don't reply and forget this letter. If "ja"
and you think you really can afford it, and it isn't wicked, let me
know, and I will dun you regularly every year for the $50. Yours as
ever,

Wm. James.

It is a great compliment that I address you. Most men say of such a
case, "Is the man deserving?" Whereas the real point is, "Does he need
us?" What is deserving nowadays?

       *       *       *       *       *

The beneficiary of this appeal was that same unfulfilled promise of a
metaphysician who appeared as "X" on page 292 of the first volume--a man
upon whom, in Cicero's phrase, none but a philosopher could look without
a groan. There were more parallels to X's case than it would be
permissible to cite here. James did not often appeal to others to help
such men with money, but he did things for them himself, even after it
had become evident that they could give nothing to the world in return,
and even when they had exhausted his patience. "Damn your
half-successes, your imperfect geniuses!" he exclaimed of another who
shall be called Z. "I'm tired of making allowances for them and propping
them up.... Z has never constrained himself in his life. Selfish,
conceited, affected, a monster of desultory intellect, he has become now
a seedy, almost sordid, old man without even any intellectual residuum
from his work that can be called a finished construction; only
'suggestions' and a begging old age." But Z, too, was helped to the end.




_To Henri Bergson._


Cambridge, _Dec. 14, 1902_.

MY DEAR SIR,--I read the copy of your "Matière et Mémoire" which you so
kindly sent me, immediately on receiving it, four years ago or more. I
saw its great originality, but found your ideas so new and vast that I
could not be sure that I fully understood them, although the _style_,
Heaven knows, was lucid enough. So I laid the book aside for a second
reading, which I have just accomplished, slowly and carefully, along
with that of the "Données Immédiates," etc.

I think I understand the main lines of your system very well at
present--though of course I can't yet trace its proper relations to the
aspects of experience of which you do not treat. It needs much building
out in the direction of Ethics, Cosmology and Cosmogony, Psychogenesis,
etc., before one can apprehend it fully. That I should take it in so
much more easily than I did four years ago shows that even at the age of
sixty one's mind can grow--a pleasant thought.

It is a work of exquisite genius. It makes a sort of Copernican
revolution as much as Berkeley's "Principles" or Kant's "Critique" did,
and will probably, as it gets better and better known, open a new era of
philosophical discussion. It fills _my_ mind with all sorts of new
questions and hypotheses and brings the old into a most agreeable
liquefaction. I thank you from the bottom of my heart.

The _Hauptpunkt_ acquired for me is your conclusive demolition of the
dualism of object and subject in perception. I believe that the
"transcendency" of the object will not recover from your treatment, and
as I myself have been working for many years past on the same line, only
with other general conceptions than yours, I find myself most agreeably
corroborated. My health is so poor now that work goes on very slowly;
but I am going, if I live, to write a general system of metaphysics
which, in many of its fundamental ideas, agrees closely with what you
have set forth and the agreement inspires and encourages me more than
you can well imagine. It would take far too many words to attempt any
detail, but some day I hope to send you the book.[42]

How good it is sometimes simply to _break away_ from all old categories,
deny old worn-out beliefs, and restate things _ab initio_, making the
lines of division fall into entirely new places!

I send you a little popular lecture of mine on immortality,[43]--no
positive theory but merely an _argumentum ad hominem_ for the ordinary
cerebralistic objection,--in which it may amuse you to see a formulation
like your own that the brain is an organ of _filtration_ for spiritual
life.

I also send you my last book, the "Varieties of Religious Experience,"
which may some time beguile an hour. Believe, dear Professor Bergson,
the high admiration and regard with which I remain, always sincerely
yours,

Wm. James.




_To Mrs. Louis Agassiz._


Cambridge, _Dec. 15, 1902_.

DEAR MRS. AGASSIZ,--I never dreamed of your replying to that note of
mine (of Dec. 5th). If you are replying to all the notes you received on
that eventful day, it seems to me a rather heavy penalty for becoming an
octogenarian.[44] But glad I am that you replied to mine, and so
beautifully. Indeed I do remember the meeting of those two canoes, and
the dance, over the river from Manaos; and many another incident and
hour of that wonderful voyage.[45] I remember your freshness of
interest, and readiness to take hold of everything, and what a blessing
to me it was to have one civilized lady in sight, to keep the memory of
cultivated conversation from growing extinct. I remember my own folly in
wishing to return home after I came out of the hospital at Rio; and my
general greenness and incapacity as a naturalist afterwards, with my
eyes gone to pieces. It was all because my destiny was to be a
"philosopher"--a fact which then I didn't know, but which only means, I
think, that, if a man is good for nothing else, he can at least teach
philosophy. But I'm going to write one book worthy of you, dear Mrs.
Agassiz, and of the Thayer expedition, if I am spared a couple of years
longer.

I hope you were not displeased at the _applause_ the other night, as you
went out. _I_ started it; if I hadn't, someone else would a moment
later, for the tension had grown intolerable.

How delightful about the Radcliffe building!

Well, once more, dear Mrs. Agassiz, we both thank you for this beautiful
and truly affectionate letter. Your affectionate,

Wm. James.

E. L. Godkin had recently died, and at the date of the next letter a
movement was on foot to raise money for a memorial in commemoration of
his public services. The money was soon subscribed and the Memorial took
shape in the endowment of the Godkin Lectureship at Harvard. James had
started discussion of the project at a meeting of the dinner Club and
Henry L. Higginson had continued it in a letter to which the following
replied.




_To Henry L. Higginson._


Cambridge, _Feb. 8, 1903_.

DEAR HENRY,--I am sorry to have given a wrong impression, and made you
take the trouble of writing--nutritious though your letters be to
receive. My motive in mentioning the Godkin testimonial was pure
curiosity, and not desire to promote it. We were ten "liberals"
together, and I wanted to learn how many of us had been alienated from
Godkin by his temper in spite of having been influenced by his writing.
I found that it was just about half and half. I never said--Heaven bear
me witness--that I had learned more from G. than from anyone. I said I
had got more _political_ education from him. You see the "Nation" took
me at the age of 22--you were already older and wickeder. If you follow
my advice now, you don't subscribe a cent to this memorial. _I_ shall
subscribe $100, for mixed reasons. Godkin's "home life" was very
different from his life against the world. When a man differed in type
from him, and consequently reacted differently on public matters; he
thought him a preposterous monster, pure and simple, and so treated him.
He couldn't imagine a different kind of creature from himself in
politics. But in private relations he was simplicity and sociability and
affectionateness incarnate, and playful as a young opossum. I never knew
his first wife well, but I admire the pluck and fidelity of the second,
and I note your chivalrous remarks about the sex, including Mrs. W. J.,
to whom report has been made of them, making her blush with pleasure.

Don't subscribe, dear Henry. I am not trying to raise subscriptions. You
left too early Friday eve. Ever affectionately yours,

W. J.

James's college class finished its work at the end of the first half of
the academic year, and in early February he turned for a few days to the
thought of a Mediterranean voyage, as a vacation and a means of escape
from Cambridge during the bad weather of March. While considering this
plan, he cabled M. Bergson to inquire as to the possibility of a meeting
in Paris or elsewhere.




_To Henri Bergson._


Cambridge, _Feb. 25, 1903_.

DEAR PROFESSOR BERGSON,--Your most obliging cablegram (with 8 words
instead of four!) arrived duly a week ago, and now I am repenting that I
ever asked you to send it, for I have been feeling so much less fatigued
than I did a month ago, that I have given up my passage to the
Mediterranean, and am seriously doubting whether it will be necessary to
leave home at all. I _ought_ not to, on many grounds, unless my health
imperatively requires it. Pardon me for having so frivolously stirred
you up, and permit me at least to pay the cost (as far as I can
ascertain it) of the despatch which you were so liberal as to send.

There is still a bare possibility (for I am so strongly tempted) that I
may, after the middle of March, take a cheaper vessel direct to England
or to France, and spend ten days or so in Paris and return almost
immediately. In that case, we could still have our interview. I think
there must be great portions of your philosophy which you have not yet
published, and I want to see how well they combine with mine. _Writing_
is too long and laborious a process, and I would not inflict on you the
task of answering my questions by letter, so I will still wait in the
hope of a personal interview some time.

I am convinced that a philosophy of _pure experience_, such as I
conceive yours to be, can be made to work, and will reconcile many of
the old inveterate oppositions of the schools. I think that your radical
denial (the manner of it at any rate) of the notion that the brain can
be in any way the _causa fiendi_ of consciousness, has introduced a very
sudden clearness, and eliminated a part of the idealistic paradox. But
your unconscious or subconscious permanence of memories is in its turn a
notion that offers difficulties, seeming in fact to be the equivalent of
the "soul" in another shape, and the manner in which these memories
"insert" themselves into the brain action, and in fact the whole
conception of the difference between the outer and inner worlds in your
philosophy, still need to me a great deal of elucidation. But behold me
challenging you to answer me _par écrit_!

I have read with great delight your article in the "Revue de
Métaphysique" for January, agree thoroughly with all its critical part,
and wish that I might see in your _intuition métaphysique_ the full
equivalent for a philosophy of concepts. _Neither_ seems to be a full
equivalent for the other, unless indeed the intuition becomes completely
mystical (and that I am willing to believe), but I don't think that that
is just what _you_ mean. The _Syllabus_[46] which I sent you the other
day is (I fear), from its great abbreviation, somewhat unintelligible,
but it will show you the sort of lines upon which I have been working. I
think that a normal philosophy, like a science, must live by
hypotheses--I think that the indispensable hypothesis in a philosophy of
pure experience is that of many kinds of other experience than ours,

                      { co-consciousness    }
that the question of  {                     } (its conditions, etc.)
                      { conscious synthesis }

becomes a most urgent question, as does also the question of the
relations of what is possible only to what is actual, what is past or
future to what is present. These are all urgent matters in your
philosophy also, I imagine. How exquisitely you do _write_! Believe me,
with renewed thanks for the telegram, yours most sincerely,

Wm. James.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


Cambridge, _Apr. 30, 1903_.

MY DEAR FLOURNOY,--I forget whether I wrote you my applause or not, on
reading your chapter on religious psychology in the "Archives." I
thought it a splendid thing, and well adapted to set the subject in the
proper light before students. Abauzit has written to me for
authorization to translate my book, and both he and W. J., Junior, have
quoted you as assured of his competency. I myself feel confident of it,
and have given him the authorization required. Possibly you may supply
him with as much of your own translation as you have executed, so that
the time you have spent on the latter may not be absolutely lost.
"Billy" also says that you have executed a review of Myers's book,[47]
finding it a more difficult task than you had anticipated. I am highly
curious to see what you have found to say. I, also, wrote a notice of
the volumes, and found it exceeding difficult to know how to go at the
job. At last I decided just to skeletonize the points of his reasoning,
but on correcting the proof just now, what I have written seems deadly
flat and unprofitable and makes me wish that I had stuck to my original
intention of refusing to review the book at all. The fact is, such a
book need not be _criticized_ at all at present. It is obviously too
soon for it to be either refuted or established by mere criticism. It
is a hypothetical construction of genius which must be kept hanging up,
as it were, for new observations to be referred to. As the years
accumulate these in a more favorable or in a more unfavorable sense, it
will tend to stand or to fall. I confess that reading the volumes has
given me a higher opinion than ever of Myers's constructive gifts, but
on the whole a lower opinion of the objective solidity of the system. So
many of the facts which form its pillars are still dubious.[48]

Bill says that you were again convinced by Eusapia,[49] but that the
conditions were not satisfactory enough (so I understood) to make the
experiments likely to convince absent hearers. Forever baffling is all
this subject, and I confess that I begin to lose my interest. Believe
me, in whatever difficulties your review of Myers may have occasioned
you, you have my fullest sympathy!

Bill has had a perfectly splendid winter in Geneva, thanks almost
entirely to your introductions, and to the generous manner in which you
took him into your own family. I wish we could ever requite you by
similar treatment of Henri, or of _ces demoiselles_. He seems to labor
under an apprehension of not being able to make you all believe how
appreciative and grateful he is, and he urges me to "Make you understand
it" when I write. I imagine that you understand it anyhow, so far as he
is concerned, so I simply assure you that _our_ gratitude here is of the
strongest and sincerest kind. I imagine that this has been by far the
most profitable and educative winter of his life, and I rejoice
exceedingly that he has obtained in so short a time so complete a sense
of being at home in, and so lively an affection for, the Swiss people
and country. (As for _your_ family he has written more than once that
the Flournoy family seems to be "the finest family" he has ever seen in
his life.)

His experience is a good measure of the improvement in the world's
conditions. Thirty years ago _I_ spent nine months in Geneva--but in how
inferior an "Academy," and with what inferior privileges and
experiences! Never inside a private house, and only after three months
or more familiar enough with other students to be admitted to
Zofingue.[50] Ignorant of 1000 things which have come to my son and
yours in the course of education. It _is_ a more evolved world, and no
mistake.

I find myself very tired and unable to work this spring, but I think it
will depart when I get to the country, as we soon shall. I am neither
writing nor lecturing, and reading nothing heavy, only Emerson's works
again (divine things, some of them!) in order to make a fifteen-minute
address about him on his centennial birthday. What I want to get at, and
let no interruptions interfere, is (at last) my _system of tychistic and
pluralistic philosophy of pure experience_.

I wish, and even more ardently does Alice wish, that you and Mrs.
Flournoy, and all the children, or any of them, might pay us a visit. I
don't _urge_ you, for there is so little in America that pays one to
come, except sociological observation. But in the big slow steamers, the
voyage is always interesting--and once here, how happy we should be to
harbor you. In any case, perhaps Henri and one of his sisters will come
and spend a year. From the point of view of education, Cambridge is
first-rate. Love to you all from us both.

Wm. James.

Late in April came a letter from Henry James in which he spoke, as if
with many misgivings, of returning to America for a six months' visit.
"I should wish," he said, "to write a book of 'impressions' and to that
end get quite away from Boston and New York--really _see_ the country at
large. On the other hand I don't see myself prowling alone in Western
cities and hotels or finding my way about by myself, and it is all
darksome and tangled. Some light may break--but meanwhile next Wednesday
(awful fact) is my 60th birthday." He had not been in America for more
than twenty years, and had never known anything of the country outside
of New England and New York.




_To Henry James._


Cambridge, _May 3, 1903_.

...Your long and _inhaltsvoll_ letter of April 10th arrived duly, and
constituted, as usual, an "event." Theodora had already given us your
message of an intended visit to these shores; and your letter made Alice
positively overflow with joyous anticipations. On my part they are less
unmixed, for I feel more keenly a good many of the _désagréments_ to
which you will inevitably be subjected, and imagine the sort of physical
loathing with which many features of our national life will inspire you.
It takes a long time to notice such things no longer. One thing, for
example, which would reconcile _me_ most easily to abandoning my native
country forever would be the certainty of immunity, when traveling, from
the sight of my fellow beings at hotels and dining-cars having their
boiled eggs brought to them, broken by a negro, two in a cup, and eaten
with butter. How irrational this dislike is, is proved both by logic,
and by the pleasure taken in the custom by the élite of mankind over
here.... Yet of such irrational sympathies and aversions (quite
conventional for the most part) does our pleasure in a country depend,
and in your case far more than in that of most men. The _vocalization_
of our countrymen is really, and not conventionally, so ignobly awful
that the process of hardening oneself thereto is very slow, and would in
your case be impossible. It is simply incredibly loathsome. I should
hate to have you come and, as a result, feel that you had now _done_
with America forever, even in an ideal and imaginative sense, which
after a fashion you can still indulge in. As far as your copyright
interests go, couldn't they be even more effectually and just as cheaply
or more cheaply attended to by your [engaging an agent] over here. Alice
foresees Lowell [Institute] lectures; but lectures have such an awful
side (when not academic) that I myself have foresworn them--it is a sort
of prostitution of one's person. This is rather a throwing of cold
water; but it is well to realize both sides, and I think I can realize
certain things for you better than the sanguine and hospitable Alice
does.

Now for the other side, there are things in the American out-of-door
nature, as well as comforts indoors that can't be beat, and from which
_I_ get an infinite pleasure. If you avoided the _banalité_ of the
Eastern cities, and traveled far and wide, to the South, the Colorado,
over the Canadian Pacific to that coast, possibly to the Hawaiian
Islands, etc., you would get some reward, at the expense, it is true, of
a considerable amount of cash. I think you ought to come in March or
April and stay till the end of October or into November. The hot summer
months you could pass in an absolutely quiet way--if you wished to--at
Chocorua with us, where you could do as much writing as you liked,
continuous, and undisturbed, and would (I am sure) grow fond of, as you
grew more and more intimate with, the sweet rough country there. After
June, 1904, _I_ shall be free, to go and come as I like, for I have
fully decided to resign, and nothing would please me so well (if I found
then that I could afford it) as to do some of that proposed traveling
along with you. I could take you into certain places that perhaps you
wouldn't see alone. Don't come therefore, if you do come, before the
spring of 1904!

I have been doing nothing in the way of work of late, and consequently
have kept my fatigue somewhat at bay. The reading of the divine Emerson,
volume after volume, has done me a lot of good, and, strange to say, has
thrown a strong practical light on my own path. The incorruptible way in
which he followed his own vocation, of seeing such truths as the
Universal Soul vouchsafed to him from day to day and month to month, and
reporting them in the right literary form, and thereafter kept his
limits absolutely, refusing to be entangled with irrelevancies however
urging and tempting, knowing both his strength and its limits, and
clinging unchangeably to the rural environment which he once for all
found to be most propitious, seems to me a moral lesson to all men who
have any genius, however small, to foster. I see now with absolute
clearness, that greatly as I have been helped and enlarged by my
University business hitherto, the time has come when the remnant of my
life must be passed in a different manner, contemplatively namely, and
with leisure and simplification for the one remaining thing, which is to
report in one book, at least, such impression as my own intellect has
received from the Universe. This I mean to stick to, and am only sorry
that I am obliged to stay in the University one other year. It is giving
up the inessentials which have grown beyond one's powers, for the sake
of the duties which, after all, are most essentially imposed on one by
the nature of one's powers.

Emerson is exquisite! I think I told you that I have to hold forth in
praise of him at Concord on the 25th--in company with Senator Hoar, T.
W. Higginson, and Charles Norton--quite a _vieille garde_, to which I
now seem to belong. You too have been leading an Emersonian life--though
the environment differs to suit the needs of the different
psychophysical organism which you present.

I have but little other news to tell you. Charles Peirce is lecturing
here--queer being.... Boott is in good spirits, and as sociable as ever.
Grace Norton ditto. I breakfasted this Sunday morning, as of yore, with
Theodora [Sedgwick], who had a bad voyage in length but not in quality,
though she lay in her berth the whole time. I can hardly conceive of
being willing to travel under such conditions. Otherwise we are well
enough, except Peggy, whose poor condition I imagine to result from
influenza. Aleck has been regenerated through and through by "bird
lore," happy as the day is long, and growing acquainted with the country
all about Boston. All in consequence of a neighboring boy on the street,
14 years old and an ornithological genius, having taken him under his
protection. Yesterday, all day long in the open air, from seven to
seven, at Wayland, spying and listening to birds, counting them, and
writing down their names!

I shall go off tomorrow or next day to the country again, by myself,
joining Henry Higginson and a colleague at the end of the week, and
returning by the 14th for Ph.D. examinations which I hate profoundly. H.
H. has bought some five miles of the shore of Lake Champlain adjoining
his own place there, and thinks of handing it over to the University for
the surveying, engineering, forestry and mining school. He is as
liberal-hearted a man as the Lord ever walloped entrails into....

What a devil of a bore your forced purchase of the unnecessary
neighboring land must have been. _I_ am just buying 150 acres more at
Chocorua, to round off our second estate there. Keep well and
prolific--everyone speaks praise of your "Better Sort," which I am
keeping for the country....




_To his Daughter._


FABYANS, N. H., _May 6, 1903_.

SWEET MARY,--Although I wrote to thy mother this P.M. I can't refrain
from writing to thee ere I go up to bed. I left Intervale at 3.30 under
a cloudy sky and slight rain, passing through the gloomy Notch to
Crawford's and then here, where I am lodged in a house full of working
men, though with a good clean bedroom. I write this in the office, with
an enormous air-tight stove, a parrot and some gold-fish as my
companions. I took a slow walk of an hour and a half before supper over
this great dreary mountain plateau, pent in by hills and woods still
free from buds. Although it is only 1500 feet high, the air is real
mountain air, soft and strong at once. I wish that you could have taken
that four-hour drive with Topsy[51] and me this morning. You would
already be well--it had so healing an influence. Poverty-stricken this
New Hampshire country may be--weak in a certain sense, shabby, thin,
pathetic--say all that, yet, like "Jenny," it _kissed_ me; and it is not
_vulgar_--even H. J. can't accuse it of that--or of "stodginess,"
especially at this emaciated season. It remains pure, and clear and
distinguished--Bless it! Once more, would thou hadst been along! I have
just been reading Emerson's "Representative Men." What luminous truths
he communicates about their home-life--for instance: "Nature never
sends a Great Man into the planet without confiding the secret to
another soul"--namely your mother's! How he hits her off, and how I
recognized whom he meant immediately. Kiss the dear tender-hearted
thing.

Common men also have their advantages. I have seen all day long such a
succession of handsome, stalwart, burnt-faced, out-of-door workers as
made me glad to be, however degenerate myself, one of their tribe.
Splendid, honest, good-natured fellows.

Good-night! I'm now going to bed, to read myself to sleep with a tiptop
novel sent me by one Barry, an old pupil of mine. 'T is called "A
Daughter of Thespis." Is this the day of your mother's great and noble
lunch? If so, I pray that it may have gone off well. Kisses to her, and
all. Your loving

PAPA.

The next letter describes the Emerson Centenary at Concord. The Address
which James delivered was published in the special volume commemorative
of the proceedings, and also in "Memories and Studies."




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


Cambridge, _May 26, 1903_.

DEAREST FANNY,--On Friday I called at your house and to my sorrow found
the blinds all down. I had not supposed that you would leave so soon,
though I might well have done so if I had reflected. It has been a
sorrow to me to have seen so little of you lately, but so goes the
_train du monde_. Collapsed condition, absences, interruptions of all
sorts, have made the year end with most of the desiderata postponed to
next year. I meant to write to you on Friday evening, then on Saturday
morning. But I went to Lincoln on Saturday P.M. and stayed over the
Emerson racket, without returning home, and have been packing and
winding up affairs all day in order to get off to Chocorua tomorrow at
7.30. These windings up of unfinished years continue till the unfinished
life winds up.

I wish that you had been at Concord. It was the most harmoniously
æsthetic or æsthetically harmonious thing! The weather, the beauty of
the village, the charming old meeting-house, the descendants of the
grand old man in such profusion, the mixture of Concord and Boston
heads, so many of them of our own circle, the allusions to great
thoughts and things, and the old-time New England rusticity and
rurality, the silver polls and ancient voices of the _vieille garde_ who
did the orating (including this 'yer child), all made a matchless
combination, took one back to one's childhood, and made that rarely
realized marriage of reality with ideality, that usually only occurs in
fiction or poetry.

It was a sweet and memorable day, and I am glad that I had an active
share in it. I thank you for your sweet words to Alice about my address.
I let R. W. E. speak for himself, and I find now, hearing so much from
others of him, that there are only a few things that _can_ be said of
him; he was so squarely and simply himself as to impress every one in
the same manner. Reading the whole of him over again continuously has
made me feel his real greatness as I never did before. He's really a
critter to be thankful for. Good-night, dear Fanny. I shall be back here
by Commencement, and somehow we must see you at Chocorua this summer.

Love to your mother as well as to yourself, from your ever affectionate

Wm. James.

The letter of May 3rd drew from Henry James a long reply which may be
found in the "Letters of Henry James," under date of May 24th; the
reply, in its turn, elicited this response:--




_To Henry James._


CHOCORUA, _June 6, 1903_.

DEAREST HENRY,--Your long and excitingly interesting type-written letter
about coming hither arrived yesterday, and I hasten to retract all my
dampening remarks, now that I understand the motives fully. The only
ones I had imagined, blindling that I am, were fraternal piety and
patriotic duty. Against those I thought I ought to proffer the thought
of "eggs" and other shocks, so that when they came I might be able to
say that you went not unwarned. But the moment it appears that what you
crave is millions of just such shocks, and that a new lease of artistic
life, with the lamp of genius fed by the oil of twentieth-century
American life, is to be the end and aim of the voyage, all my stingy
doubts wither and are replaced by enthusiasm that you are still so
young-feeling, receptive and hungry for more raw material and
experience. It cheers me immensely, and makes me feel more so myself. It
is pathetic to hear you talk so about your career and its going to seed
without the contact of new material; but feeling as you do about the new
material, I augur a great revival of energy and internal effervescence
from the execution of your project. Drop your English ideas and take
America and Americans as they take themselves, and you will certainly
experience a rejuvenation. This is all I have to say _today_--merely to
let you see how the prospect exhilarates us.

August, 1904, will be an excellent time to begin. I should like to go
South with you,--possibly to Cuba,--but as for California, I fear the
expense. I am sending you a decidedly moving book by a mulatto
ex-student of mine, Du Bois, professor of history at Atlanta (Georgia)
negro College.[52] Read Chapters VII to XI for local color, etc.

We have been up here for ten days; the physical luxury of the
simplification is something that money can't buy. Every breath is a
pleasure--this in spite of the fact that the whole country is drying up
and burning up--it makes one ashamed that one can be so happy. The smoke
here has been so thick for five days that the opposite shore [of the
Lake] is hidden. We have a first-rate hired man, a good cow, nice horse,
dog, cook, second-girl, etc. Come up and see us in August, 1904! Your
ever loving

W. J.




_To Henry W. Rankin._


CHOCORUA, _June 10, 1903_.

MY DEAR RANKIN,--Once more has my graphophobia placed me heavily in your
debt. Your two long letters, though unanswered, were and are
appreciated, in spite of the fact that, as you know, I do not (and I
fear cannot) follow the gospel scheme as you do, and that the Bible
itself, in both its testaments (omitting parts of John and the
Apocalypse) seems to me, by its intense naturalness and humanness, the
most fatal document that one can read against the orthodox theology, in
so far as the latter claims the words of the Bible to be its basis. I
myself believe that the orthodox theology contains elements that are
permanently true, and that such writers as Emerson, by reason of their
extraordinary healthy-mindedness and "once-born"-ness, are incapable of
appreciating. I believe that they will have to be expressed in any
ultimately valid religious philosophy; and I see in the temper of
friendliness of such a man as you for such writings as Emerson's and
mine (_magnus comp. parvo_) a foretaste of the day when the abstract
essentials of belief will be the basis of communion more than the
particular forms and concrete doctrines in which they articulate
themselves. Your letter about Emerson seemed to me so admirably written
that I was on the point of sending it back to you, thinking it might be
well that you should publish it somewhere. I will still do so, if you
ask me. I have myself been a little scandalized at the non-resisting
manner in which orthodox sheets have celebrated his anniversary. An
"Emerson number" of "Zion's Herald" strikes me as _tant soit peu_ of an
anomaly, and yet I am told that such a number appeared. Rereading him
_in extenso_, almost _in toto_, lately, has made him loom larger than
ever to me as a human being, but I feel the distinct lack in him of too
little understanding of the morbid side of life.

I have been in the country two weeks, delicious in spite of drought and
smoke, and still more delicious now that rain has come, and I cannot
bear to think of you still lingering in Brooklyn. Perhaps you are
already at Northfield. Indeed I hope so, and that the long Brooklyn
winter will have put you in a condition for its better enjoyment, and
for better cooperation with its work.

I shall get at Shields some day--but I'm slow in getting round! Yours
ever faithfully,

Wm. James.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


Cambridge, _Aug. 18, 1903_.

DEAR M.,-- ...I am in good condition, but in somewhat of a funk about my
lectures,[53] now that the audience draws near. I have got my mind
working on the infernal old problem of mind and brain, and how to
construct the world out of pure experiences, and feel foiled again and
inwardly sick with the fever. But I verily believe that it is only work
that makes one sick in that way that has any chance of breaking old
shells and getting a step ahead. It is a sort of madness however when it
is on you. The total result is to make me admire "Common Sense" as
having done by far the biggest stroke of genius ever made in philosophy
when it reduced the chaos of crude experience to order by its luminous
_Denkmittel_ of the stable "thing," and its dualism of thought and
matter.

I find Strong's book charming and a wonderful piece of clear and
thorough work--quite classical in fact, and surely destined to renown.
The Clifford-Prince-Strong theory has now full rights to citizenship.

Nevertheless, in spite of his so carefully blocking every avenue which
leads sideways from his conclusion, he has not convinced me yet. But I
can[not] say briefly why.... Yours in haste,

W. J.




_To Mrs. Henry Whitman._


HOTEL ----,
PORT HENRY, N.Y., _Aug. 22, 1903_.

DEAR FRIEND,--Obliged to "stop over" for the night at this loathsome
spot, for lack of train connexion, what is more natural than that I
should seek to escape the odious actual by turning to the distant
Ideal--by which term you will easily recognize _Yourself_. I didn't
write the conventional letter to you after leaving your house in June,
preferring to wait till the tension should accumulate, and knowing your
indulgence of my unfashionable ways. I haven't heard a word about you
since that day, but I hope that the times have treated you kindly, and
that you have not been "overdoing" in your usual naughty way. I, with
the exception of six days lately with the Merrimans, have been sitting
solidly at home, and have found myself in much better condition than I
was in last summer, and consequently better than for several years. It
is pleasant to find that one's organism has such reparative capacities
even after sixty years have been told out. But I feel as if the
remainder couldn't be very long, at least for "creative" purposes, and I
find myself eager to get ahead with work which unfortunately won't allow
itself to be done in too much of a hurry. I am convinced that the desire
to formulate truths is a virulent disease. It has contracted an alliance
lately in me with a feverish personal ambition, which I never had
before, and which I recognize as an unholy thing in such a connexion. I
actually dread to die until I have settled the Universe's hash in one
more book, which shall be _epoch-machend_ at last, and a title of honor
to my children! Childish idiot--as if formulas about the Universe could
ruffle its majesty, and as if the common-sense world and its duties were
not eternally the really real!--I am on my way from Ashfield, where I
was a guest at the annual dinner, to _feu_ Davidson's "school" at
Glenmore, where, in a sanguine hour, I agreed to give five discourses.
Apparently they are having a good season there. Mrs. Booker Washington
was the hero of the Ashfield occasion--a big hearty handsome natural
creature, quite worthy to be her husband's mate. Fred Pollock made a
tip-top speech.... Charles Norton appeared to great advantage as a
benignant patriarch, and the place was very pretty. Have you read Loti's
"Inde sans les Anglais"? If not, then begin. I seem to myself to have
been doing some pretty good reading this summer, but when I try to
recall it, nothing but philosophic works come up. Good-bye! and Heaven
keep you! Yours affectionately,

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


CHOCORUA, _Sept. 24, 1903_.

DEAREST FANNY,--It is so long since we have held communion that I think
it is time to recommence. Our summer is ending quietly enough, not only
you, but Theodora and Mary Tappan, having all together conspired to
leave us in September solitude, and some young fellows, companions of
Harry and Billy, having just gone down. The cook goes tomorrow for a
fortnight of vacation, but Alice and I, and probably both the older
boys, hope to stay up here more or less until the middle of October. My
"seminary" begins on Friday, October 2nd, and for the rest of the year
Friday is my only day with a college exercise in it--an arrangement
which leaves me extraordinarily free, and of which I intend to take
advantage by making excursions. Hitherto, during the entire 30 years of
my College service, I have had a midday exercise every day in the week.
This has always kept me tied too tight to Cambridge. I am _vastly_
better in nervous tone than I was a year ago, my work is simplified down
to the exact thing I want to do, and I ought to be happy in spite of the
lopping off of so many faculties of activity. The only thing to do, as
with the process of the suns one finds one's faculties dropping away one
by one, is to be good-natured about it, remember that the next
generation is as young as ever, and try to live and have a sympathetic
share in their activities. I spent three days lately (only three, alas!)
at the "Shanty" [in Keene Valley], and was moved to admiration at the
foundation for a consciousness that was being laid in the children by
the bare-headed and bare-legged existence "close to nature" of which the
memory was being stored up in them in these years. They lay around the
camp-fire at night at the feet of their elders, in every attitude of
soft recumbency, heads on stomachs and legs mixed up, happy and dreamy,
just like the young of some prolific carnivorous species. The coming
generation ought to reap the benefit of all this healthy animality. What
wouldn't I give to have been educated in it!...




_To Mrs. Henry Whitman._


Cambridge, _Oct. 29, 1903_.

MY DEAR "S. W.,"--On inquiry at your studio last Monday I was told that
you would be in the country for ten days or a fortnight more. I confess
that this pleased me much for it showed you both happy and prudent.
Surely the winter is long enough, however much we cut off of this
end--the city winter I mean; and the country this month has been little
short of divine.

We came down on the 16th, and I have to get mine (my country, I mean)
from the "Norton Woods." But they are very good indeed,--indeed, indeed!

I am better, both physically and morally, than for years past. The whole
James family thrives; and were it not for one's "duties" one could be
happy. But that things should give pain proves that something is being
_effected_, so I take that consolation. I have the duty on Monday of
reporting at a "Philosophical Conference" on the Chicago School of
Thought. Chicago University has during the past six months given birth
to the fruit of its ten years of gestation under John Dewey. The result
is wonderful--a _real school_, and _real Thought_. Important thought,
too! Did you ever hear of such a city or such a University? Here we
have thought, but no school. At Yale a school, but no thought. Chicago
has both.... But this, dear Madam, is not intended as a letter--only a
word of greeting and congratulation at your absence. I don't know why it
makes me so happy to hear of anyone being in the country. I suppose
_they_ must be happy.

Your last letter went to the right spot--but I don't expect to hear from
you now until I see you. Ever affectionately yours,

W. J.




_To Henry James._


NEWPORT, _Jan. 20, 1904_.

...I came down here the night before last, to see if a change of air
might loosen the grip of my influenza, now in its sixth week and me
still weak as a baby, almost, from its virulent effects.... Yesterday
A.M. the thermometer fell to 4 below zero. I walked as far as Tweedy's
(I am staying at a boarding-house, Mrs. Robinson's, Catherine St., close
to Touro Avenue, Daisy Waring being the only other boarder)--the snow
loudly creaking under foot and under teams however distant, the sky
luminously white and dazzling, no distance, everything equally near to
the eye, and the architecture in the town more huddled, discordant,
cheap, ugly and contemptible than I had ever seen it. It brought back
old times so vividly. So it did in the evening, when I went after sunset
down Kay Street to the termination. That low West that I've so often fed
on, with a sombre but intense crimson vestige smouldering close to the
horizon-line, economical but profound, and the western well of sky
shading upward from it through infinite shades of transparent luminosity
in darkness to the deep blue darkness overhead. It was purely American.
You never see that western sky anywhere else. Solemn and wonderful. I
should think you'd like to see it again, if only for the sake of
shuddering at it!...




_To François Pillon._


Cambridge, _June 12, 1904_.

DEAR PILLON,--Once more I get your faithful and indefatigable "Année"
and feel almost ashamed of receiving it thus from you, year after year,
when I make nothing of a return! So you are 75 years old--I had no idea
of it, but thought that you were much younger. I am only(!) 62, and wish
that I could expect another 13 years of such activity as you have shown.
I fear I cannot. My arteries are senile, and none of my ancestors, so
far as I know of them, have lived past 72, many of them dying much
earlier. This is my last day in Cambridge; tomorrow I get away into the
country, where "the family" already is, for my vacation. I shall take
your "Année" with me, and shall be greatly interested in both Danriac's
article and yours. What a mercy it is that your eyes, in spite of
cataract-operations, are still good for reading. I have had a very bad
winter for work--two attacks of influenza, one very long and bad, three
of gout, one of erysipelas, etc., etc. I expected to have written at
least 400 or 500 pages of my magnum opus,--a general treatise on
philosophy which has been slowly maturing in my mind,--but I have
written only 32 pages! That tells the whole story. I resigned from my
professorship, but they would not accept my resignation, and owing to
certain peculiarities in the financial situation of our University just
now, I felt myself obliged in honor to remain.

My philosophy is what I call a radical empiricism, a pluralism, a
"tychism," which represents order as being gradually won and always in
the making. It is theistic, but not _essentially_ so. It rejects all
doctrines of the Absolute. It is finitist; but it does not attribute to
the question of the Infinite the great methodological importance which
you and Renouvier attribute to it. I fear that you may find my system
too _bottomless_ and romantic. I am sure that, be it in the end judged
true or false, it is essential to the evolution of clearness in
philosophic thought that _someone_ should defend a pluralistic
empiricism radically. And all that I fear is that, with the impairment
of my working powers from which I suffer, the Angel of Death may
overtake me before I can get my thoughts on to paper. Life here in the
University consists altogether of _interruptions_.

I thought much of you at the time of Renouvier's death, and I wanted to
write; but I let that go, with a thousand other things that had to go.
What a life! and what touching and memorable last words were those which
M. Pratt published in the "Revue de Métaphysique"--memorable, I mean
from the mere fact that the old man could dictate them at all. I have
left unread his last publications, except for some parts of the
"Monadologie" and the "Personalisme." He will remain a great figure in
philosophic history; and the sense of his absence must make a great
difference to your consciousness and to that of Madame Pillon. My own
wife and children are well.... Ever affectionately yours,

Wm. James.




_To Henry James._


Cambridge, _June 28, 1904_.

DEAR H.,--I came down from Chocorua yesterday A.M. to go to--

Mrs. Whitman's funeral!

She had lost ground steadily during the winter. The last time I saw her
was five weeks ago, when at noon I went up to her studio thinking she
might be there.... She told me that she was to go on the following day
to the Massachusetts General Hospital, for a cure of rest and seclusion.
There she died last Friday evening, having improved in her cardiac
symptoms, but pneumonia supervening a week ago. It's a great mercy that
the end was so unexpectedly quick. What I had feared was a slow
deterioration for a year or more to come, with all the nameless
misery--peculiarly so in her case--of death by heart disease. As it was,
she may be said to have died standing, a thing she always wished to do.
She went to every dinner-party and evening party last winter, had an
extension, a sort of ball-room, built to her Mount Vernon house, etc.
The funeral was beautiful both in Trinity Church and at the grave in Mt.
Auburn. I was one of the eight pall-bearers--the others of whom you
would hardly know. The flowers and greenery had been arranged in
absolutely Whitmanian style by Mrs. Jack Gardner, Mrs. Henry Parkman,
and Sally Fairchild. The scene at the grave was _beautiful_. She had no
blood relatives, and all Boston--I mean the few whom we know--had gone
out, and seemed swayed by an overpowering emotion which abolished all
estrangement and self-consciousness. It was the sort of ending that
would please her, could she know of it. An extraordinary and indefinable
creature! I used often to feel coldly towards her on account of her way
of taking people as a great society "business" proceeding, but now that
her agitated life of tip-toe reaching in so many directions, of
genuinest amiability, is over, pure tenderness asserts its own. Against
that dark background of natural annihilation she seems to have been a
pathetic little slender worm, writhing and curving blindly through its
little day, expending such intensities of consciousness to terminate in
that small grave.

She was a most peculiar person. I wish that you had known her whole life
here more intimately, and understood its significance. You might then
write a worthy article about her. For me, it is impossible to define
her. She leaves a dreadful vacuum in Boston. I have often wondered
whether I should survive her--and here it has come in the night, without
the sound of a footstep, and the same world is here--but without her as
its witness....




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


Cambridge, _June 30, 1904_.

DEAR CHARLES,--I have just read the July "Atlantic," and am so moved by
your Ruskin letters that I can't refrain from overflowing. They seem to
me immortal documents--as the clouds clear away he will surely take his
stable place as one of the noblest of the sons of men. Mere sanity is
the most philistine and (at bottom) unimportant of a man's attributes.
The chief "cloud" is the bulk of "Modern Painters" and the other
artistic writings, which have made us take him primarily as an
art-connoisseur and critic. Regard all that as inessential, and his
inconsistencies and extravagances fall out of sight and leave the Great
Heart alone visible.

Do you suppose that there are many other correspondents of R. who will
yield up their treasures in our time to the light? I wish that your
modesty had not suppressed certain passages which evidently expressed
too much regard for yourself. The point should have been _his_
expression of that sort of thing--no matter to whom addressed! I
understand and sympathize fully with his attitude about our war. Granted
him and his date, that is the way he ought to have felt, and I revere
him perhaps the more for it....

S. W.'s sudden defection is a pathetic thing! It makes one feel like
closing the ranks.

Affectionately--to all of you--including Theodora,

W. J.




_To L. T. Hobhouse._


CHOCORUA, _Aug. 12, 1904_.

DEAR BROTHER HOBHOUSE,--Don't you think it a _tant soit peu_ scurvy
trick to play on me ('tis true that you don't name me, but to the
informed reader the reference is transparent--I say nothing of poor
Schiller's case) to print in the "Aristotelian Proceedings" (pages 104
_ff_.)[54] a beautiful duplicate of my own theses in the "Will to
Believe" essay (which should have been called by the less unlucky title
the _Right_ to Believe) in the guise of an _alternative and substitute_
for my doctrine, for which latter you, in the earlier pages of your
charmingly written essay, _substitute a travesty_ for which I defy any
candid reader to find a single justification in my text? My essay hedged
the license to indulge in private over-beliefs with so many restrictions
and signboards of danger that the outlet was narrow enough. It made of
tolerance the essence of the situation; it defined the permissible
cases; it treated the faith-attitude as a necessity for individuals,
because the total "evidence," which only the race can draw, has to
include their experiments among its data. It tended to show only that
faith could not be absolutely _vetoed_, as certain champions of
"science" (Clifford, Huxley, etc.) had claimed it ought to be. It was a
function that might lead, and probably does lead, into a wider world.
You say identically the same things; only, from your special polemic
point of view, you emphasize more the dangers; while I, from _my_
polemic point of view, emphasized more the right to run their risk.

Your essay, granting that emphasis and barring the injustice to me,
seems to me exquisite, and, taking it as a unit, I subscribe
unreservedly to almost every positive word.--I say "positive," for I
doubt whether you have seen enough of the extraordinarily invigorating
effect of mind-_cum_-philosophy on certain people to justify your
somewhat negative treatment of that subject; and I say "almost" because
your distinction between "spurious" and "genuine" courage (page 91)
reminds me a bit too much of "true" and "false" freedom, and other
sanctimonious come-offs.--Could you not have made an equally sympathetic
reading of _me_?

I shouldn't have cared a copper for the misrepresentation were it not a
"summation of stimuli" affair. I have just been reading Bradley on
Schiller in the July "Mind," and A. E. Taylor on the Will to Believe in
the "McGill Quarterly" of Montreal. Both are vastly worse than you; and
I cry to Heaven to tell me of what insane root my "leading
contemporaries" have eaten, that they are so smitten with blindness as
to the meaning of printed texts. Or are we others absolutely incapable
of making our meaning clear?

I imagine that there is neither insane root nor unclear writing, but
that in these matters each man writes from out of a field of
consciousness of which the bogey in the background is the chief object.
Your bogey is superstition; my bogey is desiccation; and each, for his
contrast-effect, clutches at any text that can be used to represent the
enemy, regardless of exegetical proprieties.

In my essay the evil shape was a vision of "Science" in the form of
abstraction, priggishness and sawdust, lording it over all. Take the
sterilest scientific prig and cad you know, compare him with the
richest religious intellect you know, and you would not, any more than I
would, give the former the exclusive right of way. But up to page 104 of
your essay he will deem you altogether on his side.

Pardon the familiarity of this epistle. I like and admire your theory of
Knowledge so much, and you re-duplicate (I _don't_ mean _copy_) my views
so beautifully in this article, that I hate to let you go unchidden.

Believe me, with the highest esteem (plus some indignation, for you
ought to know better!), Yours faithfully,

Wm. James.




_To Edwin D. Starbuck._


SALISBURY, CONN. _Aug, 24, 1904_.

DEAR STARBUCK,-- ...Of the strictures you make [in your review of my
"Varieties"], the first one (undue emphasis on extreme case) is, I find,
almost universally made; so it must in some sense be correct. Yet it
would never do to study the passion of love on examples of ordinary
liking or friendly affection, or that of homicidal pugnacity on examples
of our ordinary impatiences with our kind. So here it must be that the
extreme examples let us more deeply into the secrets of the religious
life, explain why the tamer ones value their religion so much, tame
though it be, because it is so continuous with a so much acuter ideal.
But I have long been conscious that there is on this matter something to
be said which neither my critics have said, nor I can say, and which I
must therefore commit to the future.

The second stricture (in your paragraph 4 on pages 104 _ff_.) is of
course deeply important, if true. At present I can see but vaguely just
what sort of outer relations our inner organism might respond to, which
our feelings and intellect interpret by religious thought. You ought to
work your program for all it is worth in the way of growth in
definiteness. I look forward with great eagerness to your forthcoming
book, and meanwhile urge strongly that you should publish the advance
article you speak of in Hall's new Journal. I can't see any possible
risk. It will objectify a part of your material for you, and possibly,
by arousing criticism, enable you to strengthen your points.

Your third stricture, about Higher Powers, is also very important, and I
am not at all sure that you may not be right. I have frankly to confess
that my "Varieties" carried "theory" as far as I could then carry it,
and that I can carry it no farther today. I can't see clearly over that
edge. Yet I am sure that tracks have got to be made there--I think that
the fixed point with me is the conviction that our "rational"
consciousness touches but a portion of the real universe and that our
life is fed by the "mystical" region as well. I have no mystical
experience of my own, but just enough of the germ of mysticism in me to
recognize the region from which their voice comes when I hear it.

I was much disappointed in Leuba's review of my book in the
"International Journal of Ethics." ... I confess that the way in which
he stamps out all mysticism whatever, using the common pathological
arguments, seemed to me unduly crude. I wrote him an expostulatory
letter, which evidently made no impression at all, and which he possibly
might send you if you had the curiosity to apply.

I am having a happy summer, feeling quite hearty again. I congratulate
you on being settled, though I know nothing of the place. I congratulate
you and Mrs. Starbuck also on airy fairy Lilian, who makes, I believe,
the third. Long may they live and make their parents proud. With best
regards to you both, I am yours ever truly,

Wm. James.

The "expostulatory" letter to Professor Leuba began with a series of
objections to statements which he had made, and continued with the
passage which follows.




_To James Henry Leuba._


Cambridge, _Apr. 17, 1904_.

...My personal position is simple. I have no living sense of commerce
with a God. I envy those who have, for I know the addition of such a
sense would help me immensely. The Divine, for my _active_ life, is
limited to abstract concepts which, as ideals, interest and determine
me, but do so but faintly, in comparison with what a feeling of God
might effect, if I had one. It is largely a question of intensity, but
differences of intensity may make one's whole centre of energy shift.
Now, although I am so devoid of _Gottesbewustsein_ in the directer and
stronger sense, yet there is _something in me_ which _makes response_
when I hear utterances made from that lead by others. I recognize the
deeper voice. Something tells me, "_thither lies truth_"--and I am
_sure_ it is not old theistic habits and prejudices of infancy. Those
are Christian; and I have grown so out of Christianity that entanglement
therewith on the part of a mystical utterance has to be abstracted from
and overcome, before I can listen. Call this, if you like, my mystical
_germ_. It is a very common germ. It creates the rank and file of
believers. As it withstands in my case, so it will withstand in most
cases, all purely atheistic criticism, but _interpretative_ criticism
(not of the mere "hysteria" and "nerves" order) it can energetically
combine with. Your criticism seems to amount to a pure _non possumus_:
"Mystical deliverances must be infallible revelations in every
particular, or nothing. Therefore they are _nothing_, for anyone else
than their owner." Why may they not be _something_, although not
everything?

Your only consistent position, it strikes me, would be a dogmatic
atheistic naturalism; and, without any mystical germ in us, that, I
believe, is where we all should _unhesitatingly_ be today.

Once allow the mystical germ to influence our beliefs, and I believe
that we are in my position. Of course the "subliminal" theory is an
inessential hypothesis, and the question of pluralism or monism is
equally inessential.

I am letting loose a deluge on you! Don't reply at length, or at all.
_I_ hate to reply to anybody, and will sympathize with your silence. But
I had to restate my position more clearly. Yours truly,

Wm. James.

The following document is not a letter, but a series of answers to a
questionnaire upon the subject of religious belief, which was sent out
in 1904 by Professor James B. Pratt of Williams College, and to which
James filled out a reply at an unascertained date in the autumn of that
year.


     QUESTIONNAIRE[55]


     It is being realized as never before that religion, as one of the
     most important things in the life both of the community and of the
     individual, deserves close and extended study. Such study can be of
     value only if based upon the personal experiences of many
     individuals. If you are in sympathy with such study and are willing
     to assist in it, will you kindly write out the answers to the
     following questions and return them with this questionnaire, as
     soon as you conveniently can, to JAMES B. PRATT, 20 Shepard Street,
     Cambridge, Mass.

     Please answer the questions at length and in detail. Do not give
     philosophical generalizations, but your own personal experience.

     1. What does religion mean to you personally? Is it

     (1) A belief that something exists? _Yes._

     (2) An emotional experience? _Not powerfully so, yet a_ social
     _reality_.

     (3) A general attitude of the will toward God or toward
     righteousness! _It involves these._

     (4) Or something else?

     If it has several elements, which is for you the most important?
     _The social appeal for corroboration, consolation, etc., when
     things are going wrong with my causes (my truth denied)_, etc.


     2. What do you mean by God? _A combination of Ideality and (final)
     efficacity._

     (1) Is He a person--if so, what do you mean by His being a person?
     _He must be cognizant and responsive in some way._

     (2) Or is He only a Force? _He must_ do.

     (3) Or is God an attitude of the Universe toward you? _Yes, but
     more conscious. "God" to me, is not the only spiritual reality to
     believe in. Religion means primarily a universe of spiritual
     relations surrounding the earthly practical ones, not merely
     relations of "value," but agencies and their activities. I suppose
     that the chief premise for my hospitality towards the religious
     testimony of others is my conviction that "normal" or "sane"
     consciousness is so small a part of actual experience. What e'er be
     true, it is not true exclusively, as philistine scientific opinion
     assumes. The other kinds of consciousness bear witness to a much
     wider universe of experiences, from which our belief selects and
     emphasizes such parts as best satisfy our needs._

How do you apprehend his relation to mankind           }
  and to you personally?                               }
                                                       } _Uncertain._
If your position on any of these matters is uncertain, }
  please state the fact.                               }


     3. Why do you believe in God? Is it

     (1) From some argument? _Emphatically, no._

     Or (2) Because you have experienced His presence? _No, but rather
     because I need it so that it "must" be true._

     Or (3) From authority, such as that of the Bible or of some
     prophetic person? _Only the whole tradition of religious people, to
     which something in me makes admiring response._

     Or (4) From any other reason? _Only for the social reasons._

If from several of these reasons, please indicate carefully the order of
their importance.


4. Or do you not so much _believe_ in God as want to _use_ Him? _I can't
use him very definitely, yet I believe._ Do you accept Him not so much
as a real existent Being, but rather as an ideal to live by? _More as a
more powerful ally of my own ideals._ If you should become thoroughly
convinced that there was no God, would it make any great difference in
your life--either in happiness, morality, or in other respects? _Hard to
say. It would surely make some difference._


5. Is God very real to you, as real as an earthly friend, though
different? _Dimly [real]; not [as an earthly friend]._

Do you feel that you have experienced His presence? If so, please
describe what you mean by such an experience. _Never._

How vague or how distinct is it? How does it affect you mentally and
physically?

If you have had no such experience, do you accept the testimony of
others who claim to have felt God's presence directly? Please answer
this question with special care and in as great detail as possible.
_Yes! The whole line of testimony on this point is so strong that I am
unable to pooh-pooh it away. No doubt there is a germ in me of something
similar that makes response._


6. Do you pray, and if so, why? That is, is it purely from habit, and
social custom, or do you really believe that God hears your prayers? _I
can't possibly pray--I feel foolish and artificial._

Is prayer with you one-sided or two-sided--_i.e._, do you sometimes feel
that in prayer you receive something--such as strength or the divine
spirit--from God? Is it a real communion?


7. What do you mean by "spirituality"? _Susceptibility to ideals, but
with a certain freedom to indulge in imagination about them. A certain
amount of "other worldly" fancy. Otherwise you have mere morality, or
"taste."_

Describe a typical spiritual person. _Phillips Brooks._


8. Do you believe in personal immortality? _Never keenly; but more
strongly as I grow older._ If so, why? _Because I am just getting fit to
live._


9. Do you accept the Bible as _authority_ in religious matters? Are your
religious faith and your religious life based on it? If so, how would
your belief in God and your life toward Him and your fellow men be
affected by loss of faith in the _authority_ of the Bible? _No. No. No.
It is so human a book that I don't see how belief in its divine
authorship can survive the reading of it._

10. What do you mean by a "religious experience"? _Any moment of life
that brings the reality of spiritual things more "home" to one._




_To Miss Pauline Goldmark._


CHOCORUA, _Sept. 21, 1904_.

DEAR PAULINE,--Alice went off this morning to Cambridge, to get the
house ready for the advent of the rest of us a week hence--viz.,
Wednesday the 28th. Having breakfasted at 6:30 to bid her God speed, the
weather was so lordly fine (after a heavy rain in the night) that I
trudged across lots to our hill-top, which you never saw, and now lie
there with my back against a stone, scribbling you these lines at
half-past nine. The vacation has run down with an appalling rapidity,
but all has gone well with us, and I have been extraordinarily well and
happy, and mean to be a good boy all next winter, to say nothing of
remoter futures. My brother Henry stayed a delightful fortnight, and
seemed to enjoy nature here intensely--found so much _sentiment_ and
feminine delicacy in it all. It is a pleasure to be with anyone who
takes in things through the eyes. Most people don't. The two "savans"
who were here noticed _absolutely nothing_, though they had never been
in America before.

Naturally I have wondered what things your eyes have been falling on.
Many views from hill-tops? Many magic dells and brooks? I hope so, and
that it has all done you endless good. Such a green and gold and scarlet
morn as this would raise the dead. I hope that your sister Susan has
also got great good from the summer, and that the fair Josephine is glad
to be at home again, and your mother reconciled to losing you. Perhaps
even now you are preparing to go down. I have only written as a
_Lebenszeichen_ and to tell you of our dates. I expect no reply, till
you write a word to say when you are to come to Boston. Unhappily we
can't ask you to Irving St, being mortgaged three deep to foreigners.
Ever yours,

W. J.

It will be recalled that the St. Louis Exposition had occurred shortly
before the date of the last letter and had led a number of learned and
scientific associations to hold international congresses in America.
James kept away from St. Louis, but asked several foreign colleagues to
visit him at Chocorua or in Cambridge before their return to Europe.
Among them were Dr. Pierre Janet of Paris and his wife, Professor C.
Lloyd Morgan of Bristol, and Professor Harold Höffding of Copenhagen.




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


Cambridge, _Oct. 26, 1904_.

DEAR SCHILLER,-- ...Last night the Janets left us--a few days previous,
Lloyd Morgan. I am glad to possess my soul for a while alone. Make much
of dear old Höffding, who is a good pluralist and irrationalist. I took
to him immensely and so did everybody. Lecturing to my class, he told
against the Absolutists an anecdote of an "American" child who asked his
mother if God made the world in six days. "Yes."--"The whole of
it?"--"Yes."--"Then it is finished, all done?"--"Yes."--"Then in what
business now is God?" If he tells it in Oxford you must reply: "Sitting
for his portrait to Royce, Bradley, and Taylor."

Don't return the "McGill Quarterly"!--I have another copy. Good-bye!

W. J.




_To F. J. E. Woodbridge._


Cambridge, _Feb. 6, 1905_.

DEAR WOODBRIDGE,--I appear to be growing into a graphomaniac. Truth
boils over from my organism as muddy water from a Yellowstone Geyser.
Here is another contribution to my radical empiricism, which I send hot
on the heels of the last one. I promise that, with the possible
exception of one post-scriptual thing, not more than eight pages of MS.
long, I shall do no more writing this academic year. So if you accept
this,[56] you have not much more to fear.... I think, on the whole, that
though the present article directly hitches on to the last words of my
last article, "The Thing and Its Relations," the article called the
"Essence of Humanism" had better appear before it.... Always truly yours

Wm. James.




_To Edwin D. Starbuck._


Cambridge, _Feb. 12, 1905_.

DEAR STARBUCK,--I have read your article in No. 2 of Hall's Journal with
great interest and profit. It makes me eager for the book, but pray take
great care of your style in that--it seems to me that this article is
less well written than your "Psychology of Religion" was, less clear,
more involved, more technical in language--probably the result of
rapidity. Our American philosophic literature is dreadful from a
literary point of view. Pierre Janet told me he thought it was much
worse than German stuff--and I begin to believe so; technical and
semi-technical language, half-clear thought, fluency, and no
composition! Turn your face resolutely the other way! But I didn't start
to say this. Your thought in this article is both important and
original, and ought to be worked out in the clearest possible manner....
Your thesis needs to be worked out with great care, and as concretely as
possible. It is a difficult one to put successfully, on account of the
vague character of all its terms. One point you should drive home is
that the anti-religious attitudes (Leuba's, Huxley's, Clifford's), so
far as there is any "pathos" in them, obey exactly the same logic. The
real crux is when you come to define objectively the ideals to which
feeling reacts. "God is a Spirit"--_darauf geht es an_--on the last
available definition of the term Spirit. It may be very abstract.

Love to Mrs. Starbuck. Yours always truly,

Wm. James.




_To F. J. E. Woodbridge._


[_Feb. 22, 1905._]

DEAR WOODBRIDGE,--Here's another! But I solemnly swear to you that this
shall be my very last offense for some months to come. This is the
"postscriptual" article[57] of which I recently wrote you, and I have
now cleaned up the pure-experience philosophy from all the objections
immediately in sight.... Truly yours,

Wm. James.




