XVI

1907-1909

_The Last Period (III)--Hibbert Lectures in Oxford--The Hodgson Report_


The story of the remaining years is written so fully in the letters
themselves as to require little explanation.

Angina pectoris and such minor ailments as are only too likely to
afflict a man of sixty-five years and impaired constitution interrupted
the progress of reading and writing more and more. Physical exertion,
particularly that involved in talking long to many people, now brought
on pain and difficulty in breathing. But James still carried himself
erect, still walked with a light step, and until a few weeks before his
death wore the appearance of a much younger and stronger man than he
really was. None but those near to him realized how often he was in
discomfort or pain, or how constantly he was using himself to the limit
of his endurance. He bore his ills without complaint and ordinarily
without mention; although he finally made up his mind to try to
discourage the appeals and requests of all sorts that still harassed
him, by proclaiming the fact that he was an invalid. As his power of
work became more and more reduced, frustrations became harder to bear,
and the sense that they were unavoidable oppressed him. When an
invitation to deliver a course of lectures on the Hibbert Foundation at
Manchester College, Oxford, arrived, he was torn between an impulse to
clutch at this engagement as a means of hastening the writing-out of
certain material that was in his mind, and the fear, only too
reasonable, that the obligation to have the lectures ready by a certain
date would strain him to the snapping point. After some hesitation he
agreed, however, and the lectures were, ultimately, prepared and
delivered successfully.

In proportion as the number of hours a day that he could spend on
literary work and professional reading decreased, James's general
reading increased again. He began for the first time to browse in
military biographies, and commenced to collect material for a study
which he sometimes spoke of as a "Psychology of Jingoism," sometimes as
a "Varieties of Military Experience." What such a work would have been,
had he ever completed it, it is impossible to tell. It was never more
than a rather vague project, turned to occasionally as a diversion. But
it is safe to reckon that two remarkable papers--the "Energies of Men"
(written in 1906) and the "Moral Equivalent of War" (written in
1909)--would have appeared to be related to this study. That it would
not have been a utopian flight in the direction of pacifism need hardly
be said. However he might have described it, James was not disposed to
underestimate the "fighting instinct." He saw it as a persistent and
highly irritable force, underlying the society of all the dominant
races; and he advocated international courts, reduction of armaments,
and any other measures that might prevent appeals to the war-waging
passion as commendable devices for getting along without arousing it.

"The fatalistic view of the war-function is to me nonsense, for I know
that war-making is due to definite motives and subject to prudential
checks and reasonable criticisms, just like any other form of
enterprise.... All these beliefs of mine put me squarely into the
anti-militarist party. But I do not believe that peace either ought to
be or will be permanent on this globe, unless the states pacifically
organized preserve some of the old elements of army-discipline.... In
the more or less socialistic future towards which mankind seems
drifting, we must still subject ourselves collectively to those
severities which answer to our real position upon this only partly
hospitable globe. We must make new energies and hardihoods continue the
manliness to which the military mind so faithfully clings. Martial
virtues must be the enduring cement; intrepidity, contempt of softness,
surrender of private interest, obedience to command, must still remain
the rock upon which states are built--unless, indeed, we wish for
dangerous reactions against commonwealths fit only for contempt, and
liable to invite attack whenever a centre of crystallization for
military-minded enterprise gets formed anywhere in their
neighborhood."[76]

Any utterances about war, arbitration, and disarmament, are now likely
to have their original meaning distorted by reason of what may justly be
called the present fevered state of public opinion on such questions. It
should be clear that the foregoing sentences were not directed to any
particular question of domestic or foreign policy. They were part of a
broad picture of the fighting instinct, and led up to a suggestion for
diverting it into non-destructive channels. As to particular instances,
circumstances were always to be reckoned with. James believed in
organizing and strengthening the machinery of arbitration, but did not
think that the day for universal arbitration had yet come. He saw a
danger in military establishments, went so far--in the presence of the
"jingoism" aroused by Cleveland's Venezuela message--as to urge
opposition to any increase of the American army and navy, encouraged
peace-societies, and was willing to challenge attention by calling
himself a pacifist.[77] "The first thing to learn in intercourse with
others is non-interference with their own peculiar ways of being happy,
provided those ways do not presume to interfere by violence with
ours."[78] Tolerance--social, religious, and political--was fundamental
in his scheme of belief; but he took pains to make a proviso, and drew
the line at tolerating interference or oppression. Where he recognized a
military danger, there he would have had matters so governed as to meet
it, not evade it. Writing of the British garrison in Halifax in 1897, he
said: "By Jove, if England should ever be licked by a Continental army,
it would only be Divine justice upon her for keeping up the Tommy Atkins
recruiting system when the others have compulsory service."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the case of one undertaking, which was much too troublesome to be
reckoned as a diversion, he let himself be drawn away from his
metaphysical work. He had taken no active part in the work of the
Society for Psychical Research since 1896. In December, 1905, Richard
Hodgson, the secretary of the American Branch, had died suddenly, and
almost immediately thereafter Mrs. Piper, the medium whose trances
Hodgson had spent years in studying, had purported to give
communications from Hodgson's departed spirit. In 1909 James made a
report to the S. P. R. on "Mrs. Piper's Hodgson control." The full
report will be found in its Proceedings for 19O9,[79] and the concluding
pages, in which James stated, more analytically than elsewhere, the
hypotheses which the phenomena suggested to him, have been reprinted in
the volume of "Collected Essays and Reviews." At the same time he wrote
out a more popular statement, in a paper which will be found in
"Memories and Studies." As to his final opinion of the spirit-theory,
the following letter, given somewhat out of its chronological place,
states what was still James's opinion in 1910.




_To Charles Lewis Slattery._


Cambridge, _Apr. 21, 1907_.

DEAR MR. SLATTERY,--My state of mind is this: Mrs. Piper has supernormal
knowledge in her trances; but whether it comes from "tapping the minds"
of living people, or from some common cosmic reservoir of memories, or
from surviving "spirits" of the departed, is a question impossible for
_me_ to answer just now to my own satisfaction. The spirit-theory is
undoubtedly not only the most natural, but the simplest, and I have
great respect for Hodgson's and Hyslop's arguments when they adopt it.
At the same time the electric current called _belief_ has not yet closed
in my mind.

Whatever the explanation be, trance-mediumship is an excessively complex
phenomenon, in which many concurrent factors are engaged. That is why
interpretation is so hard.

Make any use, public or private, that you like of this.

In great haste, yours,

Wm. James.

The next letter should be understood as referring to the abandonment of
an excursion to Lake Champlain with Henry L. Higginson. The celebration
alluded to in the last part of the letter had been arranged by the
Cambridge Historical Society in honor of the hundredth anniversary of
the birth of Louis Agassiz.




_To Henry L. Higginson._


CHOCORUA, N. H., _circa, June 1, 1907_.

DEAR HENRY,--On getting your resignation by telephone, I came straight
up here instead, without having time to write you my acceptance as I
meant to; and now comes your note of the fourth, before I have done so.

I am exceedingly sorry, my dear old boy, that it is the doctor's advice
that has made you fear to go. I hope the liability to relapse will soon
fade out and leave you free again; for say what they will of _Alters
Schwäche_ and resignation to decay, and _entbehren sollst du, sollst
entbehren_, it means only sour grapes, and the insides of one always
want to be doing the free and active things. However, a river can still
be lively in a shrunken bed, and we must not pay too much attention to
the difference of level. If you should summon me again this summer, I
can probably respond. I shall be here for a fortnight, then back to
Cambridge again for a short time.

I thought the Agassiz celebration went off very nicely indeed, didn't
you?--John Gray's part in it being of course the best. X---- was heavy,
but respectable, and the heavy respectable _ought_ to be one ingredient
in anything of the kind. But how well Shaler would have done that part
of the job had he been there! Love to both of you!

W. J.




_To W. Cameron Forbes._


CHOCORUA, _June 11, 1907_.

DEAR CAMERON FORBES,--Your letter from Baguio of the 18th of April
touches me by its genuine friendliness, and is a tremendous temptation.
Why am I not ten years younger? Even now I hesitate to say no, and the
only reason why I don't say yes, with a roar, is that certain rather
serious drawbacks in the way of health of late seem to make me unfit for
the various activities which such a visit ought to carry in its train. I
am afraid my program from now onwards ought to be sedentary. I ought to
be getting out a book next winter. Last winter I could hardly do any
walking, owing to a trouble with my heart.

Does your invitation mean to include my wife? And have you a good
crematory so that she might bring home my ashes in case of need?

I think if you had me on the spot you would find me a less impractical
kind of an anti-imperialist than you have supposed me to be. I think
that the manner in which the McKinley administration railroaded the
country into its policy of conquest was abominable, and the way the
country pucked up its ancient soul at the first touch of temptation, and
followed, was sickening. But with the establishment of the civil
commission McKinley did what he could to redeem things and now what the
Islands want is CONTINUITY OF ADMINISTRATION to form new habits that may
to some degree be hoped to last when we, as controllers, are gone. WHEN?
that is the question. And much difference of opinion may be fair as to
the answer. That we can't stay forever seems to follow from the fact
that the educated Philippinos differ from all previous colonials in
having been inoculated before our occupation with the ideas of the
French Revolution; and that is a virus to which history shows as yet no
anti-toxine. As I am at present influenced, I think that the U. S. ought
to solemnly proclaim a date for our going (or at least for a plebiscitum
as to whether we should go) and stand by all the risks. _Some_ date,
rather than indefinitely drift. And shape the whole interval towards
securing things in view of the change. As to this, I may be wrong, and
am always willing to be convinced. I wish I could go, and see you all
at work. Heaven knows I admire the spirit with which you are animated--a
new thing in colonial work.

It must have been a great pleasure to you to see so many of the family
at once. I have seen none of them since their return, but hope to do so
ere the summer speeds. The only dark spot was poor F----'s death.

Believe me, with affectionate regards, yours truly,

Wm. James.

I am ordering a little book of mine, just out, to be sent to you. Some
one of your circle may find entertainment in it.




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


[Post-card]

CHOCORUA, _June_ 13, 1907.

Yours of the 27th ult. received and highly appreciated. I'm glad you
relish my book so well. You go on playing the Boreas and I shedding the
sunbeams, and between us we'll get the cloak off the philosophic
traveler! But _have_ you read Bergson's new book?[80]It seems to me that
nothing is important in comparison with that divine apparition. All
_our_ positions, real time, a growing world, asserted magisterially, and
the beast intellectualism killed absolutely _dead_! The whole flowed
round by a style incomparable as it seems to me. Read it, and digest it
if you can. Much of it I can't yet assimilate.

[_No signature._]




_To Henri Bergson._


CHOCORUA, _June 13, 1907_.

O my Bergson, you are a magician, and your book is a marvel, a real
wonder in the history of philosophy, making, if I mistake not, an
entirely new era in respect of matter, but unlike the works of genius of
the "transcendentalist" movement (which are so obscurely and abominably
and inaccessibly written), a pure classic in point of form. You may be
amused at the comparison, but in finishing it I found the same
after-taste remaining as after finishing "Madame Bovary," such a flavor
of persistent _euphony_, as of a rich river that never foamed or ran
thin, but steadily and firmly proceeded with its banks full to the brim.
Then the aptness of your illustrations, that never scratch or stand out
at right angles, but invariably simplify the thought and help to pour it
along! Oh, indeed you are a magician! And if your next book proves to be
as great an advance on this one as this is on its two predecessors, your
name will surely go down as one of the great creative names in
philosophy.

There! have I praised you enough? What every genuine philosopher (every
genuine man, in fact) craves most is _praise_--although the philosophers
generally call it "recognition"! If you want still more praise, let me
know, and I will send it, for my features have been on a broad smile
from the first page to the last, at the chain of felicities that never
stopped. I feel rejuvenated.

As to the content of it, I am not in a mood at present to make any
definite reaction. There is so much that is absolutely new that it will
take a long time for your contemporaries to assimilate it, and I imagine
that much of the development of detail will have to be performed by
younger men whom your ideas will stimulate to coruscate in manners
unexpected by yourself. To me at present the vital achievement of the
book is that it inflicts an irrecoverable death-wound upon
Intellectualism. It can never resuscitate! But it will die hard, for all
the inertia of the past is in it, and the spirit of professionalism and
pedantry as well as the æsthetic-intellectual delight of dealing with
categories logically distinct yet logically connected, will rally for a
desperate defense. The _élan vital_, all contentless and vague as you
are obliged to leave it, will be an easy substitute to make fun of. But
the beast _has_ its death-wound now, and the manner in which you have
inflicted it (interval _versus_ temps d'arrêt, etc.) is masterly in the
extreme. I don't know why this later _rédaction_ of your critique of the
mathematics of movement has seemed to me so much more telling than the
early statement--I suppose it is because of the wider _use_ made of the
principle in the book. You will be receiving my own little "pragmatism"
book simultaneously with this letter. How jejune and inconsiderable it
seems in comparison with your great system! But it is so congruent with
parts of your system, fits so well into interstices thereof, that you
will easily understand why I am so enthusiastic. I feel that at bottom
we are fighting the same fight, you a commander, I in the ranks. The
position we are rescuing is "Tychism" and a really growing world. But
whereas I have hitherto found no better way of defending Tychism than by
affirming the spontaneous addition of _discrete_ elements of being (or
their subtraction), thereby playing the game with intellectualist
weapons, you set things straight at a single stroke by your fundamental
conception of the continuously creative nature of reality. I think that
one of your happiest strokes is your reduction of "finality," as usually
taken, to its status alongside of efficient causality, as the
twin-daughters of intellectualism. But this vaguer and truer finality
restored to its rights will be a difficult thing to give content to.
Altogether your reality lurks so in the background, in this book, that I
am wondering whether you _couldn't_ give it any more development _in
concreto_ here, or whether you perhaps were holding back developments,
already in your possession, for a future volume. They are sure to come
to you later anyhow, and to make a new volume; and altogether, the clash
of these ideas of yours with the traditional ones will be sure to make
sparks fly that will illuminate all sorts of dark places and bring
innumerable new considerations into view. But the process may be slow,
for the ideas are so revolutionary. Were it not for your style, your
book might last 100 years unnoticed; but your way of writing is so
absolutely commanding that your theories have to be attended to
immediately. I feel very much in the dark still about the relations of
the progressive to the regressive movement, and this great precipitate
of nature subject to static categories. With a frank pluralism of
_beings_ endowed with vital impulses you can get oppositions and
compromises easily enough, and a stagnant deposit; but after my one
reading I don't exactly "catch on" to the way in which the continuum of
reality resists itself so as to have to act, etc., etc.

The only part of the work which I felt like positively criticising was
the discussion of the idea of nonentity, which seemed to me somewhat
overelaborated, and yet didn't leave me with a sense that the last word
had been said on the subject. But all these things must be very slowly
digested by me. I can see that, when the tide turns in your favor, many
previous tendencies in philosophy will start up, crying "This is nothing
but what _we_ have contended for all along." Schopenhauer's blind will,
Hartmann's unconscious, Fichte's aboriginal freedom (reëdited at Harvard
in the most "unreal" possible way by Münsterberg) will all be claimants
for priority. But no matter--all the better if you are in some ancient
lines of tendency. Mysticism also must make claims and doubtless just
ones. I say nothing more now--this is just my first reaction; but I am
so enthusiastic as to have said only two days ago, "I thank heaven that
I have lived to this date--that I have witnessed the Russo-Japanese war,
and seen Bergson's new book appear--the two great modern turning-points
of history and of thought!" Best congratulations and cordialest regards!

Wm. James.




_To T. S. Perry._


SILVER LAKE, N.H., _June 24, 1907_.


DEAR THOS.,--Yours of the 11th is at hand, true philosopher that you
are. No one but one bawn & bred in the philosophic briar-patch could
appreciate Bergson as you do, without in the least understanding him. I
am in an identical predicament. This last of his is the _divinest_ book
that has appeared in _my_ life-time, and (unless I am the falsest
prophet) it is destined to rank with the greatest works of all time. The
style of it is as wonderful as the matter. By all means send it to Chas.
Peirce, but address him Prescott Hall, Cambridge. I am sending you my
"Pragmatism," which Bergson's work makes seem like small potatoes
enough.

Are you going to Russia to take Stolypin's place? or to head the
Revolution? I would I were at Giverny to talk metaphysics with you, and
enjoy a country where I am not responsible for the droughts and the
garden. Have been here two weeks at Chocorua, getting our place ready
for a tenant.

Affectionate regards to you all.

W. J.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


LINCOLN, MASS., _Aug. 5, 1907_.

DEAR MILLER,--I got your letter about "Pragmatism," etc., some time ago.
I hear that you are booked to review it for the "Hibbert Journal." Lay
on, Macduff! as hard as you can--I want to have the weak places pointed
out. I sent you a week ago a "Journal of Philosophy"[81] with a word
more about Truth in it, written _at_ you mainly; but I hardly dare hope
that I have cleared up my position. A letter from Strong, two days ago,
written after receiving a proof of that paper, still thinks that I deny
the existence of realities outside of the thinker; and [R. B.] Perry,
who seems to me to have written far and away the most important critical
remarks on Pragmatism (possibly the _only_ important ones), accused
Pragmatists (though he doesn't name _me_) of ignoring or denying that
the real object plays any part in deciding what ideas are true. I
confess that such misunderstandings seem to me hardly credible, and cast
a "lurid light" on the mutual understandings of philosophers generally.
Apparently it all comes from the _word_ Pragmatism--and a most unlucky
word it may prove to have been. I am a natural realist. The world _per
se_ may be likened to a cast of beans on a table. By themselves they
spell nothing. An onlooker may group them as he likes. He may simply
count them all and map them. He may select groups and name these
capriciously, or name them to suit certain extrinsic purposes of his.
Whatever he does, so long as he _takes account_ of them, his account is
neither false nor irrelevant. If neither, why not call it true? It
_fits_ the beans-_minus_-him, and _expresses_ the _total_ fact, of
beans-_plus_-him. Truth in this total sense is partially ambiguous,
then. If he simply counts or maps, he obeys a subjective interest as
much as if he traces figures. Let that stand for pure "intellectual"
treatment of the beans, while grouping them variously stands for
non-intellectual interests. All that Schiller and I contend for is that
there is _no_ "truth" without _some_ interest, and that non-intellectual
interests play a part as well as intellectual ones. Whereupon we are
accused of denying the beans, or denying being in anyway constrained by
them! It's too silly!...




_To Miss Pauline Goldmark._


PUTNAM SHANTY,
KEENE VALLEY, _Sept. 14, 1907_.


DEAR PAULINE,-- ...No "camping" for me this side the grave! A party of
fourteen left here yesterday for Panther Gorge, meaning to return by the
Range, as they call your "summit trail." Apparently it is easier than
when on that to me memorable day we took it, for Charley Putnam swears
he has done it in five and a half hours. I don't well understand the
difference, except that they don't reach Haystack over Marcy as we did,
and there is now a good trail. Past and future play such a part in the
way one feels the present. To these youngsters, as to me long ago, and
to you today, the rapture of the connexion with these hills is partly
made of the sense of future power over them and their like. That being
removed from me, I can only mix memories of past power over them with
the present. But I have always observed a curious _fading_ in what
Tennyson calls the "passion" of the past. Memories awaken little or no
sentiment when they are too old; and I have taken everything here so
prosily this summer that I find myself wondering whether the time-limit
has been exceeded, and whether for emotional purpose I am a new self.
We know not what we shall become; and that is what makes life so
interesting. Always a turn of the kaleidoscope; and when one is utterly
maimed for action, then the glorious time for _reading_ other men's
lives! I fairly revel in that prospect, which in its full richness has
to be postponed, for I'm not sufficiently maimed-for-action yet. By
going slowly and alone, I find I can compass such things as the Giant's
Washbowl, Beaver Meadow Falls, etc., and they make me feel very good. I
have even been dallying with the temptation to visit Cameron Forbes at
Manila; but I have put it behind me for this year at least. I think I
shall probably give some more lectures (of a much less "popular" sort)
at Columbia next winter--so you see there's life in the old dog yet.
Nevertheless, how different from the life that courses through _your_
arteries and capillaries! Today is the first honestly fine day there has
been since I arrived here on the 2nd. (They must have been heavily
rained on at Panther Gorge yesterday evening.) After writing a couple
more letters I will take a book and repair to "Mosso's Ledge" for the
enjoyment of the prospect....




_To W. Jerusalem_ (Vienna).


ST. HUBERT'S, N.Y. _Sept._ 15, 1907.

DEAR PROFESSOR JERUSALEM,--Your letter of the 1st of September,
forwarded from Cambridge, reaches me here in the Adirondack Mountains
today. I am glad the publisher is found, and that you are enjoying the
drudgery of translating ["Pragmatism"]. Also that you find the book more
and more in agreement with your own philosophy. I fear that its
untechnicality of style--or rather its deliberate
_anti_-technicality--will make the German _Gelehrtes Publikum_,[82] as
well as the professors, consider it _oberflächliches Zeug_[83]--which
it assuredly is not, although, being only a sketch, it ought to be
followed by something _tighter_ and abounding in discriminations.
Pragmatism is an unlucky word in some respects, and the two meanings I
give for it are somewhat heterogeneous. But it was already in vogue in
France and Italy as well as in England and America, and it was
_tactically_ advantageous to use it....




_To Henry James._


STONEHURST, INTERVALE, N.H., _Oct._ 6, 1907.

DEAREST BROTHER,--I write this at the [James] Bryces', who have taken
the Merrimans' house for the summer, and whither I came the day before
yesterday, after closing our Chocorua house, and seeing Alice leave for
home. We had been there a fortnight, trying to get some work done, and
having to do most of it with our own hands, or rather with Alice's
heroic hands, for mine are worth almost nothing in these degenerate
days. It is enough to make your heart break to see the scarcity of
"labor," and the whole country tells the same story. Our future at
Chocorua is a somewhat problematic one, though I think we shall manage
to pass next summer there and get it into better shape for good renting,
thereafter, at any cost (not the renting but the shaping). After that
what _I_ want is a free foot, and the children are now not dependent on
a family summer any longer....

I spent the first three weeks of September--warm ones--in my beloved and
exquisite Keene Valley, where I was able to do a good deal of uphill
walking, with good rather than bad effects, much to my joy. Yesterday I
took a three hours walk here, three quarters of an hour of it uphill. I
have to go alone, and slowly; but it's none the worse for that and makes
one feel like old times. I leave this P.M. for two more days at
Chocorua--at the hotel. The fall is late, but the woods are beginning
to redden beautifully. With the sun behind them, some maples look like
stained-glass windows. But the penury of the human part of this region
is depressing, and I begin to have an appetite for Europe again. Alice
too! To be at Cambridge with no lecturing and no students to nurse along
with their thesis-work is an almost incredibly delightful prospect. I am
going to settle down to the composition of another small book, more
original and ground-breaking than anything I have yet put forth(!),
which I expect to print by the spring; after which I can lie back and
write at leisure more routine things for the rest of my days.

The Bryces are wholly unchanged, excellent friends and hosts, and I like
her as much as him. The trouble with him is that his insatiable love of
information makes him try to pump _you_ all the time instead of letting
you pump _him_, and I have let my own tongue wag so, that, when gone, I
shall feel like a fool, and remember all kinds of things that I have
forgotten to ask him. I have just been reading to Mrs. B., with great
gusto on her part and renewed gusto on mine, the first few pages of your
chapter on Florida in "The American Scene." _Köstlich_ stuff! I had just
been reading to myself almost 50 pages of the New England part of the
book, and fairly melting with delight over the Chocorua portion.
Evidently that book will last, and bear reading over and over again--a
few pages at a time, which is the right way for "literature" fitly so
called. It all makes me wish that we had you here again, and you will
doubtless soon come. I mustn't forget to thank you for the gold
pencil-case souvenir. I have had a plated silver one for a year past,
now worn through, and experienced what a "comfort" they are. Good-bye,
and Heaven bless you. Your loving

W. J.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


Cambridge, _Jan._ 2, 1908.

...I am just back from the American Philosophical Association, which had
a really delightful meeting at Cornell University in the State of New
York. Mostly epistemological. We are getting to know each other and
understand each other better, and shall do so year by year, Everyone
cursed my doctrine and Schiller's about "truth." I think it largely is
misunderstanding, but it is also due to our having expressed our meaning
very ill. The general blanket-word pragmatism covers so many different
opinions, that it naturally arouses irritation to see it flourished as a
revolutionary flag. I am also partly to blame here; but it was
_tactically_ wise to use it as a title. Far more persons have had their
attention attracted, and the result has been that everybody has been
forced to think. Substantially I have nothing to alter in what I have
said....

I have just read the first half of Fechner's "Zend-Avesta," a wonderful
book, by a wonderful genius. He had his vision and he knows how to
discuss it, as no one's vision ever was discussed.

I may tell you in confidence (I don't talk of it here because my damned
arteries may in the end make me give it up--for a year past I have a
sort of angina when I make efforts) that I have accepted an invitation
to give eight public lectures at Oxford next May. I was ashamed to
refuse; but the work of preparing them will be hard (the title is "The
Present Situation in Philosophy"[84]) and they doom me to relapse into
the "popular lecture" form just as I thought I had done with it forever.
(What I wished to write this winter was something ultra dry in form,
impersonal and exact.) I find that my free and easy and personal way of
writing, especially in "Pragmatism," has made me an object of loathing
to many respectable academic minds, and I am rather tired of awakening
that feeling, which more popular lecturing on my part will probably
destine me to increase.

...I have been with Strong, who goes to Rome this month. Good,
truth-loving man! and a very penetrating mind. I think he will write a
great book. We greatly enjoyed seeing your friend Schwarz, the teacher.
A fine fellow who will, I hope, succeed.

A happy New Year to you now, dear Flournoy, and loving regards from us
all to you all. Yours as ever

Wm. James.




_To Norman Kemp Smith._


[Post-card]

Cambridge, _Jan._ 31, 1908.

I have only just "got round" to your singularly solid and compact study
of Avenarius in "Mind." I find it clear and very clarifying, after the
innumerable hours I have spent in trying to dishevel him. I have read
the "Weltbegriff" three times, and have half expected to have to read
both books over again to assimilate his immortal message to man, of
which I have hitherto been able to make nothing. You set me free! I
shall not re-read him! but leave him to his spiritual dryness and
preposterous pedantry. His only really original idea seems to be that of
the _Vitalreihe_, and that, so far as I can see, is quite false,
certainly no improvement on the notion of adaptive reflex actions.

Wm. James.




_To his Daughter._


Cambridge, _Apr._ 2, 1908,

DARLING PEG,--You must have wondered at my silence since your dear
mother returned. I hoped to write to you each day, but the strict
routine of my hours now crowded it out. I write on my Oxford job till
one, then lunch, then nap, then to my ... doctor at four daily, and from
then till dinner-time making calls, and keeping "out" as much as
possible. To bed as soon after 8 as possible--all my odd reading done
between 3 and 5 A.M., an hour not favorable for letter-writing--so that
my necessary business notes have to get in just before dinner (as now)
or after dinner, which I hate and try to avoid. I think I see my way
clear to go [to Oxford] now, if I don't get more fatigued than at
present. Four and a quarter lectures are fully written, and the rest are
down-hill work, much raw material being ready now....




_To Henry James._


Cambridge, _April_ 15, 1908.

DEAREST HENRY,--Your good letter to Harry has brought news of your play,
of which I had only seen an enigmatic paragraph in the papers. I'm right
glad it is a success, and that such good artists as the Robertsons are
in it. I hope it will have a first-rate run in London. Your apologies
for not writing are the most uncalled-for things--your assiduity and the
length of your letters to this family are a standing marvel--especially
considering the market-value of your "copy"! So waste no more in that
direction. 'Tis I who should be prostrating myself--silent as I've been
for months in spite of the fact that I'm so soon to descend upon you.
The fact is I've been trying to compose the accursed lectures in a state
of abominable brain-fatigue--a race between myself and time. I've got
six now done out of the eight, so I'm safe, but sorry that the infernal
nervous condition that with me always accompanies literary production
must continue at Oxford and add itself to the other fatigues--a fixed
habit of wakefulness, etc. I ought not to have accepted, but they've
panned out good, so far, and if I get through them successfully, I shall
be very glad that the opportunity came. They will be a good thing to
_have done_. Previously, in such states of fatigue, I have had a break
and got away, but this time no day without its half dozen pages--but the
thing hangs on so long!...




_To Henry James._


R. M. S. IVERNIA,
[Arriving at Liverpool], _Apr. 29, 1908_.

DEAR H.,--Your letter of the 26th, unstamped or post-marked, has just
been wafted into our lap--I suppose mailed under another cover to the
agent's care.

I'm glad you're not hurrying from Paris--I feared you might be awaiting
us in London, and wrote you a letter yesterday to the Reform Club, which
you will doubtless get ere you get this, telling you of our prosperous
though tedious voyage in good condition.

We cut out London and go straight to Oxford, _via_ Chester. I have been
sleeping like a top, and feel in good fighting trim again, eager for the
scalp of the Absolute. My lectures will put his wretched clerical
defenders fairly on the defensive. They begin on Monday. Since you'll
have the whole months of May and June, if you urge it, to see us, I pray
you not to hasten back from "gay Paree" for the purpose.... Up since two
A.M.

W. J.




_To Miss Pauline Goldmark._


PATTERDALE, ENGLAND, _July 2, 1908_.

Your letter, beloved Pauline, greeted me on my arrival here three hours
ago.... How I _do wish_ that I could be in Italy alongside of you now,
now or any time! You could do me so much good, and your ardor of
enjoyment of the country, the towns and the folk would warm up my cold
soul. I might even learn to speak Italian by conversing in that tongue
with you. But I fear that you'd find me betraying the coldness of my
soul by complaining of the heat of my body--a most unworthy attitude to
strike. Dear Paolina, never, never think of whether your body is hot or
cold; live in the _objective_ world, above such miserable
considerations. I have been up here eight days, Alice having gone down
last Saturday, the 27th, to meet Peggy and Harry at London, after only
two days of it. After all the social and other fever of the past six and
a half weeks (save for the blessed nine days at Bibury), it looked like
the beginning of a real vacation, and it would be such but for the
extreme heat, and the accident of one of my recent malignant "colds"
beginning. I have been riding about on stage-coaches for five days past,
but the hills are so treeless that one gets little shade, and the sun's
glare is tremendous. It is a lovely country, however, for
pedestrianizing in cooler weather. Mountains and valleys compressed
together as in the Adirondacks, great reaches of pink and green hillside
and lovely lakes, the higher parts quite fully alpine in character but
for the fact that no snow mountains form the distant background. A
strong and noble region, well worthy of one's life-long devotion, if one
were a Briton. And on the whole, what a magnificent land and race is
this Britain! Every thing about them is of better quality than the
corresponding thing in the U.S.--with but few exceptions, I imagine. And
the equilibrium is so well achieved, and the human tone so cheery,
blithe and manly! and the manners so delightfully good. Not one
_unwholesome_-looking man or woman does one meet here for 250 that one
meets in America. Yet I believe (or suspect) that ours is eventually
the bigger destiny, if we can only succeed in living up to it, and thou
in 22nd St. and I in Irving St. must do our respective strokes, which
after 1000 years will help to have made the glorious collective
resultant. Meanwhile, as my brother Henry once wrote, thank God for a
world that holds so rich an England, so rare an Italy! Alice is entirely
_aufgegangen_ in her idealization of it. And truly enough, the gardens,
the manners, the manliness are an excuse.

But profound as is my own moral respect and admiration, for a _vacation_
give me the Continent! The civilization here is too heavy, too _stodgy_,
if one could use so unamiable a word. The very stability and good-nature
of all things (of course we are leaving out the slum-life!) rest on the
basis of the national stupidity, or rather unintellectuality, on which
as on a safe foundation of non-explosible material, the magnificent
minds of the élite of the race can coruscate as they will, safely. Not
until those weeks at Oxford, and these days at Durham, have I had any
sense of what a part the Church plays in the national life. So massive
and all-pervasive, so authoritative, and on the whole so decent, in
spite of the iniquity and farcicality of the whole thing. Never were
incompatibles so happily yoked together. Talk about the genius of
Romanism! It's nothing to the genius of Anglicanism, for Catholicism
still contains some haggard elements, that ally it with the Palestinian
desert, whereas Anglicanism remains obese and round and comfortable and
decent with this world's decencies, without an _acute_ note in its whole
life or history, in spite of the shrill Jewish words on which its ears
are fed, and the nitro-glycerine of the Gospels and Epistles which has
been injected into its veins. Strange feat to have achieved! Yet the
success is great--the whole Church-machine makes for all sorts of graces
and decencies, and is not incompatible with a high type of Churchman,
high, that is, on the side of moral and worldly virtue....

How I wish you were beside me at this moment! A breeze has arisen on the
Lake which is spread out before the "smoking-room" window at which I
write, and is very grateful. The lake much resembles Lake George. Your
ever grateful and loving

W. J.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


PATTERDALE, ENGLAND, _July 6, 1908_.

DEAR CHARLES,--Going to Coniston Lake the other day and seeing the
moving little Ruskin Museum at Coniston (admission a penny) made me
think rather vividly of you, and make a resolution to write to you on
the earliest opportunity. It was truly moving to see such a collection
of R.'s busy handiwork, exquisite and loving, in the way of drawing,
sketching, engraving and note-taking, and also such a varied lot of
photographs of him, especially in his old age. Glorious old Don Quixote
that he was! At Durham, where Alice and I spent three and a half
delightful days at the house of F. B. Jevons, Principal of one of the
two colleges of which the University is composed, I had a good deal of
talk with the very remarkable octogenarian Dean of the Cathedral and
Lord of the University, a thorough liberal, or rather radical, in his
mind, with a voice like a bell, and an alertness to match, who had been
a college friend of Ruskin's and known him intimately all his life, and
loved him. He knew not of his correspondence with you, of which I have
been happy to be able to order Kent of Harvard Square to send him a
copy. His name is Kitchin.

The whole scene at Durham was tremendously impressive (though York
Cathedral made the stronger impression on me). It was so unlike Oxford,
so much more American in its personnel, in a way, yet nestling in the
very bosom of those mediæval stage-properties and ecclesiastical-principality
suggestions. Oxford is all spread out in length and breadth, Durham
concentrated in depth and thickness. There is a great deal of flummery
about Oxford, but I think if I were an Oxonian, in spite of my
radicalism generally, I might vote against all change there. It is an
absolutely unique fruit of human endeavor, and like the cathedrals, can
never to the end of time be reproduced, when the conditions that once
made it are changed. Let other places of learning go in for all the
improvements! The world can afford to keep her one Oxford unreformed. I
know that this is a superficial judgment in both ways, for Oxford does
manage to keep pace with the utilitarian spirit, and at the same time
preserve lots of her flummery unchanged. On the whole it is a thoroughly
_democratic_ place, so far as aristocracy in the strict sense goes. But
I'm out of it, and doubt whether I want ever to put foot into it
again....

England has changed in many respects. The West End of London, which used
at this season to be so impressive from its splendor, is now a mixed and
mongrel horde of straw hats and cads of every description. Motor-buses
of the most brutal sort have replaced the old carriages, Bond and Regent
Streets are cheap-jack shows, everything is tumultuous and confused and
has run down in quality. I have been "motoring" a good deal through this
"Lake District," owing to the kindness of some excellent people in the
hotel, dissenters who rejoice in the name of Squance and inhabit the
neighborhood of Durham. It is wondrous fine, but especially adapted to
trampers, which I no longer am. Altogether England seems to have got
itself into a magnificently fine state of civilization, especially in
regard to the cheery and wholesome tone of manners of the people,
improved as it is getting to be by the greater infusion of the
democratic temper. Everything here seems about twice as good as the
corresponding thing with us. But I suspect we have the bigger eventual
destiny after all; and give us a thousand years and we may catch up in
many details. I think of you as still at Cambridge, and I do hope that
physical ills are bearing on more gently. Lily, too, I hope is her well
self again. You mustn't think of answering this, which is only an
ejaculation of friendship--I shall be home almost before you can get an
answer over. Love to all your circle, including Theodora, whom I miss
greatly. Affectionately yours,

Wm. James.




_To Henri Bergson._


LAMB HOUSE, _July 28, 1908_.

DEAR BERGSON,--(can't we cease "Professor"-ing each other?--that title
establishes a "disjunctive relation" between man and man, and our
relation should be "endosmotic" socially as well as intellectually, I
think),--

_Jacta est alea_, I am not to go to Switzerland! I find, after a week or
more here, that the monotony and simplification is doing my nervous
centres so much good, that my wife has decided to go off with our
daughter to Geneva, and to leave me alone with my brother here, for
repairs. It is a great disappointment in other ways than in not seeing
you, but I know that it is best. Perhaps later in the season the
_Zusammenkunft_ may take place, for nothing is decided beyond the next
three weeks.

Meanwhile let me say how rarely delighted your letter made me. There are
many points in your philosophy which I don't yet grasp, but I have
seemed to myself to understand your anti-intellectualistic campaign very
clearly, and that I have really done it so well in your opinion makes me
proud. I am sending your letter to Strong, partly out of vanity, partly
because of your reference to him. It does seem to me that philosophy is
turning towards a new orientation. Are you a reader of Fechner? I wish
that you would read his "Zend-Avesta," which in the second edition
(1904, I think) is better printed and much easier to read than it looks
at the first glance. He seems to me of the real race of prophets, and I
cannot help thinking that _you_, in particular, if not already
acquainted with this book, would find it very stimulating and
suggestive. His day, I fancy, is yet to come. I will write no more now,
but merely express my regret (and hope) and sign myself, yours most
warmly and sincerely,

Wm. James.

The subject of the next letter was a volume of "Essays Philosophical and
Psychological, in Honor of William James,"[85] by nineteen contributors,
which had been issued by Columbia University in the spring of 1908. A
note at the beginning of the book said: "This volume is intended to mark
in some degree its authors' sense of Professor James's memorable
services in philosophy and psychology, the vitality he has added to
those studies, and the encouragement that has flowed from him to
colleagues without number. Early in 1907, at the invitation of Columbia
University, he delivered a course of lectures there, and met the members
of the Philosophical and Psychological Departments on several occasions
for social discussion. They have an added motive for the present work in
the recollections of this visit."




_To John Dewey._


RYE, SUSSEX, _Aug. 4, 1908_.

DEAR DEWEY,--I don't know whether this will find you in the Adirondacks
or elsewhere, but I hope 'twill be on East Hill. My own copy of the
Essays in my "honor," which took me by complete surprise on the eve of
my departure, was too handsome to take along, so I have but just got
round to reading the book, which I find at my brother Henry's, where I
have recently come. It is a masterly set of essays of which we may all
be proud, distinguished by good style, direct dealing with the facts,
and hot running on the trail of truth, regardless of previous
conventions and categories. I am sure it hitches the subject of
epistemology a good day's journey ahead, and proud indeed am I that it
should be dedicated to my memory.

Your own contribution is to my mind the most _weighty_--unless perhaps
Strong's should prove to be so. I rejoice exceedingly that you should
have got it out. No one yet has succeeded, it seems to me, in jumping
into the centre of your vision. Once there, all the perspectives are
clear and open; and when you or some one else of us shall have spoken
the exact word that opens the centre to everyone, mediating between it
and the old categories and prejudices, people will wonder that there
ever could have been any other philosophy. That it is the philosophy of
the future, I'll bet my life. Admiringly and affectionately yours,

Wm. James.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


LAMB HOUSE, RYE, _Aug. 9, 1908_.

DEAR FLOURNOY,--I can't make out from my wife's letters whether she has
seen you face to face, or only heard accounts of you from Madame
Flournoy. She reports you very tired from the "Congress"--but I don't
know what Congress has been meeting at Geneva just now. I don't suppose
that you will go to the philosophical congress at Heidelberg--I
certainly shall not. I doubt whether philosophers will gain so much by
talking with each other as other classes of _Gelehrten_ do. One needs to
_frequenter_ a colleague daily for a month before one can begin to
understand him. It seems to me that the collective life of philosophers
is little more than an organization of misunderstandings. I gave eight
lectures at Oxford, but besides Schiller and one other tutor, only two
persons ever _mentioned_ them to me, and those were the two heads of
Manchester College by whom I had been invited. Philosophical work it
seems to me must go on in silence and in print exclusively.

You will have heard (either directly or indirectly) from my wife of my
reasons for not accompanying them to Geneva. I have been for more than
three weeks now at my brother's, and am much better for the
simplification. I am very sorry not to have met with you, but I think I
took the prudent course in staying away.

I have just read Miss Johnson's report in the last S. P. R.
"Proceedings," and a good bit of the proofs of Piddington's on
cross-correspondences between Mrs. Piper, Mrs. Verrall, and Mrs.
Holland, which is to appear in the next number. You will be much
interested, if you can gather the philosophical energy, to go through
such an amount of tiresome detail. It seems to me that these reports
open a new chapter in the history of automatism; and Piddington's and
Johnson's ability is of the highest order. Evidently "automatism" is a
word that covers an extraordinary variety of fact. I suppose that you
have on the whole been gratified by the "vindication" of Eusapia
[Paladino] at the hands of Morselli _et al._ in Italy. Physical
phenomena also seem to be entering upon a new phase in their history.

Well, I will stop, this is only a word of greeting and regret at not
seeing you. I got your letter of many weeks ago when we were at Oxford.
Don't take the trouble to _write_ now--my wife will bring me all the
news of you and your family, and will have given you all mine. Love to
Madame F. and all the young ones, too, please. Your ever affectionate

W. J.




_To Shadworth H. Hodgson._


PAIGNTON, S. DEVON, _Oct. 3, 1908_.

DEAR HODGSON,--I have been five months in England (you have doubtless
heard of my lecturing at Oxford) yet never given you a sign of life. The
reason is that I have sedulously kept away from London, which I admire,
but at my present time of life abhor, and only touched it two or three
times for thirty-six hours to help my wife do her "shopping" (strange
use for an elderly philosopher to be put to). The last time I was in
London, about a month ago, I called at your affectionately remembered
No. 45, only to find you gone to Yorkshire, as I feared I should. I go
back in an hour, en route for Liverpool, whence, with wife and daughter,
I sail for Boston in the Saxonia. I am literally enchanted with rural
England, yet I doubt whether I ever return. I never had a fair chance of
getting acquainted with the country here, and if I were a stout
pedestrian, which I no longer am, I think I should frequent this land
every summer. But in my decrepitude I must make the best of the more
effortless relations which I enjoy with nature in my own country. I have
seen many philosophers, at Oxford, especially, and James Ward at
Cambridge; but, apart from _very_ few conversations, didn't get at
close quarters with any of them, and they probably gained as little
from me as I from them. "We are columns left alone, of a temple once
complete." The power of mutual misunderstanding in philosophy seems
infinite, and grows discouraging. Schiller of course, and his pragmatic
friend Captain Knox, James Ward, and McDougall, stand out as the most
satisfactory talkers. But there is too much fencing and scoring of
"points" at Oxford to make construction active.

Good-bye! dear Hodgson, and pray think of me with a little of the
affection and intellectual interest with which I always think of you. My
Oxford lectures won't appear till next April. Don't read the extracts
which the "Hibbert Journal" is publishing. They are torn out of their
natural setting. I have, as you probably know, ceased teaching and am
enjoying a Carnegie pension. Yours ever fondly,

Wm. James.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


LONDON, _Oct. 4, 1908_.

DEAR FLOURNOY,--I got your delightful letter duly two weeks ago, or
more. I always have a bad conscience on receiving a letter from you,
because I feel as if I _forced_ you to write it, and I know too well by
your own confessions (as well as by my own far less extreme experience
of reluctance to write) what a nuisance and an effort letters are apt to
be. But no matter! this letter of yours was a good one indeed....

We sail from Liverpool the day after tomorrow, and tomorrow will be a
busy day winding up our affairs and making some last purchases of small
things. Alice has an insatiable desire (as Mrs. Flournoy may have
noticed at Geneva) to increase her possessions, whilst I, like an
American Tolstoy, wish to diminish them. The most convenient
arrangement for a Tolstoy is to have an anti-Tolstoyan wife to "run the
house" for him. We have been for three days in Devonshire, and for four
days at Oxford previous to that. Extraordinary warm summer weather, with
exquisite atmospheric effects. I am extremely glad to leave England with
my last optical images so beautiful. In any case the harmony and
softness of the landscape of rural England probably excels everything in
the world in that line.

At Oxford I saw McDougall and Schiller quite intimately, also Schiller's
friend, Capt. Knox, who, retired from the army, lives at Gründelwald,
and is an extremely acute mind, and fine character, I should think. He
is a militant "Pragmatist." Before that I spent three days at Cambridge,
where again I saw James Ward intimately. I prophesy that if he gets his
health again ... he will become also a militant pluralist of some sort.
I think he has worked out his original monistic-theistic vein and is
steering straight towards a "critical point" where the umbrella will
turn inside out, and not go back. I hope so! I made the acquaintance of
Boutroux here last week. He came to the "Moral Education Congress" where
he made a very fine address. I find him very _simpatico_.

[Illustration: William James and Henry Clement, at the "Putnam Shanty,"
in the Adirondacks (1907?).]

But the best of all these meetings has been one of three hours this very
morning with Bergson, who is here visiting his relatives. So modest and
unpretending a man, but such a genius intellectually! We talked very
easily together, or rather _he_ talked easily, for he talked much more
than I did, and although I can't say that I follow the folds of his
system much more clearly than I did before, he has made some points much
plainer. I have the strongest suspicions that the tendency which he has
brought to a focus will end by prevailing, and that the present epoch
will be a sort of turning-point in the history of philosophy. So many
things converge towards an anti-rationalistic crystallization.

_Qui vivra verra!_

I am very glad indeed to go on board ship. For two months I have been
more than ready to get back to my own habits, my own library and
writing-table and bed.... I wish you, and all of you, a prosperous and
healthy and resultful winter, and am, with old-time affection, your ever
faithful friend,

Wm. James.

If the duty of writing weighs so heavily on you, why obey it? Why, for
example, write any more reviews? I absolutely refuse to, and find that
one great alleviation.




_To Henri Bergson._


LONDON, _Oct. 4, 1908_.

DEAR BERGSON,--My brother was sorry that you couldn't come. He wishes me
to say that he is returning to Rye the day after tomorrow and is so
engaged tomorrow that he will postpone the pleasure of meeting you to
some future opportunity.

I need hardly repeat how much I enjoyed our talk today. You must take
care of yourself and economize all your energies for your own creative
work. I want very much to see what you will have to say on the
_Substanzbegriff_! Why should life be so short? I wish that you and I
and Strong and Flournoy and McDougall and Ward could live on some
mountain-top for a month, together, and whenever we got tired of
philosophizing, calm our minds by taking refuge in the scenery.

Always truly yours,

Wm. James.




_To H. G. Wells._


Cambridge, _Nov. 28, 1908_.

DEAR WELLS,--"First and Last Things" is a great achievement. The first
two "books" should be entitled "philosophy without humbug" and used as a
textbook in all the colleges of the world. You have put your finger
accurately on the true emphases, and--in the main--on what seem to me
the true solutions (you are more monistic in your faith than I should
be, but as long as you only call it "faith," that's your right and
privilege), and the simplicity of your statements ought to make us
"professionals" blush. I have been 35 years on the way to similar
conclusions--simply because I started as a professional and had to
_débrouiller_ them from all the traditional school rubbish.

The other two books exhibit you in the character of the Tolstoy of the
English world. A sunny and healthy-minded Tolstoy, as he is a
pessimistic and morbid-minded Wells. Where the "higher synthesis" will
be born, who shall combine the pair of you, Heaven only knows. But you
are carrying on the same function, not only in that neither of your
minds is boxed and boarded up like the mind of an ordinary human being,
but all the contents down to the very bottom come out freely and
unreservedly and simply, but in that you both have the power of
contagious speech, and set the similar mood vibrating in the reader. Be
happy in that such power has been put into your hands! This book is
worth any 100 volumes on Metaphysics and any 200 of Ethics, of the
ordinary sort.

Yours, with friendliest regards to Mrs. Wells, most sincerely,

Wm. James.




_To Henry James._


Cambridge, _Dec. 19, 1908_.

DEAREST H.,-- ...I write this at 6.30 [A.M.], in the library, which the
blessed hard-coal fire has kept warm all night. The night has been
still, thermometer 20°, and the dawn is breaking in a pure red line
behind Grace Norton's house, into a sky empty save for a big morning
star and the crescent of the waning moon. Not a cloud--a true American
winter effect. But somehow "le grand puits de l'aurore" doesn't appeal
to my sense of life, or challenge my spirits as formerly. It suggests no
more enterprises to the decrepitude of age, which vegetates along,
drawing interest merely on the investment of its earlier enterprises.
The accursed "thoracic symptom" is a killer of enterprise with me, and I
dare say that it is little better with you. But the less said of it the
better--it doesn't diminish!

My time has been consumed by interruptions almost totally, until a week
ago, when I finally got down seriously to work upon my Hodgson report.
It means much more labor than one would suppose, and very little result.
I wish that I had never undertaken it. I am sending off a preliminary
installment of it to be read at the S. P. R. meeting in January. That
done, the rest will run off easily, and in a month I expect to actually
begin the "Introduction to Philosophy," which has been postponed so
long, and which I hope will add to income for a number of years to come.
Your Volumes XIII and XIV arrived the other day--many thanks. We're
subscribing to two copies of the work, sending them as wedding presents.
I hope it will sell. Very enticing-looking, but I can't settle down to
the prefaces as yet, the only thing I have been able to read lately
being Lowes Dickinson's last book, "Justice and Liberty," which seems to
me a decidedly big achievement from every point of view, and probably
destined to have a considerable influence in moulding the opinion of the
educated. Stroke upon stroke, from pens of genius, the competitive
régime, so idolized 75 years ago, seems to be getting wounded to death.
What will follow will be something better, but I never saw so clearly
the slow effect of [the] accumulation of the influence of successive
individuals in changing prevalent ideals. Wells and Dickinson will
undoubtedly make the biggest steps of change....

Well dear brother! a merry Christmas to you--to you both, I trust, for I
fancy Aleck will be with you when this arrives--and a happy New Year at
its tail! Your loving

W. J.




_To T. S. Perry._


Cambridge, _Jan. 29, 1909_.

BELOVED THOMAS, cher maître et confrère,--Your delightful letter about
my Fechner article and about your having become a professional
philosopher yourself came to hand duly, four days ago, and filled the
heart of self and wife with joy. I always knew you was one, for to be a
real philosopher all that is necessary is to _hate_ some one else's type
of thinking, and if that some one else be a representative of the
"classic" type of thought, then one is a pragmatist and owns the fulness
of the truth. Fechner is indeed a dear, and I am glad to have
introduced, so to speak, his speculations to the English world, although
the Revd. Elwood Worcester has done so in a somewhat more limited manner
in a recent book of his called "The Living Word"-(Worcester of Emmanuel
Church, I mean, whom everyone has now begun to fall foul of for trying
to reanimate the Church's healing virtue). Another case of newspaper
crime! The reporters all got hold of it with their megaphones, and made
the nation sick of the sound of its name. Whereas in former ages men
strove hard for fame, obscurity is now the one thing to be _striven_
for. For _fame_, all one need do is to exist; and the reporter will do
the rest--especially if you give them the address of your fotographer. I
hope you're a spelling reformer--I send you the last publication from
that quarter. I'm sure that simple spelling will make a page look
better, just as a crowd looks better if everyone's clothes fit.

Apropos of pragmatism, a learned Theban named---- has written a
circus-performance of which he is the clown, called "Anti-pragmatisme."
It has so much verve and good spirit that I feel like patting him on the
back, and "sicking him on," but Lord! what a fool! I think I shall leave
it unnoticed. I'm tired of reëxplaining what is already explained to
satiety. Let _them_ say, now, for it is their turn, what the relation
called truth consists in, what it is known as!

I have had you on my mind ever since Jan. 1st, when we had our Friday
evening Club-dinner, and I was deputed to cable you a happy New Year.
The next day I couldn't get to the telegraph office; the day after I
said to myself, "I'll save the money, and save him the money, for if he
gets a cable, he'll be sure to cable back; so I'll write"; the following
day, I forgot to; the next day I postponed the act; so from postponement
to postponement, here I am. Forgive, forgive! Most affectionate remarks
were made about you at the dinner, which generally doesn't err by
wasting words on absentees, even on those gone to eternity....

I have just got off my report on the Hodgson control, which has stuck to
my fingers all this time. It is a hedging sort of an affair, and I don't
know what the Perry family will think of it. The truth is that the
"case" is a particularly poor one for testing Mrs. Piper's claim to
bring back spirits. It is _leakier_ than any other case, and
intrinsically, I think, no stronger than many of her other good cases,
certainly weaker than the G. P. case. I am also now engaged in writing a
popular article, "the avowals of a psychical researcher," for the
"American Magazine," in which I simply state without argument my own
convictions, and put myself on record. I think that public opinion is
just now taking a step forward in these matters--_vide_ the Eusapian
boom! and possibly both these _Schriften_ of mine will add their
influence. Thank you for the Charmes reception and for the earthquake
correspondence! I envy you in clean and intelligent Paris, though our
winter is treating us very mildly. A lovely sunny day today! Love to all
of you! Yours fondly,

W. J.

The "Charmes reception" was a report of the speeches at the French
Academy's reception of Francis Charmes. The "Eusapian boom" will have
been understood to refer to current discussions of the medium Eusapia
Paladino.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next letter refers to a paper in which both James and Münsterberg
had been "attacked" in such a manner that Münsterberg proposed to send a
protest to the American Psychological Association.




_To Hugo Münsterberg._


Cambridge, _Mar. 16, 1909_.

DEAR MÜNSTERBERG,--Witmer has sent me the _corpus delicti_, and I find
myself curiously unmoved. In fact he takes so much trouble over me, and
goes at the job with such zest that I feel like "sicking him on," as
they say to dogs. Perhaps the honor of so many pages devoted to one
makes up for the dishonor of their content. It is really a great
compliment to have anyone take so much trouble about one. Think of
copying all Wundt's notes!

But, dear Münsterberg, I hope you'll withdraw a second time your
protest. I think it undignified to take such an attack seriously. Its
excessive dimensions (in my case at any rate), and the smallness and
remoteness of the provocation, stamp it as simply eccentric, and to show
sensitiveness only gives it importance in the eyes of readers who
otherwise would only smile at its extravagance. Besides, since these
temperamental antipathies exist--why isn't it healthy that they should
express themselves? For my part, I feel rather glad than otherwise that
psychology is so live a subject that psychologists should "go for" each
other in this way, and I think it all ought to happen _inside_ of our
Association. We ought to cultivate tough hides there, so I hope that you
will withdraw the protest. I have mentioned it only to Royce, and will
mention it to no one else. I don't like the notion of Harvard people
seeming "touchy"! Your fellow victim,

W. J.




_To John Jay Chapman._


Cambridge, _Apr. 30, 1909_.

DEAR JACK C.,--I'm not expecting you to _read_ my book, but only to
"give me a thought" when you look at the cover. A certain witness at a
poisoning case was asked how the corpse looked. "Pleasant-like and
foaming at the mouth," was the reply. A good description of you,
describing philosophy, in your letter. All that you say is true, and yet
the conspiracy has to be carried on by us professors. Reality has to be
_returned to_, after this long circumbendibus, though _Gavroche_ has it
already. There _are_ concepts, anyhow. I am glad you lost the volume.
It makes one less in existence and ought to send up the price of the
remainder.

Blessed spring! blessed spring! Love to you both from yours,

Wm. James.

The next post-card was written in acknowledgment of Professor Palmer's
comments on "A Pluralistic Universe."




_To G. H. Palmer._

[Post-card]


Cambridge, _May 13, 1909_.

"The finest critical mind of our time!" No one can mix the honey and the
gall as you do! My conceit appropriates the honey--for the gall it makes
indulgent allowance, as the inevitable watering of a pair of aged
rationalist eyes at the effulgent sunrise of a new philosophic day!
Thanks! thanks! for the honey.

W. J.




TO THEODORE FLOURNOY.


CHOCORUA, JUNE 18, 1909.

MY DEAR FLOURNOY,--You must have been wondering during all these weeks
what has been the explanation of my silence. It has had two simple
causes; 1st, laziness; and 2nd, uncertainty, until within a couple of
days, about whether or not I was myself going to Geneva for the
University Jubilee. I have been strongly tempted, not only by the
"doctorate of theology," which you confidentially told me of (and which
would have been a fertile subject of triumph over my dear friend Royce
on my part, and of sarcasm on his part about academic distinctions, as
well as a diverting episode generally among my friends,--I being so
essentially profane a character), but by the hope of seeing you, and by
the prospect of a few weeks in dear old Switzerland again. But the
economical, hygienic and domestic reasons were all against the journey;
so a few days ago I ceased coquetting with the idea of it, and have
finally given it up. This postpones any possible meeting with you till
next summer, when I think it pretty certain that Alice and I and Peggy
will go to Europe again, and probably stay there for two years....

What with the Jubilee and the Congress, dear Flournoy, I fear that your
own summer will not yield much healing repose. "Go through it like an
automaton" is the best advice I can give you. I find that it is
possible, on occasions of great strain, to get relief by ceasing all
voluntary control. _Do_ nothing, and I find that something will do
itself! and not so stupidly in the eyes of outsiders as in one's own.
Claparède will, I suppose, be the chief executive officer at the
Congress. It is a pleasure to see how he is rising to the top among
psychologists, how large a field he covers, and with both originality
and "humanity" (in the sense of the omission of the superfluous and
technical, and preference for the probable). When will the Germans learn
that part? I have just been reading Driesch's Gifford lectures, Volume
II. Very exact and careful, and the work of a most powerful intellect.
But why lug in, as he does, all that Kantian apparatus, when the
questions he treats of are real enough and important enough to be
handled directly and not smothered in that opaque and artificial veil? I
find the book extremely suggestive, and should like to believe in its
thesis, but I can't help suspecting that Driesch is unjust to the
possibilities of purely mechanical action. Candle-flames, waterfalls,
eddies in streams, to say nothing of "vortex atoms," seem to perpetuate
themselves and repair their injuries. You ought to receive very soon my
report on Mrs. Piper's Hodgson control. Some theoretic remarks I make at
the end may interest you. I rejoice in the triumph of Eusapia all along
the line--also in Ochorowicz's young Polish medium, whom you have seen.
It looks at last as if something definitive and positive were in sight.

I am correcting the proofs of a collection of what I have written on the
subject of "truth"--it will appear in September under the title of "The
Meaning of Truth, a Sequel to Pragmatism." It is already evident from
the letters I am getting about the "Pluralistic Universe" that that book
will 1st, be _read_; 2nd, be _rejected_ almost unanimously at first, and
for very diverse reasons; but, 3rd, will continue to be bought and
referred to, and will end by strongly influencing English philosophy.
And now, dear Flournoy, good-bye! and believe me with sincerest
affection for Mrs. Flournoy and the young people as well as for
yourself, yours faithfully,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Theodora Sedgwick._


CHOCORUA, _July 12, 1909_.

DEAR THEODORA,--We got your letter a week ago, and were very glad to
hear of your prosperous installation, and good impressions of the place.
I am sorry that Harry couldn't go to see you the first Sunday, but hope,
if he didn't go for yesterday, that he will do so yet. When your social
circle gets established, and routine life set up, I am sure that you
will like Newport very much. As for ourselves, the place is only just
beginning to smooth out. The instruments of labor had well-nigh all
disappeared, and had to come piecemeal, each forty-eight hours after
being ordered, so we have been using the cow as a lawn-mower, silver
knives to carve with, and finger-nails for technical purposes
generally. There is no labor known to man in which Alice has not
indulged, and I have sought safety among the mosquitoes in the woods
rather than remain to shirk my responsibilities in full view of them. We
have hired a little mare, fearless of automobiles, we get our mail
dally, we had company to dinner yesterday, relatives of Alice, the
children will be here by the middle of the week, the woods are
deliciously fragrant, and the weather, so far, cool--in fact we are
_launched_ and the regular summer equilibrium will soon set in. The
place is both pathetic and irresistible; I want to sell it, Alice wants
to enlarge it--we shall end by doing neither, but discuss it to the end
of our days.

I have just read Shaler's autobiography, and it has fairly haunted me
with the overflowing impression of his myriad-minded character. Full of
excesses as he was, due to his intense vivacity, impulsiveness, and
imaginativeness, his centre of gravity was absolutely steady, and I knew
no man whose sense of the larger relation of things was always so true
and right. Of all the minds I have known, his leaves the largest
impression, and I miss him more than I have missed anyone before. You
ought to read the book, especially the autobiographic half. Good-bye,
dear Theodora. Alice joins her love to mine, and I am, as ever, yours
affectionately,

Wm. James.




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


_Chocorua_, _Aug. 14, 1909_.

DEAR SCHILLER,-- ...I got the other day a very candid letter from A. S.
Pringle-Pattison, about my "Pluralistic Universe," in which he said: "It
is supremely difficult to accept the conclusion of an actually growing
universe, an actual addition to the sum of being or (if that expression
be objectionable) to the intensity and scope of existence, to a growing
God, in fact."--This seems to me very significant. On such minute little
snags and hooks, do all the "difficulties" of philosophy hang. Call them
categories, and sacred laws, principles of reason, etc., and you have
the actual state of metaphysics, calling all the analogies of phenomenal
life impossibilities.

No more lecturing from W. J., thank you! either at Oxford or elsewhere.
Affectionately thine,

W. J.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


CHOCORUA, S_ept. 28, 1909_.

DEAR FLOURNOY,--We had fondly hoped that before now you might both,
accepting my half-invitation, half-suggestion, be with us in this
uncared-for-nature, so different from Switzerland, and you getting
strengthened and refreshed by the change. _Dieu dispose_, indeed! The
fact that _is_ never entered into our imagination! I give up all hope of
you this year, unless it be for Cambridge, where, however, the
conditions of repose will be less favorable for you.... I am myself
going down to Cambridge on the fifth of October for two days of
"inauguration" ceremonies of our new president, Lawrence Lowell....
There are so many rival universities in our country that advantage has
to be taken of such changes to make the newspaper talk, and keep the
name of Harvard in the public ear, so the occasion is to be almost as
elaborate as a "Jubilee"; but I shall keep as much out of it as is
officially possible, and come back to Chocorua on the 8th, to stay as
late into October as we can, though probably not later than the 20th,
after which the Cambridge winter will begin. It hasn't gone well with my
health this summer, and beyond a little reading, I have done no work at
all. I have, however, succeeded during the past year in preparing a
volume on the "Meaning of Truth"--already printed papers for the most
part--which you will receive in a few days after getting this letter,
and which I think may help you to set the "pragmatic" account of
Knowledge in a clearer light. I will also send you a magazine article on
the mediums, which has just appeared, and which may divert you.[86]
Eusapia Paladino, I understand, has just signed a contract to come to
New York to be at the disposition of Hereward Carrington, an expert in
medium's tricks, and author of a book on the same, who, together with
Fielding and Bagally, also experts, formed the Committee of the London
S. P. R., who saw her at Naples.... After Courtier's report on Eusapia,
I don't think any "investigation" here will be worth much
"scientifically"--the only advantage of her coming may possibly be to
get some scientific men to believe that there is really a problem. Two
other cases have been reported to me lately, which are worth looking up,
and I shall hope to do so.

How much your interests and mine keep step with each other, dear
Flournoy. "Functional psychology," and the twilight region that
surrounds the clearly lighted centre of experience! Speaking of
"functional" psychology, Clark University, of which Stanley Hall is
president, had a little international congress the other day in honor of
the twentieth year of its existence. I went there for one day in order
to see what Freud was like, and met also Yung of Zürich, who professed
great esteem for you, and made a very pleasant impression. I hope that
Freud and his pupils will push their ideas to their utmost limits, so
that we may learn what they are. They can't fail to throw light on
human nature; but I confess that he made on me personally the impression
of a man obsessed with fixed ideas. I can make nothing in my own case
with his dream theories, and obviously "symbolism" is a most dangerous
method. A newspaper report of the congress said that Freud had condemned
the American religious therapy (which has such extensive results) as
very "dangerous" because so "unscientific." Bah!

Well, it is pouring rain and so dark that I must close. Alice joins me,
dear Flournoy, in sending you our united love, in which all your
children have a share. Ever yours,

W. J.




_To Shadworth H. Hodgson._


Cambridge, _Jan._ 1, 1910.

A happy New Year to you, dear Hodgson, and may it bring a state of mind
more recognizant of truth when you see it! Your jocose salutation of my
account of truth is an epigrammatic commentary on the cross-purposes of
philosophers, considering that on the very day (yesterday) of its
reaching me, I had replied to a Belgian student writing a thesis on
pragmatism, who had asked me to name my sources of inspiration, that I
could only recognize two, Peirce, as quoted, and "S. H. H." with his
method of attacking problems, by asking what their terms are "Known-as."
Unhappy world, where grandfathers can't recognize their own
grandchildren! Let us love each other all the same, dear Hodgson, though
the grandchild be in your eyes a "prodigal." Affectionately yours,

WM. JAMES.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news of James's election as _Associé étranger_ of the Académie des
Sciences Morales et Politiques, which had appeared in the Boston
"Journal" a day or two before the next letter, had, of course, reached
the American newspapers directly from Paris. The unread book by Bergson
of which Mr. Chapman was to forward his manuscript-review was obviously
"Le Rire," and Mr. Chapman's review may be found, not where the next
letter but one might lead one to seek it, but in the files of the
"Hibbert Journal."




_To John Jay Chapman._


Cambridge, _Jan._ 30, 1910.

DEAR JACK,--Invincible epistolary laziness and a conscience humbled to
the dust have conspired to retard this letter. God sent me straight to
you with my story about Bergson's cablegram--the only other person to
whom I have told it was Henry Higginson. _One_ of you must have put it
into the Boston "Journal" of the next day,--_you_ of course, to
humiliate me still the more,--so now I lie in the dust, spurning all the
decorations and honors under which the powers and principalities are
trying to bury me, and seeking to manifest the naked truth in my
uncomely form. Never again, never again! Naked came I into life, and
this world's vanities are not for me! You, dear Jack, are the only
reincarnation of Isaiah and Job, and I praise God that he has let me
live in your day. _Real_ values are known only to _you_!

As for Bergson, I think your change of the word "comic" into the word
"tragic" throughout his book is _impayable_, and I have no doubt it is
true. I have only read half of him, so don't know how he is coming out.
Meanwhile send me your own foolishness on the same subject, commend me
to your liege lady, and believe me, shamefully yours,

W. J.




_To John Jay Chapman._


Cambridge, _Feb._ 8, 1910.

DEAR JACK,--Wonderful! wonderful! Shallow, incoherent, obnoxious to its
own criticism of Chesterton and Shaw, off its balance, accidental,
whimsical, false; but with central fires of truth "blazing fuliginous
mid murkiest confusion," telling the reader nothing of the Comic except
that it's smaller than the Tragic, but _readable_ and splendid, showing
that the _man who wrote it_ is more than anything he can write!

Pray patch some kind of a finale to it and send it to the "Atlantic"!
Yours ever fondly,

W. J.
(Membre de I'Institut!)

       *       *       *       *       *

The "specimen" which was enclosed with the following note has been lost.
It was perhaps a bit of adulatory verse. What is said about "Harris and
Shakespeare," as also in a later letter to Mr. T. S. Perry on the same
subject, was written apropos of a book entitled "The Man Shakespeare,
His Tragic Life-Story."[87]




_To John Jay Chapman._


Cambridge, _Feb._ 15, 1910.

DEAR JACK,--Just a word to say that it pleases me to hear you write this
about Harris and Shakespeare. H. is surely false in much that he claims;
yet 'tis the only way in which Shakespeare ought to be handled, so his
_is_ the best book. The trouble with S. was his intolerable fluency. He
improvised so easily that it kept down his level. It is hard to see how
the man that wrote his best things could possibly have let himself do
ranting bombast and complication on such a large scale elsewhere. 'T is
mighty fun to read him through in order.

I send you a specimen of the kind of thing that tends to hang upon me as
the ivy on the oak. When will the day come? Never till, like me, you
give yourself out as a poetry-hater. Thine ever,

[Illustration: signature

my new signature]




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


Cambridge, _Mar. 26, 1910_.

DEAR MILLER,--Your study of me arrives! and I have pantingly turned the
pages to find the eulogistic adjectives, and find them in such abundance
that my head swims. Glory to God that I have lived to see this day! to
have so much said about me, and to be embalmed in literature like the
great ones of the past! I didn't know I was so much, was all these
things, and yet, as I read, I see that I was (or am?), and shall boldly
assert myself when I go abroad.

To speak in all dull soberness, dear Miller, it touches me to the quick
that you should have hatched out this elaborate description of me with
such patient and loving incubation. I have only spent five minutes over
it so far, meaning to take it on the steamer, but I get the impression
that it is almost unexampled in our literature as a piece of profound
analysis of an individual mind. I'm sorry you stick so much to my
psychological phase, which I care little for, now, and never cared much.
This epistemological and metaphysical phase seems to me more original
and important, and I haven't lost hopes of converting you entirely yet.
Meanwhile, thanks! thanks! [Émile] Boutroux, who is a regular angel, has
just left our house. I've written an account of his lectures which the
"Nation" will print on the 31st. I should like you to look it over,
hasty as it is.

...I hope that all these lectures on contemporaries (What a live place
Columbia is!) will appear together in a volume. I can't easily believe
that any will compare with yours as a thorough piece of interpretative
work.

We sail on Tuesday next. My thorax has been going the wrong way badly
this winter, and I hope that Nauheim may patch it up.

Strength to your elbow! Affectionately and gratefully yours,

Wm. James.




XVII

1910

_Final Months--The End_


SEVERAL reasons combined to take James to Europe in the early spring of
1910. His heart had been giving him more discomfort. He wished to
consult a specialist in Paris from whom an acquaintance of his,
similarly afflicted, had received great benefit. He believed that
another course of Nauheim baths would be helpful. Last, and not least,
he wished to be within reach of his brother Henry, who was ill and
concerning whose condition he was much distressed. In reality it was he,
not his brother, who already stood in the shadow of Death's door.

Accordingly he sailed for England with Mrs. James, and went first to
Lamb House. Thence he crossed alone to Paris, and thence went on to
Nauheim, leaving Mrs. James to bring his brother to Nauheim to join him.
The Parisian specialist could do nothing but confirm previous diagnoses.

Too much "sitting up and talking" with friends in Paris exhausted him
seriously, and, after leaving Paris, he failed for the first time to
shake off his fatigue. The immediate effect of the Nauheim baths proved
to be very debilitating, and, again, he failed to rally and improve when
he had finished them. By July, after trying the air of Lucerne and
Geneva, only to find that the altitude caused him unbearable distress,
he despaired of any relief beyond what now looked like the incomparable
consolations of being at rest in his own home. So he turned his face
westward.

The next letters bid good-bye for the summer to two tried friends. Five
months later it seemed as if James had been at more pains to make his
adieus than he usually put himself to on account of a summer's absence.
When Mrs. James returned to the Cambridge house in the autumn, after he
had died, and had occasion to open his desk copy of the Harvard
Catalogue, she found these words jotted at the head of the Faculty List:
"A thousand regrets cover every beloved name." It grieved him that life
was too short and too full for him to see many of them as often as he
wanted to. One day before he sailed, his eye had been caught by the
familiar names and, as a throng of comradely intentions filled his
heart, he had had a moment of foreboding, and he had let his hand trace
the words that cried this needless "Forgive me!" and recorded an
incommunicable Farewell.




_To Henry L. Higginson._


Cambridge, _Mar. 28, 1910_.

BELOVED HENRY,--I had most positive hopes of driving in to see you ere
the deep engulfs us, but the press is too great here, and it remains
impossible. This is just a word to say that you are not forgotten, or
ever to be forgotten, and that (after what Mrs. Higginson said) I am
hoping you may sail yourself pretty soon, and have a refreshing time,
and cross our path. We go straight to Rye, expecting to be in Paris for
the beginning of April for a week, and then to Nauheim, whence Alice,
after seeing me safely settled, will probably return to Rye for the heft
of the summer. It would pay you to turn up both there and at Nauheim and
see the mode of life.

Hoping you'll have a good [Club] dinner Friday night, and never need any
surgery again, I am ever thine,

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


Cambridge, _March 29, 1910_.

DEAREST FANNY,--Your beautiful roses and your card arrived duly--the
roses were not deserved, not at least by W. J. I have about given up all
visits to Boston this winter, and the racket has been so incessant in
the house, owing to foreigners of late, that we haven't had the strength
to send for you. I sail on the 29th in the Megantic, first to see Henry,
who has been ill, not dangerously, but very miserably. Our Harry is with
him now. I shall then go to Paris for a certain medical experiment, and
after that report at Nauheim, where they probably will keep me for some
weeks. I hope that I may get home again next fall with my organism in
better shape, and be able to see more of my friends.

After Thursday, when the good Boutrouxs go, I shall try to arrange a
meeting with you, dear Fanny. At present we are "contemporaries," that
is all, and the one of us who becomes survivor will have regrets that we
were no more!

What a lugubrious ending! With love to your mother, and love from Alice,
believe me, dearest Fanny, most affectionately yours,

W. J.




_To T, S. Perry._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _May 22, 1910_.

BELOVED THOS.,--I have two letters from you--one about ... Harris on
Shakespeare. _Re_ Harris, I did think you were a bit supercilious _a
priori_, but I thought of your youth and excused you. Harris himself is
horrid, young and crude. Much of his talk seems to me absurd, but
nevertheless _that's the way to write about Shakespeare_, and I am sure
that, if Shakespeare were a Piper-control, he would say that he
relished Harris far more than the pack of reverent commentators who
treat him as a classic moralist. He seems to me to have been a
professional _amuser_, in the first instance, with a productivity like
that of a Dumas, or a Scribe; but possessing what no other amuser has
possessed, a lyric splendor added to his rhetorical fluency, which has
made people take him for a more essentially serious human being than he
was. Neurotically and erotically, he was hyperæsthetic, with a playful
graciousness of character never surpassed. He could be profoundly
melancholy; but even then was controlled by the audience's needs. A cork
in the rapids, with no ballast of his own, without religious or ethical
ideals, accepting uncritically every theatrical and social convention,
he was simply an æolian harp passively resounding to the stage's call.
Was there ever an author of such emotional importance whose reaction
against false conventions of life was such an absolute zero as his? I
know nothing of the other Elizabethans, but could they have been as
soulless in this respect?--But _halte-la_! or I shall become a Harris
myself!... With love to you all, believe me ever thine,

W. J.

Read Daniel Halévy's exquisitely discreet "Vie de Nietzsche," if you
haven't already done so. Do you know G. Courtelines' "Les Marionettes de
la Vie" (Flammarion)? It beats Labiche.




_To François Pillon._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _May 25, 1910_.

MY DEAR PILLON,--I have been here a week, taking the baths for my
unfortunate cardiac complications, and shall probably stay six weeks
longer. I passed through Paris, where I spent a week, partly with my
friend the philosopher Strong, partly at the Fondation Thiers with the
Boutrouxs, who had been our guests in America when he lectured a few
months ago at Harvard. Every day I said: "I will get to the Pillons this
afternoon"; but every day I found it impossible to attempt your four
flights of stairs, and finally had to run away from the Boutrouxs' to
save my life from the fatigue and pectoral pain which resulted from my
seeing so many people. I have a dilatation of the aorta, which causes
anginoid pain of a bad kind whenever I make any exertion, muscular,
intellectual, or social, and I should not have thought at all of going
through Paris were it not that I wished to consult a certain Dr. Moutier
there, who is strong on arteries, but who told me that he could do
nothing for my case. I hope that these baths may arrest the disagreeable
tendency to _pejoration_ from which I have suffered in the past year.
This is why I didn't come to see the dear Pillons; a loss for which I
felt, and shall always feel, deep regret.

The sight of the new "Année Philosophique" at Boutroux's showed me how
valiant and solid you still are for literary work. I read a number of
the book reviews, but none of the articles, which seemed uncommonly
varied and interesting. Your short notice of Schinz's really _bouffon_
book showed me to my regret that even you have not yet caught the true
inwardness of my notion of Truth. You speak as if I allowed no _valeur
de connaissance proprement dite_, which is a quite false accusation.
When an idea "works" successfully among _all the other ideas_ which
relate to the object of which it is our mental substitute, associating
and comparing itself with them harmoniously, the workings are wholly
inside of the intellectual world, and the idea's value purely
intellectual, for the time, at least. This is my doctrine and
Schiller's, but it seems very hard to express it so as to get it
understood!

I hope that, in spite of the devouring years, dear Madame Pillon's state
of health may be less deplorable than it has been so long. In particular
I wish that the neuritis may have ceased. I wish! I wish! but what's the
use of wishing, against the universal law that "youth's a stuff will not
endure," and that we must simply make the best of it? Boutroux gave some
beautiful lectures at Harvard, and is the gentlest and most lovable of
characters. Believe me, dear Pillon, and dear Madame Pillon, your ever
affectionate old friend,

Wm. James.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _May 29, 1910_.

...Paris was splendid, but fatiguing. Among other things I was
introduced to the Académie des Sciences Morales, of which you may likely
have heard that I am now an _associé étranger_(!!). Boutroux says that
Renan, when he took his seat after being received at the Académie
Française, said: "Qu'on est bien dans ce fauteuil" (it is nothing but a
cushioned bench with no back!). "Peut-être n'y a-t-il que cela de vrai!"
Delicious Renanesque remark!...

W. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

The arrangement by which Mrs. James and Henry James were to have arrived
at Nauheim had been upset. The two, who were to come from England
together, were delayed by Henry's condition; and for a while James was
at Nauheim alone.




_To his Daughter._


_Bad-Nauheim_, _May 29, 1910_.

BELOVED PÉGUY,--The very _fust_ thing I want you to do is to look in the
drawer marked "Blood" in my tall filing case in the library closet, and
find the _date_ of a number of the "Journal of Speculative Philosophy"
there that contains an article called "Philosophic Reveries." Send this
_date_ (not the article) to the Revd. Prof. L. P. Jacks, 28 Holywell,
Oxford, if you find it, _immediately_. He will understand what to do
with it. If you don't find the article, do nothing! Jacks is notified. I
have just corrected the proofs of an article on Blood for the "Hibbert
Journal," which, I think, will make people sit up and rub their eyes at
the apparition of a new great writer of English. I want Blood himself to
get it as a surprise.

_I_ got as a surprise your finely typed copy of the rest of my MS., the
other day. I thank you for it; also for your delightful letters. The
type-writing seems to set free both your and Aleck's genius more than
the pen. (If you need a new ribbon it must be got from the agency in
Milk St. just above Devonshire--but you'll find it hard work to get it
into its place.) You seem to be leading a very handsome and domestic
life, avoiding social excitements, and hearing of them only from the
brethren. It is good sometimes to face the naked ribs of reality as it
reveals itself in homes. I face them _here_ with no one but the
blackbirds and the trees for my companions, save some rather odd
Americans at the _Mittagstisch_ and _Abendessen_, and the good smiling
_Dienstmädchen_ who brings me my breakfast in the morning.... I went to
my bath at 6 o'clock this morning, and had the Park all to the
blackbirds and myself. This was because I am expecting a certain Prof.
Goldstein from Darmstadt to come to see me this morning, and I had to
get the bath out of the way. He is a powerful young writer, and is
translating my "Pluralistic Universe." But the weather has grown so
threatening that I hope now that he won't come till next Sunday. It is a
shame to converse here and not be in the open air. I would to Heaven
_thou_ wert _mit_--I think thou wouldst enjoy it very much for a week
or more. The German civilization is _good_! Only this place would give a
very false impression of our wicked earth to a Mars-_Bewohner_ who
should descend and leave and see nothing else. Not a dark spot (save
what the patients' hearts individually conceal), no poverty, no vice,
nothing but prettiness and simplicity of life. I snip out a
concert-program (the afternoon one unusually good) which I find lying on
my table. The like is given free in the open air every day. The baths
weaken one so that I have little brain for reading, and must write
letters to all kinds of people every day. A big quarrel is on in Paris
between my would-be translators and publishers. I wish translators would
let my books alone--they are written for my own people exclusively! You
will have received Hewlett's delightful "Halfway House," sent to our
steamer by Pauline Goldmark, I think. I have been reading a charmingly
discreet life of Nietzsche by D. Halévy, and have invested in a couple
more of his (N.'s) books, but haven't yet begun to read them. I am half
through "Waffen-nieder!" a _first-rate_ anti-war novel by Baroness von
Suttner. It has been translated, and I recommend it as in many ways
instructive. How are Rebecca and Maggie [the cook and house-maid]? You
don't say how you enjoy ordering the bill of fare every day. You can't
vary it properly unless you make a _list_ and keep it. A good sweet dish
is _rothe Grütze_, a form of fine sago consolidated by currant-jelly
juice, and sauced with custard, or, I suppose, cream.

Well! no more today! Give no end of love to the good boys, and to your
Grandam, and believe me, ever thy affectionate,

W. J.




_To Henry P. Bowditch._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _June 4, 1910_.

DEAREST HEINRICH,--The envelope in which this letter goes was addrest in
Cambridge, Mass., and expected to go towards you with a letter in it,
long before now. But better late than never, so here goes! I came over,
as you may remember, for the double purpose of seeing my brother Henry,
who had been having a sort of nervous breakdown, and of getting my
heart, if possible, tuned up by foreign experts. I stayed upwards of a
month with Henry, and then came hither _über_ Paris, where I stayed ten
days. I have been here two and a half weeks, taking the baths, and
enjoying the feeling of the strong, calm, successful, new German
civilization all about me. Germany is _great_, and no mistake! But what
a contrast, in the well-set-up, well-groomed, smart-looking German man
of today, and his rather clumsily drest, dingy, and unworldly-looking
father of forty years ago! But something of the old _Gemüthlichkeit_
remains, the friendly manners, and the disposition to talk with you and
take you seriously and to respect the serious side of whatever comes
along. But I can write you more interestingly of physiology than I can
of sociology.... The baths may or may not arrest for a while the
downward tendency which has been so marked in the past year--but at any
rate it is a comfort to know that my sufferings have a respectable
organic basis, and are not, as so many of my friends tell me, due to
pure "nervousness." Dear Henry, you see that you are not the only pebble
on the beach, or toad in the puddle, of senile degeneration! I admit
that the form of your tragedy beats that of that of most of us; but
youth's a stuff that won't endure, in any one, and to have had it, as
you and I have had it, is a good deal gained anyhow, while to see the
daylight still under _any_ conditions is perhaps also better than
nothing, and meanwhile the good months are sure to bring the final
relief after which, "when you and I behind the veil are passed, Oh, but
the long, long time the world shall last!" etc., etc. Rather gloomy
moralizing, this, to end an affectionate family letter with; but the
circumstances seem to justify it, and I know that you won't take it
amiss.

Alice is staying with Henry, but they will both be here in a fortnight
or less. I find it pretty lonely all by myself, and the German language
doesn't run as trippingly off the tongue as it did forty years ago.
Passage back is taken for August 12th....

Well, I must stop! Pray give my love to Selma, the faithful one. Also to
Fanny, Harold, and Friedel. With Harold's engagement you are more and
more of a patriarch. Heaven keep you, dear Henry.

Believe me, ever your affectionately sympathetic old friend,

Wm. James.




_To François Pillon._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _June 8, 1910_.

MY DEAR PILLON,--I have your good letter of the 4th--which I finally had
to take a magnifying-glass to read (!)--and remained full of admiration
for the nervous centres which, after 80 years of work, could still guide
the fingers to execute, without slipping or trembling, that masterpiece
of microscopic calligraphy! Truly your nervous centres are "well
preserved"--the optical ones also, in spite of the cataracts and loss of
accommodation! How proud I should be if now, at the comparatively
youthful age of 68, I could flatter _myself_ with the hope of doing what
you have done, and living down victoriously twelve more devouring
enemies of years! With a fresh volume produced, to mark each year by! I
give you leave, as a garland and reward, to misinterpret my doctrine of
truth _ad libitum_ and to your heart's content, in all your future
writings. I will never think the worse of you for it.

What you say of dear Madame Pillon awakens in me very different
feelings. She has led, indeed, a life of suffering for many years, and
it seems to me a real tragedy that she should now be confined to the
house so absolutely. If only you might inhabit the country, where, on
fine days, with no stairs to mount or descend, she could sit with
flowers and trees around her! The city is not good when one is confined
to one's apartment. Pray give Madame Pillon my sincerest love--I never
think of her without affection--I am almost ashamed to accept year after
year your "Année Philosophique," and to give you so little in return for
it. I am expecting my wife and brother to arrive here from England this
afternoon, and we shall _probably_ all return together through Paris, by
the middle of July. I will then come and see you, with the wife, so
please keep the "Année" till then, and put it into my hands. I can read
nothing serious here--the baths destroy one's strength so. Whether they
will do any good to my circulatory organs remains to be seen--there is
no good effect perceptible so far. Believe me, dear old friend, with
every message of affection to you both, yours ever faithfully,

Wm. James.

       *       *       *       *       *

The letters which follow concern Henry Adams's "Letter to American
Teachers," originally printed for private circulation, but recently
published, with a preface by Mr. Brooks Adams, under the title: "The
Degradation of Democratic Dogma."




_To Henry Adams._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _June 17, 1910_.

DEAR HENRY ADAMS,--I have been so "slim" since seeing you, and the baths
here have so weakened my brain, that I have been unable to do any
reading except trash, and have only just got round to finishing your
"letter," which I had but half-read when I was with you at Paris. To
tell the truth, it doesn't impress me at all, save by its wit and
erudition; and I ask you whether an old man soon about to meet his Maker
can hope to save himself from the consequences of his life by pointing
to the wit and learning he has shown in treating a tragic subject. No,
sir, you can't do it, can't impress God in that way. So far as our
scientific conceptions go, it may be admitted that your Creator (and
mine) started the universe with a certain amount of "energy" latent in
it, and decreed that everything that should happen thereafter should be
a result of parts of that energy falling to lower levels; raising other
parts higher, to be sure, in so doing, but never in equivalent amount,
owing to the constant radiation of unrecoverable warmth incidental to
the process. It is customary for gentlemen to pretend to believe one
another, and until some one hits upon a newer revolutionary concept
(which may be tomorrow) all physicists must play the game by holding
religiously to the above doctrine. It involves of course the ultimate
cessation of all perceptible happening, and the end of human history.
With this general conception as _surrounding_ everything you say in your
"letter," no one can find any fault--in the present stage of scientific
conventions and fashions. But I protest against your interpretation of
some of the specifications of the great statistical drift downwards of
the original high-level energy. If, instead of criticizing what you seem
to me to say, I express my own interpretation dogmatically, and leave
you to make the comparison, it will doubtless conduce to brevity and
economize recrimination.

To begin with, the _amount_ of cosmic energy it costs to buy a certain
distribution of fact which humanly we regard as precious, seems to me to
be an altogether secondary matter as regards the question of history and
progress. Certain arrangements of matter _on the same energy-level_ are,
from the point of view of man's appreciation, superior, while others are
inferior. Physically a dinosaur's brain may show as much intensity of
energy-exchange as a man's, but it can do infinitely fewer things,
because as a force of detent it can only unlock the dinosaur's muscles,
while the man's brain, by unlocking far feebler muscles, indirectly can
by their means issue proclamations, write books, describe Chartres
Cathedral, etc., and guide the energies of the shrinking sun into
channels which never would have been entered otherwise--in short, _make_
history. Therefore the man's brain and muscles are, from the point of
view of the historian, the more important place of energy-exchange,
small as this may be when measured in absolute physical units.

The "second law" is wholly irrelevant to "history"--save that it sets a
terminus--for history is the course of things before that terminus, and
all that the second law says is that, whatever the history, it must
invest itself between that initial maximum and that terminal minimum of
difference in energy-level. As the great irrigation-reservoir empties
itself, the whole question for us is that of the distribution of its
effects, of _which_ rills to guide it into; and the size of the rills
has nothing to do with their significance. Human cerebration is the most
important rill we know of, and both the "capacity" and the "intensity"
factor thereof may be treated as infinitesimal. Yet the filling of such
rills would be cheaply bought by the waste of whole sums spent in
getting a little of the down-flowing torrent to enter them. Just so of
human institutions--their value has in strict theory nothing whatever to
do with their energy-budget--being wholly a question of the form the
energy flows through. Though the _ultimate_ state of the universe may be
its vital and psychical extinction, there is nothing in physics to
interfere with the hypothesis that the penultimate state might be the
millennium--in other words a state in which a minimum of difference of
energy-level might have its exchanges so skillfully _canalisés_ that a
maximum of happy and virtuous consciousness would be the only result. In
short, the last expiring pulsation of the universe's life might be, "I
am so happy and perfect that I can stand it no longer." You don't
believe this and I don't say I do. But I can find nothing in "Energetik"
to conflict with its possibility. You seem to me not to discriminate,
but to treat quantity and distribution of energy as if they formed one
question.

There! that's pretty good for a brain after 18 Nauheim baths--so I won't
write another line, nor ask you to reply to me. In case you can't help
doing so, however, I will gratify you now by saying that I probably
won't jaw back.--It was pleasant at Paris to hear your identically
unchanged and "undegraded" voice after so many years of loss of solar
energy. Yours ever truly,

Wm. James.



[Illustration: Facsimile of Post-card addressed to Henry Adams.]

[Post-card]

NAUHEIM, _June 19, 1910_.

P. S. Another illustration of my meaning: The clock of the universe is
running down, and by so doing makes the hands move. The energy absorbed
by the hands and the _mechanical_ work they do is the same day after
day, no matter how far the weights have descended from the position they
were originally wound up to. The _history_ which the hands perpetrate
has nothing to do with the _quantity_ of this work, but follows the
_significance_ of the figures which they cover on the dial. If they move
from O to XII, there is "progress," if from XII to O, there is "decay,"
etc. etc.

W. J.




_To Henry Adams._


[Post-card]

CONSTANCE, _June 26, [1910]_.

Yours of the 20th, just arriving, pleases me by its docility of spirit
and passive subjection to philosophic opinion. Never, never pretend to
an opinion of your own! that way lies every annoyance and madness! You
tempt me to offer you another illustration--that of the _hydraulic ram_
(thrown back to me in an exam, as a "hydraulic goat" by an
insufficiently intelligent student). Let this arrangement of metal,
placed in the course of a brook, symbolize the machine of human life. It
works, clap, clap, clap, day and night, so long as the brook runs _at
all_, and no matter how full the brook (which symbolizes the descending
cosmic energy) may be, it works always to the same effect, of raising so
many kilogrammeters of water. What the _value_ of this work as history
may be, depends on the uses to which the water is put in the house which
the ram serves.

W. J.




_To Benjamin Paul Blood._


CONSTANCE, _June 25, 1910_.

MY DEAR BLOOD,--About the time you will receive this, you will also be
surprised by receiving the "Hibbert Journal" for July, with an article
signed by me, but written mainly by yourself.[88] Tired of waiting for
your final synthetic pronunciamento, and fearing I might be cut off ere
it came, I took time by the forelock, and at the risk of making ducks
and drakes of your thoughts, I resolved to save at any rate some of your
rhetoric, and the result is what you see. Forgive! forgive! forgive! It
will at any rate have made you famous, for the circulation of the H. J.
is choice, as well as large (12,000 or more, I'm told), and the print
and paper the best ever yet, I seem to have lost the editor's letter, or
I would send it to you. He wrote, in accepting the article in May, "I
have already 40 articles accepted, and some of the writers threaten
lawsuits for non-publication, yet such was the exquisite refreshment
Blood's writing gave me, under the cataract of sawdust in which
editorially I live, that I have this day sent the article to the
printer. Actions speak louder than words! Blood is simply _great_, and
you are to be thanked for having dug him out. L. P. JACKS." Of course
I've used you for my own purposes, and probably misused you; but I'm
sure you will feel more pleasure than pain, and perhaps write again in
the "Hibbert" to set yourself right. You're sure of being printed,
whatever you may send. How I wish that I too could write poetry, for
pluralism is in its _Sturm und Drang_ period, and verse is the only way
to express certain things, I've just been taking the "cure" at Nauheim
for my unlucky heart--no results so far!

Sail for home again on August 12th. Address always Cambridge, Mass.;
things are forwarded. Warm regards, fellow pluralist. Yours ever,

Wm. James.




_To Theodore Flournoy._


GENEVA, _July 9, 1910_.

DEAREST FLOURNOY,--Your two letters, of yesterday, and of July 4th sent
to Nauheim, came this morning. I am sorry that the Nauheim one was not
written earlier, since you had the trouble of writing it at all. I thank
you for all the considerateness you show--you understand entirely my
situation. My dyspnoea gets worse at an accelerated rate, and all I
care for now is to get home--doing _nothing_ on the way. It is partly a
spasmodic phenomenon I am sure, for the aeration of my tissues, judging
by the color of my lips, seems to be sufficient. I will leave Geneva now
without seeing you again--better not come, unless just to shake hands
with my wife! Through all these years I have wished I might live nearer
to you and see more of you and exchange more ideas, for we seem two men
particularly well _faits pour nous comprendre_. Particularly, now, as my
own intellectual house-keeping has seemed on the point of working out
some good results, would it have been good to work out the less unworthy
parts of it in your company. But that is impossible!--I doubt if I ever
do any more writing of a serious sort; and as I am able to look upon my
life rather lightly, I can truly say that "I don't care"--don't care in
the least pathetically or tragically, at any rate.--I hope that Ragacz
will be a success, or at any rate a wholesome way of passing the month,
and that little by little you will reach your new equilibrium. Those
dear daughters, at any rate, are something to live for--to show them
Italy should be rejuvenating. I can write no more, my very dear old
friend, but only ask you to think of me as ever lovingly yours,

W. J.

After leaving Geneva James rested at Lamb House for a few days before
going to Liverpool to embark. Walking, talking and writing had all
become impossible or painful. The short northern route to Quebec was
chosen for the home voyage. When he and Mrs. James and his brother Henry
landed there, they went straight to Chocorua. The afternoon light was
fading from the familiar hills on August 19th, when the motor brought
them to the little house, and James sank into a chair beside the fire,
and sobbed, "It's so good to get home!"

A change for the worse occurred within forty-eight hours and the true
situation became apparent. The effort by which he had kept up a certain
interest in what was going on about him during the last weeks of his
journey, and a certain semblance of strength, had spent itself. He had
been clinging to life only in order to get home.

Death occurred without pain in the early afternoon of August 26th.

His body was taken to Cambridge, where there was a funeral service in
the College Chapel. After cremation, his ashes were placed beside the
graves of his parents in the Cambridge Cemetery.

     THE END




APPENDIXES




APPENDIX I

THREE CRITICISMS FOR STUDENTS


In his smaller classes, made up of advanced students, James found it
possible to comment in detail on the work of individuals. Three letters
have come into the hands of the editor, from which extracts may be taken
to illustrate such comments. They were written for persons with whom he
could communicate only by letter, and are extended enough to suggest the
_viva voce_ comments which many a student recalls, but of which there is
no record. The first is from a letter to a former pupil and refers to
work of Bertrand Russell and others which the pupil was studying at the
time. The second and third comment on manuscripts that had been prepared
as "theses" and had been submitted to James for unofficial criticism.
They exhibit him, characteristically, as encouraging the student to
formulate something more positive.


_Jan. 26, 1908._

Those propositions or supposals which [Russell, Moore and Meinong] make
the exclusive vehicles of truth are mongrel curs that have no real place
between realities on the one hand and beliefs on the other. The
negative, disjunctive and hypothetic truths which they so conveniently
express can all, perfectly well (so far as I see), be translated into
relations between beliefs and positive realities. "Propositions" are
expressly devised for quibbling between realities and beliefs. They seem
to have the objectivity of the one and the subjectivity of the other,
and he who uses them can straddle as he likes, owing to the ambiguity of
the word _that_, which is essential to them. "_That_ Cæsar existed" is
"true," sometimes means the _fact that_ be existed is real, sometimes
the _belief that_ he existed is true. You can get no honest discussion
out of such terms....


_Aug. 15, 1908._

Dear K----, ...[I have] read your thesis once through. I only finished
it yesterday. It is a big effort, hard to grasp at a single reading,
and I'm too lazy to go over it a second time in its present physically
inconvenient shape. It is obvious that parts of it have been written
rapidly and not boiled down; and my impression is that you have left
over in it too much of the complication of form in which our ideas, our
critical ideas especially, first come to us, and which has, with much
rewriting, to be straightened out. You were dealing with dialecticians
and logic-choppers, and you have met them on their own ground with a
logic-chopping even more diseased than theirs. So far as I can see, you
_have_ met them, though your own expressions are often far from lucid
(--result of haste?); but in some cases I doubt whether they themselves
would think that they were met at all. I fear a little that both Bradley
and Royce will think that your _reductiones ad absurdum_ are too fine
spun and ingenious to have real force. Too complicated, too complicated!
is the verdict of my horse-like mind on much of this thesis. Your
defense will be, of course, that it is a thesis, and as such, expected
to be barbaric. But then I point to the careless, hasty writing of much
of it. You _must_ simplify yourself, if you hope to have any influence
in print.

The writing becomes more careful and the style clearer, the moment you
tackle Russell in the 6th part. And when you come to your own dogmatic
statement of your vision of things in the last 30 pages or so, I think
the thesis splendid, prophetic in tone and _very_ felicitous, often, in
expression. This is indeed the _philosophie de l'avenir_, and a dogmatic
expression of it will be far more effective than critical demolition of
its alternatives. It will render that unnecessary if able enough. One
will simply _feel_ them to be diseased. My total impression is that the
critter K---- has a _really magnificent vision_ of the lay of the land
in philosophy,--of the land of bondage, as well as of that of
promise,--but that he has a tremendous lot of work to do yet in the way
of getting himself into straight and effective literary shape. He has
_elements_ of extraordinary literary power, but they are buried in much
sand and shingle....


_May. 26, 1900._

Dear Miss S----, I am a caitiff! I have left your essay on my poor self
unanswered.... It is a great compliment to me to be taken so
philologically and importantly; and I must say that from the technical
point of view you may be proud of your production. I like greatly the
objective and dispassionate key in which you keep everything, and the
number of subdivisions and articulations which you make gives me
vertiginous admiration. Nevertheless, the tragic fact remains that I
don't feel wounded at all by all that output of ability, and for reasons
which I think I can set down briefly enough. It all comes, in my eyes,
from too much philological method--as a Ph.D. thesis your essay is
supreme, but why don't you go farther? You take utterances of mine
written at different dates, for different audiences belonging to
different universes of discourse, and string them together as the
abstract elements of a total philosophy which you then show to be
inwardly incoherent. This is splendid philology, but is it live
criticism of anyone's _Weltanschauung_? Your use of the method only
strengthens the impression I have got from reading criticisms of my
"pragmatic" account of "truth," that the whole Ph.D. industry of
building up an author's meaning out of separate texts leads nowhere,
unless you have first grasped his centre of vision, by an act of
imagination. That, it seems to me, you lack in my case.

For instance: [Seven examples are next dealt with in two and a half
pages of type-writing. These pages are omitted.]

...I have been unpardonably long; and if you were a man, I should
assuredly not expect to influence you a jot by what I write. Being a
woman, there may be yet a gleam of hope!--which may serve as the excuse
for my prolixity. (It is not for the likes of _you_, however, to hurl
accusations of prolixity!) Now if I may presume to give a word of advice
to one so much more accomplished than myself in dialectic technique, may
I urge, since you have shown what a superb mistress you are in that
difficult art of discriminating abstractions and opposing them to each
other one by one, since in short there is no university extant that
wouldn't give you its _summa cum laude_,--I should certainly so reward
your thesis at Harvard,--may I urge, I say, that you should now turn
your back upon that academic sort of artificiality altogether, and
devote your great talents to the study of reality in its concreteness?
In other words, do some _positive_ work at the problem of what truth
signifies, substitute a definitive alternative for the humanism which I
present, as the latter's substitute. Not by proving their inward
incoherence does one refute philosophies--every human being is
incoherent--but only by superseding them by other philosophies more
satisfactory. Your wonderful technical skill ought to serve you in good
stead if you would exchange the philological kind of criticism for
constructive work. I fear however that you won't--the iron may have
bitten too deeply into your soul!!

Have you seen Knox's paper on pragmatism in the "Quarterly Review" for
April--perhaps the deepest-cutting thing yet written on the pragmatist
side? On the other side read Bertrand Russell's paper in the "Edinburgh
Review" just out. A thing after your own heart, but ruined in my eyes by
the same kind of vicious abstractionism which your thesis shows. It is
amusing to see the critics of the will to believe furnish such exquisite
instances of it in their own persons. _E.g._, Russell's own splendid
atheistic-titanic confession of faith in that volume of essays on
"Ideals of Science and of Faith" edited by one Hand. X----, whom you
quote, has recently worked himself up to the pass of being ordained in
the Episcopal church.... I justify them both; for only by such
experiments on the part of individuals will social man gain the evidence
required. They meanwhile seem to think that the only "true" position to
hold is that everything not imposed upon a will-less and non-coöperant
intellect must count as false--a preposterous principle which no human
being follows in real life.

Well! There! that is all! But, dear Madam, I should like to know where
you come from, who you are, what your present "situation" is, etc.,
etc.--It is natural to have some personal curiosity about a lady who has
taken such an extraordinary amount of pains for me!

Believe me, dear Miss S----, with renewed apologies for the extreme
tardiness of this acknowledgment, yours with mingled admiration and
abhorrence,

WM. JAMES.




APPENDIX II

BOOKS BY WILLIAM JAMES


The following chronological list includes books only, but it gives the
essays and chapters contained in each.

Professor R. B. Perry's "Bibliography" (see below) lists a great number
of contributions to periodicals, which have never been reprinted, and
includes notes indicative of the matter of each.

(No attempt has been made to compile a list of references to literature
about William James, but the following may be mentioned as easily
obtainable: _William James_, by ÉMILE BOUTROUX. Paris, 1911.
Translation: Longmans, Green & Co., New York and London, 1912. _La
Philosophie de William James_, by THEODORE FLOURNOY. St. Blaise, 1911.
Translation: _The Philosophy of William James._ Henry Holt & Co., New
York, 1917.)


     _Literary Remains of Henry James, Sr._, with an Introduction by
     WILLIAM JAMES. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1884.

     _The Principles of Psychology._ New York: Henry Holt & Co.; London:
     Macmillan & Co., 1890.

     _Volume I._ Scope of Psychology--Functions of the Brain--Conditions
     of Brain Activity--Habit--The Automaton Theory--The Mind-Stuff
     Theory--Methods and Snares of Psychology--Relations of Minds to
     Other Things--The Stream of Thought--The Consciousness of
     Self--Attention--Conception--Discrimination and
     Comparison--Association--The Perception of Time--Memory.

     _Volume II._ Sensation--Imagination--Perception of Things--The
     Perception of Space--The Perception of Reality--Reasoning--The
     Production of Movement--Instinct--The
     Emotions--Will--Hypnotism--Necessary Truth and the Effects of
     Experience.

     _A Text-Book of Psychology._ Briefer Course. New York: Henry Holt &
     Co.; London: Macmillan & Co., 1892.

     Introductory--Sensation--Sight--Hearing--Touch--Sensations of
     Motion--Structure of the Brain--Functions of the Brain--Some
     General Conditions of Neural Activity--Habit--Stream of
     Consciousness--The
     Self--Attention--Conception--Discrimination--Association--Sense of
     Time--Memory--Imagination--Perception--The Perception of
     Space--Reasoning--Consciousness and
     Movement--Emotion--Instinct--Will--Psychology and Philosophy.

     _The Will to Believe, and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy._ New
     York and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1897.

     The Will to Believe--Is Life Worth Living?--The Sentiment of
     Rationality--Reflex Action and Theism--The Dilemma of
     Determinism--The Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life--Great Men
     and their Environment--The Importance of Individuals--On Some
     Hegelisms--What Psychical Research has Accomplished.

     _Human Immortality, Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine._
     London: Constable & Co., also Dent & Sons; Boston: Houghton,
     Mifflin & Co., 1898.

     _The Same._ A New Edition with Preface in Reply to His Critics.
     Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1899.

     _Talks to Teachers on Psychology, and to Students on Some of Life's
     Ideals._ New York: Henry Holt & Co.; London: Longmans, Green & Co.,
     1899.

     Psychology and the Teaching Art--The Stream of Consciousness--The
     Child as a Behaving Organism--Education and Behavior--The Necessity
     of Reactions--Native and Acquired Reactions--What the Native
     Reactions Are--The Laws of Habit--Association of
     Ideas--Interest--Attention--Memory--Acquisition of
     Ideas--Apperception--The Will.

     Talks to Students: The Gospel of Relaxation--On a Certain Blindness
     in Human Beings--What Makes Life Significant?

     _The Varieties of Religious Experience._ A Study in Human Nature.
     The Gifford Lectures on Natural Religion, Edinburgh, 1901-1902. New
     York and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1902.

     Religion and Neurology--Circumscription of the Topic--The Reality
     of the Unseen--The Religion of Healthy-Mindedness--The Sick
     Soul--The Divided Self, and the Process of its
     Unification--Conversion--Saintliness--The Value of
     Saintliness--Mysticism--Philosophy--Other
     Characteristics--Conclusions--Postscript.

     _Pragmatism._ A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. New York
     and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1907.

     The Present Dilemma in Philosophy--What Pragmatism Means--Some
     Metaphysical Problems Pragmatically Considered--The One and the
     Many--Pragmatism and Common Sense--Pragmatism's Conception of
     Truth--Pragmatism and Humanism--Pragmatism and Religion.

     _A Pluralistic Universe._ Hibbert Lectures at Manchester College.
     New York and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1909.

     The Types of Philosophic Thinking--Monistic Idealism--Hegel and his
     Method--Concerning Fechner--Compounding of Consciousness--Bergson
     and his Critique of Intellectualism--The Continuity of
     Experience--Conclusions---- Appendixes: _A._ The Thing and its
     Relations. _B._ The Experience of Activity. _C._ On the Notion of
     Reality as Changing.

     _The Meaning of Truth._ A Sequel to _Pragmatism_. New York and
     London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1909.

     The Function of Cognition--The Tigers in India--Humanism and
     Truth--The Relation between Knower and Known--The Essence of
     Humanism--A Word More about Truth--Professor Pratt on Truth--The
     Pragmatist Account of Truth and its Misunderstanders--The Meaning
     of the Word Truth--The Existence of Julius Cæsar--The Absolute and
     the Strenuous Life--Hébert on Pragmatism--Abstractionism and
     "Relativismus"--Two English Critics--A Dialogue.

     _Some Problems of Philosophy._ A Beginning of an Introduction to
     Philosophy. New York and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1911.

     Philosophy and its Critics--The Problems of Metaphysics--The
     Problem of Being--Percept and Concept--The One and the Many--The
     Problem of Novelty--Novelty and the Infinite--Novelty and
     Causation---- Appendix: Faith and the Right to Believe.

     _Memories and Studies._ New York and London: Longmans, Green & Co.,
     1911.

     Louis Agassiz--Address at the Emerson Centenary in Concord--Robert
     Gould Shaw--Francis Boott--Thomas Davidson--Herbert Spencer's
     Autobiography--Frederick Myers's Services to Psychology--Final
     Impressions of a Psychical Researcher--On Some Mental Effects of
     the Earthquake--The Energies of Men--The Moral Equivalent of
     War--Remarks at the Peace Banquet--The Social Value of the
     College-bred--The Ph.D. Octopus--The True Harvard--Stanford's Ideal
     Destiny--A Pluralistic Mystic (B. P. Blood).

     _Essays in Radical Empiricism._ Edited by RALPH BARTON PERRY. New
     York and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1912.

     Introduction--Does Consciousness Exist?--A World of Pure
     Experience--The Thing and its Relations--How Two Minds can Know One
     Thing--The Place of Affectional Facts in a World of Pure
     Experience--The Experience of Activity--The Essence of
     Humanism--_La Notion de Conscience_--Is Radical Empiricism
     Solipsistic?--Mr. Pitkin's Refutation of Radical
     Empiricism--Humanism and Truth Once More--Absolutism and
     Empiricism.

     _Collected Essays and Reviews._ Edited by _Ralph Barton Perry_. New
     York and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1920.

     Review of E. Sargent's _Planchette_ (1869)--Review of G. H. Lewes's
     _Problems of Life and Mind_ (1875)--Review entitled "German
     Pessimism" (1875)--Chauncey Wright (1875)--Review of "Bain and
     Renouvier" (1876)--Review of Renan's _Dialogues_ (1876)--Review of
     G. H. Lewes's _Physical Basis of Mind_ (1877)--Remarks on Spencer's
     Definition of Mind as Correspondence (1878)--Quelques
     Considérations sur la Méthode Subjective (1878)--The Sentiment of
     Rationality (1879)--Review (unsigned) of W. K. Clifford's _Lectures
     and Essays_ (1879)--Review of Herbert Spencer's _Data of Ethics_
     (1879)--The Feeling of Effort (1880)--The Sense of Dizziness in
     Deaf Mutes (1882)--What is an Emotion? (1884)--Review of Royce's
     _The Religious Aspect of Philosophy_ (1885)--The Consciousness of
     Lost Limbs (1887)--Réponse de W. James aux Remarques de M.
     Renouvier sur sa théorie de la volonté (1888)--The Psychological
     Theory of Extension (1889)--A Plea for Psychology as a Natural
     Science (1892)--The Original Datum of Space Consciousness
     (1893)--Mr. Bradley on Immediate Resemblance (1893)--Immediate
     Resemblance--Review of G. T. Ladd's _Psychology_ (1894)--The
     Physical Basis of Emotion (1894)--The Knowing of Things Together
     (1895)--Review of W. Hirsch's _Genie und Entartung_
     (1895)--Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results
     (1898)--Review of R. Hodgson's _A Further Record of Observations of
     Certain Phenomena of Trance_ (1898)--Review of Sturt's _Personal
     Idealism_ (1903)--The Chicago School (1904)--Review of F. C. S.
     Schiller's _Humanism_ (1904)--Laura Bridgman (1904)--G. Papini and
     the Pragmatist Movement in Italy (1906)--The Mad Absolute
     (1906)--Controversy about Truth with John E. Russell (1907)--Report
     on Mrs. Piper's Hodgson Control; Conclusion (1909)--Bradley or
     Bergson? (1910)--A Suggestion about Mysticism (1910).


     _A List of the Published Writings of William James_, with notes,
     and an index; by RALPH BARTON PERRY. New York and London: Longmans,
     Green & Co., 1920.




INDEX

THROUGHOUT the index the initial =J.= stands for William James. In the
list of references to his own writings, arranged alphabetically at the
end of the entries under his name, the titles of separate papers are set
in roman and quoted, those of volumes in italics.

The words "See Contents" under a name indicate that letters addressed to
the person in question are to be sought in the Table of Contents, where
all letters are listed.


Abauzit, F., =1=, 145, =2=, 185.

Abbot, F. E., _Scientific Theism_, =1=, 247.

Absolute, Philosophy of the, =1=, 238.

Absolute Unity, =1=, 231.

Académie Française, =2=, 338.

Académie des Sciences Morales, et Politiques, =J.= a corresponding
   member of, =2=, 75;
  =J.= an _associé étranger_ of, 328, 319, 338.

Adams, Brooks, =2=, 343.

Adams, Henry, _Letter to American Teachers_, =2=, 343 _ff._;
  mentioned, 10. _See Contents._

Adirondack range, =1=, 194, 195.

Adirondacks. _See_ Keene Valley.

Adler, Waldo, =2=, 75, 76, 163.

Æsthetics, Study of, and Art, =2=, 87.

Agassiz, Alexander, =1=, 31.

Agassiz, Louis, =J.= joins his Brazilian expedition, =1=, 54 _ff._,
  =J.= quoted on, 55;
  quoted, on =J.=, 56;
  on the Brazilian expedition, 56, 57, 59, 61, 67, 68, 69;
  described by =J.=, 65, 66;
  centenary of, =2=, 287, 288;
  mentioned, =1=, 34, 35, 37, 4=2=, 47, 48, 72, =2=, 2.

Agassiz, Mrs. Louis, her 80th birthday, =2=, 180 and _n._, 181;
  mentioned, =1=, 60, 65, 67. _See Contents_.

Aguinaldo, Emilio, =2=, 148.

Alcott, A. Bronson, =1=, 18 _n._

Allen, John A., =1=, 74.

Amalfi, Sorrento to, =2=, 22=1=, 222.

Amazon, the, Agassiz's expedition to. _See_ Brazil.

America, general aspect of the country, =1=, 346, 347 and _n._
  And _see_ United States.

American Philosophical Association, =2=, 163, 164, 300.

Americans, in Germany, =1=, 87.

Angell, James R., =1=, 345, =2=, 14.

Anglican Church, =2=, 305.

Anglicanism and Romanism, =2=, 305.

Anglophobia in U. S. revealed by Venezuela incident, =2=, 27, 31, 32.

Annunzio, Gabriele d', =2=, 63.

"Anti-pragmatisme," =2=, 319.

Aristotle, =1=, 283.

_Aristotelian Society Proceedings_, =2=, 207.

Arnim, Gisela von. _See_ Grimm, Mrs. Herman.

Ashburner, Anne, =1=, 179, 181, 315.

Ashburner, Grace, =1=, 181, 315. _See Contents_.

Ashfield, annual dinner at, =2=, 199.

Athens, =2=, 224, 225. And _see_ Parthenon, the.

Atkinson, Charles, =1=, 35.

Ausable Lakes, =1=, 194.

Austria, political conditions in (1867), =1=, 95.

Avenarius, =2=, 301.


Baginsky, Dr., =1=, 214.

Bain, Alexander, =1=, 143, 164.

Bakewell, Charles M., =2=, 14, 81, 85, 120, 248.

Baldwin, James M., =2=, 20.

Baldwin, William, =1=, 337.

Balfour, A. J., _Foundations of Belief_, =2=, 20.

Balzac, Honoré de, =1=, 106, =2=, 265.

Bancroft, George, =1=, 107, 109.

Bancroft, Mrs. George, =1=, 135.

Bancroft, John C., =1=, 70.

Baring Bros., =1=, 73.

Barber, Catherine, marries William James I, =1=, 4;
  her ancestry, 4 and _n._
  And _see_ James, Mrs. Catherine (Barber).

Barber, Francis, =1=, 5.

Barber, Jannet, =1=, 4 _n._

Barber, John, =J.='s great-grandfather, in the Revolutionary army,
  =1=, 4 and _n._;
  H. James, Senior, on, 5.

Barber, Mrs. John, =1=, 5.

Barber, Patrick, =1=, 4 _n._

Barber family, the, =1=, 4, 5.

Bashkirtseff, Marie, Diary of, =1=, 307, =2=, 148.

Bastien-Lepage, Jules, =1=, 210 and _n._

"Bay." _See_ Emmet, Ellen.

Bayard, Thomas F., =2=, 27 _n._

Beers, Clifford W., _A Mind that Found Itself_, =2=, 273, 274 and _n._
  _See Contents_.

Beethoven, Ludwig von, _Fidelio_, =1=, 112.

Belgium, philosophers in, =1=, 216.

Benn, A. W., =1=, 333, 334.

Berenson, Bernhard, =2=, 138.

Bergson, Henri, _Matière et Mémoire_, =2=, 178, 179;
  his system, 179;
  =J.='s enthusiasm for, 179, 180 _n._;
  _L'Evolution Créatrice_, 290 _ff._;
  _Le Rire_, 329;
  mentioned, 17=2=, 226, 257, 314, 315.
  _See Contents._

Berkeley, Sir W., _Principles_, =2=, 179.

Berlin, =1=, 100, 105, 106, 11=2=, 122.

Berlin, University of, =1=, 118, 120, 121.

Bernard, Claude, =1=, 72, 156.

Bhagavat-Gita, the, =2=, 238.

Bible, the, and orthodox theology, =2=, 196.

Bielshowski, A., _Life of Goethe_, =2=, 262.

Bigelow, Henry J., =1=, 72.

Bigelow, W., Sturgis, =2=, 10.

Birukoff, _Life of Tolstoy_, =2=, 262.

Black, W., _Strange Adventures of a Phaeton_, =1=, 173.

Blood, Benjamin Paul, _The Flaw in Supremacy_, =2=, 39;
  J.'s article on, in _Hibbert Journal_, 39 _n._, 347, 348;
  his _Anæsthetic Revolution_ reviewed by =J.=, 40 and _n._;
  his strictures on =J.='s English, 59;
  mentioned, 22, 338, 339.
  _See Contents._

Bôcher, Ferdinand, =1=, 337.

Boer War, the, =2=, 118, 140.

Bonn-am-Rhein, =1=, 20.

Boott, Elizabeth (Mrs. Frank Duveneck), =1=, 153, 155.

Boott, Francis, J.'s commemorative address on, =1=, 153;
  mentioned, 155, 341 _n._, =2=, 191.
  _See Contents._

Bornemann, Fraülein, =1=, 116, 135.

Bosanquet, B., quoted, =2=, 126.

Boston _Journal_, =2=, 329.

Boston _Transcript_, J.'s letter to, on Medical License bill, =2=, 68-70;
  72 and _n._, 124, 125.

Boulogne, Collège de, =1=, 20.

Bourget, Paul, _Idylle Tragique_, =2=, 37;
  and Tolstoy, 37, 38;
  mentioned, =1=, 348.

Bourget, Mme. Paul, =1=, 348.

Bourkhardt, James, =1=, 64, 70.

Bourne, Ansel, =1=, 294.

Boutroux, Émile, =2=, 314, 33=2=, 335, 337, 338.

Bowditch, Henry I., =1=, 124.

Bowditch, Henry P., =1=, 7=1=, 10=2=, 138, 139, 149, 167, 169, 195.
  _See Contents._

Bowen, Francis, =1=, 53.

Boyd, Harriet A. (Mrs. C. H. Hawes), =2=, 223, 224.

Bradley, Francis H., _Logic_, =1=, 258;
  mentioned, =2=, 142, 208, 216, 271, 272, 281, 282.

Brazil, Agassiz's expedition to, =1=, 54 _ff._;
  letters written by =J.=, 56-70;
  recalled, on Mrs. Agassiz's 80th birthday, =2=, 181.

Brazilians, the, =1=, 59, 66.

Brighton (England) Aquarium, =1=, 287.

British Guiana, =2=, 26.

British intellectuality, =1=, 270.

Brown-Séquard, Charles E., =1=, 71.

Browning, Robert, "A Grammarian's Funeral," =1=, 129, 130;
  mentioned, =2=, 123.

Bruno, Giordano, inscription on statue of, =2=, 139,

Bryce, James, =1=, 303, 345, =2=, 65, 298, 299.

Bryce, Mrs. James, =2=, 298, 299.

Bryn Mawr College, =2=, 120, 121.

Bull, Mrs. Ole, =2=, 144.

Bunch, a dog, =1=, 183.

Burkhardt, Jacob, _Renaissance in Italy_, =1=, 176.

Busse, _Leib und Seele, Geist and Körper_, =2=, 237 and _n._

Butler, Joseph, _Analogy_, =1=, 189.

Butler, Samuel, =1=, 283.


Cabot, J. Elliot, =1=, 204.

Caird, Edward, =1=, 205, 305.

California, impressions of, =2=, 82.

California, Northern, =2=, 80.

California, University of, =2=, 5.

California Champagne, Gift of, =1=, 291.

Canadian Pacific Ry., =2=, 80.

Carlyle, "Jenny," =2=, 192.

Carlyle, Thomas, and H. James, Senior, compared, =1=, 241;
  mentioned, 220.

Carnegie, Andrew, =2=, 18.

Carpenter, William B., =1=, 143.

Carqueiranne, Château de, =2=, 114.

Carrington, Hereward, =2=, 327.

Cams, Karl G., =1=, 96.

Casey, Silas, =1=, 155.

Castle Malwood, =2=, 160.

Catholic Church, =J.='s attitude toward, =1=, 296, 297.

Catholics, "concrete," differentiated from their church, =1=, 297.

Cattell, J. M., quoted, =1=, 300;
  mentioned, =2=, 32.

Census of Hallucinations in America, conducted by =J.=, =1=, 228,
  229, =2=, 50.

Chamberlain, Joseph, =1=, 303.

Chambers, Dr., _Clinical Lectures_, =1=, 150.

Chanzy, Antoine E. A., =1=, 160.

Chapman, John J., _Practical Agitation_, =2=, 124;
  _Political Nursery_, 128;
  mentioned, 125, 329.
  _See Contents._

Chapman, Mrs. John J., =2=, 256.

Charmes, Francis, =2=, 320.

Chatrian, L. G. C. A. _See_ Erckmann-Chatrian.

Chautauqua, =J.='s lectures at, and impressions of, =2=, 40 _ff._

Chesterton, Gilbert K., _Heretics_, =2=, 241, 260;
  mentioned, 257 and =n.=, 330.

Chicago, anarchist riot in, and English newspapers, =1=, 252.

Chicago University, School of Thought, =2=, 201, 202.

Child, Francis J., death of, =2=, 52;
  mentioned, =1=, 51, 169, 195, 291, 315 and _n._, 317.
  _See Contents._

Child, Mrs. F. J., =1=, 51, 197, =2=, 52.

Chocorua, =J.='s summer home at, =1=, 267, 268;
  life at, 271, 272;
  =J.='s life ends at, =2=, 350;
  =1=, 261, 323.

Christian Scientists, and the Medical License bill, =2=, 68, 69.

Christian Theology, position with reference to, =2=, 213, 214.

Clairvoyance. _See_ Psychic phenomena.

Claparède, Edward, =2=, 226, 227, 323.

Clark University, =2=, 327.

Clarke, Joseph Thatcher, =2=, 130.

Clemens, Samuel L. _See_ Twain, Mark.

Cleveland, Grover, his Venezuela Message, and its reaction on
  =J.=, =2=, 26 _ff._, 31, 32, 33, =2=, 285.

Clifford, W. K., =2=, 218.

Club, the, =2=, 9, 10.

Colby, F. M., =2=, 264.

Collier, Robert J. F., =2=, 264.

Colorado Springs, summer school at, =2=, 24.

Columbia Faculty Club, =J.='s talks at, =2=, 265 and _n._

Columbia University, =2=, 332.

Columbus, Christopher, and Dr. Bowditch, =1=, 124.

Common sense, =2=, 198.

Concord, Mass., Emerson centenary at, =2=, 194.

Concord Summer School of Philosophy, =1=, 230, 255.

Congress of the U. S., and the Spanish War, =2=, 73, 74.

Coniston, Ruskin Museum at, =2=, 306.

Continent, the, and England, contrasts between, =2=, 152, 305.

Conversion, =2=, 57.

Correggio, Antonio de, his Shepherds' Adoration, =1=, 90;
  and Rafael, 90.

Corruption, in Europe and America, =2=, 101.

Courtelines, G., _Les Marionettes de la Vie_, =2=, 336.

Courtier, M., =2=, 327.

Cousin, Victor, =1=, 117.

Crafts, James W., =2=, 10.

Cranch, Christopher P., =1=, 131.

_Critique Philosophique_, =1=, 188, 207.

Crothers, Samuel M., =2=, 262.

Cuba, and the Spanish War, =2=, 73, 74.


Danriac, Lionel, =2=, 45, 203.

Dante Alighieri, =1=, 331.

Darwin, Charles R., =1=, 225.

Darwin, Mrs. W. E. (Sara Sedgwick), =1=, 76, 179, =2=, 152.

Darwin, William E., =2=, 152.

Darwin, William Leonard, =2=, 276.

Daudet, Alphonse, =2=, 168.

Davidson. Thomas, =J.='s essay on, =2=, 107 _n._;
  =J.= lectures at his summer school, 197, 199;
  mentioned, =1=, 192, 202, 204, 249, 255, =2=, 156.
  _See Contents._

Davis, Jefferson, =1=, 66, 67.

Death, reflections concerning, =2=, 154.

Delboeuf, J., =1=, 216, 217.

Demoniacal possession, =2=, 56, 57.

Derby, Richard, =1=, 122.

Descartes, René C., =1=, 188, =2=, 13.

Determinism, =1=, 245, 246.

Dewey, John, _Beliefs and Realities_, =2=, 245, 246;
 mentioned, 202, 257.
 _See Contents._

Dexter, Newton, =1=, 68, 73.

Dibblee, Anita, =2=, 82, 84.

Dibblee, B. H., =2=, 82.

Dibblee, Mrs., =2=, 82, 84.

Dickinson, G. Lowes, _Justice and Liberty_, =2=, 317, 318.

Diderot, Denis, _OEuvres Choisis_, =1=, 106, 107;
  mentioned, 142.

Dilthey, W., =1=, 109, 110, 111.

Divonne, =1=, 137, 138.

Dixwell, Epes S., =1=, 124.

Dixwell, Fanny, =1=, 76 and _n._
  And _see_ Holmes, Mrs. Fanny Dixwell.

Dooley, Mr. _See_ Dunne, Finley P.

Dorr, George B., =2=, 255.

Dorrs, the, =2=, 63.

Dresden, =1=, 86, 9=2=, 93, 104.

Dresden Gallery, =1=, 90.

Dreyfus Case, the, =2=, 89, 97 _ff._, 102.

Driesch, Hans, _Gifford Lectures_, =2=, 323.

Driver, Dr., =2=, 118.

Du Bois, W. E. B., _The Souls of Black Folk_, =2=, 196 and _n._

Du Bois-Raymond, Emil, =1=, 121.

Dudevant, Mme. Aurore. _See_ Sand, George.

Du Maurier, George, _Peter Ibbetson_, =1=, 318.

Dunne, Finley P., =2=, 94, 264.

Durham, =2=, 306, 307.

Duveneck, Frank, =1=, 153, 337 and _n._, 341.

Duveneck, Mrs. Frank. _See_ Boott, Elizabeth.

Dwight, Thomas, =1=, 97, 98, 122, 124, 165, 166, 170.


Edinburgh, praise of, =2=, 146, 147, 150;
  social amenities in, 147, 148.

Education, importance of, =1=, 119.

Eliot, Charles W., quoted, on =J.= in Scientific School, =1=, 31, 32 and _n._;
  on J. Wyman, 47, 48;
  on courses given by =J.=, =2=, 4 _n._;
  mentioned, =1=, 35, 165, 166, 202, 262, =2=, 3, 15, 86, 137, 266.

Eliot, George, _Daniel Deronda_, =1=, 185.

Elliot, Gertrude, =2=, 263.

Elliot, John W., =2=, 129.

Elliot, Mrs. John W. (Mary Morse), =1=, 197, 199, =2=, 129.

Ellis, Rufus, =1=, 192.

Emerson, Edward W., on H. James, Senior, =1=, 17, 18 and _n._;
  mentioned, 33.

Emerson, Mary Moody, and H. James, Senior, =1=, 18 _n._

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, letters of H. James, Senior, to, quoted, =1=, 11;
  centenary of, =2=, 187, 190, 193, 194 (=J.='s address at);
  "the divine," 190, 191;
  his devotion to truth, 190;
  _Representative Men_, 192, 193;
  and Santayana, 234, 235;
  mentioned, =1=, 9, 18 _n._, 125, =2=, 23, 196, 197.

Emmet, Ellen, =1=, 316, =2=, 61, 82, 83, 84.
  _See Contents._

Emmet, Mrs. Temple (Ellen Temple), =2=, 64.

Emmet, Rosina H., =2=, 38, 61, 62, 64.
  _See Contents._

Emmet, Temple, =2=, 61.

Empiricism, =1=, 152. And _see_ Radical Empiricism.

England, in 1871, =1=, 161;
  gardens in, 288;
  impressions of, in 1901, =2=, 152;
  contrasted with Continental countries, 152, 305;
  and the U. S., 304, 305;
  changes in, 307;
  high state of civilization in, 307, 308.

English, in Germany, =1=, 87.

English language, the teaching of the, =1=, 341.

English newspapers, and the anarchist riot in Chicago, =1=, 252;
  attitude of, on Venezuela Message, =2=, 33;
  mentioned, 125, 126.

English people, one aspect of the greatness of, =1=, 288.

English social and political system, =1=, 232, 233.

Erb, Dr., =2=, 128.

Erckmann (Émile)-Chatrian (L. G. C. A.), _L'Ami Fritz_, =1=, 101;
  _Les Confessions d'un Joueur de Clarinette_, 101;
  _Histoire d'un Sous-Maître_, 162;
  mentioned, 106, 136.

Erdmann, Johann E., =1=, 345.

Erie Canal, the, =1=, 3.

_Essays Philosophical and Philological in Honor of William
  James_, =2=, 309, 310.

Esterhazy M. (Dreyfus case), =2=, 98, 100.

Evans, Mrs. Glendower. _See Contents._

Evans, Mary Anne. _See_ Eliot, George.

Everett, Charles Carroll, =1=, 202, =2=, 156.

Everett, William, =1=, 51.

Experience, The philosophy of, =2=, 184, 185, 187.


Faidherbe, Louis L. C., =1=, 160.

Fairchild, Sally, =2=, 205.

Faith-curers, and the Medical License bill, =2=, 68, 69, 70, 71.

Farlow, William G., =1=, 71.

Fechner, Gustav T., _Zend-Avesta_, =2=, 300, 309;
  mentioned, =1=, 160, =2=, 269, 318.

Fichte, Johann G., =1=, 141, =2=, 293.

Field, Kate, _Washington_, =1=, 308.

_Figaro_, =2=, 97, 99.

Fischer, Kuno, Essay on Lessing's _Nathan der Weise_, =1=, 94;
  _Hegel's Leben, Werke und Lehre_, =2=, 134, 135, 138.

Fiske, John, death of, =2=, 156, 157;
  _Cosmic Philosophy_, =2=, 233;
  mentioned, =1=, 347, =2=, 10.

Fitz, Reginald H., =1=, 162.

Flaubert, Gustave, _Madame Bovary_, =2=, 291;
  mentioned, =1=, 182.

Fletcher, Horace, =2=, 254.

Flint, Austin, =1=, 167.

Florence, Boboli Garden, =1=, 177; 180, 181, 328 _ff._, 340, 342.

Flournoy, Theodore, _William James_, =1=, 145 and _n._;
  beginnings of =J.='s friendship with, 320;
  _Métaphysique et Psychologie_, =2=, 25;
  on religious psychology, 185;
  reviews Myers's _Human Personality_, 185;
  lectures on pragmatism, 267;
  mentioned, 129, 172, 180 _n._, 227, 228, 315.
  His children referred to:
    Alice, =2=, 129, 241, 242;
    Ariane-Dorothée, 129;
    Henri, 186, 187;
    Marguerite, 129.
  _See Contents._

Flournoy, Mme. Theodore, =1=, 325, 326, =2=, 23, 25, 46,
  48, 53, 55, 129, 187, 310, 313.

Foote, Henry W., =1=, 111, 112, 113, 153.

Forbes, W. Cameron, =2=, 297. _See Contents._

Forbes-Robertson, J., =2=, 263.

Fouillée, Alfred, Renouvier's articles on, =1=, 231;
  mentioned, 324.

France, and Prussia (1867), =1=, 95;
  religious and revolutionary parties in, 161, 162;
  influence of Catholic education in, 162;
  and the Dreyfus case, =2=, 89;
  decadence of, 105, 106.

France, Anatole, =2=, 63.

Francis of Assisi, St., =2=, 142.

Francis Joseph, Emperor, =1=, 88.

Franco-Prussian War, =J.='s views on, =1=, 159, 160, 161.

Frazer, J. G., =2=, 139.

Free will, influence on =J.= of Renouvier's writings on, =1=, 147, 164,
  165, 169;
  and determinism, 186;
  S. H, Hodgson's paper on, 244, 245.

French language, =1=, 341.

Freud, Sigmund, =2=, 327, 328.


Galileo, =2=, 1 =n.=

Galileo anniversary at Padua, =1=, 333.

Gardiner, H. N., =2=, 163. _See Contents._

Gardner, Mrs. John L., =2=, 205.

Garibaldi, statue of, =2=, 139.

Gautier, Théophile, =1=, 106.

Geneva, "Academy" of, =1=, 20, =2=, 187;
  Museum at, 21.

German art, =1=, 105.

German character, =1=, 126.

German education, =1=, 121.

German essayists, discussed, =1=, 94, 95.

German genius, its massiveness, =2=, 176.

German language, =J.='s progress in learning, =1=, 87, 101, 108, 116, 121;
  mentioned, 87, 88, 89, 92, 341.

German motto, the, =1=, 213.

German universities, and Harvard, =1=, 217, 218 and _n._

Germans, =J.='s opinion of, =1=, 100, 101, 121, 122, =2=, 104.

Germany, =J.='s impressions of, =1=, 86, 105;
  peasant-women in, 211;
  philosophers in, 216, 217;
  in 1910, =2=, 341.

Gibbens, Alice H., early life, =1=, 192;
  marries =J.=, 192. And _see_ James, Mrs. William.

Gibbens, Mrs. E. P., =1=, 192, 222, 247, 248, 260, 339,
  =2=, 118. _See Contents._

Gibbens, Margaret, =1=, 248, 260, 279, 28=1=, 318. And
 _see_ Gregor, Mrs. Leigh R.
  _See Contents._

Gibbens, Mary, marries W. M. Salter, =1=, 248.

Gifford Lectures. _See_ this title under James, William, Works of.

Gilman, Daniel Coit, =1=, 202, 203.

Gizycki, Herr von, =1=, 214, 248.

Gladstone, William E., =2=, 31.

Glenmore, Davidson's summer school of philosophy at, =2=, 197 _n._, 199.

God, conceptions of, =2=, 211, 213, 269, 270.

Goddard, George A., =1=, 274.

Godkin, E. L., Life of, quoted, =1=, 17, 115 _n._;
  =J.='s opinion of, 284, 285;
  _Comments and Reflections_, =2=, 30;
  illness of, 160, 161;
  his death, 181;
  proposed memorial to, 18=1=, 182;
  his home life and his "life against the world," 182;
  mentioned, =1=, 118, 239, =2=, 167.
  _See Contents._

Godkin, Mrs. E. L., =1=, 240, 241, =2=, 30, 167.

Godkin, Lawrence, =2=, 30.

Goethe, Johann W. von, quoted, =1=, 54;
  _Italienische Reise_, 91;
  Vischer on Faust, 94;
  _Gedichte_, =2=, 176;
  mentioned, =1=, 104, 107.

Goldmark, Charles, =2=, 75, 77.

Goldmark, Josephine, =2=, 215.

Goldmark, Pauline, =2=, 75, 76, 94. _See Contents._

Goldmarks, the, =2=, 275.

Goldstein, Julius, =2=, 339.

Goodwin, William W., =1=, 51.

Gordon, George A., =1=, 277.

Grand Canyon of Arizona, =2=, 238, 239.

Grandfather Mountain, =1=, 316, 317.

Grant, Sir Ludovic, =2=, 144.

Grant, Percy, =2=, 262.

Grant, Ulysses S., =1=, 155.

Gray, John C., Jr., =1=, 102, 127, 154, 155, 168, 169, =2=, 9, 10, 288.
  _See Contents._

Gray, Roland, =2=, 109.

Great Britain, and Venezuela, =2=, 26, 27;
  and the Boer War, 140, 141.
  And _see_ England.

Greeks, the, =2=, 225.

Green, St. John, =2=, 233.

Greene, T. H., =2=, 237.

Gregor, Mrs. Leigh R. (Margaret Gibbens), =1=, 338, =2=, 106.
  And _see_ Gibbens, Margaret.

Gregor, Rosamund, =2=, 275 and _n._

Grimm, Herman, his _Unüberwindliche Mächte_, reviewed by
  =J.=, =1=, 103, 104 and _n._;
  his arrant moralism, 104;
  "suckled by Goethe," 104;
  J. dines with, 109 _ff._;
  his costume, 110;
  on Homer, 111;
  mentioned, 107, 108, 125.

Grimm, Mrs. Herman (Gisela von Arnim), =1=, 111, 116.

Grimm Brothers, =1=, 107, 110.

Grinnell, Charles E., =2=, 10.

Gryon, Switzerland, =1=, 321, 322.

Gurney, Edmund, _Phantasms of the Living_, =1=, 267;
  his death, 279;
  =J.='s regard for, 280 and _n._;
  mentioned, 222, 229 _n._, 242, 25=1=, 255, =2=, 30.

Gurney, Mrs. Edmund, =1=, 279, 287.

Gurney, Ephraim W., =1=, 76 _n._, 151.

Gurney, Mrs. Ephraim W. (Ellen Hooper), =1=, 76 _n._


Habit, Chapter on, in the _Psychology_, =1=, 297.

Halévy, Daniel, _Vie de Nietzsche_, =2=, 336, 340.

Hall, G. Stanley, quoted, =1=, 188, 189, 307;
  his new Journal, =2=, 210, 217;
  mentioned, =1=, 255, 269, =2=, 327.

Hallucinations, Census of. _See_ Census.

Hamilton, Alexander, =1=, 5.

Hamilton, Sir W., =1=, 189.

Hampton Court, =1=, 287.

Hapgood, Norman, =2=, 264.

Harris, Frank, _The Man Shakespeare_, =2=, 330, 335, 336.

Harris, William T., =1=, 201, 202, 204.

Hartmann, Karl R. E. von, =1=, 19=1=, =2=, 293.

Harvard Medical School, in the sixties, =1=, 71 _ff._;
  and the Medical License Bill, =2=, 67.

Harvard Psychological Laboratory, beginning of, =1=, 179 _n._;
  Münsterberg in charge of, 301, 302.

Harvard Summer School, =2=, 4.

Harvard University, beginning of =J.='s service in, =1=, 165;
  courses in philosophy offered by, 191;
  Hegelism at, 208;
  contrasted with German universities, 217, 218 and _n._;
  Department of Philosophy, =J.= on the future of, 317, 318;
  =J.='s new courses at, =2=, 3, 4;
  routine business of professors, 45 and _n._;
  a possible genuine philosophic universe at, 122;
  confers LL.D. on =J.=, 173 and _n._;
  =J.= resigns professorship at, 220, 266 and _n._;
  Roosevelt as possible President of, 232 and _n._

Havens, Kate, =1=, 85 _n._

Hawthorne Julian, _Bressant_, =1=, 167.

Hay, John, =1=, 251.

Hegel, Georg W. F., _Aesthetik_, =1=, 87;
  mentioned, 202, 205, 208, 305.

Hegelianism (Hegelism), at Harvard, =1=, 208;
  in the _Psychology_, 304 and _n._, 305;
  mentioned, =2=, 237.

Hegelians, =1=, 205.

Heidelberg, =1=, 137.

Helmholtz, H. L. F. von, _Optics_, =1=, 266;
  mentioned, 72, 119, 123, 137, 224, 225, 347.

Helmholtz, Frau von, =1=, 347.

Henderson, Gerard C., =2=, 275.

Henry, Joseph, =1=, 7.

Henry, Colonel (Dreyfus case), =2=, 98.

Herder, Johann G. von, =1=, 141.

Hering, Ewald, =1=, 212.

Hewlett, Maurice, _Halfway House_, =2=, 340.

Heymans, G., _Einführung in die Metaphysik_, =2=, 237 and _n._

Hibbert Foundation lectures (Manchester College), =2=, 283, 284.

_Hibbert Journal_, =2=, 313, 348,

Higginson, Henry L., takes charge of =J.='s patrimony, =1=, 233;
  and the Harvard Union, =2=, 108 and _n._;
  mentioned, 9, 10, 18=1=, 19=1=, 26=1=, 287, 329.
  _See Contents._

Higginson, James J., =1=, 102, 127.

Higginson, Storrow, =1=, 35.

Higginson, T. W., =2=, 191.

Hildreth, J. L., =1=, 275, 277.

Hildreth, Mrs. J. L., =1=, 276.

Hoar, George F., =2=, 191.

Hobhouse, L. T., and "The Will to Believe," =2=, 207, 209;
  mentioned, 282. _See Contents._

Hodder, Alfred, =2=, 14.

Hodges, George, =2=, 276,

Hodgson, Richard, death of, =2=, 242, 258;
  his work and character, 242;
  and Mrs. Piper, 242;
  =J.= investigates Mrs. Piper's claim to give communications
  from his spirit, 286, 287;
  =J.='s report thereon, 317, 319, 324;
  mentioned, =1=, 228, 229 _n._, 254, 281.

Hodgson, Shadworth H., "Time and Space," =1=, 188;
  "Theory of Practice," 188;
  "Philosophy and Experience," and "Dialogue on the Will," 243-245;
  mentioned, 143, 191, 202, 203, 204, 205, 208, 222.
  _See Contents._

Höffding, Harold, =2=, 216.

Holland, Mrs. _See_ Mediums.

Holmes, O. W., =1=, 71.

Holmes, O. W., Jr., =1=, 60, 73, 76, 80, 154, 155, =2=, 10, 51.
  _See Contents._

Holmes, Mrs. O. W., Jr. (Fanny Dixwell), her "panel" and its
  inscription, =2=, 156 and _n._, 157.

Holt, Edwin B., =2=, 234.

Holt, Henry, =2=, 18. _See Contents._

Holt, Henry, & Co., J. contracts to write volume on Psychology for, =1=, 194.

Homer, =1=, 111.

Hooper, Edward W., =2=, 156.

Hooper, Ellen, =1=, 76 and _n._

Hooper, Ellen (Mrs. John Potter), =2=, 275.

Hooper, Louisa, =2=, 275.

Hopkins, Woolsey R., describes accident to H. James, Senior, =1=, 7, 8.

Horace Mann Auditorium, =2=, 17.

Horse-swapping, =1=, 271.

House of Commons, =1=, 345, 346.

Howells, W. D., _Indian Summer_, =1=, 253;
  _Shadow of a Dream_, 298;
  _Hazard of New Fortunes_, 298, 299;
  _Rise of Silas Lapham_, 307;
  _Minister's Charge_, 307, 308;
  _Lemuel Barker_, 308;
  _Criticism and Fiction_, 308;
  mentioned, =1=, 158, =2=, 10.
  _See Contents._

Howells, Mrs. W. D., =1=, 253, 298, 299.

Howison, George H., =1=, 239 _n._, 304, =2=, 78.
  _See Contents._

Hugo, Victor, _Les Misérables_, =1=, 263;
  _La Légende des Siècles_, =2=, 63;
  mentioned, =1=, 90, =2=, 51.

Huidekoper, Rosamund, =2=, 275.

Humanism, =2=, 245, 282.

Humboldt, H. A. von, _Travels_, =1=, 62.

Humboldt, W., letters of, =1=, 141.

Hume, David, =1=, 187, =2=, 18, 123, 165.

Hunnewell, Walter, =1=, 68.

Hunt, William M., =1=, 24.

Hunter, Ellen (Temple), =2=, 258, 262.

Huxley, Thomas H., =J.= quoted on, =1=, 226 _n._;
  his _Life and Letters_, 226 _n._, =2=, 248;
  mentioned, =2=, 218.

Hyatt, Alpheus, =1=, 31.

Hyslop, James H., =2=, 242, 287.


Ideal, the, =1=, 238.

Idealism, Absolute, Royce's argument for, =1=, 242.

Immortality, =1=, 310, =2=, 214, 287.

Imperialism, =2=, 74.

Indians, in Brazil, =1=, 66, 67, 70.

Indifferentism, =1=, 238.

Insane, proposed national society to improve condition of, =2=, 273, 274.

Intellectualism, =2=, 291, 292.

Italian language, =1=, 341, =2=, 222.

Italy, =1=, 175, 180, 181.


Jacks, L. P., =2=, 339, 348.

Jackson Henry, =1=, 274, 275.

Jacobi, Friedrich H., =1=, 141.

James, Alexander R. (=J.='s son), =2=, 37, 43, 92. _See Contents._

James, Alice (=J.='s sister), her diary quoted, =1=, 16;
  in England with H. James, Jr., from 1885 on, 258;
  her illness, 258, 259, 284;
  her diary quoted, 259 _n._;
    quoted, on =J.='s European trip in 1889, 289, 290;
  her death, 319;
  mentioned, 18, 47, 60, 69, 91, 103, 142, 172, 183, 217,
  220, 281, 285, 286, =2=, 127.
  _See Contents._

James, Mrs. Catherine (Barber), third wife of W. James I, (=J.='s paternal
  grandmother), "a dear gentle lady," =1=, 6;
  her house in Albany, 105;
  mentioned, 4, 5 _n._, 7.

James, Garth Wilkinson (=J.='s brother), wounded at Fort Wagner,
  =1=, 43, 44, 49;
  mentioned, =1=, 17, 33, 35, 36, 40, 41, 42, 51, 52, 60,
  69, 70, 88, 135 _n._, 136, 192.

James, Henry, Senior (=J.='s father), quoted, on his father, =1=, 4,
    his grandfather, 5,
    and his mother, 5 and _n._;
  his habit of thought expressed in his description of his mother, 5 _n._;
  sketch of his life and character, 7-19;
  maimed for life by accident, 7, 8;
  his discontent with orthodox dispensation, 8;
  marries Mary Walsh, 8;
  =J.='s striking resemblance to, 10;
  relations with his children, 10, 18, 19;
  =J.='s introduction
  to his _Literary Remains_, 10, 13;
  letters of, to Emerson, 11;
  effect of Swedenborg's works on, 12;
  the only business of his later life, 1=2=, 13;
  =J.='s
estimate of, 13;
  Henry James quoted on, 14;
  letter of, to editor of _New Jerusalem Messenger_, 14-16;
  his directions regarding his funeral service, 16;
  Godkin quoted on, 17;
  E. W. Emerson quoted on, 17, 18 and _n._;
  and Miss Emerson, 18 _n._;
  influence of his "full and homely idiom" on the conversation of
  his sons, 18;
  his philosophy, discussed by =J.=, 96, 97;
  his essay on Swedenborg, 117;
  letter of, to Henry James, 169;
  dangerously ill, 218;
  =J.='s last letter to, 218-220;
  his _Secret of Swedenborg_, 220;
  his death, 221;
  =J.='s memories of, 221, 222;
  his mentality described, 241, 242;
  compared with Carlyle, 241;
  mentioned, =2=, 6, 7, 27, 36, 53, 68, 80, 92, 103, 104, 115 and
  _n._, 118, 135 _n._, 153, 157, 158 and _n._, 175,
  217, 260, 289, 290, 316, =2=, 39, 278.
  _See Contents._

_Literary Remains_ of, edited by =J.=, =1=, 4 and _n._, 5 _n._, 10,
  13, 236, 239, 240, 241.

James, Mrs. Henry, Senior (Mary Walsh), (=J.='s mother), her character,
  =1=, 9;
  her death, 218;
  mentioned, 8, 69, 80, 103, 117, 156, 175, 183, 219, 220. _See Contents._

James, Henry, Jr. (=J.='s brother), impressions of an elder generation
  reflected in _The Wings of the Dove_, =1=, 7;
  and his mother, 9; his birth, 9;
  quoted, on his father, 14;
  influence of his father's "idiom" on his speech, 18;
  at the Collège de Boulogne, 20;
  early secret passion for authorship, 21;
  his "meteorological blunder," 21; quoted, on =J.=, as
  "he sits drawing," 22, 23;
  letter of his father to, 169;
  his feeling for Europe, 209;
  its reaction on him and on =J.=, contrasted, 209, 210;
  described by =J.=, 288;
  his "third manner" of writing criticized by =J.=, =2=, 240, 277-279;
  his paper on Boston, 252;
  mentioned, =1=, 17, 25, 33, 36, 40, 41, 45, 51, 53, 68,
  70, 76, 80, 90, 94, 95, 99, 100, 115, 117, 118, 136, 138,
  141, 148 _n._, 174, 175, 177, 178, 180, 218, 219, 240, 258,
  260, 262, 269, 283, 284, 286, 287, 289, 290, 319, =2=, 10,
  35, 61, 62, 84, 105,  106, 110, 161, 167, 168, 169, 170, 192,
  193, 215, 224, 250, 280, 315, 333, 335, 338, 341, 350.
  _See Contents._

  Works of: _The American_, =1=, 185;
  _The American Scene_, =2=, 264, 277, 299;
  _The Bostonians_, =1=, 250, 25=1=, 25=2=, 253;
  _The Golden Bowl_, =2=, 240;
  Notes _of a Son and Brother_, =1=, 10, 11 _n._, 24, 32, 36, 135 _n._;
  _Partial Portraits_, 280;
  _The Portrait of a Lady_, 36;
  _Princess Cassamassima_, 251;
  _The Reverberator_, 280;
  _Roderick Hudson_, 184;
  _W. W. Story, Life of_, 27 _n._;
  _The Tragic Muse_, 299;
  _A Small Boy and Others_, 4 _n._, 8 _n._, 9, 10, 14, 20, 21, 22, 23;
  _The Wings of the Dove_, 7, 36, =2=, 240.

James, Henry, 3d (=J.='s son), =1=, 275, 278, 279, 282, 329, 330,
  336, 343, =2=,
  30, 31, 84, 129, 143, 145, 147, 159, 324.
  _See Contents._

James, Hermann (J.'s son), birth of, =1=, 234, 235; death of, 247.

James, Margaret M. (=J.='s daughter), birth of, =1=, 267;
  mentioned, 275, 276, 279, 281, 322, 332, 336, =2=, 43, 54,
  98, 102, 110, 130, 191.
  _See Contents._

James, Robertson (=J.='s brother), in Union army, =1=, 43, 44;
  mentioned, 17, 33, 41, 43, 52, 60, 69, 70, 81, 136.

James, William, =J.='s grandfather, his career, from penury to
  great wealth, =1=, 2, 3;
  a leading citizen of Albany, 3;
  personal appearance, 3;
  anecdotes of, 3, 4;
  H. James, Senior, quoted on, 4;
  his stiff Presbyterianism and its results, 4;
  his will disallowed by court, 4, 6;
  marries Catherine Barber, 4.

James, William, (=J.='s uncle), =1=, 6.

JAMES, WILLIAM.
  His ancestors in America, =1=, 1;
  recurrence of his father's habit of thought in, 5 _n._;
  and his mother, 9;
  resemblance of, to his father, 10;
  quoted, on his father, 13;
  influence of his father's "idiom," 18 and _n._;
  frequent changes of schools and tutors, 19;
  in Europe, 1855 to 1858, 19;
  at the Collège de Boulogne, and the "Academy" of Geneva, 20;
  quoted, on his education, 20;
  interest in exact knowledge, 20;
  begins study of anatomy at Geneva, 21;
  his cosmopolitanism of consciousness, 22;
  widely read in three languages, 22;
  effect of his early training, 22;
  takes up painting, 22-24;
  portrait of Katharine Temple, 24;
  physique, personal appearance and dress, 24, 25;
  temperament and conversation, 26;
  "smiting" quality of his best talk, 27;
  keen about new things, 28;
  disadvantage
of being too encouraging to "little geniuses," 28, 29;
  freer criticism of those who had arrived, 29;
  influence as a teacher at Harvard, 29, 30;
  in Lawrence Scientific School, 31 and _n._;
  physical condition keeps him out of army in Civil War, 47;
  transfers from Chemistry to Comparative Anatomy, 47;
  and Jeffries Wyman, 48, 49;
  begins course at Medical School, 53;
  philosophy begins to beckon, 53;
  joins Agassiz's expedition to the Amazon, 54;
  his nine months with Agassiz not wasted, 55, 56;
  has small-pox at Rio, 60, 61, 63 and _n._;
  interne at Mass. General Hospital, 71;
  again in Medical School, 71-84.

  Impaired health causes his visit to Germany, 84, 85;
  in Dresden, Berlin and Teplitz, 85, 86;
  describes his condition in letter to his father, 95, 96;
  returns to U. S., 139;
  takes degree of M.D. (1869), 140;
  eye-weakness, 140, 141;
  scope of his reading, 141, 142 and _n._, 143;
  his note-books, 143, 144;
  relation between earlier and later writings, 144 and _n._;
  morbid depression, 145;
  chapter on the "sick soul" the story of his own case, 145-147;
  return of resolution and self-confidence, 147, 148;
  Instructor in Physiology, 165;
  his real subject, physiological psychology, 165, 166;
  his deepest inclination always toward philosophy, 166;
  H. James, Senior's, letter on the change in =J.='s mental tone
  and outlook, 169, 170;
  decides to devote himself to biology, 171;
  Europe again, 171;
  end of the period of morbid depression, 171;
  gives course in Psychology and organizes Psychological Laboratory,
  179 and _n_,;
  contributions to periodicals, 180;
  on teaching of philosophy in American colleges, 189 _ff._

  Marries Alice H. Gibbens, 192;
  effect of his new domesticity, 193;
  importance of his wife's companionship and understanding, 193;
  contracts to write a volume on Psychology, 194;
  vacations in Keene Valley, 195;
  his mode of life there, 195;
  a bit of self-analysis, 199, 200;
  first work on _Psychology_, 203, 223;
  declines invitation to teach at Johns Hopkins, 203;
  in Europe, 1880-83, 208 _ff._;
  and Henry James, 209, 210;
  "reaction" on Europe, 209, 210;
  death of his mother, 218, and of his father, 221;
    his memories of them, 221, 222;
  corresponding member of English Society for Psychical Research, 227;
    an organizer and officer of the American Society, 227;
    investigates psychic phenomena, 227 _ff._;
  conducts American Census of Hallucinations, 228, 229;
  edits his father's _Literary Remains_, 236, 239 _ff._;
  his life at Chocorua, 271, 272, 273.

  Abroad in 1889, 286 _ff._;
  at International Congress of Physiological Psychology, 288, 289, 290;
  his new house in Cambridge, 290, 291;
  his inclination toward the under-dog, 292, 293, =2=, 178;
  completion of the _Psychology_, =1=, 293 _ff._;
  effect of its publication on his reputation, 300;
  prepares an abridgment (_Briefer Course_), 300, 301;
  turns his attention more fully toward philosophy, 301;
  raises money for Harvard Laboratory, 301, and recommends Münsterberg
  as its head, 301;
  his sabbatical year abroad, 302, 320 _ff._;
  beginning of his friendship with Flournoy, 320;
  receives honorary degree at Padua, 333.

  How his mind was moving during the nineties, =2=, 2 _ff._;
  his opinion of psychology, 2;
  new courses at Harvard, 3, 4;
  outside lecturing, 4;
  would devote his thought and work to metaphysical and religious
  questions, 5;
  frustrations, 5, 6;
  personal appearance, 6, 7;
  his daily round, 7-9;
  the Club, 9, 10;
  nervous break-down, 10;
  D. S. Miller quoted on, 11-17;
  attitude toward spelling reform, 18, 19;
  and Cleveland's Venezuela Message, 26 _ff._;
  experiments with mescal, 35, 37;
  Chautauqua lectures, 40 _ff._;
  work on college committees, 45 _n._,
  at Faculty meetings, 45 _n._,
  lectures at Lowell Institute, 54 and _n._, 55;
  invited to deliver Gifford Lectures at Edinburgh, 55;
  Blood's strictures on his English, 59;
  on a proposed Medical License bill, 66 _ff._;
  on the Spanish War, 73, 74;
  corresponding member of Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, 75;
  a memorable night in the Adirondacks, 75-77.

  Effect on his health of misadventures in the Adirondack, 78, 79, 90, 91;
  two years of exile and illness, 92 _ff._;
  an individualist and a liberal, 93;
  opposed to Philippine policy of McKinley administration, 93, 94;
  his teaching limited to a half-course a year, 171;
  lectures and contributions to philosophic journals, 171;
  strain on his strength, 171;
  the spirit in which he did his work, 172, 173;
  receives LL.D. from Harvard, 173 and _n._;
  replies to Prof. Pratt's _Questionnaire_, 212-215;
  at Philosophical Congress at Rome, 219, 220, 225 _ff._;
  lectures at Stanford University, 220, 235, 240, 244 and _n._;
  and the San Francisco earthquake, 220, 246 _ff._;
  _Pragmatism_, 220;
  resigns his professorship, 220, 266 and _n._;
  the last meeting of his class, 220, 221, 262.

  Declining health, 283, 333;
  lectures on Hibbert Foundation at Oxford, 283, 284;
  uncompleted projects, 284;
  his attitude toward war, 284, 285, and universal arbitration, 285;
  tolerance fundamental in his scheme of belief, 286;
  his report on "Mrs. Piper's Hodgson control," 286, 287;
  last months in Europe, 333 _ff._;
  farewell to Harvard Faculty, 334;
  returns to Chocorua, 350;
  the end, 350.

  Letters containing moral counsel, or touching upon problems of _Belief_,
  =2=, 57, 65, 76, 77, 149, 150, 196, 197, 210, 211, 212-215, 269, 326,
  344-346;
  _Conduct_, =1=, 77-79, 100, 128 _ff._, 148, 199, 200, =2=, 131, 132;
  _Life and Death_, =1=, 218-220, 309-311, =2=, 130, 154.

  WORKS OF:--
    "Address of the President before the Society for Psychical Research,"
    =2=, 30 and _n._
    "Bain and Renouvier," 1, 186.
    _Briefer Course_ (abridgment of the _Principles of Psychology_), =1=,
    300, 301, 304, 314.
    "Brute and Human Intellect," =1=, 180.
    "Certain Blindness in Human Beings, A," =2=, 5.
    _Collected Essays and Reviews_, =1=, 225 _n._, =2=, 20 _n._, 287, 295 _n_.
    "Confidences of a Psychical Researcher," =2=, 327 and _n._
    "Dilemma of Determinism, The," =1=, 237 and _n._, 238.
    "Does Consciousness Exist?" _See_ "Notion de Conscience, La."
    "Energies of Men, The," =2=, 252, 284.
    "Feeling of Effort, The," =1=, 207.
    "Frederick Myers's Service to Psychology," =2=, 151 and _n._
    "German-American Novel, A." =1=, 104 _n._
    Gifford Lectures on Natural Religion, =J.= invited to deliver, =2=, 55;
      preparing for, 85, 92, 93;
      delivered, 144 _ff._;
      success of, 147, 149, 150, 151;
      outline of, 150;
      published as _Varieties of Religious Experience_, 169;
      mentioned, 75, 96, 97, 105, 108, 111, 115, 127, 134, =2=, 162, 164, 165.
      And _see_ _Varieties of Religious Experience_, _infra_.
    "How Two Minds can Know One Thing," =2=, 217 and _n._
    _Human Immortality_, =2=, 180 and _n._
    "Introspective Psychology, On Some Omissions of," =1=, 230.
    "Knight-Errant of the Intellectual Life, A," =2=, 107 _n._
    Lowell Institute Lectures, =2=, 54 and _n._, 55.
    _Meaning of Truth, The_, =2=, 20 _n._, 327.
    _Memories and Studies_, =1=, 153, 226 _n._, 229 _n._, =2=, 39
    _n._, 59 _n._, 107 _n._, 151 _n._,
    193, 247, 285 _n._, 287, 327 _n._
    "Moral Equivalent of War, The," =2=, 284.
    "Notion de Conscience, La," =2=, 226 and _n._, 267 and _n._
    "Perception of Space, The," =1=, 266 _n._
    "Perception of Time, The," =1=, 266.
    "Philosophic Reveries," =2=, 339.
    "Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results," =2=, 5.
    _Philosophy, Some Problems of_, =1=, 144 _n._, 186.
    _Pluralistic Mystic, A._ (lectures on Hibbert Foundation), =2=, 39 _n._,
    300, 311, 313, 322, 324, 325, 326, 339.
    _Pragmatism_, =2=, 17, 276, 279, 292, 294, 295, 300;
      translated by W. Jerusalem, 297.
    "Pragmatism's Conception of Truth," =2=, 271 and _n._
    "Proposed Shortening of the College Course," =2=, 45 _n._
    _Psychology, Principles of_, =1=, 194, 203, 223, 224, 249,
    268, 269, 283, 293 _ff._, 296, 297, 300, 301, 304 and _n._, 305,
    307, 320, =2=, 12, 13.
    "Quelques Considérations sur la Méthode Subjective," =1=, 180.
    _Radical Empiricism, Essays in_, =2=, 267 _n._
    "Radical Empiricism, Is it Solipsistic?" =2=, 218.
    "Radical Empiricism as a Philosophy," =2=, 197 _n._
    _Selected Essays and Reviews_, =2=, 271.
    "Sentiment of Rationality, The," =1=, 203 and _n._
    "Shaw Monument, Oration on Unveiling of," =2=, 59, 60.
    "Spatial Quale, The," =1=, 205 and _n._
    "Spencer's Definition of Mind as Correspondence," =1=, 180.
    _Talks to Teachers and Students on Some of Life's Problems_, =2=,
    4, 5, 40, 79, 286.
    "Tigers in India, The," =2=, 20 _n._
    _Varieties of Religious Experience._ (Gifford Lectures), =1=, 145-147,
    293, =2=, 169, 170, 209, 210, 268.
    "What Psychical Research has Accomplished," =1=, 229 and _n._, 306.
    "_Will to Believe, The_," =2=, 44, 48, 85, 87, 88, 207, 208, 209, 282.
    _Will to Believe, The, and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy_, =1=, 229
    _n._, 237 _n._, 280 _n._, =2=, 4, 5, 34, 58 _n._, 64.
    "Word More about Truth, A," =2=, 295.
      _See_ also list of Dates at the beginning of Volume I, and the partial
    bibliography (Appendix II, _infra_).

James, Mrs. William (Alice Gibbens), =1=, 192, 193, 195, 196, 217, 218, 232,
    237, 247, 269, 276, 277, 278, 279, 281, 286, 288, 294, 297, 298, 316, 319,
    321, 325, 328, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 346, =2=, 5, 7, 8, 9, 20, 24, 34,
    35, 36, 37, 38, 52, 59, 60, 63, 92, 93, 96, 97, 110, 111, 112, 113, 129,
    134, 145, 147, 158, 159, 161, 165, 175, 176, 182, 187, 188, 193, 215, 223,
    233, 247, 250, 256, 258, 259, 275, 312, 313, 333, 334, 338, 350.
  _See Contents._

James, William (=J.='s son), birth of, =1=, 234;
  mentioned, 237, 260, 275, 276, 277, 282, 329, 330, 336, 346, =2=,
  92, 98, 129, 159, 174, 175, 185, 186, 187, 250, 258, 259, 274, 275, 276.
  _See Contents._

Jameson Raid, =2=, 27.

Janet, Pierre, =2=, 216, 217, 226, 254.

Janet, Mme. Pierre, =2=, 216.

Jap, a dog, =1=, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279.

Jefferies, Richard, _The Life of the Fields_, =2=, 258, 259.

Jeffries, B. Joy, =1=, 163.

Jerome, W. T., =2=, 264.

Jerusalem, W. _See Contents._

Jevons, F. B., =2=, 306.

"Jimmy," students' name for the _Briefer Course_, =1=, 301.

Johns Hopkins University, =J.= declines invitation to teach at, =1=, 203.

Johnson, Alice, =2=, 311.

_Journal of Speculative Philosophy_, =1=, 266, =2=, 339.

Jung-Stilling, Johann K., _Autobiography_, =1=, 155.


Kallen, Horace M., =2=, 271.

Kant, Immanuel, _Kritik der reinen Vernunft_, =1=, 138, =2=, 179;
  =J.= lectures on, 45, 47, 51, 54;
  mentioned, =1=, 117, 141, 191, 202, 205, =2=, 3.

Kaulbach, W. von, =1=, 90.

Keane, Bishop, =1=, 294.

Keene Valley, Adirondacks, =J.='s summer holidays in, =1=, 194, 195, 196;
  an eventful 24 hours, and its effect, =2=, 75-79, 95;
  his further misadventure, 90, 91;
  mentioned, =1=, 232, =2=, 51, 259, 261, 296, 297.

Kipling, Rudyard, _The Light that Failed_, =1=, 307;
  mentioned, =2=, 21, 22, 231.

Kitchin, George W., =2=, 306.

Knox, H. V., =2=, 313, 314.

Kruger, Paul, =2=, 27.

Kolliker, R. A. von, =1=, 123.

Kosmos, the startling discoveries concerning, =1=, 101.

Kühnemann, Eugen, =2=, 263.


La Farge, Bancel, =2=, 275.

La Farge, John, =1=, 24, 91, =2=, 173.

Lamar, Lucuis Q. C., =1=, 251.

Lamb, Charles, =2=, 239.

Lamb House, Rye, Henry James's English home, =2=, 107, 111.

Lawrence Scientific School, Chemical laboratory in, =1=, 31;
  C. W. Eliot quoted on =J.='s course in, 31, 32 and _n._

Leibnitz, Baron G. W. von, =2=, 13.

Lemaître, Jules, =2=, 63.

_Leonardo_, =2=, 227, 228, 245.

Leopardi, Giacomo, "To Sylvia," =1=, 246 and _n._

Lesley, Susan I., _Recollections of my Mother_, =2=, 135 and _n._

Lessing, Gotthold E., _Emilia Galotti_, =1=, 91;
  Fischer's Essay on _Nathan der Weise_, 94.

Leuba, James H., =2=, 210, 211, 218.
  _See Contents._

Lincoln, Abraham, effect of his death, =1=, 66, 67;
  characterized by =J.=, 67.

Linville, N. C., =1=, 316, 317.

Lister, Sir Joseph, =1=, 72.

Lloyd, Henry D., =2=, 166.

Locke, John, =1=, 191, =2=, 165, 257.

Lodge, Henry Cabot, =2=, 30.

Lodge, Sir Oliver, =1=, 229 _n._

Loeser, Charles A., =1=, 337, 339.

Lombroso, Cesar, =2=, 15.

London, =1=, 175, =2=, 307.

London, _Times_, =2=, 43, 65, 118.

Long, George, =1=, 78.

Loring, Katharine P., =1=, 259, 262, 311, 316.

Lotze, Rudolf H., =1=, 206, 208.

Loubet, Émile, President of France, =2=, 89, 98.

Lowell, A. Lawrence, =2=, 326.

Lowell, James Russell, death of, =1=, 314, 315 _n._;
  =J.='s memory of, 315;
  mentioned, 195.

Lucerne, =2=, 133.

Ludwig, Karl F. W., =1=, 72, 160, 215.

Lutoslawski, W., =2=, 103, 171.
  _See Contents._


McDougall, William, =2=, 313, 314, 315.

McKinley, William, and the Spanish War, =2=, 74;
  Philippine Policy of his administration disapproved by =J.=, 93, 94, 289;
  and Roosevelt, =J.='s description of, 94;
  mentioned, 50, 101, 102, 109.

MacMonnies, F. W., Bacchante, =2=, 62 and _n._, 63.

Macaulay, Thomas B., Lord, =1=, 225.

Mach, Ernst, =1=, 211, 212.

Maine, U. S. S., explosion of, =2=, 73.

Manchester College. _See_ Hibbert Foundation.

Marcus Aurelius, =1=, 78, 79.

Marshall, Henry Rutgers, _Instinct and Reason_, =1=, 87.
  _See Contents_.

Martin, L. J., =2=, 246, 249.

Martineau, James, =1=, 283.

Mascagni, Pietro, _I Rantzau_, =1=, 334, 335.

Massachusetts General Hospital, =1=, 71, 72.

Materialism, =1=, 82, 83.

Maudsley, Henry, =1=, 143.

Maupassant, Guy de, =1=, 282.

Medical License bill (proposed), in Mass., =2=, 66 _ff._

Mediums, =1=, 228, =2=, 287, 311.
  And _see_ Paladino, Eusapia, and Piper, Mrs.

Mental Hygiene, Connecticut Society for, =2=, 273;
  National Committee for, 273.

Merriman, Daniel. _See Contents._

Merriman, Mrs. Daniel, =2=, 118.

Merriman, R. B., =2=, 63, 66, 132, 175.

Mescal, =J.='s experiment with, =2=, 35, 37.

Metaphysical problems, =J.='s mind haunted by, =2=, 2.

Metaphysics, outline of course offered by =J.= in, =2=, 3, 4;
  =J.='s proposed system of, 179, 180.

Meysenbug, Malwida von, _Memoiren einer Idealistin_, =2=, 135 and _n._

Mezes, Sidney E., =2=, 14.

Mill, John Stuart, =1=, 164, =2=, 267.

Miller, Dickinson S., quoted, on =J.= as a teacher and lecturer, =2=, 11-17;
  "Truth and Error," 18;
  quoted, on =J.='s talks with Columbia Faculty Club, 265 _n._;
  his "study" of =J.=, 331, 332;
  mentioned, 87, 88, 137, 163, 232 _n._, 282.
  _See Contents._

_Mind_, =1=, 254, 255.

Mind-curers. _See_ Faith-curers.

Miracles, =2=, 57, 58.

Mitchell, S. Weir, =2=, 37.

Monism, =1=, 238, 244, 245.

Montgomery, Edmund, =1=, 254, 255.

Morgan, C. Lloyd, =2=, 216.

Moritz, C. P., =1=, 141.

Morley, John, _Voltaire_, =1=, 144 _n._

Morse, Frances R., =1=, 197, =2=, 106, 113, 232.
  _See Contents._

Morse, Mary. _See_ Elliot, Mrs. John W.

Morse, John T., =2=, 10.

Motterone, Monte, =1=, 324.

Müller, G. E., =1=, 312, 313.

Munich Congress, =2=, 46, 50.

Munk, H., =1=, 213, 114.

Münsterberg, Hugo, recommended by =J.= as head
  of Harvard Psychological Laboratory, =1=, 301, 302;
  "the Rudyard Kipling of philosophy," 318;
  "an immense success," 332;
  criticizes =J.=, =2=, 267, 268;
  mentioned, =1=, 312, =2=, 2, 18, 121, 229, 270, 293, 320.
  _See Contents._

Murray, Gilbert, =2=, 271.

Musset, Alfred de, =2=, 63.

Myers, F. W. H., _Human Personality_, =1=, 229 _n._, =2=, 151, 185 and _n._;
  death of, 141;
  =J.='s tribute to, 141, 151, 157;
  mentioned, =1=, 287, 290, =2=, 57, 114, 118, 156, 157, 161.
  _See Contents._

Myers, Mrs. F. W. H., =1=, 290, 345, =2=, 151, 157.


Naples, =2=, 222.

_Nation, The_, review of _Literary Remains of Henry James_ in, =1=, 240, 241;
  =J.='s comments on, 284;
  and Cleveland's Venezuela Message, =2=, 28;
  mentioned, =1=, 70, 92, 104 and _n._, 117, 118, 161,
  186, 188, 189, =2=, 42, 182, 332.

Nauheim (Bad), =2=, 92, 93, 95, 104, 107, 134, 135, 157, 158, 160, 333, 338.

Neilson, Adelaide, =1=, 168.

Nevins, John C., _Demon Possession and Allied Themes_, =2=, 56 and _n._

New Forest, The, =2=, 160, 161.

_New Jerusalem Messenger_, H. James, Senior's, letter to
  editor of, =1=, 14-16.

_New World, The_, =1=, 334, =2=, 44.

New York City, =2=, 264, 265.

Newcomb, Simon, =1=, 250.

Newport, R. I., =2=, 202, 203.

Newton, Sir Isaac, =2=, 1 _n._

Nichols, Herbert, =1=, 335, =2=, 14.

Nietzsche, Friedrich W., =2=, 233.

Nivedita, Sister, =2=, 144.

Nonentity, Idea of, =2=, 293.

Nordau, Max S., _Entartung_, =2=, 19;
  mentioned, 17.

Norton, Charles Eliot, Ruskin's letters to, =2=, 206;
  mentioned, =1=, 181, 291, 331, 338, 347, =2=, 191, 199.
  _See Contents._

Norton, Grace, =1=, 284, =2=, 191.
  _See Contents._

Norton, Mrs. Charles E. (Susan Sedgwick), =1=, 181.

Norton Woods, the, =2=, 201.


Olney, Richard, and the Venezuela Message, =2=, 27, 29.

Optimism, =1=, 83, 238.

Oregon, forest fires in, =2=, 80.

Ostensacken, Baron, =1=, 337, 339.

Ostwald, W., =2=, 229.

Oxford, =2=, 307.


Padua, Galileo anniversary at, =1=, 333 and _n._;
  University of, confers degree on =J.=, 333.

Pædagogy, =2=, 47.

Paladino, Eusapia, =2=, 186 and _n._, 311, 320, 327.

Paley, William, =1=, 283.

Pallanza, Italy, =1=, 329.

Palmer, George H., a Hegelian, =1=, 205, 208;
  investigates psychic phenomena with =J.=, 227;
  mentioned, 202, 292, 335, =2=, 2, 18.
  _See Contents._

Palmer, Mrs. Alice Freeman, =2=, 124.

Papini, Giovanni, _Crepuscolo dei Filosofi_, =2=, 245, 246;
  mentioned, 172, 227, 228, 229, 257, 267.

Paris, =1=, 174, 175, 217.

Paris Commune (1871), =1=, 161.

Parkman, Francis, =2=, 10.

Parkman, Mrs. Henry, =2=, 205.

Parthenon, the, =2=, 224, 225.

Party spirit, the only permanent force of corruption in the U. S., =2=, 100.

Pasteur, Louis, =1=, 72, 225.

Paty du Clam, Colonel du, =2=, 98.

Paulsen, Friederich, _Einleitung_, =1=, 346, =2=, 244.

Peabody, Elizabeth, =1=, 112.

Peabody, Frances G., =2=, 229.

Peace Congress, =2=, 277.

Peillaube, M., =2=, 228, 229.

Peirce, Benjamin, =1=, 32.

Peirce, Charles S., =1=, 33, 34, 80, 149, 169, =2=, 191, 233, 294, 328.

Peirce, James M., =2=, 258.

Perry, Ralph Barton, his _List of Published Writings_
  of =J.=, =1=, 144, 223, 224;
  mentioned, =2=, 121, 163, 234, 295.

Perry, Thomas S., with =J.= in Berlin, =1=, 107, 109, 111, 113, 114, 117, 124;
  mentioned, 40 _n._, 60, 91, 94, 102, 106, 134, 151, 157, 169, =2=, 10.
  _See Contents._

Pertz, Mrs. Emma (Wilkinson), =1=, 135 and _n._

Pessimism, =1=, 238.

Peterson, Ellis, =1=, 166.

Pflüger, Dr., =1=, 156.

Phelps, Edward J., =2=, 27 _n._

Philippine question, the, =2=, 167, 168.

Philippines, policy of McKinley administration concerning, =2=, 93, 94;
  duty of U. S. with regard to, 289.

Philosophical Club, University of California, =J.='s lectures to, =2=, 79.

_Philosophical Review_, =2=, 228.

Philosophical Society, =J.= refuses to join, =2=, 164.

Philosophy, =J.= begins to feel the pull of, =1=, 53, 54;
  difficulties attending teaching of, in American colleges, 188, 189, 190.

Physiological Psychology, =1=, 165, 166, 179.

Physiological Psychology, International Congress of, =1=, 288, 289, 290.

Physiology, =J.= attends lectures on, in Berlin, =1=, 118, 120, 121;
  =J.='s first teaching subject, 165.

Picquart, M. G. (Dreyfus case), =2=, 67, 98.

Piddington, J. G., =2=, 311.

Pierce, George W., =2=, 14.

Pillon, François, =1=, 208, 229, 233, 343, =2=, 45, 79.
  _See Contents._

Pillon, Mme. François, =2=, 73, 204, 338, 343.

Pinkham, Lydia E., "the Venus of Medicine," =1=, 261 and _n._

Piper, Mrs. William, =J.= quoted on, =1=, 227, 228;
  mentioned, =2=, 242, 311, 319, 320.
  And _see_ Hodgson, R.

Plato, =1=, 283.

Pluralism, =1=, 186, =2=, 155.

Pluralistic idealism, =2=, 22.

Pollock, Sir Frederick, =1=, 222, =2=, 199.

Pomfret, Conn., =1=, 153, 154.

_Popular Science Monthly_, =1=, 190.

Porter, Noah, =1=, 231, 232.

Porter, Samuel, =1=, 214.

Porto Rico, =2=, 74.

Potter, Horatio, =1=, 59.

Powderly, Terence V., =1=, 284.

Pragmatism, and radical empiricism, distinction between, =2=, 267;
  disadvantages of the word as a title, 271, 295, 298.

Prague, =1=, 211, 212, 213.

Pratt, James B., =J.='s replies to his questionnaire on
  religious belief, =2=, 212-215.

Pratt, M., =2=, 204.

Prince, William H., =1=, 37, 39, 42, 44.

Prince, Mrs. William H. (Katharine James), =1=, 42.
  _See Contents._

Princeton Theological Seminary, H. James, Senior, at, =1=, 8.

Pringle-Pattison, A. S., =2=, 325, 326.
  And _see_ Seth, Andrew.

Profession, choice of, =1=, 75, 79, 123.

Prussia, political conditions in (1867), =1=, 95;
  and France, 95.

Prussians, =1=, 122.

Psychic phenomena, investigated by =J.= and Palmer, =1=, 225 _ff._;
  mentioned, 248, 250, 305, 306, =2=, 56, 287, 320.

Psychical Research, American Society for, =J.= active in organizing, =1=, 227;
  amalgamated with English Society, 227;
  =J.= on its function, 249, 250, =2=, 242, 286, 306.

Psychical Research, English Society for, founded, =1=, 227;
  =J.= a corresponding member, vice-president, and president
  of, 227, 229 _n._, 248.

Psychologists, American Association of, =2=, 20.

Psychology, =J.= begins to read on, =1=, 118, 119;
  =J.= gives course in, 179;
  =J.= helps to make it a modern science, 224, 225;
  "a nasty little subject," =2=, 2.

Psychology, Experimental, in U. S., History of, =1=, 179 _n._

Psychology, Physiological. _See_ Physiological Psychology.

Putnam, Charles P., =1=, 71, 195, 196, 327, =2=, 296.

Putnam, Frederick W., =1=, 31.

Putnam, George, =2=, 224, 225.

Putnam, James J., letter to =J.= on Medical License bill, =2=, 72 _n._;
  mentioned, =1=, 71, 168, 195, 196, =2=, 112, 128, 147, 249.
  _See Contents._

Putnam, Marian (Mrs. James J.), =2=, 249.


Quincy, Henry P., =1=, 77, 122.


Radcliffe College, =2=, 4, 24, 180 _n._, 181.

Radcliffe College, =J.='s class at. _See Contents._

Radical Empiricism and pragmatism, distinction between, =2=, 267;
  mentioned, 203, 204.

Rafael Sanzio, the Sistine Madonna, =1=, 90.

Raffaello, Florentine cook, =1=, 339, 341.

Rankin, Henry W., =2=, 55.
  _See Contents._

Reed, Thomas B., =2=, 50.

Reid, Carveth, =1=, 205, 222.

Religion, =J.='s views on, =2=, 64, 65, 127, 149, 150, 211 _ff._, 269.

Renan, Ernest, death of, =1=, 326;
  mentioned, 110, =2=, 123, 338.

Renouvier, Charles, the _Année 1867 Philosophique_, =1=, 138, 186;
  influence on =J.= of his writings on free will, 147, 169;
  =J.='s first acquaintance with his work, 186;
  =J.='s correspondence with, 186;
  translates some of =J.='s papers, 186;
  his articles on Fouillée, 231;
  _Principes de la Nature_, 334;
  his _Philosophy of History_, =2=, 44, 47;
  his death, 204;
  _Monadologie_ and _Personalisme_, 204;
  mentioned, =1=, 138, 205.
  _See Contents._

Republican Party, the, in 1899, =2=, 94.

Reverdin, M., =2=, 267.

Rhea, Jannet, =1=, 4 _n._

Rhea, Matthew, =1=, 4 _n._

Rhodes, James F., _History of the U. S._, =2=, 27 _n._;
  mentioned, 10.

Richet, Charles, =1=, 229 _n._, =2=, 114, 225.

Richter, Jean Paul, =1=, 141.

Rindge, Frederick H., =1=, 330, =2=, 39.

Rio de Janeiro, =1=, 58 _ff._

Risks, choice of, =2=, 49, 50.

Ritter, Charles, =1=, 23, =2=, 25, 55.

Robertson, Alexander, =1=, 8, 9.

Robertson, G. Croom, editor of _Mind_, =1=, 222, 254.
  _See Contents._

Robeson, Andrew R., =1=, 33.

Romanism and Anglicanism, =2=, 305.

Romanticism, =1=, 256.

Rome, Philosophical Congress at, =2=, 225 _ff._, 228;
  mentioned, =1=, 178, 180, =2=, 138, 139, 269.

Roosevelt, Theodore, as possible President of Harvard, =2=, 232 and _n._;
  mentioned, 94, 266.

Ropes, John C., death of, =2=, 108, 109;
  mentioned, =1=, 35, =2=, 10, 156.

Rosmini-Serbati, Antonio, =1=, 295.

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, =1=, 142.

Royce, Josiah, early life, =1=, 200, 201;
  quoted, on his first acquaintance with =J.=, 200, 201;
  brought to Harvard through =J.='s influence, 201;
  his _Religious Aspect of Philosophy_, 239, 242, 265;
  "a perfect little Socrates," 249;
  made professor, 332;
  and =J.=, as teachers, compared by Miller, =2=, 16;
  "the Rubens of philosophy," 86;
  _The World and the Individual_, 113 and _n._, 114, 116, 121 and _n._;
  his system, 114;
  a sketcher in philosophy, 114, 116;
  mentioned, =1=, 238, 239, 255, 262, 280, 291, 318, 347,
  =2=, 18, 122, 143, 216, 234, 321, 322.
  _See Contents._

Ruskin, John, his letters to C. E. Norton, =2=, 206, 207;
  characterized by =J.=, 206;
  _Modern Painters_, 206;
  mentioned, =1=, 220, =2=, 306.

Rye (England), =2=, 104.
  And _see_ Lamb House.


Sabatier, Paul, =2=, 142.

St. Gaudens, Augustus, his monument to R. G. Shaw unveiled, =2=, 59-61.

St. Louis, hurricane at, =2=, 35, 36.

St. Louis Exposition (1904), =2=, 216.

Sainte-Beuve, C. A., =1=, 142.

Salisbury, Robert Cecil, Marquis of, =2=, 27.

Salter, C. C., =1=, 51.

Salter, W. M., =1=, 248, 346, =2=, 97.
  _See Contents._

Salter, Mrs. W. M. (Mary Gibbens), =1=, 248.

San Francisco, earthquake at, =2=, 246 _ff._, 251, 256;
  mentioned, 80, 81.

Sanctis, Professor di, =2=, 225.

Sand, George, and A. de Musset, =2=, 63;
  mentioned, =1=, 106, 182, 183.

Santayana, George, _Interpretations of Poetry and Religion_, =2=, 122-124;
  _Life of Reason_, 234, 235;
  mentioned, =1=, 335, =2=, 14, 121, 225.
  _See Contents._

Sardou, Victorien, _Agnes_, =1=, 168.

Sargent, Epes, _Planchette_, reviewed by =J.=, =1=, 225 _n._

Sargent, John S., =1=, 303.

_Saturday Club, Early Years of the_. _See_ Emerson, Edward W.

Saxons, the, =1=, 86.

Scenery, part played by, in =J.='s spiritual experience, =2=, 174, 175.

Schelling, Friedrich W. J. von, =1=, 14.

Schiller, F. C. S., his article on =J.= in _Mind_, =2=, 65, 66;
  _Studies in Humanism_, 270;
  mentioned, 172, 186 _n._, 208, 230, 257, 267, 296, 300, 311, 313, 314, 337.
  _See Contents._

Schiller, J. C. Friedrich von, =1=, 91, 141, 202.

Schinz, Herr, =2=, 337.

Schlegel, August W. von, =1=, 141.

Schlegel, Karl W. F. von, =1=, 141.

Schmidt, Heinrich J., _History of German Literature_, =1=, 141.

Schopenhauer, Arthur, =1=, 191, =2=, 293.

Schott, Dr. (Nauheim), =2=, 124, 128, 134, 157.

Schurman, Jacob G., =1=, 334, =2=, 166.

Scotland, =J.= strongly attracted by, =1=, 286.

Scott, Sir Walter, his _Journal_, =1=, 309.

Scripture, Edward W., =1=, 334.

Scudder, Samuel H., =1=, 31.

Sea, =J.='s views of traveling by, =1=, 58.

Seals, trained, =1=, 278.

Sécretan, Charles, =1=, 324.

Sedgwick, Arthur G., =1=, 320 and _n._, =2=, 10.

Sedgwick, Lucy (Mrs. Arthur G.), =1=, 320 and _n._

Sedgwick, Sara, =1=, 76 and _n._
  And _see_ Darwin, Mrs. W. E.

Sedgwick, Theodora, =1=, 181, 291, 315, 317, 328, 331,
  =2=, 151, 152, 191, 200, 207, 308.
  _See Contents._

Selberg, "a swell young Jew," =1=, 112, 114, 115.

Semler, Dr., =1=, 87.

Seth, Andrew, =2=, 96, 116, 144.
  And _see_ Pringle-Pattison, A. S.

Seth, James, =2=, 144.

Shakespeare:
  H. Grimm on _Hamlet_, =1=, 111;
  _As You Like It_, 144 _n._, 190;
  at Stratford, =2=, 166;
  mentioned, 330, 335, 336.

Shaler, Nathaniel S., quoted, on J. Wyman, =1=, 48;
  _The Individual_, =2=, 153 and _n._, 154;
  _Autobiography_, 325;
  mentioned, =1=, 31, =2=, 258, 288.
  _See Contents._

Shaw, G. Bernard, _Cæsar and Cleopatra_, =2=, 263;
  mentioned, 330.

Shaw, Robert G., unveiling of St. Gaudens's monument to, =2=, 59-61;
  mentioned, =1=, 43.

Sherman, William T., =1=, 56, 57.

Sidgwick, Henry, "Lecture against Lecturing," =2=, 12;
  death of, 141;
  mentioned, =1=, 229 _n._, 287, 290, 345, =2=, 50, 156.

Slattery, Charles L. _See Contents._

Smith, Adam, =1=, 283.

Smith, Norman K. _See Contents._

Smith, Paulina C., =2=, 106.

Smith, Pearsall, =1=, 287.

Snow, William F., quoted, on =J.= and the San Francisco
  earthquake, =2=, 247 _n._

Snow, Mrs. W. F., =2=, 246.

Society for Psychical Research. _See_ Psychical Research, Society for.

Solomons, Leon M., death of, =2=, 119;
  his character and work, 119, 120.

Sorbonne, the, =J.= declines appointment as exchange
  professor at, =2=, 236 and _n._

Sorrento, to Amalfi, =2=, 221, 222.

Spain, misrule of, in Cuba, =2=, 73.

Spanish War, the, =2=, 73, 74.

Spannenberg, Frau, =1=, 85.

_Spectator, The_, =2=, 126.

Spelling reform, =J.='s attitude toward, =2=, 18, 19.

Spencer, Herbert, _Psychology_, =1=, 188;
  _Data of Ethics_, 264;
  mentioned, 143, 164, 191, 254.

Spinoza, Baruch, =1=, 283, =2=, 13.

Spirit-theory, the. _See_ Psychic phenomena.

Spiritualism. _See_ Psychic phenomena.

Spiritualists, and the Medical License bill, =2=, 68.

Springfield _Republican_, =2=, 125.

Stanford, Leland, =2=, 242, 244.

Stanford, Mrs. Leland, =1=, 242, 244.

Stanford, Leland, Jr.,=1=, 243.

Stanford University, =J.='s lectures at, =2=, 235, 240, 244 and _n._;
  a miracle, 241;
  its history, 242, 243;
  what it might be made, 243, 244.

Stanley, Sir Henry M., =1=, 303.

Stanley, Lady, =1=, 303.

Starbuck, E. D., _Psychology of Religion_, =2=, 217.
  _See Contents._

Stead, W. T., =2=, 276, 277.

Steffens, Heinrich, =1=, 141.

Stephen. Sir James Fitz-James, "Essay on Spirit-Rapping," =1=, 34 _n._

Stephen, Sir Leslie, _Utilitarians_, =2=, 152;
  his letters, 176.

Steuben, Baron von, =1=, 5.

Storey, Moorfield, =1=, 109, =2=, 10.
  _See Contents._

Stout, G. F., =2=, 47, 65.

Strasburg, =1=, 86, 87.

Stratford-on-Avon, and the Baconian theory, =2=, 166.

Strong, Charles A., =2=, 198, 225, 229, 230,
  282, 295, 301, 309, 310, 315, 337.
  _See Contents._

Stumpf, Carl, _Tonpsychologie_, =1=, 266, 267;
  mentioned, 211, 212, 213, 216, 289.
  _See Contents._

Sturgis, James, =1=, 184.

Style in philosophic writing, =2=, 217, 228, 229, 237,
  244, 245, 257, 272, 281, 300.

Subjectivism, tendency to, =1=, 249.

Subliminal, Problem of the, =2=, 141, 149, 150, 212.

Success, worship of, =2=, 260.

Sully, James, =2=, 1 _n._, 225, 226, 218.
  _See Contents._

"Supernatural" matters. _See_ Psychic phenomena.

Suttner, Baroness von, _Waffennieder_, =2=, 340.

Swedenborg, Emmanuel, influence of his works on H. James,
  Senior, =1=, 12, 13, 14;
  _Society of the Redeemed Form of Man_, quoted, 12 and _n._;
  H. James, Senior's, essay on, 117;
  mentioned, =2=, 40.

Switzerland, =1=, 322, 323, 327, 328, 336.

Sylvain, Mlle., =2=, 224.

Sylvain, M., =2=, 224.


Tappan, Mary, =2=, 200.
  _See Contents._

Tappan, Mrs., =1=, 118.

Taylor, A. E., =2=, 208, 216, 281, 282.

Temple, Ellen, =1=, 38, 39, 51, =2=, 61, 81.
  And _see_ Emmet, Mrs. Temple.

Temple, Henrietta, =1=, 39.

Temple, Katharine, =J.='s portrait of, =1=, 24;
  mentioned, 36, 51, 74, 75.
  _See Contents._

Temple, "Minny," the original of two of Henry James's heroines, =1=, 36;
  =J.= quoted on, 36, 37;
  her "madness," 38;
  mentioned, 43, 51, 74, 75, 98.

Temple, Mrs. Robert (=J.='s aunt), =1=, 36.

Tennyson, Alfred, Lord, =2=, 276.

Teplitz, =1=, 133, 134, 137.

Thames, the, =1=, 287.

Thatness. _See_ Whatness.

Thaw, Henry, trial of, =2=, 264.

Thayer, Abbott, =2=, 276.

Thayer, Gerald, =2=, 275, 276.

Thayer, Joseph Henry, =1=, 323.

Thayer, Miriam, =1=, 323.

Thayer Expedition. _See_ Brazil, Agassiz's expedition to.

Thies, Louis, =1=, 107, 112, 157.

Thies, Miss, =1=, 116.

Thompson, Daniel G., =1=, 295.

Tieck, Ludwig, =1=, 141.

Tolstoy, Leo, _War and Peace_, =2=, 37, 40, 48;
  and P. Bourget, 37, 38;
  _Anna Karenina_, 41, 48;
  and H. G. Wells, 316;
  mentioned, 44, 45, 51, 52, 63.

Torquay, =2=, 167.

Townsend, Henry E., =1=, 122.

Truth, the, obscured by American philosophers, =2=, 237, 272, 337.

Tuck, Henry, =1=, 122, 124.

Tuckerman, Emily, =2=, 168.

Turgenieff, Ivan, =1=, 177, 182, 185.

Twain, Mark, =1=, 333, 341, 342, =2=, 264.

Tweedie, Mrs. Edmund, =1=, 36.

Tweedies, the, =1=, 117, 184.

Tychism, =2=, 204, 292.

Tychistic and pluralistic philosophy of pure experience, =2=, 187.


Union College, H. James, Senior, graduates at, =1=, 8.

_Unitarian Review_, Davidson's article in, =1=, 236.

Unitarianism (Boston), the "bloodless pallor" of, =1=, 236.

United States, =J.='s remarks on, =1=, 216, 217;
  and the Philippines, =2=, 140, 141;
  rushing to wallow in the mire of empire, 141;
  manner of eating boiled eggs in, 188;
  vocalization of people of, 189;
  and England, 304, 305.

Upham, Miss, =1=, 34, 50.

Uphues, =1=, 345, 346.


Van Buren, "Elly," =1=, 70, 74, 75.

Van Rensselaer, Stephen, =1=, 3.

Venezuela Message, Cleveland's, =2=, 26 _ff._

Venus de Milo, =1=, 113.

Verne, Jules, _Tour of the World in Eighty Days_, =1=, 173.

Veronese, Paul, =1=, 90.

Verrall, Mrs. A. W. _See_ Mediums.

Vers-chez-les-Blanc, =1=, 320, 345, =2=, 48.

Victor Emmanuel III, King of Italy, =2=, 227.

Victoria, Queen, her Jubilee, =1=, 270.

Vienna, exhibition of French paintings at, =1=, 210.

Villari, Pasquale, =1=, 338, 339, 342.

Villari, Mrs., =1=, 338, 339, 342.

Vincent, George E., =2=, 41, 42.

Virchow, Rudolf, =1=, 72.

Vischer, F. T., Essays, =1=, 94;
  _Aesthetik_, 94.

Viti, Signor da, =2=, 227.

Vivekananda, =2=, 144.

Voltaire, =1=, 144 _n._

Vulpian, A., =1=, 156.


Walcott, Henry P., =1=, 347, =2=, 10.

Waldstein, Charles, =1=, 274, =2=, 224.
  _See Contents._

Walsh, Catherine (=J.='s 'Aunt Kate'), =1=, 41,
  51, 60, 61, 70, 80, 81, 114, 118, 183, 218,
  259, 280, 282, 285.

Walsh, Hugh, =1=, 8.

Walsh, Rev. Hugh, =1=, 8 _n._

Walsh, James (=J.='s maternal grandfather), =1=, 8.

Walsh, Mary, marries H. James, Senior, =1=, 8;
  her ancestry, 8, 9.
  And _see_ James, Mrs. William.

Walsh, Mrs. Mary (Robertson), =1=, 8.

Walston, Sir Charles. _See_ Waldstein, Charles.

Wambaugh, Eugene, =2=, 132.

Ward, James, =2=, 312, 313, 314, 315.

Ward, Samuel, =1=, 73.

Ward, Thomas W., on the Brazilian expedition, =1=, 59, 60, 65;
  mentioned, 33.
  _See Contents._

Ward, Dorothy, =2=, 166.

Ware, William R., =1=, 124, 153.

Waring, Daisy, =2=, 202.

Waring, George E., quoted, on Henry James, =1=, 184, 185.

Warner, Joseph B., =2=, 160, 233.

Warren, W. R., =2=, 233.

Washington, Booker T., _Up from Slavery_, =2=, 148;
  mentioned, 60, 61.

Washington, Mrs. Booker T., at Ashfield, =2=, 199.

Washington, George, =1=, 5, 277.

Washington, State of, forest fires in, =2=, 80.

Wells, H. G., _Utopia_, =2=, 230, 231;
  _Anticipations_, 231;
  _Mankind in the Making_, 231;
  =J.='s appreciation of, 231;
  _Kipps_, 241;
  "Two Studies in Disappointment," 259, 260;
  _First and Last Things_, 316;
  the Tolstoy of the English World, 316;
  mentioned, 246, 257, 318.
  _See Contents._

Werner, G., =2=, 242.

Whatness and thatness, =1=, 244, 245.

"White man's burden," cant about the, =2=, 88.

Whitman, Henry, death of, =2=, 156;
  mentioned, =1=, 298, 302.

Whitman, Sarah (Mrs. Henry), her character and
  accomplishments, =1=, 302, =2=, 205, 206;
  last illness and death, 204, 205, 207;
  mentioned, =1=, 309 _n._, 348, =2=, 156, 256.
  _See Contents._

Whitman, Walt, =2=, 123.

Whole, Idolatry of the, =1=, 246, 247.

Wilkinson, Emma. _See_ Pertz, Mrs. Emma.

Wilkinson, J. J. Garth, =1=, 135 _n._

William II of Germany, his message to Kruger, =2=, 27, 28.

Wilmarth, Mrs., =2=, 50.

Witmer, Lightner, =2=, 320.

Wolff, Christian, =1=, 264.

Woodberry, George E., _The Heart of Man._ =2=, 89, 90.

Woodbridge, F. J. E., _Journal_, =2=, 244.
  _See Contents._

Worcester, Elwood, _The Living World_, =2=, 318.

Wordsworth, W., _The Excursion_, =1=, 168, 169.

Wright, Chauncy, and =J.=, =1=, 152 _n._;
  mentioned, =2=, 233.

Wundt, Wilhelm M., as a type of the German professor, =1=, 263;
  his _System_, 333;
  mentioned, 119, 215, 216, 224, 264, 295, =2=, 321.

Wyman, Jeffries, influence as a teacher, =1=, 47;
  C. W. Eliot and N. S. Shaler quoted on, 47, 48;
  =J.= quoted on, 48, 49;
  mentioned, 35, 37, 50, 71, 72, 150, 155, 160, 163, 170.


Yale University, =1=, 231.

Yankees, a German lady's idea of, =1=, 89, 90.

Yoga practices, =2=, 252 _ff._

Yosemite Valley, =2=, 81.


Zennig's restaurant (Berlin), =1=, 112, 113.

_Zion's Herald_, Emerson number of, =2=, 197.

Zola, Émile, _Germinal_, =1=, 287;
  mentioned, =2=, 67, 73.


MCGRATH-SHERRILL PRESS
GRAPHIC ARTS BLDG.
BOSTON

       *       *       *       *       *

The following typographical errors have been corrected by the etext
transcriber:

mutally encouraging=>mutually encouraging

Malvida von Meysenbug, Stuttgart, 1877=>Malwida von Meysenbug,
Stuttgart, 1877

Meysenbug, Malvida von, _Memoiren einer Idealistin_=>Meysenbug, Malwida
von, _Memoiren einer Idealistin_

Rome eems to beat=>Rome seems to beat

Qu'on est bien dans çe fauteuil=>Qu'on est bien dans ce fauteuil


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES:

[1] "It seems to me that psychology is like physics before Galileo's
time--not a single elementary law yet caught a glimpse of. A great
chance for some future psychologue to make a greater name than Newton's;
but who then will read the books of this generation? Not many, I trow.
Meanwhile they must be written." To James Sully, July 8, 1890.

[2] President Eliot, in a memorandum already referred to (vol. 1, p. 32,
note), calls attention to these courses and remarks: "These frequent
changes were highly characteristic of James's whole career as a teacher.
He changed topics, textbooks and methods frequently, thus utilizing his
own wide range of reading and interest and his own progress in
philosophy, and experimenting from year to year on the mutual contacts
and relations with his students." James continued to be titular
Professor of Psychology until 1897, just as he had been nominally
Assistant Professor of Physiology for several years during which the
original and important part of his teaching was psychological. His title
never indicated exactly what he was teaching.

[3] At this meeting he delivered a presidential address "On the Knowing
of Things Together," a part of which is reprinted in _The Meaning of
Truth_, p. 43, under the title, "The Tigers in India." _Vide_, also,
_Collected Essays and Reviews_.

[4] In a brief letter to the _Harvard Crimson_ (Jan. 9, 1896), James
urged the right and duty of individuals to stand up for their opinions
publicly during such crises, even though in opposition to the
administration. Mr. Rhodes, in his _History of the United States,
1877-1896_, makes the following observation: "Cleveland, in his chapter
on the 'Venezuelan Boundary Controversy,' rates the un-Americans who
lauded 'the extreme forbearance and kindness of England.' ... The
reference ... need trouble no one who allows himself to be guided by two
of Cleveland's trusted servants and friends. Thomas F. Bayard, Secretary
of State during the first administration, and actual ambassador to Great
Britain, wrote in a private letter on May 25, 1895, 'There is no
question now open between the United States and Great Britain that needs
any but frank, amicable and just treatment.' Edward J. Phelps, his first
minister to England, in a public address on March 30, 1896, condemned
emphatically the President's Venezuela policy." See Rhodes, _History_,
vol. VIII, p. 454; also p. 443 _et seq._

[5] "The Evolution of the Summer Resort."

[6] "Address of the President before the Society for Psychical
Research." Proc. of the (Eng.) Soc. for Psych. Res. 1896, vol. XII, pp.
2-10; also in _Science_, 1896, N. S., vol. IV, pp. 881-888.

[7] From the last paragraph of Cleveland's Venezuela message.

[8] In 1910--during his final illness, in fact--James fulfilled this
promise. See "A Pluralistic Mystic," included in Memories and Studies;
also letter of June 25, 1910, p. 348 _infra_.

[9] Cf. William James's unsigned review of Blood's _Anæsthetic
Revelation_ in the _Atlantic Monthly_, 1874, vol. XXXIV, p. 627.

[10] James always did a reasonable share of college committee work,
especially for the committee of his own department. But although he had
exercised a determining influence in the selection of every member of
the Philosophical Department who contributed to its fame in his time
(except Professor Palmer, who was his senior in service), he never
consented to be chairman of the Department. He attended the weekly
meetings of the whole Faculty for any business in which he was
concerned; otherwise irregularly. He spoke seldom in Faculty.
Occasionally he served on special committees. He usually formed an
opinion of his own quite quickly, but his habitual tolerance in matters
of judgment showed itself in good-natured patience with discussion--this
despite the fact that he often chafed at the amount of time consumed.
"Now although I happen accidentally to have been on all the committees
which have had to do with the proposed reform, and have listened to the
interminable Faculty debates last winter, I disclaim all powers or right
to speak in the _name_ of the majority. Members of our dear Faculty have
a way of discovering reasons fitted exclusively for their idiosyncratic
use, and though voting with their neighbors, will often do so on
incommunicable grounds. This is doubtless the effect of much learning
upon originally ingenious minds; and the result is that the abundance of
different points and aspects which a simple question ends by presenting,
after a long Faculty discussion, beggars both calculation beforehand and
enumeration after the fact."--"The Proposed Shortening of the College
Course." _Harvard Monthly_, Jan., 1891.

[1] "I _loved_ Child more than any man I know." Sept. 12, '96.

[11] Eight lectures on "Abnormal Mental States" were delivered at the
Lowell Institute in Boston, but were never published. Their several
titles were "Dreams and Hypnotism," "Hysteria," "Automatisms," "Multiple
Personality," "Demoniacal Possession," "Witchcraft," "Degeneration,"
"Genius." In a letter to Professor Howison (Apr. 5, 1897) James said,
"In these lectures I did not go into psychical research so-called, and
although the subjects were decidedly morbid, I tried to shape them
towards optimistic and hygienic conclusions, and the audience regarded
them as decidedly anti-morbid in their tone."

[12] _Demon Possession and Allied Themes_, by John C. Nevius.

[13] _The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy_ had
just appeared.

[14] The Address has been reprinted in _Memories and Studies_.

[15] For a short while MacMonnies's Bacchante stood in the court of the
Boston Public Library.

[16] These words were not employed in public, but were once applied to a
well-known professor in a private letter.

[17] A full report of the speech made at the Legislative hearing was
printed in the _Banner of Light_, Mar. 12, 1898. The letter to the
Boston _Transcript_ in 1894 appeared in the issue of Mar. 24.

[18] _James J. Putnam to William James_

BOSTON, _Mar. 9, 1898_.

DEAR WILLIAM,--We have thought and talked a good deal about the subject
of your speech in the course of the last week. I prepared with infinite
labor a letter intended for the _Transcript_ of last Saturday, but it
was not a weighty contribution and I am rather glad it was too late to
get in. I think it is generally felt among the best doctors that your
position was the liberal one, and that it would be a mistake to try to
exact an examination of the mind-healers and Christian Scientists. On
the other hand, I am afraid most of the doctors, even including myself,
do not have any great feeling of fondness for them, and we are more in
the way of seeing the fanatical spirit in which they proceed and the
harm that they sometimes do than you are. Of course they do also good
things which would remain otherwise not done, and that is the important
point, and sincere fanatics are almost always, and in this case I think
certainly, of real value.

Always affectionately,
JAMES J. P.


[19] That is, there was here no path to follow, only "blazes" on the
trees.

[20] The housekeeper at the Putnam-Bowditch "shanty."

[21] Photograph of a boy and girl standing on a rock which hangs dizzily
over a great precipice above the Yosemite Valley.

[22] G. E. Woodberry: _The Heart of Man_; 1899.

[23] James's house was number 95, his mother-in-law's number 107.

[24] Augusta was the house-maid; Dinah, a bull-terrier.

[25] It will be recalled that Davidson had a summer School of Philosophy
at his place called Glenmore on East Hill, and that East Hill is at one
end of Keene Valley. See also James's essay on Thomas Davidson, "A
Knight Errant of the Intellectual Life," in _Memories and Studies_.

[26] A gift which provided for building the "Harvard Union."

[27] "You have never spent a night under our roof, or eaten a meal in
our house!" This fictitious charge had become the recognized theme of
frequent elaborations.

[28] _The World and the Individual_, vol. I. Mrs. Evans was inclined to
contend for Royce's philosophy.

[29] The name of an American claret which his correspondent had
"discovered" and in which it also pleased James to find merit.

[30] The second volume of _The World and the Individual_. (Gifford
Lectures at the University of Aberdeen.)

[31] _Interpretations of Poetry and Religion._ New York, 1900.

[32] _Memoiren einer Idealistin_, by Malwida von Meysenbug, Stuttgart,
1877.

[33] _Recollections of My Mother_ [Anne Jean Lyman], by Susan I. Lesley,
Boston, 1886.

[34] Sister Nivedita.

[35] Booker T. Washington's _Up from Slavery_.

[36] "Frederick Myers's Services to Psychology." Reprinted in _Memories
and Studies_.

[37] _The Individual, A Study of Life and Death_. New York, 1900. This
