XIII

1899-1902

     _Two years of Illness in Europe--Retirement from Active Duty at
     Harvard--The First and Second Series of the Gifford Lectures_


WHEN James sailed for Hamburg on July 15, he planned quite definitely to
devote the summer to rest and the treatment of his heart, then to write
out the Gifford Lectures during the winter, and to deliver them by the
following spring; and, happily, could not foresee that he was to spend
nearly two years in exile and idleness. For nearly six years he had
driven himself beyond the true limits of his strength. Now it became
evident that the strain of his second over-exertion in the Adirondacks
had precipitated a complete collapse. He had been advised during the
winter to go to Nauheim for a course of baths. But when he got there,
the eminent specialists who examined his heart ignored his nervous
prostration. He was doubtless a difficult patient to diagnose or
prescribe for. Matters went from bad to worse; little by little all his
plans had to be abandoned. A year went by, and a return to regular work
in Cambridge was unthinkable. He was no better in the summer of 1900
than when he landed in Germany in July of 1899. His daughter had been
sent to school in England. The three other children remained in America.
He and Mrs. James moved about between England, Nauheim, the south of
France, Switzerland and Rome, consulting a specialist in one place or
trying the baths or the climate in another--with how much homesickness,
and with how much courage none the less, the letters will indicate.

His only systematic reading was a persistent, though frequently
intermitted, exploration of religious biographies and the literature of
religious conversion, in preparation for the Gifford Lectures. During
the second year he managed to get one course of these lectures written
out. Not until he had delivered them in Edinburgh, in May, 1901, did he
know that he had turned the corner and feel as if he had begun to live
again.

Every letter that came to him from his family and friends at home was
comforting beyond measure, and he poured out a stream of acknowledgment
in long replies, which he dictated to Mrs. James. His own writing was
usually limited to jottings in a note-book and to post-cards. He always
had a fountain-pen and a few post-cards in his pocket, and often, when
sitting in a chair in the open air, or at a little table in one of the
outdoor restaurants that abound in Nauheim and in southern Europe, he
would compress more news and messages into one of these little missives
than most men ever get into a letter. A few of his friends at home
divined his situation, and were at pains to write him regularly and
fully. Letters that follow show how grateful he was for such devotion.

       *       *       *       *       *

In this state of enforced idleness he browsed through newspapers and
journals more than he had before or than he ever did again, and so his
letters contained more comments on daily events. It will be clear that
what was happening did not always please him. He was an individualist
and a liberal, both by temperament and by reason of having grown up with
the generation which accepted the doctrines of the _laissez-faire_
school in a thoroughgoing way. The Philippine policy of the McKinley
administration seemed to him a humiliating desertion of the principles
that America had fought for in the Revolution and the War of
Emancipation. The military occupation of the Philippines, described by
the President as "benevolent assimilation," and what he once called the
"cold pot-grease of McKinley's eloquence" filled him with loathing. He
saw the Republican Party in the light in which Mr. Dooley portrayed it
when he represented its leaders as praying "that Providence might remain
under the benevolent influence of the present administration." When
McKinley and Roosevelt were nominated by the Republicans in 1900, he
called them "a combination of slime and grit, soap and sand, that ought
to scour anything away, even the moral sense of the country." He was
ready to vote for Bryan if there were no other way of turning out the
administration responsible for the history of our first years in the
Philippines, "although it would doubtless have been a premature victory
of a very mongrel kind of reform." In the same way, the cant with which
many of the supporters of England's program in South Africa extolled the
Boer War in the British press provoked his irony. The uproar over the
Dreyfus case was at its height. The "intellectuels," as they were called
in France, the "Little Englanders" as they were nicknamed in England,
and the Anti-Imperialists in his own country had his entire sympathy.
The state of mind of a member of the liberal minority, observing the
phase of history that was disclosing itself at the end of the century,
is admirably indicated in his correspondence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Pauline Goldmark, next addressed, and her family were in the habit
of spending their summers in Keene Valley, where they had a cottage that
was not far from the Putnam Shanty. James had often joined forces with
them for a day's climb when he was staying at the Shanty. The reader
will recall that it was their party that he had joined on Mt. Marcy the
year before.




_To Miss Pauline Goldmark._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _Aug. 12, 1899_.

MY DEAR PAULINE,--I am afraid we are stuck here till the latter half of
September. Once a donkey, always a donkey; at the Lodge in June, after
some slow walks which seemed to do me no harm at all, I drifted one day
up to the top of Marcy, and then (thanks to the Trail Improvement
Society!) found myself in the Johns Brook Valley instead of on the Lodge
trail back; and converted what would have been a three-hours' downward
saunter into a seven-hours' scramble, emerging in Keene Valley at 10.15
P.M. This did me no good--quite the contrary; so I have come to Nauheim
just in time. My carelessness was due to the belief that there was only
one trail in the Lodge direction, so I didn't attend particularly, and
when I found myself off the track (the trail soon stopped) I thought I
was going to South Meadow, and didn't reascend. Anyhow I was an ass, and
you ought to have been along to steer me straight. I fear we shall
ascend no more acclivities together. "Bent is the tree that should have
grown full straight!" You have no idea of the moral repulsiveness of
this _Curort_ life. Everybody fairly revelling in disease, and
abandoning themselves to it with a sort of _gusto_. "Heart," "heart,"
"heart," the sole topic of attention and conversation. As a "phase,"
however, one ought to be able to live through it, and the extraordinary
nerve-rest, crawling round as we do, is beneficial. Man is never
satisfied! Perhaps I shall be when the baths, etc., have had their
effect. We go then straight to England.--I do hope that you are all
getting what you wish in Switzerland, and that for all of you the entire
adventure is proving golden. Mrs. James sends her love, and I am, as
always, yours most affectionately,

Wm. James.




_To Mrs. E. P. Gibbens._


VILLA LUISE, BAD-NAUHEIM, _Aug. 22, 1899_.

DARLING BELLE-MÈRE,--The day seems to have come for another letter to
you, though my fingers are so cold that I can hardly write. We have had
a most conveniently dry season--convenient in that it doesn't coop us up
in the house--but a deal of cloud and cold. Today is sunny but
frigid--like late October. Altogether the difference of weather is very
striking. European weather is stagnant and immovable. It is as if it got
stuck, and needed a kick to start it; and although it is doubtless
better for the nerves than ours, I find my soul thinking most kindly
from this distance of our glorious quick passionate American climate,
with its transparency and its impulsive extremes. This weather is as if
fed on solid pudding. We inhabit one richly and heavily furnished
bedroom, 21 x 14, with good beds and a balcony, and are rapidly making
up for all our estrangement, locally speaking, in the past. It is a
great "nerve-rest," though the listlessness that goes with all
nerve-rest makes itself felt. Alice seems very well.... The place has
wonderful adaptation to its purposes in the possession of a vast park
with noble trees and avenues and incessant benches for rest; restaurants
with out-of-door tables everywhere in sight; music morning, afternoon
and night; and charming points to go to out of town. Cab-fare is cheap.
But nothing else.... The Gifford lectures are in complete abeyance. I
have word from Seth that under the circumstances the Academic Senate
will be sure to grant me any delay or indulgence I may ask for; so this
relieves tension. I can make nothing out yet about my heart.... So I
_try_ to take long views and not fuss about temporary feelings, though I
dare say I keep dear Alice worried enough by the fuss I imagine myself
_not_ to make. It is a loathsome world, this medical world; and I
confess that the thought of another six weeks here next year doesn't
exhilarate me, in spite of the decency of all our physical conditions. I
still remain faithful to Irving St. (95 and 107),[23] Chocorua, Silver
Lake, and Keene Valley!

We get almost no syllable of American news, in spite of the fact that we
take the London "Chronicle." Pray send the "Nation" and the "Literary
Digest." _Don't_ send the "Sciences" as heretofore. Let them accumulate.
I think that after reception of this you had better address us care of
H. J., Rye, Sussex. We shall probably be off by the 10th or 12th of
Sept. I hope that public opinion is gathering black against the
Philippine policy--in spite of my absence! I hope that Salter will pitch
in well in the fall. The still blacker nightmare of a Dreyfus case hangs
over us; and there is little time in the day save for reading the
"Figaro's" full reports of the trial. Like all French happenings, it is
as if they were edited expressly for literary purpose. Every "witness"
so-called has a power of statement equal to that of a first-class
lawyer; and the various human types that succeed each other, exhibiting
their several peculiarities in full blossom, make the thing like a
novel. Esterhazy seems to me the _great_ hero. How Shakespeare would
have enjoyed such a fantastic scoundrel,--knowing all the secrets,
saying what he pleases, mystifying all Europe, leading the whole French
army (except apparently Picquart) by the nose,--a regular Shakespearean
type of villain, with an insane exuberance of rhetoric and fancy about
his vanities and hatreds, that literature has never given yet. It would
seem incredible that the Court-Martial should condemn. Henry was
evidently the spy, employed by Esterhazy, and afterwards Du Paty helped
their machinations, in order not to stultify his own record at the
original trial--at least this seems the plausible theory. The older
generals seem merely to have been passive connivers, stupidly and
obstinately holding to the original official mistake rather than
surrender under fire. And such is the prestige of caste-opinion, such
the solidity of the professional spirit, that, incredible as it may
seem, it is still quite probable that the officers will obey the lead of
their superiors, and condemn Dreyfus again. The President, Jouaust, who
was supposed to be impartial, is showing an apparently bad animus
against Picquart. P. is a real _hero_--a precious possession for any
country. He ought to be made Minister of War; though that would
doubtless produce a revolution. I suppose that Loubet will pardon
Dreyfus immediately if he is recondemned. Then Dreyfus, and perhaps
Loubet, will be assassinated by some Anti-Semite, and who knows what
will follow? But before you get this, you will know far more about the
trial than I can tell you.

We long for news from the boys--not a word from Billy since he left
Tacoma. I am glad their season promises to be shorter! Enough is as good
as a feast! What a scattered lot we are! I hope that Margaret will be
happy in Montreal. As for you in your desolation, I could almost weep
for you. My only advice is that you should cling to Aleck as to a
life-preserver. I trust you got the $200 I told Higginson to send you. I
am mortified beyond measure by that overdrawn bank account, and do not
understand it at all.

Oceans of love from your affectionate son,

WILLIAM.




_To William M. Salter._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _Sept. 11, 1899_.

DEAR MACKINTIRE,--The incredible has happened, and Dreyfus, without one
may say a single particle of _positive_ evidence that he was guilty, has
been condemned again. The French Republic, which seemed about to turn
the most dangerous corner in her career and enter on the line of
political health, laying down the finest set of political precedents in
her history to serve as standards for future imitation and habit, has
slipped Hell-ward and all the forces of Hell in the country will proceed
to fresh excesses of insolence. But I don't believe the game is lost.
"Les intellectuels," thanks to the Republic, are now aggressively
militant as they never were before, and will grow stronger and stronger;
so we may hope. I have sent you the "Figaro" daily; but of course the
reports are too long for you to have read through. The most grotesque
thing about the whole trial is the pretension of awful holiness, of
semi-divinity in the diplomatic documents and waste-paper-basket scraps
from the embassies--a farce kept up to the very end--these same
documents being, so far as they were anything (and most of them were
nothing), mere records of treason, lying, theft, bribery, corruption,
and every crime on the part of the diplomatic agents. Either the German
and Italian governments will now publish or not publish all the details
of their transactions--give the exact documents meant by the
_bordereaux_ and the exact names of the French traitors. If they do not,
there will be only two possible explanations: either Dreyfus's guilt,
or the pride of their own sacrosanct etiquette. As it is scarcely
conceivable that Dreyfus can have been guilty, their silences will be
due to the latter cause. (Of course it can't be due to what they owe in
honor to Esterhazy and whoever their other allies and servants may have
been. E. is safe over the border, and a pension for his services will
heal all his wounds. Any other person can quickly be put in similar
conditions of happiness.) And they and Esterhazy will then be exactly on
a par morally, actively conspiring to have an innocent man bear the
burden of their own sins. By their carelessness with the documents they
got Dreyfus accused, and now they abandon him, for the sake of their own
divine etiquette.

The breath of the nostrils of all these big institutions is crime--that
is the long and short of it. We must thank God for America; and hold
fast to every advantage of our position. Talk about our corruption! It
is a mere fly-speck of superficiality compared with the rooted and
permanent forces of corruption that exist in the European states. The
only serious permanent force of corruption in America is party spirit.
All the other forces are shifting like the clouds, and have no
partnerships with any permanently organized ideal. Millionaires and
syndicates have their immediate cash to pay, but they have no intrenched
prestige to work with, like the church sentiment, the army sentiment,
the aristocracy and royalty sentiment, which here can be brought to bear
in favor of every kind of individual and collective crime--appealing not
only to the immediate pocket of the persons to be corrupted, but to the
ideals of their imagination as well.... My dear Mack, we "intellectuals"
in America must all work to keep our precious birthright of
individualism, and freedom from these institutions. _Every_ great
institution is perforce a means of corruption--whatever good it may also
do. Only in the free personal relation is full ideality to be found.--I
have vomited all this out upon you in the hope that it may wake a
responsive echo. One must do _something_ to work off the effect of the
Dreyfus sentence.

I rejoice immensely in the purchase [on our behalf] of the two pieces of
land [near Chocorua], and pine for the day when I can get back to see
them. If all the same to you, I wish that you would buy Burke's in your
name, and Mother-in-law Forrest's in her name. But let this be exactly
as each of you severally prefers.

We leave here in a couple of days, I imagine. I am better; but I can't
tell how much better for a few weeks yet. I hope that you will smite the
ungodly next winter. What a glorious gathering together of the forces
for the great fight there will be. It seems to me as if the proper
tactics were to pound McKinley--put the whole responsibility on him. It
is he who by his purely drifting "non-entanglement" policy converted a
splendid opportunity into this present necessity of a conquest of
extermination. It is he who has warped us from our continuous national
habit, which, if we repudiate him, it will not be impossible to resume.

Affectionately thine, Mary's, Aleck's, Dinah's, Augusta's,[24] and
everyone's,

W. J.

P.S. Damn it, America doesn't know the meaning of the word corruption
compared with Europe! Corruption is so permanently organized here that
it isn't thought of as such--it is so transient and shifting in America
as to make an outcry whenever it appears.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _Sept. 17, 1899_.

...In two or three days more I shall be discharged (in very decent
shape, I trust) and after ten days or so of rigorously prescribed
"Nachkur" in the cold and rain of Switzerland (we have seen the sun only
in short but entrancing glimpses since Sept. 1, and you know what bad
weather is when it once begins in Europe), we shall pick up our Peggy at
Vevey, and proceed to Lamb House, Rye, _über_ Paris, with all possible
speed. God bless the American climate, with its transparent, passionate,
impulsive variety and headlong fling. There are deeper, slower tones of
earnestness and moral gravity here, no doubt, but ours is more like
youth and youth's infinite and touching promise. God bless America in
general! _Conspuez_ McKinley and the Republican party and the Philippine
war, and the Methodists, and the voices, etc., as much as you please,
but bless the innocence. Talk of corruption! We don't know what the word
corruption means at home, with our improvised and shifting agencies of
crude pecuniary bribery, compared with the solidly intrenched and
permanently organized corruptive geniuses of monarchy, nobility, church,
army, that penetrate the very bosom of the higher kind as well as the
lower kind of people in all the European states (except Switzerland) and
sophisticate their motives away from the impulse to straightforward
handling of any simple case. _Temoin_ the Dreyfus case! But no matter!
Of all the forms of mental crudity, that of growing earnest over
international comparisons is probably the most childish. Every nation
has its ideals which are a dead secret to other nations, and it has to
develop in its own way, in touch with them. It can only be judged by
itself. If each of us does as well as he can in his own sphere at home,
he will do all he _can_ do; that is why I hate to remain so long
abroad....

We have been having a visit from an extraordinary Pole named
Lutoslawski, 36 years old, author of philosophical writings in seven
different languages,--"Plato's Logic," in English (Longmans) being his
chief work,--and knower of several more, handsome, and to the last
degree genial. He has a singular philosophy--the philosophy of
friendship. He takes in dead seriousness what most people admit, but
only half-believe, viz., that we are _Souls_ (Zoolss, he pronounces it),
that souls are immortal, and agents of the world's destinies, and that
the chief concern of a soul is to get ahead by the help of other souls
with whom it can establish confidential relations. So he spends most of
his time writing letters, and will send 8 sheets of reply to a
post-card--that is the exact proportion of my correspondence with him.
Shall I rope you in, Fanny? He has a great chain of friends and
correspondents in all the countries of Europe. The worst of them is that
they think a secret imparted to one may at his or her discretion become,
_de proche en proche_, the property of all. He is a _wunderlicher
Mensch_: abstractly his scheme is divine, but there is something on
which I can't yet just lay my defining finger that makes one feel that
there is some need of the corrective and critical and arresting judgment
in his manner of carrying it out. These Slavs seem to be the great
radical livers-out of their theories. Good-bye, dearest Fanny....

Your affectionate

W. J.




_To Mrs. Henry Whitman._


LAMB HOUSE, RYE, _Oct. 5, 1899_.

DEAR MRS. WHITMAN,--You see where at last we have arrived, at the end of
the first _étape_ of this pilgrimage--the second station of the cross,
so to speak--with the Continent over, and England about to begin. The
land is bathed in greenish-yellow light and misty drizzle of rain. The
little town, with its miniature brick walls and houses and nooks and
coves and gardens, makes a curiously vivid and quaint picture,
alternately suggesting English, Dutch, and Japanese effects that one has
seen in pictures--all exceedingly tiny (so that one wonders how
_families_ ever could have been reared in most of the houses) and neat
and _zierlich_ to the last degree. _Refinement_ in architecture
certainly consists in narrow trim and the absence of heavy mouldings.
Modern Germany is incredibly bad from that point of view--much worse,
apparently, than America. But the German people are a good safe fact for
great powers to be intrusted to--earnest and serious, and pleasant to be
with, as we found them, though it was humiliating enough to find how
awfully imperfect were one's powers of conversing in their language.
French not much better. I remember nothing of this extreme mortification
in old times, and am inclined to think that it is due less to loss of
ability to speak, than to the fact that, as you grow older, you speak
better English, and expect more of yourself in the way of
accomplishment. I am sure _you_ spoke no such English as now, in the
seventies, when you came to Cambridge! And how could I, as yet untrained
by conversation with you?

Seven mortal weeks did we spend at the _Curort_, Nauheim, for an
infirmity of the heart which I contracted, apparently, not much more
than a year ago, and which now must be borne, along with the rest of the
white man's burden, until additional visits to Nauheim have removed it
altogether for ordinary practical purposes. N. was a sweetly pretty
spot, but I longed for more activity. A glorious week in Switzerland,
solid in its sometimes awful, sometimes beefy beauty; two days in
Paris, where I could gladly have stayed the winter out, merely for the
fun of the sight of the intelligent and interesting streets; then
hither, where H. J. has a real little _bijou_ of a house and garden, and
seems absolutely adapted to his environment, and very well and contented
in the leisure to write and to read which the place affords.

In a few days we go almost certainly to the said H. J.'s apartment,
still unlet, in London, where we shall in all probability stay till
January, the world forgetting, by the world forgot, or till such later
date as shall witness the completion of the awful Gifford job, at which
I have not been able to write one line since last January. I long for
the definitive settlement and ability to get to work. I am very glad
indeed, too, to be in an English atmosphere again. Of course it will
conspire better with my writing tasks, and after all it is more
congruous with one's nature and one's inner ideals. Still, one loves
America above all things, for her youth, her greenness, her plasticity,
innocence, good intentions, friends, everything. Je veux que mes cendres
reposent sur les bords du Charles, au milieu de ce bon peuple de Harvarr
Squerre que j'ai tant aimé. That is what I say, and what Napoleon B.
would have said, had his life been enriched by your and my educational
and other experiences--poor man, he knew too little of life, had never
even heard of us, whilst we have heard of him!

Seriously speaking, though, I believe that international comparisons are
a great waste of time--at any rate, international judgments and passings
of sentence are. Every nation has ideals and difficulties and sentiments
which are an impenetrable secret to one not of the blood. Let them
alone, let each one work out its own salvation on its own lines. They
talk of the decadence of France. The hatreds, and the _coups de gueule_
of the newspapers there are awful. But I doubt if the better ideals were
ever so aggressively strong; and I fancy it is the fruit of the much
decried republican régime that they have become so. My brother
represents English popular opinion as less cock-a-whoop for war than
newspaper accounts would lead one to imagine; but I don't know that he
is in a good position for judging. I hope if they do go to war that the
Boers will give them fits, and I heartily emit an analogous prayer on
behalf of the Philippinos.

I have had pleasant news of Beverly, having had letters both from Fanny
Morse and Paulina Smith. I hope that your summer has been a good one,
that work has prospered and that Society has been less _énervante_ and
more nutritious for the higher life of the Soul than it sometimes is.
_We_ have met but one person of any accomplishments or interest all
summer. But I have managed to read a good deal about religion, and
religious people, and care less for accomplishments, except where (as in
you) they go with a sanctified heart. Abundance of accomplishments, in
an unsanctified heart, only make one a more accomplished devil.

Good bye, angelic friend! We both send love and best wishes, both to you
and Mr. Whitman, and I am as ever yours affectionately,

W. J.




_To Thomas Davidson._


34 DE VERE GARDENS,
LONDON, _Nov. 2, 1899_.

DEAR OLD T. D.,--A recent letter from Margaret Gibbens says that you
have gone to New York in order to undergo a most "radical operation." I
need not say that my thoughts have been with you, and that I have felt
anxiety mixed with my hopes for you, ever since. I do indeed hope that,
whatever the treatment was, it has gone off with perfect success, and
that by this time you are in the durable enjoyment of relief, and nerves
and everything upon the upward track. It has always seemed to me that,
were I in a similar plight, I should choose a kill-or-cure operation
rather than anything merely palliative--so poisonous to one's whole
mental and moral being is the irritation and worry of the complaint. It
would truly be a spectacle for the Gods to see you rising like a
phoenix from your ashes again, and shaking off even the memory of
disaster like dew-drops from a lion's mane, etc.--and I hope the
spectacle will be vouchsafed to us men also, and that you will be
presiding over Glenmore as if nothing had happened, different from the
first years, save a certain softening of your native ferocity of heart,
and gentleness towards the shortcomings of weaker people. Dear old East
Hill![25] I shall never forget the beauty of the morning (it had rained
the night before) when I took my bath in the brook, before driving down
to Westport one day last June.

We got your letter at Nauheim, a sweet safe little place, made for
invalids, to which it took long to reconcile me on that account. But
nous en avons vu bien d'autres depuis, and from my present retirement in
my brother's still unlet flat (he living at Rye), Nauheim seems to me
like New York for bustle and energy. My heart, in short, has gone back
upon me badly since I was there, and my doctor, Bezley Thorne, the first
specialist here, and a man who inspires me with great confidence, is
trying to tide me over the crisis, by great quiet, in addition to a
dietary of the strictest sort, and more Nauheim baths, _à domicile_.
Provided I can only get safely out of the Gifford scrape, the deluge has
leave to come.--Write, dear old T. D., and tell how you are, and let it
be good news if possible. Give much love to the Warrens, and believe me
always affectionately yours,

Wm. James.

The woman thou gavest unto me comes out strong as a nurse, and treats me
much better than I deserve.




_To John C. Gray._


[Dictated to Mrs. James]

LONDON, _Nov. 23, 1899_.

DEAR JOHN,--A week ago I learnt from the "Nation"--strange to have heard
it in no directer way!--that dear old John Ropes had turned his back on
us and all this mortal tragi-comedy. No sooner does one get abroad than
that sort of thing begins. I am deeply grieved to think of never seeing
or hearing old J. C. R. again, with his manliness, good-fellowship, and
cheeriness, and idealism of the right sort, and can't hold in any longer
from expression. You, dear John, seem the only fitting person for me to
condole with, for you will miss him most tremendously. Pray write and
tell me some details of the manner of his death. I hope he didn't suffer
much. Write also of your own personal and family fortunes and give my
love to the members of our dining club collectively and individually,
when you next meet.

I have myself been shut up in a sick room for five weeks past, seeing
hardly anyone but my wife and the doctor, a bad state of the heart being
the cause. We shall be at West Malvern in ten days, where I hope to
begin to mend.

Hurrah for Henry Higginson and his gift[26] to the University! I think
the Club cannot fail to be useful if they make it democratic enough.

I hope that Roland is enjoying Washington, but not so far
transubstantiated into a politician as to think that McKinley & Co. are
the high-water mark of human greatness up to date.

John Ropes, more than most men, seems as if he would be natural to meet
again.

Please give our love to Mrs. Gray, and believe me, affectionately yours,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


LAMB HOUSE, _Dec. 23, 1899_.

DEAREST FANNY,--About a week ago I found myself thinking a good deal
about you.

I may possibly have begun by wondering how it came that, after showing
such a spontaneous tendency towards that "clandestine correspondence"
early in the season, you should recently, in spite of pathetic news
about me, and direct personal appeals, be showing such great epistolary
reserve. I went on to great lengths about you; and ended by realizing
your existence, and its significance, as it were, very acutely. I
composed a letter to you in my mind, whilst lying awake, dwelling in a
feeling manner on the fact that human beings are born into this little
span of life of which the best thing is its friendships and intimacies,
and soon their places will know them no more, and yet they leave their
friendships and intimacies with no cultivation, to grow as they will by
the roadside, expecting them to "keep" by force of mere inertia; they
contribute nothing empirical to the relation, treating it as something
transcendental and metaphysical altogether; whereas in truth it
deserves from hour to hour the most active care and nurture and
devotion. "There's that Fanny," thought I, "the rarest and most
precious, perhaps, of all the phenomena that enter into the circle of my
experience. I take her for granted; I seldom see her--she _has never
passed a night in our house!_[27] and yet of all things she is the one
that probably deserves the closest and most unremitting attention on my
part. This transcendental relation of persons to each other in the
absolute won't do! I must write to Fanny and tell her, in spite of her
deprecations, just how perfect and rare and priceless a fact I know her
existence in this Universe eternally to be. This very morrow I will
dictate such a letter to Alice." The morrow came, and several days
succeeded, and brought each its impediment with it, so that letter
doesn't get written till today. And now Alice, who had suddenly to take
Peggy (who is with us for ten days) out to see a neighbor's little girl,
comes in; so I will give the pen to her.

[Remainder of letter dictated to Mrs. James]

Sunday, 24th.

Brother Harry and Peggy came in with Alice last evening, so my letter
got postponed till this morning. What I was going to say was this. The
day before yesterday we received in one bunch seven letters from you,
dating from the 20th of October to the 8th of December, and showing that
you, at any rate, had been alive to the duty of actively nourishing
friendship by deeds.... Your letters were sent to Baring Brothers,
instead of Brown, Shipley and Co., and it was a mercy that we ever got
them at all. You are a great letter-writer inasmuch as your pen flows
on, giving out easily such facts and feelings and thoughts as form the
actual contents of your day, so that one gets a live impression of
concrete reality. _My_ letters, I find, tend to escape into humorisms,
abstractions and flights of fancy, which are not nutritious things to
impart to friends thousands of miles away who wish to realize the facts
of your private existence. We are now received into the shelter of H.
J.'s "Lamb House," where we have been a week, having found West Malvern
(where the doctor sent me after my course of baths) rather too bleak a
retreat for the drear-nighted December. (Heaven be praised! we have just
lived down the solstice after which the year always seems a brighter,
hopefuller thing.) Harry's place is a most exquisite collection of
quaint little stage properties, three quarters of an acre of
brick-walled English garden, little brick courts and out-houses,
old-time kitchen and offices, paneled chambers and tiled fire-places,
but all very simple and on a small scale. Its host, soon to become its
proprietor, leads a very lonely life but seems in perfect equilibrium
therewith, placing apparently his interest more and more in the
operations of his fancy. His health is good, his face calm, his spirits
equable, and he will doubtless remain here for many years to come, with
an occasional visit to London. He has spoken of you with warm affection
and is grateful for the letters which you send him in spite of the lapse
of years....

I have resigned my Gifford lectureship, but they will undoubtedly grant
me indefinite postponement. I have also asked for a second year of
absence from Harvard, which of course will be accorded. If I improve, I
may be able to give my first Gifford course next year. I can do no work
whatsoever at present, but through the summer and half through the fall
was able to do a good deal of reading in religious biography. Since
July, in fact, my only companions have been saints, most excellent,
though sometimes rather lop-sided company. In a general manner I can
see my way to a perfectly bully pair of volumes, the first an objective
study of the "Varieties of Religious Experience," the second, my own
last will and testament, setting forth the philosophy best adapted to
normal religious needs. I hope I may be spared to get the thing down on
paper. So far my progress has been rather downhill, but the last couple
of days have shown a change which possibly may be the beginning of
better things. I mean to take great care of myself from this time on. In
another week or two we hope to move to a climate (possibly near Hyères)
where I may sit more out of doors. Gathering some strength there, I
trust to make for Nauheim in May. If I am benefited there, we shall stay
over next winter; otherwise we return by midsummer. Were Alice not
holding the pen, I should celebrate her unselfish devotion, etc., and
were I not myself dictating, I should celebrate my own uncomplaining
patience and fortitude. As it is, I leave you to imagine both. Both are
simply beautiful!

...There, dear Fanny, this is all I can do today in return for your
seven glorious epistles. Take a heartful of love and gratitude from both
of us. Remember us most affectionately to your Mother and Mary. Write
again soon, I pray you, but always to _Brown, Shipley and Co._ Stir up
Jim Putnam to write when he can, and believe me, lovingly yours,

Wm. James.




_To Mrs. Glendower Evans._


[Dictated to Mrs. James]

COSTEBELLE, HYÈRES, _Jan. 17, 1900_.

DEAR BESSIE,--Don't think that this is the first time that my spirit has
turned towards you since our departure. Away back in Nauheim I began
meaning to write to you, and although that meaning was "fulfilled" long
before you were born, in Royce's Absolute, yet there was a hitch about
it in the finite which gave me perplexity. I think that the real reason
why I kept finding myself able to dictate letters to other persons--not
many, 't is true--and yet postponing ever until next time my letter unto
you, was that my sense of your value was so much greater than almost
anybody else's--though I wouldn't have anything in this construed
prejudicial to Fanny Morse. Bowed as I am by the heaviest of matrimonial
chains, ever dependent for expression on Alice here, how can my spirit
move with perfect spontaneity, or "voice itself" with the careless
freedom it would wish for in the channels of its choice? I am sure you
understand, and under present conditions of communication anything more
explicit might be imprudent.

She has told you correctly all the outward facts. I feel within a week
past as if I might really be taking a turn for the better, and I know
you will be glad.

I have, in the last days, gone so far as to read Royce's book[28] from
cover to cover, a task made easy by the familiarity of the thought, as
well as the flow of the style. It is a charming production--it is odd
that the adjectives "charming" and "pretty" emerge so strongly to
characterize my impression. R. has got himself much more organically
together than he ever did before, the result being, in its _ensemble_, a
highly individual and original _Weltanschauung_, well-fitted to be the
storm-centre of much discussion, and to form a wellspring of suggestion
and education for the next generation of thought in America. But it
makes youthful anew the paradox of philosophy--so trivial and so
ponderous at once. The book leaves a total effect on you like a
picture--a summary impression of charm and grace as light as a breath;
yet to bring forth that light nothing less than Royce's enormous organic
temperament and technical equipment, and preliminary attempts, were
required. The book consolidates an impression which I have never before
got except by glimpses, that Royce's system is through and through to be
classed as a light production. It is a charming, romantic sketch; and it
is only by handling it after the manner of a sketch, keeping it within
sketch technique, that R. can make it very impressive. In the few places
where he tries to grip and reason close, the effect is rather
disastrous, to my mind. But I do think of Royce now in a more or less
settled way as primarily a sketcher in philosophy. Of course the
sketches of some masters are worth more than the finished pictures of
others. But stop! if this was the kind of letter I meant to write to
you, it is no wonder that I found myself unable to begin weeks ago. My
excuse is that I only finished the book two hours ago, and my mind was
full to overflowing.

Next Monday we are expecting to move into the neighboring Château de
Carqueiranne, which my friend Professor Richet of Paris has offered
conjointly to us and the Fred Myerses, who will soon arrive. A whole
country house in splendid grounds and a perfect Godsend under the
conditions. If I can only bear the talking to the Myerses without too
much fatigue! But that also I am sure will come. Our present situation
is enviable enough. A large bedroom with a balcony high up on the vast
hotel façade; a terrace below it graveled with white pebbles containing
beds of palms and oranges and roses; below that a downward sloping
garden full of plants and winding walks and seats; then a wide hillside
continuing southward to the plain below, with its gray-green olive
groves bordered by great salt marshes with salt works on them, shut in
from the sea by the causeways which lead to a long rocky island, perhaps
three miles away, that limits the middle of our view due south, and
beyond which to the East and West appears the boundless Mediterranean.
But delightful as this is, there is no place like home; Otis Place is
better than Languedoc and Irving Street than Provence. And I am sure,
dear Bessie, that there is no maid, wife or widow in either of these
countries that is half as good as you. But here I must absolutely stop;
so with a good-night and a happy New Year to you, I am as ever,
affectionately your friend,

Wm. James.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


[Dictated to Mrs. James]

HOTEL D' ALBION,
COSTEBELLE, HYÈRES, _Jan. 18, 1900_.

DARLING MILLER,--Last night arrived your pathetically sympathetic letter
in comment on the news you had just received of my dropping out for the
present from the active career. I want you to understand how deeply I
value your unflagging feeling of friendship, and how much we have been
touched by this new expression of it.... My strength and spirits are
coming back to me with the open-air life, and I begin to feel quite
differently towards the future. Even if this amelioration does not
develop fast, it is a check to the deterioration, and shows that
curative forces are still there. I look perfectly well at present, and
that of itself is a very favorable sign. In a couple of weeks I mean to
begin the Gifford lectures, writing, say, a page a day, and having all
next year before me empty, am very likely to get, at any rate, the first
course finished. A letter from Seth last night told me that the
Committee [on the Gifford Lectureship] had refused my resignation and
simply shoved my appointment forward by one year. So be of good cheer,
Miller; we shall yet fight the good fight, sometimes side by side,
sometimes agin one another, as merrily as if no interruption had
occurred. Show this to Harry, to whom his mother will write today.

We enjoyed Royce's visit very much, and yesterday I finished reading his
book, which I find perfectly charming as a composition, though as far as
cogent reasoning goes, it leaks at every joint. It is, nevertheless, a
big achievement in the line of philosophic fancy-work, perhaps the most
important of all except religious fancy-work. He has got himself
together far more intricately than ever before, and ought, after this,
to be recognized by the world according to the measure of his real
importance. To me, however, the book has brought about a curious
settlement in my way of classing Royce. In spite of the great technical
freight he carries, and his extraordinary mental vigor, he belongs
essentially among the lighter skirmishers of philosophy. A sketcher and
popularizer, not a pile-driver, foundation-layer, or wall-builder.
Within his class, of course, he is simply magnificent. It all goes with
his easy temperament and rare good-nature in discussion. The subject is
not really vital to him, it is just fancy-work. All the same I do hope
that this book and its successor will prove a great ferment in our
philosophic schools. Only with schools and living masters can philosophy
_bloom_ in a country, in a generation.

No more, dear Miller, but endless thanks. All you tell me of yourself
deeply interests me. I am deeply sorry about the eyes. Are you sure it
is not a matter for glasses? With much love from both of us. Your ever
affectionate,

W. J.




_To Francis Boott._


[Dictated to Mrs. James]

CHÂTEAU DE CARQUEIRANNE, _Jan. 31, 1900_.

DEAR OLD FRIEND,--Every day for a month past I have said to Alice,
"Today we must get off a letter to Mr. Boott"; but every day the
available strength was less than the call upon it. Yours of the 28th
December reached us duly at Rye and was read at the cheerful little
breakfast table. I must say that you are the only person who has caught
the proper tone for sympathizing with an invalid's feelings. Everyone
else says, "We are glad to think that you are by this time in splendid
condition, richly enjoying your rest, and having a great success at
Edinburgh"--this, where what one craves is mere pity for one's unmerited
sufferings! _You_ say, "it is a great disappointment, more I should
think than you can well bear. I wish you could give up the whole affair
and turn your prow toward home." That, dear Sir, is the proper note to
strike--la voix du coeur qui seul au coeur arrive; and I thank you for
recognizing that it is a case of agony and patience. I, for one, should
be too glad to turn my prow homewards, in spite of all our present
privileges in the way of simplified life, and glorious climate. What
wouldn't I give at this moment to be partaking of one of your recherchés
déjeuners à la fourchette, ministered to by the good Kate. From the bed
on which I lie I can "sense" it as if present--the succulent roast pork,
the apple sauce, the canned asparagus, the cranberry pie, the dates, the
"To Kalon,"[29]--above all the _rire en barbe_ of the ever-youthful
host. Will they ever come again?

Don't understand me to be disparaging our present meals which, cooked by
a broadbuilt sexagenarian Provençale, leave nothing to be desired.
Especially is the fish good and the artichokes, and the stewed lettuce.
Our _commensaux_, the Myerses, form a good combination. The house is
vast and comfortable and the air just right for one in my condition,
neither relaxing nor exciting, and floods of sunshine.

Do you care much about the war? For my part I think Jehovah has run the
thing about right, so far; though on utilitarian grounds it will be very
likely better if the English win. When we were at Rye an interminable
controversy raged about a national day of humiliation and prayer. I
wrote to the "Times" to suggest, in my character of traveling American,
that both sides to the controversy might be satisfied by a service
arranged on principles suggested by the anecdote of the Montana settler
who met a grizzly so formidable that he fell on his knees, saying, "O
Lord, I hain't never yet asked ye for help, and ain't agoin' to ask ye
for none now. But for pity's sake, O Lord, don't help the bear." The
solemn "Times" never printed my letter and thus the world lost an
admirable epigram. You, I know, will appreciate it.

Mrs. Gibbens speaks with great pleasure of your friendly visits, and I
should think you might find Mrs. Merriman good company. I hope you are
getting through the winter without any bronchial trouble, and I hope
that neither the influenza nor the bubonic plague has got to Cambridge
yet. The former is devastating Europe. If you see dear Dr. Driver, give
him our warmest regards. One ought to stay among one's own people. I
seem to be mending--though very slowly, and the least thing knocks me
down. This noon I am still in bed, a little too much talking with the
Myerses yesterday giving me a strong pectoral distress which is not yet
over. This dictation begins to hurt me, so I will stop. My spirits now
are first-rate, which is a great point gained.

Good-bye, dear old man! We both send our warmest love and are, ever
affectionately yours,

Wm. James.




_To Hugo Münsterberg._


CARQUEIANNE, _March 13, 1900_.

DEAR MÜNSTERBERG,--Your letter of the 7th "ult." was a most delightful
surprise--all but the part of it which told of your being ill again--and
of course the news of poor Solomons's death was a severe shock.... As
regards Solomons, it is pathetically tragic, and I hope that you will
send me full details. There was something so lonely and self-sustaining
about poor little S., that to be snuffed out like this before he had
fairly begun to live in the eyes of the world adds a sort of tragic
dramatic unity to his young career. Certainly the _keenest_ intellect we
ever had, and one of the loftiest characters! But there was always a
mysterious side to me about his mind: he appeared so critical and
destructive, and yet kept alluding all the while to ethical and
religious ideals of his own which he wished to live for, and of which he
never vouchsafed a glimpse to anyone else. He was the only student I
have ever had of whose criticisms I felt afraid: and that was partly
because I never quite understood the region from which they came, and
with the authority of which he spoke. His surface thoughts, however, of
a scientific order, were extraordinarily _treffend_ and clearly
expressed; in fact, the way in which he went to the heart of a subject
in a few words was masterly. Of course he must have left, apart from his
thesis, a good deal of MS. fit for publication. I have not seen our
philosophical periodicals since leaving home. Have any parts of his
thesis already appeared? If not, the whole thing should be published as
"Monograph Supplement" to the "Psychological Review," and his papers
gone over to see what else there may be. An adequate obituary of him
ought also to be written. Who knew him most intimately? I think the
obituary and a portrait ought also to be posted in the laboratory. Can
you send me the address of his mother?--I think his father is dead. I
should also like to write a word about him to Miss S----, if you can
give me her address. If we had foreseen this early end to poor little
Solomons, how much more we should have made of him, and how considerate
we should have been!

It pleases me much to think of so many other good young fellows, as you
report them, in the laboratory this year. How many candidates for Ph.D.?
How glad I am to be clear of those examinations, certainly the most
disagreeable part of the year's work....




_To George H. Palmer._


CARQUEIRANNE, _Apr. 2, 1900_.

GLORIOUS OLD PALMER,--I had come to the point of feeling that my next
letter _must_ be to you, when in comes your delightful "favor" of the
18th, with all its news, its convincing clipping, and its enclosures
from Bakewell and Sheldon. I have had many impulses to write to
Bakewell, but they have all aborted--my powers being so small and so
much _in Anspruch genommen_ by correspondence already under way. I judge
him to be well and happy. What think you of his wife? I suppose she is
no relation of yours. I shouldn't think any of your three candidates
would do for that conventional Bryn Mawr. She stoneth the prophets, and
I wish she would get X---- and get stung. He made a _deplorable_
impression on me many years ago. The only comment _I_ heard when I gave
my address there lately (the last one in my "Talks") was that A---- had
hoped for something more technical and psychological! Nevertheless, some
good girls seem to come out at Bryn Mawr. I am awfully sorry that Perry
is out of place. Unless he gets something good, it seems to me that we
ought to get him for a course in Kant. He is certainly the soundest,
most normal all-round man of our recent production. Your list for next
year interests me muchly. I am glad of Münsterberg's and Santayana's new
courses, and hope they'll be good. I'm glad you're back in Ethics and
glad that Royce has "Epistemology"--portentous name, and small result,
in my opinion, but a substantive _discipline_ which ought, _par le temps
qui court_, to be treated with due formality. I look forward with
eagerness to his new volume.[30] What a colossal feat he has performed
in these two years--all thrown in by the way, as it were.

Certainly Gifford lectures are a good institution for stimulating
production. They have stimulated me so far to produce two lectures of
wishy-washy generalities. What is that for a "showing" in six months of
absolute leisure? The second lecture used me up so that I must be off a
good while again.

No! dear Palmer, the best I can possibly hope for at Cambridge after my
return is to be able to carry one half-course. So make all calculations
accordingly. As for Windelband, how can I ascertain anything except by
writing to him? I shall see no one, nor go to any University
environment. My impression is that we must go in for budding genius, if
we seek a European. If an American, we can get a _sommité_! But who? in
either case? Verily there is room at the top. S---- seems to be the
only Britisher worth thinking of. I imagine we had better train up our
own men. A----, B----, C----, either would no doubt do, especially A----
if his health improves. D---- is our last card, from the point of view
of policy, no doubt, but from that of inner organization it seems to me
that he may have too many points of coalescence with both Münsterberg
and Royce, especially the latter.

The great event in my life recently has been the reading of Santayana's
book.[31] Although I absolutely reject the platonism of it, I have
literally squealed with delight at the imperturbable perfection with
which the position is laid down on page after page; and grunted with
delight at such a thickening up of our Harvard atmosphere. If our
students now could begin really to understand what Royce means with his
voluntaristic-pluralistic monism, what Münsterberg means with his
dualistic scientificism and platonism, what Santayana means by his
pessimistic platonism (I wonder if he and Mg. have had any close
mutually encouraging intercourse in this line?), what I mean by my crass
pluralism, what you mean by your ethereal idealism, that these are so
many religions, ways of fronting life, and worth fighting for, we should
have a genuine philosophic universe at Harvard. The best condition of it
would be an open conflict and rivalry of the diverse systems. (Alas!
that I should be out of it, just as my chance begins!) The world might
ring with the struggle, if we devoted ourselves exclusively to
belaboring each other.

I now understand Santayana, the man. I never understood him before. But
what a perfection of rottenness in a philosophy! I don't think I ever
knew the anti-realistic view to be propounded with so impudently
superior an air. It is refreshing to see a representative of moribund
Latinity rise up and administer such reproof to us barbarians in the
hour of our triumph. I imagine Santayana's _style_ to be entirely
spontaneous. But it has curious classic echoes. Whole pages of pure Hume
in style; others of pure Renan. Nevertheless, how fantastic a
philosophy!--as if the "world of values" _were_ independent of
existence. It is only as _being_, that one thing is better than another.
The idea of darkness is as good as that of light, as ideas. There is
more value in light's _being_. And the exquisite consolation, when you
have ascertained the badness of all fact, in knowing that badness is
inferior to goodness, to the end--it only rubs the pessimism in. A man
whose egg at breakfast turns out always bad says to himself, "Well, bad
and good are not the same, anyhow." That is just the trouble! Moreover,
when you come down to the facts, what do your harmonious and integral
ideal systems prove to be? in the concrete? Always things burst by the
growing content of experience. Dramatic unities; laws of versification;
ecclesiastical systems; scholastic doctrines. Bah! Give me Walt Whitman
and Browning ten times over, much as the perverse ugliness of the latter
at times irritates me, and intensely as I have enjoyed Santayana's
attack. The barbarians are in the line of mental growth, and those who
do insist that the ideal and the real are dynamically continuous are
those by whom the world is to be saved. But I'm nevertheless delighted
that the other view, always existing in the world, should at last have
found so splendidly impertinent an expression among ourselves. I have
meant to write to Santayana; but on second thoughts, and to save myself,
I will just ask you to send him this. It saves him from what might be
the nuisance of having to reply, and on my part it has the advantage of
being more free-spoken and direct. He is certainly an _extraordinarily
distingué_ writer. Thank him for existing!

As a contrast, read Jack Chapman's "Practical Agitation." The other pole
of thought, and a style all splinters--but a gospel for our rising
generation--I hope it will have its effect.

Send me your Noble lectures. I don't see how you could risk it without a
MS. If you did fail (which I doubt) you deserved to. Anyhow the printed
page makes everything good.

I can no more! Adieu! How is Mrs. Palmer this winter? I hope entirely
herself again. You are impartially silent of her and of my wife! The
"Transcript" continues to bless us. We move from this hospitable roof to
the hotel at Costebelle today. Thence after a fortnight to Geneva, and
in May to Nauheim once more, to be reëxamined and sentenced by Schott.
Affectionately yours,

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


COSTEBELLE, _Apr. 12, 1900_.

DEAREST FANNY,--Your letters continue to rain down upon us with a
fidelity which makes me sure that, however it may once have been, _now_,
on the principle of the immortal Monsieur Perrichon, we must be firmly
rooted in your affections. You can never "throw over" anybody for whom
you have made such sacrifices. All qualms which I might have in the
abstract about the injury we must be inflicting on so busy a Being by
making her, through our complaints of poverty, agony, and exile, keep us
so much "on her mind" as to tune us up every two or three days by a long
letter to which she sacrifices all her duties to the family and state,
disappear, moreover, when I consider the character of the letters
themselves. They are so easy, the facts are so much the immediate
out-bubblings of the moment, and the delicious philosophical reflexions
so much like the spontaneous breathings of the soul, that the _effort_
is manifestly at the zero-point, and into the complex state of affection
which necessarily arises in you for the objects of so much loving care,
there enter none of those curious momentary arrows of impatience and
vengefulness which might make others say, if they were doing what you do
for us, that they wished we were dead or in some way put beyond reach,
so that our eternal "appeal" might stop. No, Fanny! we have no repinings
and feel no responsibilities towards you, but accept you and your
letters as the gifts you are. The infrequency of our answering proves
this fact; to which you in turn must furnish the correlative, if the
occasion comes. On the day when you temporarily hate us, or don't "feel
like" the usual letter, don't let any thought of inconsistency with your
past acts worry you about not taking up the pen. Let us go; though it be
for weeks and months--I shall know you will come round again. "Neither
heat nor frost nor thunder shall ever do away, I ween, the marks of that
which once hath been." And to think that you should never have spent a
night, and only once taken a meal, in our house! When we get back, we
must see each other daily, and may the days of both of us be right long
in the State of Massachusetts! Bless her!

I got a letter from J. J. Chapman praising her strongly the other day.
And sooth to say the "Transcript" and the "Springfield Republican," the
reception of whose "weeklies" has become one of the solaces of my life,
do make a first-rate showing for her civilization. One can't just say
what "tone" consists in, but these papers hold their own excellently in
comparison with the English papers. There is far less alertness of mind
in the general make-up of the latter; and the "respectability" of the
English editorial columns, though it shows a correcter literary drill,
is apt to be due to a remorseless longitude of commonplace
conventionality that makes them deadly dull. (The "Spectator" appears to
be the only paper with a nervous system, in England--that of a
_carnassier_ at present!) The English people seem to have positively a
passionate hunger for this mass of prosy stupidity, never less than a
column and a quarter long. The Continental papers of course are
"nowhere." As for our yellow papers--every country has its criminal
classes, and with us and in France, they have simply got into journalism
as part of their professional evolution, and they must be got out. Mr.
Bosanquet somewhere says that so far from the "dark ages" being over, we
are just at the beginning of a new dark-age period. He means that
ignorance and unculture, which then were merely brutal, are now
articulate and possessed of a literary voice, and the fight is
transferred from fields and castles and town walls to "organs of
publicity"; but it is the same fight, of reason and goodness against
stupidity and passions; and it must be fought through to the same kind
of success. But it means the reëducating of perhaps twenty more
generations; and by that time some altogether new kind of institutional
opportunity for the Devil will have been evolved.

_April_ 13th. I had to stop yesterday.... Six months ago, I shouldn't
have thought it possible that a life deliberately founded on pottering
about and dawdling through the day would be endurable or even possible.
I have attained such skill that I doubt if my days ever at any time
seemed to glide by so fast. But it corrodes one's soul nevertheless. I
scribble a little in bed every morning, and have reached page 48 of my
third Gifford lecture--though Lecture II, alas! must be rewritten
entirely. The conditions don't conduce to an energetic grip of the
subject, and I am afraid that what I write is pretty slack and not what
it would be if my vital tone were different. The problem I have set
myself is a hard one: _first_, to defend (against all the prejudices of
my "class") "experience" against "philosophy" as being the real backbone
of the world's religious life--I mean prayer, guidance, and all that
sort of thing immediately and privately felt, as against high and noble
general views of our destiny and the world's meaning; and _second_, to
make the hearer or reader believe, what I myself invincibly do believe,
that, although all the special manifestations of religion may have been
absurd (I mean its creeds and theories), yet the life of it as a whole
is mankind's most important function. A task well-nigh impossible, I
fear, and in which I shall fail; but to attempt it is _my_ religious
act.

We got a visit the other day from [a Scottish couple here who have heard
that I am to give the Gifford lectures]; and two days ago went to
afternoon tea with them at their hotel, next door. _She_ enclosed a
tract (by herself) in the invitation, and proved to be a [mass] of holy
egotism and conceit based on professional invalidism and self-worship. I
wish my sister Alice were there to "react" on her with a description!
Her husband, apparently weak, and the slave of her. No talk but
evangelical talk. It seemed assumed that a Gifford lecturer must be one
of Moody's partners, and it gave me rather a foretaste of what the
Edinburgh atmosphere may be like. Well, I shall enjoy sticking a knife
into its gizzard--if atmospheres have gizzards? Blessed be
Boston--probably the freest place on earth, that isn't merely heathen
and sensual.

I have been supposing, as one always does, that you "ran in" to the
Putnams' every hour or so, and likewise they to No. 12. But your late
allusion to the telephone and the rarity of your seeing Jim [Putnam]
reminded me of the actual conditions--absurd as they are. (Really you
and we are nearer together now at this distance than we have ever been.)
Well, let Jim see this letter, if you care to, flattering him by saying
that it is more written for him than for you (which it certainly has not
been till this moment!), and thanking him for existing in this naughty
world. His account of the Copernican revolution (studento-centric) in
the Medical School is highly exciting, and I am glad to hear of the
excellent little Cannon becoming so prominent a reformer. Speaking of
reformers, do you see Jack Chapman's "Political Nursery"? of which the
April number has just come. (I have read it and taken my bed-breakfast
during the previous page of this letter, though you may not have
perceived the fact.) If not, _do_ subscribe to it; it is awful fun. He
just looks at things, and tells the truth about them--a strange thing
even to _try_ to do, and he doesn't always succeed. Office 141 Broadway,
$1.00 a year.

Fanny, you won't be reading as far as this in this interminable letter,
so I stop, though 100 pent-up things are seeking to be said. The weather
has still been so cold whenever the sun is withdrawn that we have
delayed our departure for Geneva to the 22nd--a week later. We make a
short visit to our friends the Flournoys (a couple of days) and then
proceed towards Nauheim _via_ Heidelberg, where I wish to consult the
great Erb about the advisability of more baths in view of my nervous
complications, before the great Schott examines me again. I do wish I
could send for Jim for a consultation. Good-bye, dearest and best of
Fannys. I hope your Mother is wholly well again. Much love to her and
to Mary Elliot. It interested me to hear of Jack E.'s great operation.
Yours ever,

W. J.




_To his Son Alexander._


[GENEVA, _circa May 3, 1900_.]

DEAR FRANÇOIS,--Here we are in Geneva, at the Flournoys'--dear people
and splendid children. I wish Harry could marry Alice, Billy marry
Marguerite, and you marry Ariane-Dorothée--the absolutely jolliest and
beautifullest 3-year old I ever saw. I am trying to get you engaged! I
enclose pictures of the dog. Ariane-Dorothée r-r-r-olls her r-r-r's like
fury. I got your picture of the elephant--very good. Draw everything you
see, no matter how badly, trying to notice how the lines run--one line
every day!--just notice it and draw it, no matter how badly, and at the
end of the year you'll be s'prised to see how well you can draw. Tell
Billy to get you a big blank book at the Coöp., and every day take one
page, just drawing down on it some _thing_, or _dog_, or _horse_, or
_man_ or _woman_, or _part_ of a man or woman, which you have looked at
that day just for the purpose, to see how the lines run. I bet the last
page of that book will be better than the first! Do this for my sake.
Kiss your dear old Grandma. P'r'aps, we shall get home this summer after
all. In two or three days I shall see a doctor and know more about
myself. Will let you know. Keep motionless and listen as much as you
can. Take in things without speaking--it'll make you a better man. Your
Ma thinks you'll grow up into a filosopher like me and write books. It
is easy enuff, all but the writing. You just get it out of other books,
and write it down. Always your loving,

DAD.

At this time James's thirteen-year-old daughter was living with family
friends--the Joseph Thatcher Clarkes--in Harrow, and was going to an
English school with their children. She had been passing through such
miseries as a homesick child often suffers, and had written letters
which evoked the following response.




_To his Daughter._


VILLA LUISE,
BAD-NAUHEIM, _May 26, 1900_.

DARLING PEG,--Your letter came last night and explained sufficiently the
cause of your long silence. You have evidently been in a bad state of
spirits again, and dissatisfied with your environment; and I judge that
you have been still more dissatisfied with the inner state of trying to
consume your own smoke, and grin and bear it, so as to carry out your
mother's behests made after the time when you scared us so by your
inexplicable tragic outcries in those earlier letters. Well! I believe
you have been trying to do the manly thing under difficult
circumstances, but one learns only gradually to do the _best_ thing; and
the best thing for you would be to write at least weekly, if only a
post-card, and say just how things are going. If you are in bad spirits,
there is no harm whatever in communicating that fact, and defining the
character of it, or describing it as exactly as you like. The bad thing
is to pour out the _contents_ of one's bad spirits on others and leave
them with it, as it were, on their hands, as if it was for them to do
something about it. That was what you did in your other letter which
alarmed us so, for your shrieks of anguish were so excessive, and so
unexplained by anything you told us in the way of facts, that we didn't
know but what you had suddenly gone crazy. That is the _worst_ sort of
thing you can do. The middle sort of thing is what you do this
time--namely, keep silent for more than a fortnight, and when you do
write, still write rather mysteriously about your sorrows, not being
quite open enough.

Now, my dear little girl, you have come to an age when the inward life
develops and when some people (and on the whole those who have most of a
destiny) find that all is not a bed of roses. Among other things there
will be waves of terrible sadness, which last sometimes for days; and
dissatisfaction with one's self, and irritation at others, and anger at
circumstances and stony insensibility, etc., etc., which taken together
form a melancholy. Now, painful as it is, this is sent to us for an
enlightenment. It always passes off, and we learn about life from it,
and we ought to learn a great many good things if we react on it
rightly. [_From margin._] (For instance, you learn how good a thing your
home is, and your country, and your brothers, and you may learn to be
more considerate of other people, who, you now learn, may have their
inner weaknesses and sufferings, too.) Many persons take a kind of
sickly delight in hugging it; and some sentimental ones may even be
proud of it, as showing a fine sorrowful kind of sensibility. Such
persons make a regular habit of the luxury of woe. That is the worst
possible reaction on it. It is usually a sort of disease, when we get it
strong, arising from the organism having generated some poison in the
blood; and we mustn't submit to it an hour longer than we can help, but
jump at every chance to attend to anything cheerful or comic or take
part in anything active that will divert us from our mean, pining inward
state of feeling. When it passes off, as I said, we know more than we
did before. And we must try to make it last as short a time as possible.
The worst of it often is that, while we are in it, we don't _want_ to
get out of it. We hate it, and yet we prefer staying in it--that is a
part of the disease. If we find ourselves like that, we must make
ourselves do something different, go with people, speak cheerfully, set
ourselves to some hard work, make ourselves sweat, etc.; and that is the
good way of reacting that makes of us a valuable character. The disease
makes you think of _yourself_ all the time; and the way out of it is to
keep as busy as we can thinking of _things_ and of _other people_--no
matter what's the matter with our self.

I have no doubt you are doing as well as you know how, darling little
Peg; but we have to learn everything, and I also have no doubt that
you'll manage it better and better if you ever have any more of it, and
soon it will fade away, simply leaving you with more experience. The
great thing for you _now_, I should suppose, would be to enter as
friendlily as possible into the interest of the Clarke children. If you
like them, or acted as if you liked them, you needn't trouble about the
question of whether they like you or not. They probably will, fast
enough; and if they don't, it will be their funeral, not yours. But this
is a great lecture, so I will stop. The great thing about it is that it
is all true.

The baths are threatening to disagree with me again, so I may stop them
soon. Will let you know as quick as anything is decided. Good news from
home: the Merrimans have taken the Irving Street house for another year,
and the Wambaughs (of the Law School) have taken Chocorua, though at a
reduced rent. The weather here is almost continuously cold and sunless.
Your mother is sleeping, and will doubtless add a word to this when she
wakes. Keep a merry heart--"time and the hour run through the roughest
day"--and believe me ever your most loving

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


[Post-card]

ALTDORF, LAKE LUZERN, _July 20, [1900]_.

Your last letter was, if anything, a more unmitigated blessing than its
predecessors; and I, with my curious inertia to overcome, sit _thinking
of letters_, and of the soul-music with which they might be filled if my
tongue could only utter the thoughts that arise in me to youward, the
beauty of the world, the conflict of life and death and youth and age
and man and woman and righteousness and evil, etc., and Europe and
America! but it stays all caked within and gets no articulation, the
power of speech being so non-natural a function of our race. We are
staying above Luzern, near a big spruce wood, at "Gutsch," and today
being hot and passivity advisable, we came down and took the boat, for a
whole day on the Lake. The works both of Nature and of Man in this
region seem too perfect to be credible almost, and were I not a bitter
Yankee, I would, without a moment's hesitation, be a Swiss, and probably
then glad of the change. The _goodliness_ of this land is one of the
things I ache to utter to you, but can't. Some day I will write, also to
Jim P. My condition baffles me. I have lately felt better, but been bad
again, and altogether can _do_ nothing without repentance afterwards. We
have just lunched in this bowery back verandah, water trickling,
beautiful old convent sleeping up the hillside. Love to you all!

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _Sept. 16, 1900_.

DEAREST FANNY,-- ...Here I am having a little private picnic all by
myself, on this effulgent Sunday morning--real American September
weather, by way of a miracle. I ordered my bath-chair man to wheel me
out to the "Hochwald," where, he having been dismissed for three hours,
until two o'clock, I am lying in the said luxurious throne, writing this
on my knee, with nothing between but a number of Kuno Fischer's "Hegel's
Leben, Werke und Lehre," now in process of publication, and the
flexibility of which accounts for the poor handwriting. I am alone, save
for the inevitable restaurant which hovers on the near horizon, in a
beautiful grove of old oak trees averaging some 16 or 18 feet apart,
through whose leaves the sunshine filters and dapples the clear ground
or grass that lies between them. Alice is still in England, having
finally at my command had to give up her long-cherished plan of a run
home to see her mother, the children, you, and all the other _dulcissima
mundi nomina_ that make of life a thing worth living for. I _funked_ the
idea of being alone so long when I came to the point. It is not that I
am worse, but there will be cold weather in the next couple of months;
and, unable to sit out of doors then, as here and now, I shall probably
either have to over-walk or over-read, and both things will be bad for
me.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: "Damn the Absolute!"

Chocorua, September, 1903. One morning James and Royce strolled into the
road and sat down on a wall in earnest discussion. When James heard the
camera click, as his daughter took the upper snap-shot, he cried,
"Royce, you're being photographed! Look, out! I say _Damn the
Absolute_!"]

As things are _now_, I get on well enough, for the bath business
(especially the "bath-chair") carries one through a good deal of the
day. The great Schott has positively forbidden me to go to England as I
did last year; so, early in October, our faces will be turned towards
Italy, and by Nov. 1 we shall, I hope, be ensconced in a _pension_ close
to the Pincian Garden in Rome, to see how long _that_ resource will
last. I confess I am in the mood of it, and that there is a suggestion
of more richness about the name of Rome than about that of Rye, which,
until Schott's veto, was the plan. How the Gifford lectures will fare,
remains to be seen. I have felt strong movings towards home this
fall, but reflection says: "Stay another winter," and I confess that now
that October is approaching, it feels like the home-stretch and as if
the time were getting short and the limbs of "next summer" in America
burning through the veil which seems to hide them in the shape of the
second European winter months. Who knows? perhaps I may be spry and
active by that time! I have still one untried card up my sleeve, that
may work wonders. All I can say of this third course of baths is that so
far it seems to be doing me no harm. That it will do me any substantial
good, after the previous experiences, seems decidedly doubtful. But one
must suffer some inconvenience to please the doctors! Just as in most
women there is a wife that craves to suffer and submit and be bullied,
so in most men there is a _patient_ that needs to have a doctor and obey
his orders, whether they be believed in or not....

Don't take the Malwida book[32] too seriously. I sent it _faute de
mieux_. I don't think I ever told you how much I enjoyed hearing the
Lesley volume[33] read aloud by Alice. We were just in the exactly right
condition for enjoying that breath of old New England. Good-bye, dearest
Fanny. Give my love to your mother, Mary, J. J. P., and all your circle.
_Leb' wohl_ yourself, and believe me, your ever affectionate,

W. J.




_To Josiah Royce._


NAUHEIM, _Sept. 26, 1900_.

BELOVED ROYCE,--Great was my, was _our_ pleasure in receiving your long
and delightful letter last night. Like the lioness in Æsop's fable, you
give birth to one young one only in the year, but that one is a lion. I
give birth mainly to guinea-pigs in the shape of post-cards; but despite
such diversities of epistolary expression, the heart of each of us is in
the right place. I need not say, my dear old boy, how touched I am at
your expressions of affection, or how it pleases me to hear that you
have missed me. I too miss you profoundly. I do not find in the hotel
waiters, chambermaids and bath-attendants with whom my lot is chiefly
cast, that unique mixture of erudition, originality, profundity and
vastness, and human wit and leisureliness, by accustoming me to which
during all these years you have spoilt me for inferior kinds of
intercourse. You are still the centre of my gaze, the pole of my mental
magnet. When I write, 'tis with one eye on the page, and one on you.
When I compose my Gifford lectures mentally, 'tis with the design
exclusively of overthrowing your system, and ruining your peace. I lead
a parasitic life upon you, for my highest flight of ambitious ideality
is to become your conqueror, and go down into history as such, you and I
rolled in one another's arms and silent (or rather loquacious still) in
one last death-grapple of an embrace. How then, O my dear Royce, can I
forget you, or be contented out of your close neighborhood? Different as
our minds are, yours has nourished mine, as no other social influence
ever has, and in converse with you I have always felt that my life was
being lived importantly. Our minds, too, are not different in the
_Object_ which they envisage. It is the whole paradoxical
physico-moral-spiritual Fatness, of which most people single out some
skinny fragment, which we both cover with our eye. We "aim at him
generally"--and most others don't. I don't believe that we shall dwell
apart forever, though our formulas may.

Home and Irving Street look very near when seen through these few winter
months, and tho' it is still doubtful what I may be able to do in
College, for social purposes I shall be available for probably numerous
years to come. I haven't got at work yet--only four lectures of the
first course written (strange to say)--but I am decidedly better today
than I have been for the past ten months, and the matter is all ready in
my mind; so that when, a month hence, I get settled down in Rome, I
think the rest will go off fairly quickly. The second course I shall
have to resign from, and write it out at home as a book. It must seem
strange to you that the way from the mind to the pen should be as
intraversable as it has been in this case of mine--you in whom it always
seems so easily pervious. But Miller will be able to tell you all about
my condition, both mental and physical, so I will waste no more words on
that to me decidedly musty subject.

I fully understand your great aversion to letters and other off-writing.
You have done a perfectly Herculean amount of the most difficult
productive work, and I believe you to be much more tired than you
probably yourself suppose or know. Both mentally and physically, I
imagine that a long vacation, in other scenes, with no sense of duty,
would do you a world of good. I don't say the full fifteen months--for I
imagine that one summer and one academic half-year would perhaps do the
business better--you could preserve the relaxed and desultory condition
as long as that probably, whilst later you'd begin to chafe, and _then_
you'd better be back in your own library. If _my_ continuing abroad is
hindering this, my sorrow will be extreme. Of course I must some time
come to a definite decision about my own relations to the College, but I
am reserving that till the end of 1900, when I shall write to Eliot in
full. There is still a therapeutic card to play, of which I will say
nothing just now, and I don't want to commit myself before that has been
tried.

You say nothing of the second course of Aberdeen lectures, nor do you
speak at all of the Dublin course. Strange omissions, like your not
sending me your Ingersoll lecture! I assume that the publication of
[your] Gifford Volume II will not be very long delayed. I am eager to
read them. I can read philosophy now, and have just read the first three
_Lieferungen_ of K. Fischer's "Hegel." I must say I prefer the original
text. Fischer's paraphrases always flatten and dry things out; and he
gives no rich sauce of his own to compensate. I have been sorry to hear
from Palmer that he also has been very tired. One can't keep going
forever! P. has been like an archangel in his letters to me, and I am
inexpressibly grateful. Well! everybody has been kinder than I
deserve....




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


ROME, _Dec. 25, 1900_.

...Rome is simply the most satisfying lake of picturesqueness and guilty
suggestiveness known to this child. Other places have single features
better than anything in Rome, perhaps, but for an _ensemble_ Rome seems
to beat the world. Just a FEAST for the eye from the moment you leave
your hotel door to the moment you return. Those who say that beauty is
all made up of suggestion are well disproved here. For the things the
eyes most gloat on, the inconceivably corrupted, besmeared and ulcerated
surfaces, and black and cavernous glimpses of interiors, have no
suggestions save of moral horror, and their "tactile values," as
Berenson would say, are pure gooseflesh. Nevertheless the sight of them
delights. And then there is such a geologic stratification of history! I
dote on the fine equestrian statue of Garibaldi, on the Janiculum,
quietly bending his head with a look half-meditative, half-strategical,
but wholly victorious, upon Saint Peter's and the Vatican. What luck for
a man and a party to have opposed to it an enemy that stood up for
_nothing_ that was ideal, for _everything_ that was mean in life.
Austria, Naples, and the Mother of harlots here, were enough to deify
anyone who defied them. What glorious things are some of these Italian
inscriptions--for example on Giordano Bruno's statue:--

A BRUNO

_il secolo da lui divinato
qui
dove il rogo arse_.

--"here, where the faggots burned." It makes the tears come, for the
poetic justice; though I imagine B. to have been a very pesky sort of a
crank, worthy of little sympathy had not the "rogo" done its work on
him. Of the awful corruptions and cruelties which this place suggests
there is no end.

Our neighbors in rooms and _commensaux_ at meals are the J. G.
Frazers--he of the "Golden Bough," "Pausanias," and other three-and
six-volume works of anthropological erudition, Fellow of Trinity
College, Cambridge, and a sucking babe of humility, unworldliness and
molelike sightlessness to everything except _print_.... He, after Tylor,
is the greatest authority now in England on the religious ideas and
superstitions of primitive peoples, and he knows nothing of psychical
research and thinks that the trances, etc., of savage soothsayers,
oracles and the like, are all _feigned_! Verily science is amusing! But
he is conscience incarnate, and I have been stirring him up so that I
imagine he will now proceed to put in big loads of work in the morbid
psychological direction.

Dear Fanny ... I can write no more this morning. I hope your Christmas
is "merry," and that the new year will be "happy" for you all. Pray take
our warmest love, give it to your mother and Mary, and some of it to the
brothers. I will write better soon. Your ever grateful and affectionate

W. J.

Don't let up on your own writing, so say we both! Your letters are pure
blessings.




_To James Sully._


ROME, _Mar. 3, 1901_.

DEAR SULLY,--Your letter of Feb. 8th arrived duly and gave me much
pleasure _qua_ epistolary manifestation of sympathy, but less _qua_
revelation of depression on your own part. I have been so floundering up
and down, now above and now below the line of bad nervous prostration,
that I have written no letters for three weeks past, hoping thereby the
better to accomplish certain other writing; but the other writing had to
be stopped so letters and post-cards may begin.

I see you take the war still very much to heart, and I myself think that
the blundering way in which the Colonial Office drove the Dutchmen into
it, with no conception whatever of the psychological situation, is only
outdone by our still more anti-psychological blundering in the
Philippines. Both countries have lost their moral prestige--we far more
completely than you, because for our conduct there is literally _no_
excuse to be made except _absolute_ stupidity, whilst you can make out a
very fair case, as such cases go. But we can, and undoubtedly shall,
draw back, whereas that for an Empire like yours seems politically
impossible. Empire anyhow is half crime by necessity of Nature, and to
see a country like the United States, lucky enough to be born outside of
it and its fatal traditions and inheritances, perversely rushing to
wallow in the mire of it, shows how strong these ancient race instincts
be. And that is my consolation! We are no worse than the best of men
have ever been. We are simply not superhuman; and the loud reaction
against the brutal business, in both countries, shows how the _theory_
of the matter has really advanced during the last century.

Yes! H. Sidgwick is a sad loss, with all his remaining philosophic
wisdom unwritten. I feel greatly F. W. H. Myers's loss also. He suffered
terribly with suffocation, but bore it stunningly well. He died in this
very hotel, where he had been not more than a fortnight. I don't know
_how_ tolerant (or intolerant) you are towards his pursuits and
speculations. I regard them as fragmentary and conjectural--of course;
but as most laborious and praiseworthy; and knowing how much
psychologists as a rule have counted him out from their profession, I
have thought it my duty to write a little tribute to his service to
psychology to be read on March 8th, at a memorial meeting of the S. P.
R. in his honor. It will appear, whether read or not, in the
Proceedings, and I hope may not appear to you exaggerated. I seriously
believe that the general problem of the subliminal, as Myers propounds
it, promises to be one of the _great_ problems, possibly even the
greatest problem, of psychology....

We leave Rome in three days, booked for Rye the first of April. I _must_
get into the _country!_ If I do more than just pass through London, I
will arrange for a meeting. My Edinburgh lectures begin early in
May--after that I shall have freedom. Ever truly yours,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


[Post-card]

FLORENCE, _March 18, 1901_.

Thus far towards home, thank Heaven! after a week at Perugia and Assisi.
Glorious air, memorable scenes. Made acquaintance of Sabatier, author of
St. Francis's life--very jolly. Best of all, made acquaintance with
Francis's retreat in the mountain. _Navrant!_--it makes one see medieval
Christianity face to face. The lair of the individual wild animal, and
that animal the saint! I hope you saw it. Thanks for your last letter to
Alice. Lots of love.

W. J.




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


RYE, _April 13, 1901_.

DEAR SCHILLER,--You are showering benedictions on me. I return the bulky
ones, keeping the lighter weights. I think the parody on Bradley
amazingly good--if I had his book here I would probably revive my memory
of his discouraged style and scribble a marginal contribution of my own.
He is, really, an extra humble-minded man, I think, but even more
humble-minded about his reader than about himself, which gives him that
false air of arrogance. How you concocted those epigrams, _à la_ preface
of B., I don't see. In general I don't see how an epigram, being a pure
bolt from the blue, with no introduction or cue, ever gets itself writ.
On the Limericks, as you call them, I set less store, much less. If
everybody is to come in for a share of allusion, I am willing, but I
don't want my name to figure in the ghostly ballet with but few
companions. Royce wrote a _very_ funny thing in pedantic German some
years ago, purporting to be the proof by a distant-future professor that
I was an habitual drunkard, based on passages culled from my writings.
He may have it yet. If I ever get any animal spirits again, I may get
warmed up, by your example, into making jokes, and may then contribute.
But I beg you let this thing mull till you get a _lot_ of matter--and
then _sift_. It's the only way. But Oxford seems a better climate for
epigram than is the rest of the world.

I shall stay here--I find myself much more comfortable thoracically
already than when I came--until my Edinburgh lectures begin on May 16th,
though I shall have to run up to London towards the end of the month to
get some clothes made, and to meet my son who arrives from home. I much
regret that it will be quite impossible for me to go either to Oxford or
Cambridge--though, if things took an unexpectedly good turn, I might
indeed do so after June 18th, when my lecture course ends. Do you
meanwhile keep hearty and "funny"! I stopped at Gersau half a day and
found it a sweet little place. Fondly yours,

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


ROXBURGHE HOTEL,
EDINBURGH, _May 15, 1901_.

DEAREST FANNY,--You see where we are! I give _you_ the first news of
life's journey being so far advanced! It is a deadly enterprise, I'm
afraid, with the social entanglements that lie ahead, and I feel a cake
of ice in my epigastrium at the prospect, but _le vin est versé, il faut
le boire_, and from the other point of view, that it is real life
beginning once more, it is perfectly glorious, and I feel as if
yesterday in leaving London I had said good-bye to a rather dreadful
and death-bound segment of life. As regards the sociability, it is
fortunately a time of year in which only the medical part of the
University is present. The professors of the other faculties are already
in large part scattered, I think,--at least the two Seths (who are the
only ones I directly know) are away, and I have written to the Secretary
of the Academic Senate, Sir Ludovic Grant of the Law Faculty, that I am
unable to "dine out" or attend afternoon receptions, so we may be pretty
well left alone. I always hated lecturing except as regular instruction
to students, of whom there will probably be none now in the audience.
But to compensate, there begins next week a big convocation here of all
ministers in Scotland, and there will doubtless be a number of them
present, which, considering the matter to be offered, is probably
better.

We had a splendid journey yesterday in an American (almost!) train,
first-class, and had the pleasure of some talk with our Cambridge
neighbor, Mrs. Ole Bull, on her way to Norway to the unveiling of a
monument to her husband. She was accompanied by an extraordinarily fine
character and mind--odd way of expressing myself!--a young Englishwoman
named Noble, who has Hinduized herself (converted by Vivekananda to his
philosophy) and lives now for the Hindu people. These free individuals
who live their own life, no matter what domestic prejudices have to be
snapped, are on the whole a refreshing sight to me, who can do nothing
of the kind myself. And Miss Noble[34] is a most deliberate and balanced
person--no frothy enthusiast in point of character, though I believe her
philosophy to be more or less false. Perhaps no more so than anyone
else's!

We are in one of those deadly respectable hotels where you have to ring
the front-door-bell. Give me a cheerful, blackguardly place like the
Charing Cross, where we were in London. The London tailor and
shirtmaker, it being in the height of the Season, didn't fulfill their
promises; and as I sloughed my ancient cocoon at Rye, trusting to pick
up my iridescent wings the day before yesterday in passing through the
metropolis, I am here with but two _chemises_ at present (one of them
now in the wash) and fear that tomorrow, in spite of tailors' promises
to send, I may have to lecture in my pyjamas--that would give a cachet
of American originality. The weather is fine--we have just finished
breakfast.

Our son Harry ... and his mother will soon sally out to explore the
town, whilst I lie low till about noon, when I shall report my presence
and receive instructions from my boss, Grant, and prepare to meet the
storm. It is astonishing how pusillanimous two years of invalidism can
make one. Alice and Harry both send love, and so do I in heaps and
steamer-loads, dear Fanny, begging your mother to take of it as much as
she requires for her share. I will write again--doubtless--tomorrow.

_May 17._

It proved quite impossible to write to you yesterday, so I do it the
first thing this morning. I have made my plunge and the foregoing chill
has given place to the warm "reaction." The audience was more numerous
than had been expected, some 250, and exceedingly sympathetic, laughing
at everything, even whenever I used a polysyllabic word. I send you the
"Scotsman," with a skeleton report which might have been much worse
made. I am all right this morning again, so have no doubts of putting
the job through, if only I don't have too much sociability. I have got
a week free of invitations so far, and all things considered, fancy
that we shan't be persecuted.

Edinburgh is surely the noblest city ever built by man. The weather has
been splendid so far, and cold and bracing as the top of Mount
Washington in early April. Everyone here speaks of it however as "hot."
One needs fires at night and an overcoat out of the sun. The full-bodied
air, half misty and half smoky, holds the sunshine in that way which one
sees only in these islands, making the shadowy side of everything quite
black, so that all perspectives and vistas appear with objects cut
blackly against each other according to their nearness, and plane rising
behind plane of flat dark relieved against flat light in ever-receding
gradation. It is magnificent.

But I mustn't become a Ruskin!--the purpose of this letter being merely
to acquaint you with our well-being and success so far. We have found
bully lodgings, spacious to one's heart's content, upon a cheerful
square, and actually with a book-shelf fully two feet wide and two
stories high, upon the wall, the first we have seen for two years!
(There were of course book-cases enough at Lamb House, but all tight
packed already.) We now go out to take the air. I feel as if a decidedly
bad interlude in the journey of my life were closed, and the real honest
thing gradually beginning again. Love to you all! Your ever affectionate

W. J.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


EDINBURGH, _May 30, 1901_.

DEAREST FANNY,-- ...Beautiful as the spring is here, the words you so
often let drop about American weather make me homesick for that article.
It is blasphemous, however, to pine for anything when one is in
Edinburgh in May, and takes an open drive every afternoon in the
surrounding country by way of a constitutional. The green is of the
vividest, splendid trees and acres, and the air itself an _object_,
holding watery vapor, tenuous smoke, and ancient sunshine in solution,
so as to yield the most exquisite minglings and gradations of silvery
brown and blue and pearly gray. As for the city, its vistas are
magnificent.

We are _comblés_ with civilities, which Harry and Alice are to a certain
extent enjoying, though I have to hang back and spend much of the time
between my lectures in bed, to rest off the aortic distress which that
operation gives. I call it aortic because it feels like that, but I can
get no information from the Drs., so I won't swear I'm right. My heart,
under the influence of that magical juice, tincture of digitalis,--only
6 drops daily,--is performing _beautifully_ and gives no trouble at all.
The audiences grow instead of dwindling, and in spite of rain, being
about 300 and just crowding the room. They sit as still as death and
then applaud magnificently, so I am sure the lectures are a success.
Previous Gifford lectures have had audiences beginning with 60 and
dwindling to 15. In an hour and a half (I write this in bed) I shall be
beginning the fifth lecture, which will, when finished, put me half way
through the arduous job. I know you will relish these details, which
please pass on to Jim P. I would send you the reports in the "Scotsman,"
but they distort so much by their sham continuity with vast omission
(the reporters get my MS.), that the result is caricature. Edinburgh is
_spiritually_ much like Boston, only stronger and with more temperament
in the people. But we're all growing into much of a sameness everywhere.

I have dined out once--an almost fatal experiment! I was introduced to
Lord Somebody: "How often do you lecture?"--"Twice a week."--"What do
you do between?--play golf?" Another invitation: "Come at 6--the dinner
at 7.30--and we can walk or play bowls till dinner so as not to fatigue
you"--I having pleaded my delicacy of constitution.

I rejoice in the prospect of Booker W.'s[35] book, and thank your mother
heartily. My mouth had been watering for just that volume.
Autobiographies take the cake. I mean to read nothing else. Strange to
say, I am now for the first time reading Marie Bashkirtseff. It takes
hold of me tremenjus. I feel as if I had lived inside of her, and in
spite of her hatefulness, esteem and even like her for her incorruptible
way of telling the truth. I have not seen Huxley's life yet. It must be
delightful, only I can't agree to what seems to be becoming the
conventionally accepted view of him, that he possessed the exclusive
specialty of living for the truth. A good deal of humbug about that!--at
least when it becomes a professional and heroic attitude.

Your base remark about Aguinaldo is clean forgotten, if ever heard. I
know you wouldn't harm the poor man, who, unless Malay human nature is
weaker than human nature elsewhere, has pretty surely some surprises up
his sleeve for us yet. Best love to you all. Your affectionate

Wm. James.




_To Henry W. Rankin._


EDINBURGH, _June 16, 1901_.

DEAR MR. RANKIN,--I have received all your letters and missives,
inclusive of the letter which you think I must have lost, some months
back. I professor-ed you because I had read your name printed with that
title in a newspaper letter from East Northfield, and supposed that, by
courtesy at any rate, that title was conferred on you by a public
opinion to which I liked to conform.

I have given nine of my lectures and am to give the tenth tomorrow. They
have been a success, to judge by the numbers of the audience (300-odd)
and their non-diminution towards the end. No previous "Giffords" have
drawn near so many. It will please you to know that I am stronger and
tougher than when I began, too; so a great load is off my mind. You have
been so extraordinarily brotherly to me in writing of your convictions
and in furnishing me ideas, that I feel ashamed of my churlish and chary
replies. You, however, have forgiven me. Now, at the end of this first
course, I feel my "matter" taking firmer shape, and it will please you
less to hear me say that I believe myself to be (probably) permanently
incapable of believing the Christian scheme of vicarious salvation, and
wedded to a more continuously evolutionary mode of thought. The reasons
you from time to time have given me, never better expressed than in your
letter before the last, have somehow failed to convince. In these
lectures the ground I am taking is this: The mother sea and
fountain-head of all religions lie in the mystical experiences of the
individual, taking the word mystical in a very wide sense. All
theologies and all ecclesiasticisms are secondary growths superimposed;
and the experiences make such flexible combinations with the
intellectual prepossessions of their subjects, that one may almost say
that they have no proper _intellectual_ deliverance of their own, but
belong to a region deeper, and more vital and practical, than that which
the intellect inhabits. For this they are also indestructible by
intellectual arguments and criticisms. I attach the mystical or
religious consciousness to the possession of an extended subliminal
self, with a thin partition through which messages make irruption. We
are thus made convincingly aware of the presence of a sphere of life
larger and more powerful than our usual consciousness, with which the
latter is nevertheless continuous. The impressions and impulsions and
emotions and excitements which we thence receive help us to live, they
found invincible assurance of a world beyond the sense, they melt our
hearts and communicate significance and value to everything and make us
happy. They do this for the individual who has them, and other
individuals follow him. Religion in this way is absolutely
indestructible. Philosophy and theology give their conceptual
interpretations of this experiential life. The farther margin of the
subliminal field being unknown, it can be treated as by Transcendental
Idealism, as an Absolute mind with a part of which we coalesce, or by
Christian theology, as a distinct deity acting on us. Something, not our
immediate self, does act on our life! So I seem doubtless to my audience
to be blowing hot and cold, explaining away Christianity, yet defending
the more general basis from which I say it proceeds. I fear that these
brief words may be misleading, but let them go! When the book comes out,
you will get a truer idea.

Believe me, with profound regards, your always truly,

Wm. James.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


RYE, _June 26, 1901_.

DEAR CHARLES NORTON,--Your delightful letter of June 1st has added one
more item to my debt of gratitude to you; and now that the Edinburgh
strain is over, I can sit down and make you a reply a little more
adequate than heretofore has been possible. The lectures went off most
successfully, and though I got tired enough, I feel that I am
essentially tougher and stronger for the old familiar functional
activity. My _tone_ is changed immensely, and that is the main point. To
be actually earning one's salt again, after so many months of listless
waiting and wondering whether such a thing will ever again become
possible, puts a new heart into one, and I now look towards the future
with aggressive and hopeful eyes again, though perhaps not with quite
the cannibalistic ones of the youth of the new century.

Edinburgh is great. A strong broad city, and, in its spiritual essence,
almost exactly feeling to me like old Boston, _nuclear_ Boston, though
on a larger, more important scale. People were very friendly, but we had
to dodge invitations--_hoffentlich_ I may be able to accept more of them
next year. The audience was extraordinarily attentive and reactive--I
never had an audience so keen to catch every point. I flatter myself
that by blowing alternately hot and cold on their Christian prejudices I
succeeded in baffling them completely till the final quarter-hour, when
I satisfied their curiosity by showing more plainly my hand. Then, I
think, I permanently dissatisfied both extremes, and pleased a mean
numerically quite small. _Qui vivra verra_. London seemed curiously
profane and free-and-easy, not exactly _shabby_, but go-as-you-please,
in aspect, as we came down five days ago. Since then I spent a day with
poor Mrs. Myers.... I mailed you yesterday a notice I wrote in Rome of
him.[36] He "looms" upon me after death more than he did in life, and I
think that his forthcoming book about "Human Personality" will probably
rank hereafter as "epoch-making."

At London I saw Theodora [Sedgwick] and the W. Darwins. Theodora was as
good and genial as ever, and Sara [Darwin] looked, I thought,
wonderfully "distinguished" and wonderfully little changed considering
the length of intervening years and the advance of the Enemy. I was too
tired to look up Leslie Stephen, or anyone else save Mrs. John Bancroft
when in London, although I wanted much to see L. S. The first volume of
his "Utilitarians" seems to me a wonderfully spirited performance--I
haven't yet got at the other two.

I am hoping to get off to Nauheim tomorrow, leaving Alice and Harry to
follow a little later. I confess that the Continent "draws" me again. I
don't know whether it be the essential identity of soul that expresses
itself in English things, and makes them seem known by heart already and
intellectually dead and unexciting, or whether it is the singular lack
of visible _sentiment_ in England, and absence of "charm," or the
oppressive ponderosity and superfluity and prominence of the
unnecessary, or what it is, but I'm blest if I ever wish to be in
England again. Any continental country whatever stimulates and refreshes
vastly more, in spite of so much strong picturesqueness here, and so
beautiful a Nature. England is ungracious, unamiable and heavy; whilst
the Continent is everywhere light and amiably quaint, even where it is
ugly, as in many elements it is in Germany. To tell the truth, I long to
steep myself in America again and let the broken rootlets make new
adhesions to the native soil. A man coquetting with too many countries
is as bad as a bigamist, and loses his soul altogether.

I suppose you are at Ashfield and I hope surrounded, or soon to be so,
by more children than of late, and all well and happy. Don't feel too
bad about the country. We've thrown away our old privileged and
prerogative position among the nations, but it only showed we were less
sincere about it than we supposed we were. The eternal fight of
liberalism has now to be fought by us on much the same terms as in the
older countries. We have still the better chance in our freedom from all
the corrupting influences from on top from which they suffer.--Good-bye
and love from both of us, to you all. Yours ever faithfully,

Wm. James.




_To Nathaniel S. Shaler._


[1901?]

DEAR SHALER,--Being a man of methodical sequence in my reading, which in
these days is anyhow rather slower than it used to be, I have only just
got at your book.[37] Once begun, it slipped along "like a novel," and I
must confess to you that it leaves a good taste behind; in fact a sort
of _haunting_ flavor due to its individuality, which I find it hard to
explain or define.

To begin with, it doesn't seem exactly like you, but rather like some
quiet and conscientious old passive contemplator of life, not bristling
as you are with "points," and vivacity. Its light is dampened and
suffused--and all the better perhaps for that. Then it is essentially a
confession of faith and a religious attitude--which one doesn't get so
much from you upon the street, although even there 'tis clear that you
have that within which passeth show. The optimism and healthy-mindedness
are yours through and through, so is the wide imagination. But the
moderate and non-emphatic way of putting things is not; nor is the
absence of any "American humor." So I don't know just when or where or
how you wrote it. I can't place it in the Museum or University Hall.
Probably it was in Quincy Street, and in a sort of Piperio-Armadan
trance! Anyhow it is a sincere book, and tremendously impressive by the
gravity and dignity and peacefulness with which it suggests rather than
proclaims conclusions on these eternal themes. No more than you can I
believe that death is due to selection; yet I wish you had framed some
hypothesis as to the physico-chemical necessity thereof, or discussed
such hypotheses as have been made. I think you deduce a little too
easily from the facts the existence of a general guiding tendency toward
ends like those which our mind sets. We never know what ends may have
been kept from realization, for the dead tell no tales. The surviving
witness would in any case, and whatever he were, draw the conclusion
that the universe was planned to make him and the like of him succeed,
for it actually did so. But your argument that it is millions to one
that it didn't do so by chance doesn't apply. It would apply if the
witness had preëxisted in an independent form and framed his scheme, and
then the world had realized it. Such a coincidence would prove the world
to have a kindred mind to his. But there has been no such coincidence.
The world has come but once; the witness is there after the fact and
simply approves, dependently. As I understand improbability, it only
exists where independents coincide. Where only one fact is in question,
there is no relation of "probability" at all. I think, therefore, that
the excellences we have reached and now approve may be due to no general
design but merely to a succession of the short designs we actually know
of, taking advantage of opportunity, and adding themselves together from
point to point. We are all you say we are, as heirs; we are a mystery of
condensation, and yet of extrication and individuation, and we must
worship the soil we have so wonderfully sprung from. Yet I don't think
we are necessitated to worship it as the Theists do, in the shape of one
all-inclusive and all-operative designing power, but rather like
polytheists, in the shape of a collection of beings who have each
contributed and are now contributing to the realization of ideals more
or less like those for which we live ourselves. This more pluralistic
style of feeling seems to me both to allow of a warmer sort of loyalty
to our past helpers, and to tally more exactly with the mixed condition
in which we find the world as to its ideals. What if we did come where
we are by chance, or by mere fact, with no one general design? What is
gained, is gained, all the same. As to what may have been lost, who
knows of it, in any case? or whether it might not have been much better
than what came? But if it might, that need not prevent _us_ from
building on what _we_ have.

There are lots of impressive passages in the book, which certainly will
live and be an influence of a high order. Chapters 8, 10, 14, 15 have
struck me most particularly.

I gave at Edinburgh two lectures on "The Religion of
Healthy-Mindedness," contrasting it with that of "the sick soul." I
shall soon have to quote your book as a healthy-minded document of the
first importance, though I believe myself that the sick soul must have
its say, and probably carries authority too.... Ever yours,

Wm. James.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


NAUHEIM, _July 10, 1901_.

DEAREST FANNY,--Your letter of June 28th comes just as I was working
myself up to a last European farewell to you, anyhow, the which has far
more instigative spur now, with your magnificent effusion in my hands.
Dear Fanny, whatever you do, don't _die_ before our return! In these
two short years so many of my best friends have been mown down, that I
feel uncertainty everywhere, and gasp till the interval is over. John
Ropes, Henry Sidgwick, F. Myers, T. Davidson, Carroll Everett, Edward
Hooper, John Fiske, all intimate and valuable, some of them extremely
so, and the circle grows ever smaller and will grow so to the end of
one's own life. Now comes Whitman, whom I never knew very well, but whom
I always liked thoroughly, and wish I had known better.... It will be
interesting to know what new turn it will give to S. W.'s existence. I
haven't the least idea how it will affect her outward life. Doubtless
she will be freer to come abroad; but I hope and trust she will not be
taking to staying any time in London or Paris, in the brutal cynical
atmosphere of which places her little eagerness and efflorescences and
cordialities would receive no such sympathetic treatment as they do with
us, until she had stayed long enough for people to know her thoroughly
and conquered a position by living down the first impression. Nothing so
_anti-English_ as S. W.'s whole "sphere." So keep her at home--with
occasional sallies abroad; and if she must ever winter abroad, let it be
in delightful slipshod old Rome! All which, as you perceive, is somewhat
confidential. I trust that the present failure of health with her is
something altogether transient, and that she will keep swimming long
after everyone else has put into shore.

Which simile reminds me of Mrs. Holmes's panel, with its superb
inscription.[38] What a sense she has for such things! and how I thank
you for quoting it! With your and her permission, I shall make a vital
use of it in a future book. It sums up the attitude towards life of a
good philosophic pluralist, and that is what, in my capacity of author
of that book, I am to be. I thank you also for the reference to I
Corinthians, 1, 28, etc.[39] I had never expressly noticed that text;
but it will make the splendidest motto for Myers's two posthumous
volumes, and I am going to write to Mrs. Myers to suggest the same. I
thank you also for your sympathetic remarks about my paper on Myers.
Fifty or a hundred years hence, people will know better than now whether
his instinct for truth was a sound one; and perhaps will then pat me on
the back for backing him. At present they give us the cold shoulder. We
are righter, in any event, than the Münsterbergs and Jastrows are,
because we don't undertake, as a condition of our investigating
phenomena, to bargain with them that they shan't upset our
"presuppositions."

It is a beautiful summer morning, and I write under an awning on the
high-perched corner balcony of the bedroom in which we live, of a corner
house on the edge of the little town, with houses on the west of us and
the fertile country spreading towards the east and south. A lovely
region, though a climate terribly _flat_. I expect to take my last bath
today, and to get my absolution from the terrible Schott; whereupon we
shall leave tomorrow morning for Strassburg and the Vosges, for a week
of touring up in higher air, and thence, _über_ Paris, as straight as
may be for Rye. I keep in a state of subliminal excitement over our
sailing on the 31st. It seems too good to be really possible. Yet the
ratchet of time will work along its daily cogs, and doubtless bring it
safe within our grasp. Last year I felt no distinctly beneficial effect
from the baths. This year it is distinct. I have, in other words,
continued pretty steadily getting better for four months past; so it is
evident that I am in a genuinely ameliorative phase of my existence, of
which the acquired momentum may carry me beyond any living man of my
age. At any rate, I set no limits now!

When we return I shall go straight up to Chocorua to the Salters'. What
I _crave_ most is some wild American country. It is a curious
organic-feeling need. One's social relations with European landscape are
entirely different, everything being so fenced or planted that you can't
lie down and sprawl. Kipling, alluding to the "bleeding raw" appearance
of some of our outskirt settlements, says, "Americans don't mix much
with their landscape as yet." But we mix a darned sight more than
Europeans, so far as our individual organisms go, with our camping and
general wild-animal personal relations. Thank Heaven that our Nature is
so much less "redeemed"!...

You see, Fanny, that we are in good spirits on the whole, although my
poor dear Alice has long sick-headaches that consume a good many
days--she is just emerging from a bad one. Happiness, I have lately
discovered, is no positive feeling, but a negative condition of freedom
from a number of restrictive sensations of which our organism usually
seems to be the seat. When they are wiped out, the clearness and
cleanness of the contrast is happiness. This is why anesthetics make us
so happy. But don't you take to drink on that account! Love to your
mother, Mary, and all. Write to us no more. How happy _that_
responsibility gone must make you! We both send warmest love,

W. J.




_To Henry James._


[Post-card]

BAD-NAUHEIM, _July 11, [1901]_.

Your letter and paper, with the shock of John Fiske's death, came
yesterday. It is too bad, for he had lots of good work in him yet, and
is a loss to American letters as well as to his family. Singularly
simple, solid, honest creature, he will be hugely missed by many!
Everybody seems to be going! _We_ stay. Life here is absolutely
monotonous, but very sweet. The country is so innocently pretty. I sit
up here on a terrace-restaurant, looking down on park and town, with the
leaves playing in the warm breeze above me, and the little Gothic town
of Friedberg only a mile off, in the midst of the great fertile plain
all chequer-boarded with the different tinted crops and framed in a
far-off horizon of low hills and woods. Alice and Harry, kept in by the
heat, come later. He went for a distant walk yesterday P.M. and, not
returning till near eleven, we thought he might have got lost in the
woods. Yale beat the University race, _but_ Bill's four[-oared crew]
beat the Yale four. On such things is human contentment based. The baths
stir up my aortic feeling and make me depressed, but I've had 6 of them,
and the rest will pass quickly. Love.

W. J.




_To E. L. Godkin._


BAD-NAUHEIM, _July 25, 1901_.

DEAR GODKIN,--Yours of the 9th, which came duly, gave me great pleasure,
first because it showed that your love for me had not grown cold, and,
second, because it seemed to reveal in you tendencies towards
sociability at large which are incompatible with a very alarming
condition of health. Nothing can give us greater pleasure than to come
and see you before we sail. We shall stick here, probably, for a
fortnight longer, then go for a week to the Hartz mountains to brace up
a little--the baths being very debilitating and the air of Nauheim
sedative. Then straight to Rye until we sail--on August 31st. I hope
that you enjoy the "New Forest"--the "Children" thereof, by Capt. Mayne
Reid, I think, was one of my most mysteriously impressive books about
the age of ten. But I fear that there is not much primeval forest to be
seen there nowadays. Nauheim is a sweet little place. One never sees a
soldier and wouldn't know that _Militarismus_ existed. There are two
policemen, one of them an old fellow of 70 who shuffles along to keep
his weak knees from giving way. I went on business to the police office
t' other day. The building stood in a fine cabbage garden, and over the
first door one met on entering stood the word _Küche_[40] in large
letters. Quite like the old idyllic pre-Sadowan German days. My heart is
getting _well_! I made an excursion to Homburg yesterday, with J. B.
Warner of Cambridge, counsellor at law, and general disputant. For about
six hours we discussed the Philippine question, he damning the
anti-Imperialists--yet my thoracic contents remained as solid as if cast
in Portland cement. Six months ago I should have had the wildest
commotion there. Congratulate me! Kindest regards to you both, in which
my wife joins. Yours ever affectionately,

Wm. James.

It should perhaps be explained that E. L. Godkin had had a cerebral
hemorrhage the year before. It had left him clear in mind, but a
permanent invalid, with little power of locomotion. James spent several
days with him at Castle Malwood near Stony Cross before he sailed for
home; and when he was in England again the next year, he repeated the
visit.

[Illustration: William James and Henry James posing for a Kodak in
1900.]



_To E. L. Godkin._


LAMB HOUSE, _Aug. 29, 1901_.

MY DEAR GODKIN,--Just a line to bid you both farewell! We leave for
London tomorrow morning and at four on Saturday we shall be ploughing
the deep. All goes well, save that the wife has sprained her ankle, and
with the "firmness" that characterizes her lovely sex insists on
hobbling about and doing all the packing. I shan't be aisy till I see
her in her berth.

After all, in spite of you and Henry, and all Americo-phobes, I'm glad
I'm going back to my own country again. Notwithstanding its
"humble"ness, its fatigues, and its complications, there's no place like
home--though I think the New Forest might come near it as a substitute.
England in general is too padded and cushioned for my rustic taste.

The most elevating _moral_ thing I've seen during these two years
abroad, after Myers's heroic exit from this world at Rome last winter,
has been the gentleness and cheerful spirit with which you are still
able to remain in it after such a blow as you have received. Who could
suppose so much public ferocity to cover so much private sweetness?
Seriously speaking, it is more edifying to us others, dear Godkin, than
you yourself can understand it to be, and I for one have learned by the
example. I pray that your winter problems may gradually solve themselves
without perplexity, and that next spring may find you relieved of all
this helplessness. It is a very slow progress, with many steps
backwards, but if the length of the forward steps preponderates, one
may be well content. Good-bye and bless you both. Affectionately yours,

Wm. James.

James returned to America in early September, in advance of the
beginning of the College term. But from this time on he limited his
teaching to one half-course during the year. His intention was to
husband his strength for writing. The course which he offered during the
first half of the College year was accordingly announced as a course on
"The Psychological Elements of Religious Life." By the end of the
winter, the second series of Gifford lectures, constituting the last
half of the "Varieties," had been written out.




_To Miss Pauline Goldmark._


SILVER LAKE, N. H., _Sept. 14, 1901_.

DEAR PAULINE,--Your kind letter (excuse pencil--pen won't write) appears
to have reached London after our departure and has just followed us
hither. I had hoped for a word from you, first at Nauheim, then on the
steamer, then at Cambridge; but this makes everything right. How good to
think of you as the same old loveress of woods and skies and waters, and
of your Bryn-Mawr friends. May none of the lot of you ever grow
insufficient or forsake each other! The sight of you sporting in
Nature's bosom once lifted me into a sympathetic region, and made a
better boy of me in ways which it would probably amuse and surprise you
to learn of, so strangely are characters useful to each other, and so
subtly are destinies intermixed. But with you on the mountain-tops of
existence still, and me apparently destined to remain grubbing in the
cellar, we seem far enough apart at present and may have to remain so.
Alas! how brief is life's glory, at the best. I can't get to Keene
Valley this year, and [may] possibly never get there. Give a kindly
thought, my friend, to the spectre who once for a few times trudged by
your side, and who would do so again if he could. I'm a "motor," and
morally ill-adapted to the game of patience. I have reached home in
pretty poor case, but I think it's mainly "nerves" at present, and
therefore remediable; so I live on the future, but keep my expectations
modest. Two years away has been too long, and the "strangeness" which I
dreaded (from past experience of it) covers all things American as with
a veil. Pathetic and poverty-stricken is all I see! This will pass away,
but I don't want good things to pass away also, so I beseech you,
Pauline, to sit down and write me a good intimate letter telling me what
your life and interest were in New York last winter.

I am very sorry to hear of your sister Susan's illness, and pray that
the summer will set her right. Did you see much of Miller this summer? I
hate to think of his having grown so delicate! Did you see Perry again?
He was at the Putnam Camp? How is Adler after his _Cur_?--or is he not
yet back? What have you read? What have you cared for? Be indulgent to
me, and write to me here--I stay for 10 days longer--the family--all
well--remain in Cambridge. I find letters a great thing to keep one from
slipping out of life.

Love to you all! Your

W. J.

The next letter was written across the back of a circular invitation to
join the American Philosophical Association, then being formed, of which
Professor Gardiner was Secretary.




_To H. N. Gardiner._


Cambridge, _Nov. 14, 1901_.

DEAR GARDINER,--I am still pretty poorly and can't "jine" anything--but,
apart from that, I don't foresee much good from a Philosophical Society.
Philosophical discussion proper only succeeds between intimates who have
learned how to converse by months of weary trials and failure. The
philosopher is a lone beast dwelling in his individual burrow.--Count me
_out_!--I hope all goes well with you. I expect to get well, but it
needs _patience_.

Wm. James.

On April 1, 1902, James sailed for England, to deliver the second
"course" of his series of Gifford Lectures in Edinburgh.




_To F. C. S. Schiller._


HATLEY ST. GEORGE,
TORQUAY, _Apr. 20, 1902_.

MY DEAR SCHILLER,--I could shed tears that you should have been so near
me and yet been missed. I got your big envelope on Thursday at the
hotel, and your two other missives here this morning. Of the Axioms
paper I have only read a sheet and a half at the beginning and the
superb conclusion which has just arrived. I shall fairly _gloat_ upon
the whole of it, and will write you my impressions and criticisms, if
criticisms there be. It is an uplifting thought that truth is to be told
at last in a radical and attention-compelling manner. I think I know,
though, how the attention of many will find a way not to be
compelled--their will is so set on having a technically and artificially
and _professionally_ expressed system, that all talk carried on as yours
is on principles of common-sense activity is as remote and little
worthy of being listened to as the slanging each other of boys in the
street as we pass. Men disdain to notice that. It is only after our
(_i.e._ your and my) general way of thinking gets organized enough to
become a regular part of the _bureaucracy_ of philosophy that we shall
get a serious hearing. Then, I feel inwardly convinced, our day will
have come. But then, you may well say, the brains will be out and the
man will be dead. Anyhow, _vive_ the Anglo-Saxon amateur, disciple of
Locke and Hume, and _pereat_ the German professional!

We are here for a week with the Godkins--poor old G., once such a power,
and now an utter wreck after a stroke of paralysis three years ago.
Beautiful place, southeast gale, volleying rain and streaming panes and
volumes of soft sea-laden wind.

I hope you are not serious about an Oxford degree for your humble
servant. If you are, pray drop the thought! I am out of the race for all
such vanities. Write me a degree on parchment and send it yourself--in
any case it would be but your award!--and it will be cheaper and more
veracious. I _had_ to take the Edinburgh one, and accepted the Durham
one to please my wife. Thank you, no coronation either! I am a poor New
Hampshire rustic, in bad health, and long to get back, after four
summers' absence, to my own cottage and children, and never come away
again for lectures or degrees or anything else. It all depends on a
man's age; and after sixty, if ever, one feels as if one ought to come
to some sort of equilibrium with one's native environment, and by means
of a regular life get one's small message to mankind on paper. That
nowadays is my only aspiration. The Gifford lectures are all facts and
no philosophy--I trust that you may receive the volume by the middle of
June.

When, oh, when is your volume to appear? The sheet you send me leaves
off just at the point where Boyle-Gibson begins to me to be most
interesting! Ever fondly yours,

Wm. James.

Your ancient President, Schurman, was also at Edinburgh getting LL.D'd.
He is conducting a campaign in favor of Philippino independence with
masterly tactics, which reconcile me completely to him, laying his
finger on just the right and telling points.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


LAMB HOUSE, RYE, _May 4, 1902_.

DEAR NORTON,--I hear with grief and concern that you have had a bad
fall. In a letter received this morning you are described as better, so
I hope it will have had no untoward consequences beyond the immediate
shock. We need you long to abide with us in undiminished vigor and
health. Our voyage was smooth, though cloudy, and we found Miss Ward a
very honest and lovable girl. Henry D. Lloyd, whose name you know as
that of a state-socialist writer, sat opposite to us, and proved one of
the most "winning" men it was ever my fortune to know.

We went to Stratford for the first time. The absolute extermination and
obliteration of every record of Shakespeare save a few sordid material
details, and the general suggestion of narrowness and niggardliness
which ancient Stratford makes, taken in comparison with the way in which
the spiritual quantity "Shakespeare" has mingled into the soul of the
world, was most uncanny, and I feel ready to believe in almost any
mythical story of the authorship. In fact a visit to Stratford now seems
to me the strongest appeal a Baconian can make. The country round about
was exquisite. Still more so the country round about Torquay, where we
stayed with the Godkins for eight days--he holding his own, as it seemed
to me, but hardly improving, she earning palms of glory by her strength
and virtue. A regular little trump! They have taken for the next two
months the most beautiful country place I ever saw, occupying an elbow
of the Dart, and commanding a view up and down. We are here for but a
week, my lectures beginning on the 13th. H. J. seems tranquil and happy
in his work, though he has been much pestered of late by gout.

I suppose you are rejoicing as much as I in the public interest finally
aroused in the Philippine conquest. A personal scandal, it seems, is
really the only thing that will wake the ordinary man's attention up. It
should be the first aim of every good leader of opinion to rake up one
on the opposite side. It should be introduced among our Faculty methods!

Don't think, dear Norton, that you must answer this letter, which only
your accident has made me write. We shall be home so soon that I shall
see you face to face. The wife sends love, as I do, to you all. No warm
weather whatever as yet--I am having chilblains!! Ever affectionately
yours,

Wm. James.




_To Mrs. Henry Whitman._


R.M.S. IVERNIA, _June 18, 1902_.

DEAR MRS. WHITMAN,--We ought to be off Boston tonight. After a cold and
wet voyage, including two days of head-gale and heavy sea, and one of
unbroken fog with lugubriously moo-ing fog-horn, the sun has risen upon
American weather, a strong west wind like champagne, blowing out of a
saturated blue sky right in our teeth, the sea all effervescing and
sparkling with white caps and lace, the strong sun lording it in the
sky, and hope presiding in the heart. What more natural than to report
all this happy turn of affairs to you, buried as you probably still are
in the blankets of the London atmosphere, beautiful opalescent blankets
though they be, and (when one's vitals once are acclimated) yielding
more wonderful artistic effects than anything to be seen in America.
"C'est le pays de la couleur," as my brother is fond of saying in the
words of Alphonse Daudet! But no matter for international comparisons,
which are the least profitable of human employments. Christ died for us
all, so let us all be as we are, save where we want to reform ourselves.
(The only unpardonable crime is that of wanting to reform _one another_,
after the fashion of the U. S. in the Philippines.) ... Your sweet
letter of several dates reached us just before we left Edinburgh--excuse
the insipid adjective "sweet," which after all does express something
which less simple vocables may easily miss--and gave an impression of
harmony and inner health which it warms the heart to become sensible of.
I understand your temptation to stay over, but I also understand your
temptation to get back; and I imagine that more and more you will solve
the problem by a good deal of alternation in future years. It is curious
how utterly distinct the three countries of England, Ireland and
Scotland are, which we so summarily lump together--Scotland so
democratic and so much like New England in many respects. But it would
be a waste of time for you to go there. Keep to the South and spend one
winter in Rome, before you die, and a spring in the smaller Italian
cities!

I hope that Henry will have managed to get you and Miss Tuckerman to Rye
for a day--it is so curiously quaint and characteristic. I had a bad
conscience about leaving him, for I think he feels lonely as he grows
old, and friends pass over to the majority. He and I are so utterly
different in all our observances and springs of action, that we can't
rightly judge each other. I even feel great shrinking from urging him to
pay us a visit, fearing it might yield him little besides painful
shocks--and, after all, what besides pain and shock _is_ the right
reaction for anyone to make upon our vocalization and pronunciation? The
careful consonants and musical cadences of the Scotchwomen were such a
balm to the ear! I wish that you and poor Henry could become really
intimate. He is at bottom a very tender-hearted and generous being! No
more paper! so I cross! I wish when we once get settled again at
Chocorua that we might enclose you under our roof, even if only for one
night, on your way to or from the Merrimans. I should like to show you
true simplicity.

[_No signature_.]

The Gifford Lectures were published as "The Varieties of Religious
Experience, a Study in Human Nature," in June, 1902. The immediate
"popularity" of this psychological survey of man's religious
propensities was great; and the continued sales of the book contributed
not a little to relieve James of financial anxiety during the last years
of his life.

The cordiality with which theological journals and private
correspondents of many creeds greeted the "Varieties," as containing a
fair treatment of facts which other writers had approached with a
sectarian or anti-theological bias, was striking. James was amused at
being told that the book had "supplied the protestant pulpits with
sermons for a twelve-month." Regarding himself as "a most protestant
protestant," as he once said, he was especially pleased by the manner in
which it was received by Roman Catholic reviewers.

Certain philosophical conclusions were indicated broadly in the
"Varieties" without being elaborated. The book was a survey, an
examination, of the facts. James had originally conceived of the Gifford
appointment as giving him "an opportunity for a certain amount of
psychology and a certain amount of metaphysics," and so had thought of
making the first series of lectures descriptive of man's religious
propensities and the second series a metaphysical study of their
satisfaction through philosophy. The psychological material had grown to
unforeseen dimensions, and it ended by filling the book. The
metaphysical study remained to be elaborated; and to such work James now
turned.




