XII


1893-1899 (CONTINUED)


     _The Will to Believe--Talks to Teachers--Defense of Mental
     Healers--Excessive Climbing in the Adirondacks_




_To Theodore Flournoy._

[Dictated]

Cambridge, _Dec. 7, 1896_.

MY DEAR FLOURNOY,--Your altogether precious and delightful letter
reached me duly, and you see I am making a not altogether too dilatory
reply. In the first place, we congratulate you upon the new-comer, and
think if she only proves as satisfactory a damsel as her charming elder
sisters, you will never have any occasion to regret that she is not a
boy. I hope that Madame Flournoy is by this time thoroughly strong and
well, and that everything is perfect with the baby. I should like to
have been at Munich with you; I have heard a good many accounts of the
jollity of the proceedings there, but on the whole I did a more
wholesome thing to stay in my own country, of which the dangers and dark
sides are singularly exaggerated in Europe.

Your lamentations on your cerebral state make me smile, knowing, as I
do, under all your subjective feelings, how great your vigor is. Of
course I sympathize with you about the laboratory, and advise you, since
it seems to me you are in a position to make conditions rather than have
them imposed on you, simply to drop it and teach what you prefer.
Whatever the latter may be, it will be as good for the students as if
they had something else from you in its place, and I see no need in this
world, when there is someone provided somewhere to do everything, for
anyone of us to do what he does least willingly and well.

_I_ have got rid of the laboratory forever, and should resign my place
immediately if they reimposed its duties upon me. The results that come
from all this laboratory work seem to me to grow more and more
disappointing and trivial. What is most needed is new ideas. For every
man who has one of them one may find a hundred who are willing to drudge
patiently at some unimportant experiment. The atmosphere of your mind is
in an extraordinary degree sane and balanced on philosophical matters.
That is where your forte lies, and where your University ought to see
that its best interests lie in having you employed. Don't consider this
advice impertinent. Your temperament is such that I think you need to be
strengthened from without in asserting your right to carry out your true
vocation.

Everything goes well with us here. The boys are developing finely; both
of them taller than I am, and Peggy healthy and well. I have just been
giving a course of public lectures of which I enclose you a ticket to
amuse you.[11] The audience, a thousand in number, kept its numbers to
the last. I was careful not to tread upon the domains of psychical
research, although many of my hearers were eager that I should do so. _I
am teaching Kant for the first time in my life_, and it gives me much
satisfaction. I am also sending a collection of old essays through the
press, of which I will send you a copy as soon as they appear; I am sure
of your sympathy in advance for much of their contents. But I am afraid
that what you never will appreciate is their wonderful English style!
Shakespeare is a little street-boy in comparison!

Our political crisis is over, but the hard times still endure. Lack of
confidence is a disease from which convalescence is not quick. I doubt,
notwithstanding certain appearances, whether the country was ever
morally in as sound a state as it now is, after all this discussion. And
the very silver men, who have been treated as a party of dishonesty, are
anything but that. They very likely are victims of the economic
delusion, but their intentions are just as good as those of the other
side....

If you meet my friend Ritter, please give him my love. I shall write to
you again ere long _eigenhändig_. Meanwhile believe me, with lots of
love to you all, especially to _ces demoiselles_, and felicitations to
their mother, Always yours,

Wm. James.

My wife wishes to convey to Madame Flournoy her most loving regards and
hopes for the little one.

       *       *       *       *       *

James had already been invited to deliver a course of "Gifford Lectures
on Natural Religion" at the University of Edinburgh. He had not yet
accepted for a definite date; but he had begun to collect illustrative
material for the proposed lectures. A large number of references to such
material were supplied to him by Mr. Henry W. Rankin of East
Northfield.




_To Henry W. Rankin._


NEWPORT, R.I., _Feb. 1, 1897_.

DEAR MR. RANKIN,--A pause in lecturing, consequent upon our midyear
examinations having begun, has given me a little respite, and I am
paying a three-days' visit upon an old friend here, meaning to leave for
New York tomorrow where I have a couple of lectures to give. It is an
agreeable moment of quiet and enables me to write a letter or two which
I have long postponed, and chiefly one to you, who have given me so much
without asking anything in return.

One of my lectures in New York is at the Academy of Medicine before the
Neurological Society, the subject being "Demoniacal Possession." I shall
of course duly advertise the Nevius book.[12] I am not as positive as
you are in the belief that the obsessing agency is really demonic
individuals. I am perfectly willing to adopt that theory if the facts
lend themselves best to it; for who can trace limits to the hierarchies
of personal existence in the world? But the lower stages of mere
automatism shade off so continuously into the highest supernormal
manifestations, through the intermediary ones of imitative hysteria and
"suggestibility," that I feel as if no _general theory_ as yet would
cover all the facts. So that the most I shall plead for before the
neurologists is the recognition of demon possession as a regular
"morbid-entity" whose commonest homologue today is the "spirit-control"
observed in test-mediumship, and which tends to become the more
benignant and less alarming, the less pessimistically it is regarded.
This last remark seems certainly to be true. Of course I shall not
ignore the sporadic cases of old-fashioned malignant possession which
still occur today. I am convinced that we stand with all these things
at the threshold of a long inquiry, of which the end appears as yet to
no one, least of all to myself. And I believe that the best theoretic
work yet done in the subject is the beginning made by F. W. H. Myers in
his papers in the S. P. R. Proceedings. The first thing is to start the
medical profession out of its idiotically _conceited ignorance_ of all
such matters--matters which have everywhere and at all times played a
vital part in human history.

You have written me at different times about conversion, and about
miracles, getting as usual no reply, but not because I failed to heed
your words, which come from a deep life-experience of your own
evidently, and from a deep acquaintance with the experiences of others.
In the matter of conversion I am quite willing to believe that a new
truth may be supernaturally revealed to a subject when he really _asks_.
But I am sure that in many cases of conversion it is less a new truth
than a new power gained over life by a truth always known. It is a case
of the conflict of two _self-systems_ in a personality up to that time
heterogeneously divided, but in which, after the conversion-crisis, the
higher loves and powers come definitively to gain the upper-hand and
expel the forces which up to that time had kept them down in the
position of mere grumblers and protesters and agents of remorse and
discontent. This broader view will cover an enormous number of cases
_psychologically_, and leaves all the _religious importance_ to the
result which it has on any other theory.

As to true and false miracles, I don't know that I can follow you so
well, for in any case the notion of a miracle as a mere attestation of
superior power is one that I cannot espouse. A miracle must in any case
be an expression of personal purpose, but the demon-purpose of
antagonizing God and winning away his adherents has never yet taken
hold of my imagination. I prefer an open mind of inquiry, first _about
the facts_, in all these matters; and I believe that the S. P. R.
methods, if pertinaciously stuck to, will eventually do much to clear
things up.--You see that, although religion is the great interest of my
life, I am rather hopelessly non-evangelical, and take the whole thing
too impersonally.

But my College work is lightening in a way. Psychology is being handed
over to others more and more, and I see a chance ahead for reading and
study in other directions from those to which my very feeble powers in
that line have hitherto been confined. I am going to give all the
fragments of time I can get, after this year is over, to religious
biography and philosophy. Shield's book, Steenstra's, Gratry's, and
Harris's, I don't yet know, but can easily get at them.

I hope your health is better in this beautiful winter which we are
having. I am very well, and so is all my family. Believe me, with
affectionate regards, truly yours,

Wm. James.




_To Benjamin Paul Blood._


Cambridge, _Apr. 28, 1897_.

DEAR BLOOD,--Your letter is delectable. From your not having yet
acknowledged the book,[13] I began to wonder whether you had got it, but
this acknowledgment is almost too good. Your thought is
obscure--lightning flashes darting gleams--but that's the way truth is.
And altho' I "put pluralism in the place of philosophy," I do it only so
far as philosophy means the articulate and the scientific. Life and
mysticism exceed the articulable, and if there is a _One_ (and surely
men will never be weaned from the idea of it), it must remain only
mystically expressed.

I have been roaring over and quoting some of the passages of your
letter, in which my wife takes as much delight as I do. As for your
strictures on my English, I accept them humbly. I have a tendency
towards too great colloquiality, I know, and I trust your sense of
English better than any man's in the country. I have a fearful job on
hand just now: an address on the unveiling of a military statue. Three
thousand people, governor and troops, etc. Why they fell upon me, God
knows; but being challenged, I could not funk. The task is a mechanical
one, and the result somewhat of a school-boy composition. If I thought
it wouldn't bore you, I should send you a copy for you to go carefully
over and correct or rewrite as to the English. I should probably adopt
every one of your corrections. What do you say to this? Yours ever,

Wm. James.

_P.S._ Please don't betitle _me_!

       *       *       *       *       *

The "copy" which was offered for correction with so much humility was
the "Oration" on the unveiling of St. Gaudens's monument to Colonel
Robert Gould Shaw of the 54th Massachusetts Infantry (the first colored
regiment). James was quite accustomed to lecturing from brief notes and
to reading from a complete manuscript; but on this occasion he thought
it necessary to commit his address to memory. He had never done this
before and he never tried to do it again. He memorized with great
difficulty, found himself placed in an entirely unfamiliar relation to
his audience, and felt as much nervous trepidation as any inexperienced
speaker.[14]




_To Henry James._


Cambridge, _June 5, 1897_.

DEAR H.,--Alice wrote you (I think) a brief word after the crisis of
last Monday. It took it out of me nervously a good deal, for it came at
the end of the month of May, when I am always fagged to death; and for a
week previous I had almost lost my voice with hoarseness. At nine
o'clock the night before I ran in to a laryngologist in Boston, who
sprayed and cauterized and otherwise tuned up my throat, giving me
pellets to suck all the morning. By a sort of miracle I spoke for
three-quarters of an hour without becoming perceptibly hoarse. But it is
a curious kind of physical effort to fill a hall as large as Boston
Music Hall, unless you are trained to the work. You have to shout and
bellow, and you seem to yourself wholly unnatural. The day was an
extraordinary occasion for sentiment. The streets were thronged with
people, and I was toted around for two hours in a barouche at the tail
end of the procession. There were seven such carriages in all, and I had
the great pleasure of being with St. Gaudens, who is a most charming and
modest man. The weather was cool and the skies were weeping, but not
enough to cause any serious discomfort. They simply formed a harmonious
background to the pathetic sentiment that reigned over the day. It was
very peculiar, and people have been speaking about it ever since--the
last wave of the war breaking over Boston, everything softened and made
poetic and unreal by distance, poor little Robert Shaw erected into a
great symbol of deeper things than he ever realized himself,--"the
tender grace of a day that is dead,"--etc. We shall never have anything
like it again. The monument is really superb, certainly one of the
finest things of this century. Read the darkey [Booker T.] Washington's
speech, a model of elevation and brevity. The thing that struck me most
in the day was the faces of the old 54th soldiers, of whom there were
perhaps about thirty or forty present, with such respectable old darkey
faces, the heavy animal look entirely absent, and in its place the
wrinkled, patient, good old darkey citizen.

As for myself, I will never accept such a job again. It is entirely
outside of my legitimate line of business, although my speech seems to
have been a great success, if I can judge by the encomiums which are
pouring in upon me on every hand. I brought in some mugwumpery at the
end, but it was very difficult to manage it.... Always affectionately
yours,

Wm. James.

       *       *       *       *       *

Letters to Ellen and Rosina Emmet, which now enter the series, will be
the better understood for a word of reminder. "Elly" Temple, one of the
Newport cousins referred to in the very first letters, had married, and
gone with her husband, Temple Emmet, to California. But in 1887, after
his death, she had returned to the East to place her daughters in a
Cambridge school. In 1895 and 1896 Ellen and Rosina had made several
visits to the house in Irving Street; and thus the comradely cousinship
of the sixties had been maintained and reëstablished with the younger
generation. At the date now reached, Ellen, or "Bay" as she was usually
called, was studying painting. She and Rosina had been in Paris during
the preceding winter. Now they and their mother were spending the summer
on the south coast of England, at Iden, quite close to Rye, where Henry
James was already becoming established.




_To Miss Ellen Emmet (Mrs. Blanchard Rand)._


BAR HARBOR, ME., _Aug. 11, 1897_.

DEAR OLD BAY (and DEAR ROSINA),--For I have letters from both of you and
my heart inclines to both so that I can't write to either without the
other--I hope you are enjoying the English coast. A rumor reached me not
long since that my brother Henry had given up his trip to the Continent
in order to be near to you, and I hope for the sakes of all concerned
that it is true. He will find in you both that eager and vivid artistic
sense, and that direct swoop at the vital facts of human character from
which I am sure he has been weaned for fifteen years at least. And I am
sure it will rejuvenate him again. It is more Celtic than English, and
when joined with those faculties of soul, conscience, or whatever they
be that make England rule the waves, as they are joined in you, Bay,
they leave no room for any anxiety about the creature's destiny. But
Rosina, who is all senses and intelligence, alarms me by her recital of
midnight walks on the Boulevard des Italiens with bohemian artists....
You can't live by gaslight and excitement, nor can naked intelligence
run a _jeune fille's_ life. Affections, pieties, and prejudices must
play their part, and only let the intelligence get an occasional peep at
things from the midst of their smothering embrace. That again is what
makes the British nation so great. Intelligence doesn't flaunt itself
there quite naked as in France.

As for the MacMonnies Bacchante,[15] I only saw her faintly looming
through the moon-light one night when she was _sub judice_, so can frame
no opinion. The place certainly calls for a lightsome capricious figure,
but the solemn Boston mind declared that anything but a solemn figure
would be desecration. As to her immodesty, opinions got very hot. My
knowledge of MacMonnies is confined to one statue, that of Sir Henry
Vane, also in our Public Library, an impressionist sketch in bronze (I
think), sculpture treated like painting--and I must say I don't admire
the result _at all_. But you _know_; and I wish I could see other things
of his also. How I wish I could _talk_ with Rosina, or rather hear her
talk, about Paris, _talk in her French_ which I doubt not is by this
time admirable. The only book she has vouchsafed news of having read, to
me, is the d'Annunzio one, which I have ordered in most choice Italian;
but of Lemaître, France, etc., she writes never a word. Nor of V. Hugo.
She ought to read "La Légende des Siècles." For the picturesque pure and
simple, go there! laid on with a trowel so generous that you really get
your glut. But the things in French literature that I have gained most
from--the next most to Tolstoy, in the last few years--are the whole
cycle of Geo. Sand's life: her "Histoire," her letters, and now lately
these revelations of the de Musset episode. The whole thing is beautiful
and uplifting--an absolute "liver" harmoniously leading her own life and
_neither_ obedient nor defiant to what others expected or thought.

We are passing the summer very quietly at Chocorua, with our bare feet
on the ground. Children growing up bullily, a pride to the parental
heart.... Alice and I have just spent a rich week at North Conway, at a
beautiful "place," the Merrimans'. I am now here at a really grand
place, the Dorrs'--tell Rosina that I went to a domino party last night
but was so afraid that some one of the weird and sinister sisters would
speak to me that I came home at 12 o'clock, when it had hardly begun. I
am so sensitive! Tell her that a lady from Michigan was recently shown
the sights of Cambridge by one of my Radcliffe girls. She took her to
the Longfellow house, and as the visitor went into the gate, said, "I
will just wait here." To her surprise, the visitor went up to the house,
looked in to one window after the other, then rang the bell, and the
door closed upon her. She soon emerged, and said that the servant had
shown her the house. "I'm so sensitive that at first I thought I would
only peep in at the windows. But then I said to myself, 'What's the use
of being so sensitive?' So I rang the bell."

Pray be happy this summer. I see nothing more of Rosina's in the papers.
How is that sort of thing going on?... As for your mother, give her my
old-fashioned love. For some unexplained reason, I find it very hard to
write to her--probably it is the same reason that makes it hard for her
to write to me--so we can sympathize over so strange a mystery. Anyhow,
give her my best love, and with plenty for yourself, old Bay, and for
Rosina, believe me, yours ever,

Wm. James.




_To E. L. Godkin._


CHOCORUA, _Aug. 17, 1897_.

DEAR GODKIN,--Thanks for your kind note _in re_ "Will to Believe." I
suppose you expect as little a reply to it as I expected one from you to
the book; but since you ask what I _du_ mean by Religion, and add that
until I define that word my essay cannot be effective, I can't forbear
sending you a word to clear up that point. I mean by religion for a man
_anything_ that for _him_ is a live hypothesis in that line, altho' it
may be a dead one for anyone else. And what I try to show is that
whether the man believes, disbelieves, or doubts his hypothesis, the
moment he does either, on principle and methodically, he runs a risk of
one sort or the other from his own point of view. There is no escaping
the risk; why not then admit that one's human function is to run it? By
settling down on that basis, and respecting each other's choice of risk
to run, it seems to me that we should be in a clearer-headed condition
than we now are in, postulating as most all of us do a rational
certitude which doesn't exist and disowning the semi-voluntary mental
action by which we continue in our own severally characteristic
attitudes of belief. Since our willing natures are active here, why not
face squarely the fact without humbug and get the benefits of the
admission?

I passed a day lately with the [James] Bryces at Bar Harbor, and we
spoke--not altogether unkindly--of you. I hope you are enjoying, both of
you, the summer. All goes well with us. Yours always truly,

Wm. James.




_To F. C. S. Schiller_ [Corpus Christi, Oxford].


Cambridge, _Oct. 23, 1897_.

DEAR SCHILLER,--Did you ever hear of the famous international prize
fight between Tom Sayers and Heenan the Benicia Boy, or were you too
small a baby in 1857 [1860?] The "Times" devoted a couple of pages of
report and one or more eulogistic editorials to the English champion,
and the latter, brimming over with emotion, wrote a letter to the
"Times" in which he touchingly said that he would live in future as one
who had been once deemed worthy of commemoration in its leaders. After
reading your review of me in the October "Mind" (which only reached me
two days ago) I feel as the noble Sayers felt, and think I ought to
write to Stout to say I will try to live up to such a character. My
past has not deserved such words, but my future shall. Seriously, your
review has given me the keenest possible pleasure. This philosophy must
be thickened up most decidedly--your review represents it as something
to rally to, so we must fly a banner and start a school. Some of your
phrases are bully: "reckless rationalism," "pure science is pure bosh,"
"infallible _a priori_ test of truth to screen us from the consequences
of our choice," etc., etc. Thank you from the bottom of my heart!

The enclosed document [a returned letter addressed to Christ Church]
explains itself. The Church and the Body of Christ are easily confused
and I haven't a scholarly memory. I wrote you a post-card recently to
the same address, patting you on the back for your article on
Immortality in the "New World." A staving good thing. I am myself to
give the "Ingersoll Lecture on Human Immortality" here in November--the
second lecturer on the foundation. I treat the matter very inferiorly to
you, but use your conception of the brain as a sifting agency, which
explains my question in the letter. Young [R. B.] Merriman is at Balliol
and a really good fellow in all possible respects. Pray be good to him
if he calls on you. I hope things have a peacock hue for you now that
term has begun. They are all going well here. Yours always gratefully,

W. J.




_To James J. Putnam._


Cambridge, _Mar. 2, 1898_.

DEAR JIM,--On page 7 of the "Transcript" tonight you will find a
manifestation of me at the State House, protesting against the proposed
medical license bill.

If you think I _enjoy_ that sort of thing you are mistaken. I never did
anything that required as much moral effort in my life. My vocation is
to treat of things in an all-round manner and not make _ex-parte_ pleas
to influence (or seek to) a peculiar jury. _Aussi_, why do the medical
brethren force an unoffending citizen like me into such a position?
Legislative license is sheer humbug--mere abstract paper thunder under
which every ignorance and abuse can still go on. Why this mania for more
laws? Why seek to stop the really extremely important experiences which
these peculiar creatures are rolling up?

Bah! I'm sick of the whole business, and I well know how all my
colleagues at the Medical School, who go only by the label, will view me
and my efforts. But if Zola and Col. Picquart can face the whole French
army, can't I face their disapproval?--Much more easily than that of my
own conscience!

You, I fancy, are not one of the fully disciplined demanders of more
legislation. So I write to you, as on the whole my dearest friend
hereabouts, to explain just what my state of mind is. Ever yours,

W. J.

James was not indulging in empty rhetoric when he said that his
conscience drove him to face the disapproval of his medical colleagues.
Some of them never forgave him, and to this day references to his
"appearance" at the State House in Boston are marked by partisanship
rather than understanding.

What happened cannot be understood without recalling that thirty-odd
years ago the licensing of medical practitioners was just being
inaugurated in the United States. Today it is evident that everyone must
be qualified and licensed before he can be permitted to write
prescriptions, to sign statements upon which public records, inquests,
and health statistics are to be based, and to go about the community
calling himself a doctor. On the other hand, experience has proved that
those people who do not pretend to be physicians, who do not use drugs
or the knife, and who attempt to heal only by mental or spiritual
influence, cannot be regulated by the clumsy machinery of the criminal
law. But either because the whole question of medical registration was
new, or because professional men are seldom masters of the science of
lawmaking, the sponsors of the bills proposed to the Massachusetts
Legislature in 1894 and 1898 ignored these distinctions. James did not
name them, although his argument implied them and rested upon them. The
bills included clauses which attempted to abolish the faith-curers by
requiring them to become Doctors of Medicine. The "Spiritualists" and
Christian Scientists were a numerous element in the population and
claimed a religious sanction for their beliefs. The gentlemen who mixed
an anti-spiritualist program in their effort to have doctors examined
and licensed by a State Board were either innocent of political
discretion or blind to the facts. For it was idle to argue that
faith-curers would be able to continue in their own ways as soon as they
had passed the medical examinations of the State Board, and that
accordingly the proposed law could not be said to involve their
suppression. Obviously, medical examinations were barriers which the
faith-curers could not climb over. This was the feature of the proposed
law which roused James to opposition, and led him to take sides for the
moment with all the spokesmen of all the-isms and-opathies.

"I will confine myself to a class of diseases" (he wrote to the Boston
"Transcript" in 1894) "with which my occupation has made me somewhat
conversant. I mean the diseases of the nervous system and the mind....
Of all the new agencies that our day has seen, there is but one that
tends steadily to assume a more and more commanding importance, and that
is the agency of the patient's mind itself. Whoever can produce effects
there holds the key of the situation in a number of morbid conditions of
which we do not yet know the extent; for systematic experiments in this
direction are in their merest infancy. They began in Europe fifteen
years ago, when the medical world so tardily admitted the facts of
hypnotism to be true; and in this country they have been carried on in a
much bolder and more radical fashion by all those 'mind-curers' and
'Christian Scientists' with whose results the public, and even the
profession, are growing gradually familiar.

"I assuredly hold no brief for any of these healers, and must confess
that my intellect has been unable to assimilate their theories, so far
as I have heard them given. But their _facts_ are patent and startling;
and anything that interferes with the multiplication of such facts, and
with our freest opportunity of observing and studying them, will, I
believe, be a public calamity. The law now proposed will so interfere,
simply because the mind-curers will not take the examinations....
Nothing would please some of them better than such a taste of
imprisonment as might, by the public outcry it would occasion, bring the
law rattling down about the ears of the mandarins who should have
enacted it.

"And whatever one may think of the narrowness of the mind-curers, their
logical position is impregnable. They are proving by the most brilliant
new results that the therapeutic relation may be what we can at present
describe only as a relation of one person to another person; and they
are consistent in resisting to the uttermost any legislation that would
make 'examinable' information the root of medical virtue, and hamper
the free play of personal force and affinity by mechanically imposed
conditions."

James knew as well as anyone that in the ranks of the healers there were
many who could fairly be described as preying on superstition and
ignorance. "X---- personally is a rapacious humbug" was his privately
expressed opinion of one of them who had a very large following. He had
no reverence for the preposterous theories with which their minds were
befogged; but "every good thing like _science_ in medicine," as he once
said, "has to be imitated and grimaced by a rabble of people who would
be at the required height; and the folly, humbug and mendacity is
pitiful." Furthermore he saw a quackery quite as odious and much more
dangerous than that of the "healers" in the patent-medicine business,
which was allowed to advertise its lies and secret nostrums in the
newspapers and on the bill-boards, and which flourished behind the
counter of every apothecary and village store-keeper at that time. (The
Federal Pure Food and Drug Act was still many years off.)

The spokesmen of the medical profession were ignoring what he believed
to be instructive phenomena. "What the real interests of medicine
require is that mental therapeutics should _not_ be stamped out, but
studied, and its laws ascertained. For that the mind-curers must at
least be suffered to make their experiments. If they cannot interpret
their results aright, why then let the orthodox M.D.'s follow up their
facts, and study and interpret them? But to force the mind-curers to a
State examination is to kill the experiments outright." But instead of
the open-minded attitude which he thus advocated, he saw doctors who
"had no more exact science in them than a fox terrier"[16] invoking the
holy name of Science and blundering ahead with an air of moral
superiority.

"One would suppose," he exclaimed again in the 1898 hearing, "that any
set of sane persons interested in the growth of medical truth would
rejoice if other persons were found willing to push out their
experiences in the mental-healing direction, and provide a mass of
material out of which the conditions and limits of such therapeutic
methods may at last become clear. One would suppose that our orthodox
medical brethren might so rejoice; but instead of rejoicing they adopt
the fiercely partisan attitude of a powerful trades-union, demanding
legislation against the competition of the 'scabs.' ... The mind-curers
and their public return the scorn of the regular profession with an
equal scorn, and will never come up for the examination. Their movement
is a religious or quasi-religious movement; personality is one condition
of success there, and impressions and intuitions seem to accomplish more
than chemical, anatomical or physiological information.... Pray do not
fail, Mr. Chairman, to catch my point. You are not to ask yourselves
whether these mind-curers do really achieve the successes that are
claimed. It is enough for you as legislators to ascertain that a large
number of our citizens, persons as intelligent and well-educated as
yourself, or I, persons whose number seems daily to increase, are
convinced that they do achieve them, are persuaded that a valuable new
department of medical experience is by them opening up. Here is a purely
medical question, regarding which our General Court, not being a
well-spring and source of medical virtue, not having any private test of
therapeutic truth, must remain strictly neutral under penalty of making
the confusion worse.... Above all things, Mr. Chairman, let us not be
infected with the Gallic spirit of regulation and reglementation for
their own abstract sakes. Let us not grow hysterical about law-making.
Let us not fall in love with enactments and penalties because they are
so logical and sound so pretty, and look so nice on paper."[17]




_To James J. Putnam._


Cambridge, _Mar. [3?] 1898_.

DEAR JIM,--Thanks for your noble-hearted letter, which makes me feel
warm again. I am glad to learn that you feel positively _agin_ the
proposed law, and hope that you will express yourself freely towards the
professional brethren to that effect.

Dr. Russell Sturgis has written me a similar letter.

Once more, thanks!

W. J.

P.S. _March 3._ The "Transcript" report, I am sorry to say, was a good
deal cut. I send you another copy, to keep and use where it will do most
good. The rhetorical problem with me was to say things to the Committee
that might neutralize the influence of their medical advisers, who, I
supposed, had the inside track, and all the _prestige_. I being banded
with the spiritists, faith-curers, magnetic healers, etc., etc. Strange
affinities![18]

W. J.




_To François Pillon._


Cambridge, _June 15, 1898_.

MY DEAR PILLON,--I have just received your pleasant letter and the
_Année_, volume 8, and shall immediately proceed to read the latter,
having finished reading my examinations yesterday, and being now free to
enjoy the vacation, but excessively tired. I grieve to learn of poor
Mrs. Pillon's continued ill health. How much patience both of you
require. I think of you also as spending most of the summer in Paris,
when the country contains so many more elements that are good for body
and soul.

How much has happened since I last heard from you! To say nothing of the
Zola trial, we now have the Cuban War! A curious episode of history,
showing how a nation's ideals can be changed in the twinkling of an eye,
by a succession of outward events partly accidental. It is quite
possible that, without the explosion of the Maine, we should still be at
peace, though, since the _basis_ of the whole American attitude is the
persuasion on the part of the people that the cruelty and misrule of
Spain in Cuba call for her expulsion (so that in that sense our war is
just what a war of "the powers" against Turkey for the Armenian
atrocities would have been), it is hardly possible that peace could have
been maintained indefinitely longer, unless Spain had gone out--a
consummation hardly to be expected by peaceful means. The actual
declaration of war by Congress, however, was a case of _psychologie des
foules_, a genuine hysteric stampede at the last moment, which shows
how unfortunate that provision of our written constitution is which
takes the power of declaring war from the Executive and places it in
Congress. Our Executive has behaved very well. The European nations of
the Continent cannot believe that our pretense of humanity, and our
disclaiming of all ideas of conquest, is sincere. It has been
_absolutely_ sincere! The self-conscious feeling of our people has been
entirely based in a sense of philanthropic duty, without which not a
step would have been taken. And when, in its ultimatum to Spain,
Congress denied any project of conquest in Cuba, it genuinely meant
every word it said. But here comes in the psychologic factor: once the
excitement of action gets loose, the taxes levied, the victories
achieved, etc., the old human instincts will get into play with all
their old strength, and the ambition and sense of mastery which our
nation has will set up new demands. We shall never take Cuba; I imagine
that to be very certain--unless indeed after years of unsuccessful
police duty there, for that is what we have made ourselves responsible
for. But Porto Rico, and even the Philippines, are not so sure. We had
supposed ourselves (with all our crudity and barbarity in certain ways)
a better nation morally than the rest, safe at home, and without the old
savage ambition, destined to exert great international influence by
throwing in our "moral weight," etc. Dreams! Human Nature is everywhere
the same; and at the least temptation all the old military passions
rise, and sweep everything before them. It will be interesting to see
how it will end.

But enough of this!--It all shows by what short steps progress is made,
and it confirms the "criticist" views of the philosophy of history. I am
going to a great popular meeting in Boston today where a lot of my
friends are to protest against the new "Imperialism."

In August I go for two months to California to do some lecturing. As I
have never crossed the continent or seen the Pacific Ocean or those
beautiful _parages_, I am very glad of the opportunity. The year after
next (_i.e._ one year from now) begins a new year of absence from my
college duties. I _may_ spend it in Europe again. In any case I shall
hope to see you, for I am appointed to give the "Gifford Lectures" at
Edinburgh during 1899-1901--two courses of 10 each on the philosophy of
religion. A great honor.--I have also received the honor of an election
as "Correspondent" of the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques.
Have I _your_ influence to thank for this? Believe me, with most
sympathetic regards to Mrs. Pillon and affectionate greetings to
yourself, yours most truly

Wm. James.

Before starting for California, James went to the Adirondack Lodge to
snatch a brief holiday. One episode in this holiday can best be
described by an extract from a letter to Mrs. James.




_To Mrs. James._


ST. HUBERT'S INN,
KEENE VALLEY, _July 9, 1898_.

...I have had an eventful 24 hours, and my hands are so stiff after it
that my fingers can hardly hold the pen. I left, as I informed you by
post-card, the Lodge at seven, and five hours of walking brought us to
the top of Marcy--I carrying 18 lbs. of weight in my pack. As usual, I
met two Cambridge acquaintances on the mountain top--"Appalachians" from
Beede's. At four, hearing an axe below, I went down (an hour's walk) to
Panther Lodge Camp, and there found Charles and Pauline Goldmark, Waldo
Adler and another schoolboy, and two Bryn Mawr girls--the girls all
dressed in boys' breeches, and cutaneously desecrated in the extreme
from seven of them having been camping without a male on Loon Lake to
the north of this. My guide had to serve for the party, and quite
unexpectedly to me the night turned out one of the most memorable of all
my memorable experiences. I was in a wakeful mood before starting,
having been awake since three, and I may have slept a little during this
night; but I was not aware of sleeping at all. My companions, except
Waldo Adler, were all motionless. The guide had got a magnificent
provision of firewood, the sky swept itself clear of every trace of
cloud or vapor, the wind entirely ceased, so that the fire-smoke rose
straight up to heaven. The temperature was perfect either inside or
outside the cabin, the moon rose and hung above the scene before
midnight, leaving only a few of the larger stars visible, and I got into
a state of spiritual alertness of the most vital description. The
influences of Nature, the wholesomeness of the people round me,
especially the good Pauline, the thought of you and the children, dear
Harry on the wave, the problem of the Edinburgh lectures, all fermented
within me till it became a regular Walpurgis Nacht. I spent a good deal
of it in the woods, where the streaming moonlight lit up things in a
magical checkered play, and it seemed as if the Gods of all the
nature-mythologies were holding an indescribable meeting in my breast
with the moral Gods of the inner life. The two kinds of Gods have
nothing in common--the Edinburgh lectures made quite a hitch ahead. The
intense significance of some sort, of the whole scene, if one could only
_tell_ the significance; the intense inhuman remoteness of its inner
life, and yet the intense _appeal_ of it; its everlasting freshness and
its immemorial antiquity and decay; its utter Americanism, and every
sort of patriotic suggestiveness, and you, and my relation to you part
and parcel of it all, and beaten up with it, so that memory and
sensation all whirled inexplicably together; it was indeed worth coming
for, and worth repeating year by year, if repetition could only procure
what in its nature I suppose must be all unplanned for and unexpected.
It was one of the happiest lonesome nights of my existence, and I
understand now what a poet is. He is a person who can feel the immense
complexity of influences that I felt, and make some partial tracks in
them for verbal statement. In point of fact, I can't find a single word
for all that significance, and don't know what it was significant of, so
there it remains, a mere boulder of _impression_. Doubtless in more ways
than one, though, things in the Edinburgh lectures will be traceable to
it.

In the morning at six, I shouldered my undiminished pack and went up
Marcy, ahead of the party, who arrived half an hour later, and we got in
here at eight [P.M.] after 10-1/2 hours of the solidest walking I ever
made, and I, I think, more fatigued than I have been after any walk. We
plunged down Marcy, and up Bason Mountain, led by C. Goldmark, who had,
with Mr. White, blazed a trail the year before;[19] then down again,
away down, and up the Gothics, not counting a third down-and-up over an
intermediate spur. It was the steepest sort of work, and, as one looked
from the summits, seemed sheer impossible, but the girls kept up
splendidly, and were all fresher than I. It was true that they had slept
like logs all night, whereas I was "on my nerves." I lost my Norfolk
jacket at the last third of the course--high time to say good-bye to
that possession--and staggered up to the Putnams to find Hatty Shaw[20]
taking me for a tramp. Not a soul was there, but everything spotless and
ready for the arrival today. I got a bath at Bowditch's bath-house,
slept in my old room, and slept soundly and well, and save for the
unwashable staining of my hands and a certain stiffness in my thighs, am
entirely rested and well. But I don't believe in keeping it up too long,
and at the Willey House will lead a comparatively sedentary life, and
cultivate sleep, if I can....

W. J.

The intense experience which James thus described had consequences that
were not foreseen at the time. He had gone to the Adirondacks at the
close of the college term in a much fatigued condition. He had been
sleeping badly for some weeks, and when he started up Mount Marcy he had
neuralgia in one foot; but he had characteristically determined to
ignore and "bully" this ailment. Under such conditions the prolonged
physical exertion of the two days' climb, aggravated by the fact that he
carried a pack all the second day, was too much for a man of his years
and sedentary occupations. As the summer wore on, pain or discomfort in
the region of his heart became constant. He tried to persuade himself
that it signified nothing and would pass away, and concealed it from his
wife until mid-winter. To Howison--who was himself a confessed heart
case--he wrote, "My heart has been kicking about terribly of late,
stopping, and hurrying and aching and so forth, but I do not propose to
give up to it too much." The fact was that the strain of the two days'
climb had caused a valvular lesion that was irreparable, although not
great enough seriously to curtail his activities if he had given heed
to his general condition and avoided straining himself again.

In August James went to California to give the lectures which have
already been mentioned in a letter to Pillon. Again, these lectures were
in substance the "Talks to Teachers." The next letter, written just
before he left Cambridge, answers a request to him to address the
Philosophical Club at the University of California.




_To G. H. Howison._


Cambridge, _July 24, 1898_.

DEAR HOWISON,--Your kind letter greeted me on my arrival here three days
ago--but I have waited to answer it in order to determine just what my
lecture's title should be. I wanted to make something entirely popular,
and as it were emotional, for technicality seems to me to spell
"failure" in philosophy. But the subject in the margin of my
consciousness failed to make connexion with the centre, and I have
fallen back on something less vital, but still, I think, sufficiently
popular and practical, which you can advertise under the rather
ill-chosen title of "Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results,"
if you wish.

I am just back from a month of practical idleness in the Adirondacks,
but such is the infirmity of my complexion that I am not yet in proper
working trim. You ask me, like an angel, in what form I like to take my
sociability. The spirit is willing to take it in any form, but the flesh
is weak, and it runs to destruction of nerve-tissue and madness in me to
go to big stand-up receptions where the people scream and breathe in
each other's faces. But I know my duties; and one such reception I will
gladly face. For the rest, I should infinitely prefer a chosen few at
dinner. But this enterprise is going, my friend, to give you and Mrs.
Howison a heap of trouble. My purpose is to arrive on the eve of the
26th. I will telegraph you the hour and train. When the lectures to the
teachers are over, I will make for the Yosemite Valley, where I want to
spend a fortnight if I can, and come home.... Yours ever truly,

Wm. James.




_To Henry James._


OCCIDENTAL HOTEL,
SAN FRANCISCO, _Aug. 11, 1898_.

DEAR OLD HENRY,--You see I have worked my way across the Continent, and,
full of the impressions of this queer place, I must overflow for a page
or two to you. I saw some really grand and ferocious scenery on the
Canadian Pacific, and wish I could go right back to see it again. But it
doesn't mean much, on the whole, for human habitation, and the British
Empire's investment in Canada is in so far forth but _scenic_. It is
grand, though, in its vastness and simplicity. In Washington and Oregon
the whole foreground consisted of desolation by fire. The magnificent
coniferous forests burnt and burning, as they have been for years and
years back. Northern California one pulverous earth-colored mass of
hills and heat, with green spots produced by irrigation hardly showing
on the background. I drove through a wheatfield at Harry's Uncle
Christopher's on a machine, drawn by 26 mules, which cut a swathe 18
feet wide through the wheat and threw it out in bags to be taken home,
as fast as the leisurely mules could walk. It is like Egypt. Down here,
splendid air, and a city so indescribably odd and unique in its
suggestions that I have been saying to myself all day that _you_ ought
to have taken it in when you were under 30 and added it to your
portraits of places. So remote and terminal, so full of the sea-port
nakedness, yet so new and American, with its queer suggestions of a
history based on the fifties and the sixties. But at my age those
impressions are curiously weak to what they once were, and the time to
travel is between one's 20th and 30th year. This hotel--an old house
cleaned into newness--is redolent of '59 or '60, when it must have been
built. Hideous vast stuccoed thing, with long undulating balustrades and
wells and lace curtains. The fare is very good, but the servants all
Irish, who seem cowed in the dining-room, and go about as if they had
corns on their feet and for that reason had given up the pick and
shovel.... Tomorrow, in spite of drouth and dust, I leave for the
Yosemite Valley, with a young Californian philosopher, named [Charles
M.] Bakewell, as companion. On the whole I prefer the works of God to
those of man, and the alternative, a trip down the coast, beauties as it
would doubtless show, would include too much humanity....




_To his Son Alexander._


BERKELEY, CAL., _Aug. 28, 1898_.

DARLING OLD CHERUBINI,--See how brave this girl and boy are in the
Yosemite Valley![21] I saw a moving sight the other morning before
breakfast in a little hotel where I slept in the dusty fields. The young
man of the house had shot a little wolf called a coyote in the early
morning. The heroic little animal lay on the ground, with his big furry
ears, and his clean white teeth, and his jolly cheerful little body, but
his brave little life was gone. It made me think how brave all these
living things are. Here little coyote was, without any clothes or house
or books or anything, with nothing but his own naked self to pay his
way with, and risking his life so cheerfully--and losing it--just to
see if he could pick up a meal near the hotel. He was doing his
coyote-business like a hero, and you must do your boy-business, and I my
man-business bravely too, or else we won't be worth as much as that
little coyote. Your mother can find a picture of him in those green
books of animals, and I want you to copy it. Your loving

DAD.




_To Miss Rosina H. Emmet._


MONTEREY, _Sept. 9, 1898_.

DEAR OLD ROSINA,--I have seen your native state and even been driven by
dear, good, sweet Hal Dibblee (who is turning into a perfectly ideal
fellow) through the charming and utterly lovable place in which you all
passed your childhood. (How your mother must sometimes long for it
again!) Of California and its greatness, the half can never be told. I
have been on a ranch in the white, bare dryness of Siskiyou County, and
reaped wheat with a swathe of 18 feet wide on a machine drawn by a
procession of 26 mules. I've been to Yosemite, and camped for five days
in the high Sierras; I've lectured at the two universities of the state,
and seen the youths and maidens lounge together at Stanford in cloisters
whose architecture is purer and more lovely than aught that Italy can
show. I've heard Mrs. Dibblee read letter after letter from Anita
concerning your life together; and even one letter to Anita from Bay,
which the former enclosed. (Dear Bay!) All this, dear old Rosina, is a
"summation of stimuli" which at last carries me over the dam that has so
long obstructed all my epistolary efforts in your direction.

Over and over again I have been on the point of writing to you, more
than once I have actually written a page or two, but something has
always checked the flow, and arrested the current of the soul. What is
it? I think it is this: I naturally tend, when "familiar" with what the
authors of the beginning of the century used to call "a refined female,"
to indulge in chaffing personalities in writing to her. There is
something in you that doubtfully enjoys the chaffing; and subtly feeling
that, I stop. But some day, when experience shall have winnowed you with
her wing; when the illusions and the hopes of youth alike are faded;
when eternal principles of order are more to you than sensations that
pass in a day, however exciting; when friends that know you and your
roots and derivations are more satisfactory, however humdrum and hoary
they be, than the handsome recent acquaintances that know nothing of you
but the hour; when, in short, your being is mellowed, dulled and
harmonized by time so as to be a grave, wise, deep, and discerning moral
and intellectual unity (as mine is already from the height of my 40
centuries!), then, Rosina, we two shall be the most perfect of
combinations, and I shall write to you every week of my life and you
will be utterly unable to resist replying. That will not be, however,
before you are forty years old. You are sure to come to it! For you see
the truth, irrespective of persons, as few people see it; and after all,
you care for that more than for anything else--and that means a rare and
unusual destiny, and ultimate salvation.--But here I am, chaffing, quite
against my intentions and altogether in spite of myself. The ruling
passion is irresistible. Let me stop!

But still I must be personal, and not write merely of the climate and
productions of California, as I have been doing to others for the past
four weeks. How I do wish I could be dropped amongst you for but 24
hours! What talk I should hear! What perceptions of truth from you and
Bay (and probably young Leslie) would pour into my receptive soul. How
I _should_ like to hear you hold forth about the French, their art,
their literature, their nature, and all else about them! How I should
like to hear you _talk_ French! How I should like to note the changes
wrought in you by all this experience, and take all sorts of excursions
in your company! Don't come home for one more year if you can help it.
Stay and let the impressions set and tie themselves in with a hard knot,
so that they will be worth something and definitive.

I am so glad to hear that Bay is doing so well, and doubly glad (as Mrs.
Dibblee tells me from Anita) that H. J. is going to sit to her for his
portrait. I am a bit sorry that the youthful Harry didn't accept your
invitation, but his time was after all so short that it has been perhaps
good for him to get the massive English impression. What times we live
in! Dreyfus, Cuba, and Khartoum!--I keep well, though fragile as a
worker. You will have heard of my Edinburgh appointment and my election
to the Institut de France as _Correspondant_. The latter is silly, but
the former a serious scrape out of which I am praying all the gods to
help me, as the time for preparation is so short. All Cambridge friends
are well. You heard of dear Child's death, last summer, I suppose.
Good-bye! Write to me, dear old Rosina. Kiss Bay and Leslie--even
_effleurez_ your own cheek, for me. Give my best love to your mother,
and believe me always your affectionate

W. J.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


Cambridge, _Dec. 3, 1898_.

ILLUSTRIOUS FRIEND AND JOY OF MY LIVER,--I am much pleased to hear from
you, for I have wished to know of your destinies, and Bakewell couldn't
give me a very precise account. I congratulate you on getting your
review of me off your hands--you must experience a relief similar to
that of Christian when he lost his bag of sin. I imagine your account of
its unsatisfactoriness is a little hyperæsthetic, and that what you have
brooded over so long will, in spite of anything in the accidents of its
production, prove solid and deep, and reveal _ex pede_ the Hercules. Of
course, if you do not unconditionally subscribe to my "Will to Believe"
essay, it shows that you still are groping in the darkness of
misunderstanding either of my meaning or of the truth; for in spite of
"the bludgeonings of fate," my head is "bloody but unbowed" as to the
rightness of my contention there, in both its parts. But we shall see;
and I hope you are now free for more distant flights.

I am extremely sorry to hear you have been not well again, even though
you say you are so much better now. You ought to be _entirely_ well and
every inch a king. Remember that, _whenever_ you need a change, your bed
is made in this house for as many weeks as you care to stay. I know
there will come feelings of disconsolateness over you occasionally, from
being so out of the academic swim. But that is nothing! And while this
time is on, you should think exclusively of its unique characteristics
of blessedness, which will be irrecoverable when you are in the harness
again.

I spent the first six weeks after term began in trying to clear my table
of encumbering tasks, in order to get at my own reading for the Gifford
lectures. In vain. Each day brought its cargo, and I never got at my own
work, until a fortnight ago the brilliant resolve was communicated to
me, by divine inspiration, of not doing anything for anybody else, not
writing a letter or looking at a MS., on any day until I should have
done at least one hour of work for _myself_. If you spend your time
preparing to be ready, you _never_ will be ready. Since that wonderful
insight into the truth, despair has given way to happiness. I do my hour
or hour and a half of free reading; and don't care what extraneous
interest suffers.... Good-night, dear old Miller. Your ever loving,

W. J.




_To Dickinson S. Miller._


Cambridge, _Jan. 31, 1899_.

...Your account of Josiah Royce is adorable--we have both gloated over
it all day. The best intellectual character-painting ever limned by an
English pen! Since teaching the "Conception of God," I have come to
perceive what I didn't trust myself to believe before, that looseness of
thought is R.'s _essential_ element. He _wants_ it. There isn't a tight
joint in his system; not one. And yet I thought that a mind that could
talk me blind and black and numb on mathematics and logic, and whose
favorite recreation is works on those subjects, must necessarily conceal
closeness and exactitudes of ratiocination that I hadn't the wit to find
out. But no! he is the Rubens of philosophy. Richness, abundance,
boldness, color, but a sharp contour never, and never any _perfection_.
But isn't fertility better than perfection? Deary me! Ever thine,

W. J.




_To Henry Rutgers Marshall._


Cambridge [_Feb. 7, 1899_?].

DEAR MARSHALL,--I will hand your paper to Eliot, though I am sure that
nothing will come of it in _this_ University.

Moreover, it strikes me that no good will ever come to Art as such from
the analytic study of Æsthetics--harm rather, if the abstractions could
in any way be made the basis of practice. We should get stark things
done on system with all the intangible personal _je ne sçais quaw_ left
out. The difference between the first-and second-best things in art
absolutely seems to escape verbal definition--it is a matter of a hair,
a shade, an inward quiver of some kind--yet what miles away in point of
preciousness! Absolutely the same verbal formula applies to the supreme
success and to the thing that just misses it, and yet verbal formulas
are all that your aesthetics will give.

Surely imitation in the concrete is better for results than any amount
of gabble in the abstract. Let the rest of us philosophers gabble, but
don't mix us up with the interests of the art department as such! Them's
my sentiments.

Thanks for the "cudgels" you are taking up for the "Will to Believe."
Miller's article seems to be based solely on my little catchpenny
_title_. Where would he have been if I had called my article "a critique
of pure faith" or words to that effect? As it is, he doesn't touch a
_single_ one of my points, and slays a mere abstraction. I shall
greedily read what you write.

I have been too lazy and hard pressed to write to you about your
"Instinct and Reason," which contains many good things in the way of
psychology and morals, but which--I tremble to say it before you--on the
whole _does_ disappoint me. The religious part especially seems to me to
rest on too narrow a phenomenal base, and the formula to be too simple
and abstract. But it is a good contribution to American scholarship all
the same, and I hope the Philippine Islanders will be forced to study
it.

Forgive my brevity and levity. Yours ever,

W. J.




_To Henry Rutgers Marshall._


Cambridge, _Feb. 8 [1899]_.

DEAR MARSHALL,--Your invitation was perhaps the finest "tribute" the
Jameses have ever received, but it is plumb impossible that either of us
should accept. Pinned down, by ten thousand jobs and duties, like two
Gullivers by the threads of the Lilliputians.

I should "admire" to see the Kiplings again, but it is no go. Now that
by his song-making power he is the mightiest force in the formation of
the "Anglo-Saxon" character, I wish he would hearken a bit more to his
deeper human self and a bit less to his shallower jingo self. If the
Anglo-Saxon race would drop its sniveling cant it would have a good deal
less of a "burden" to carry. We're the most loathsomely canting crew
that God ever made. Kipling knows perfectly well that our camps in the
tropics are not college settlements or our armies bands of
philanthropists, slumming it; and I think it a shame that he should
represent us to ourselves in that light. I wish he would try a bit
interpreting the savage _soul_ to us, as he _could_, instead of using
such official and conventional phrases as "half-devil and half-child,"
which leaves the whole insides out.

Heigh ho!

I have only had time to glance at the first 1/2 of your paper on Miller.
I am delighted you are thus going for him. His whole paper is an
_ignoratio elenchi_, and he doesn't touch a single one of my positions.

Believe me with great regrets and thanks, yours ever,

Wm. James.




_To Mrs. Henry Whitman._


CHOCORUA, _June 7, 1899_.

DEAR MRS. WHITMAN,--I got your penciled letter the day before leaving.
The R.R. train seems to be a great stimulus to the acts of the higher
epistolary activity and correspondential amicality in you--a fact for
which I have (occasional) reason to be duly grateful. So here, in the
cool darkness of my road-side "sitting-room," with no pen in the house,
with the soft tap of the carpenter's hammer and the pensive scrape of
the distant wood-saw stealing through the open wire-netting door, along
with the fragrant air of the morning woods, I get stimulus responsive,
and send you penciled return. Yes, the daylight that now seems shining
through the Dreyfus case is glorious, and if the President only gets his
back up a bit, and mows down the whole gang of Satan, or as much of it
as can be touched, it will perhaps be a great day for the distracted
France. I mean it may be one of those moral crises that become starting
points and high-water marks and leave traditions and rallying cries and
new forces behind them. One thing is certain, that no other alternative
form of government possible to France in this century could have stood
the strain as this democracy seems to be standing it.

Apropos of which, a word about Woodberry's book.[22] I didn't know him
to be that kind of a creature at all. The essays are grave and noble in
the extreme. I hail another American author. They can't be popular, and
for cause. The respect of him for the Queen's English, the classic
leisureliness and explicitness, which give so rare a dignity to his
style, also take from it that which our generation seems to need, the
sudden word, the unmediated transition, the flash of perception that
makes reasonings unnecessary. Poor Woodberry, so high, so true, so good,
so original in his total make-up, and yet so unoriginal if you take him
spot-wise--and therefore so ineffective. His paper on Democracy is very
fine indeed, though somewhat too abstract. I haven't yet read the first
and last essays in the book, which I shall buy and keep, and even send a
word of gratulation to the author for it.

As for me, my bed is made: I am against bigness and greatness in all
their forms, and with the invisible molecular moral forces that work
from individual to individual, stealing in through the crannies of the
world like so many soft rootlets, or like the capillary oozing of water,
and yet rending the hardest monuments of man's pride, if you give them
time. The bigger the unit you deal with, the hollower, the more brutal,
the more mendacious is the life displayed. So I am against all big
organizations as such, national ones first and foremost; against all big
successes and big results; and in favor of the eternal forces of truth
which always work in the individual and immediately unsuccessful way,
under-dogs always, till history comes, after they are long dead, and
puts them on the top.--You need take no notice of these ebullitions of
spleen, which are probably quite unintelligible to anyone but myself.
Ever your

W. J.

When the College term ended in June, 1899, the sailing date of the
European steamer on which James had taken passage for his wife and
daughter and himself was still three weeks away. He turned again to the
Adirondack Lodge and there persuaded himself, to his intense
satisfaction, that if he walked slowly and alone, so that there was no
temptation to talk while walking, or to keep on when he felt like
stopping, he could still spend several hours a day on the mountain sides
without inconvenience to his heart. But one afternoon he took a wrong
path and did not discover his mistake until he had gone so far that it
seemed safer to go on than to turn back. So he kept on. But the "trail"
he was following was not the one he supposed it to be and led him
farther and farther. He fainted twice; it grew dark; but having neither
food, coat, nor matches, he stumbled along until at last he came out on
the Keene Valley road and, at nearly eleven o'clock at night, reached a
house where he could get food and a conveyance.

He ought to have avoided all exertion for weeks thereafter, but he tried
again to make light of what had occurred, and, on getting back to
Cambridge, spent a very active few days over final arrangements for his
year of absence. When his boat had sailed and the stimulus which his
last duties supplied had been withdrawn, he began to discover what
condition he was in.




