PART II




The Eleven Principles out of the Teaching of Baha'u'llah, Explained by
'Abdu'l-Baha in Paris.


I.--The Search after Truth.

II.--The Unity of Mankind.

III.--Religion ought to be the Cause of Love and Affection. (Not given
separately.)

IV.--The Unity of Religion and Science.

V.--Abolition of Prejudices.

VI.--Equalization of Means of Existence.

VII.--Equality of Men before the Law.

VIII.--Universal Peace.

IX.--Non-Interference of Religion and Politics.

X.--Equality of Sex--Education of Women.

XI.--The Power of the Holy Spirit.




THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, PARIS


Since my arrival in Paris, I have been told of the Theosophical Society,
and I know that it is composed of honoured and respected men. You are men
of intellect and thought, men with spiritual ideals, and it is a great
pleasure for me to be among you.

Let us thank God who has drawn us together this evening. It gives me great
joy, for I see that you are seekers after truth. You are not held in
bondage by the chains of prejudice, and your greatest longing is to know
the truth. Truth may be likened to the sun! The sun is the luminous body
that disperses all shadows; in the same way does truth scatter the shadows
of our imagination. As the sun gives life to the body of humanity so does
truth give life to their souls. Truth is a sun that rises from different
points on the horizon.

Sometimes the sun rises from the centre of the horizon, then in summer it
rises farther north, in winter farther south--but it is always the
self-same sun, however different are the points of its rising.

In like manner truth is one, although its manifestations may be very
different. Some men have eyes and see. These worship the sun, no matter
from which point on the horizon it may dawn; and when the sun has left the
winter sky to appear in the summer one, they know how to find it again.
Others there are who worship only the spot from which the sun arose, and
when it arises in its glory from another place they remain in
contemplation before the spot of its former rising. Alas! these men are
deprived of the blessings of the sun. Those who in truth adore the sun
itself will recognize it from whatsoever dawning-place it may appear, and
will straightway turn their faces towards its radiance.

We must adore the sun itself and not merely the place of its appearance.
In the same way men of enlightened heart worship truth on whatever horizon
it appears. They are not bound by personality, but they follow the truth,
and are able to recognize it no matter from whence it may come. It is this
same truth which helps humanity to progress, which gives life to all
created beings, for it is the Tree of Life!

In His teaching Baha'u'llah gives us the explanation of truth, and I wish
to speak to you briefly about this, for I see that you are capable of
understanding. I.--The first principle of Baha'u'llah is:

The Search for Truth

Man must cut himself free from all prejudice and from the result of his
own imagination, so that he may be able to search for truth unhindered.
Truth is one in all religions, and by means of it the unity of the world
can be realized.

All the peoples have a fundamental belief in common. Being one, truth
cannot be divided, and the differences that appear to exist among the
nations only result from their attachment to prejudice. If only men would
search out truth, they would find themselves united.

II.--The second principle of Baha'u'llah is:

The Unity of Mankind

The one all-loving God bestows His divine Grace and Favour on all mankind;
one and all are servants of the Most High, and His Goodness, Mercy and
loving Kindness are showered upon all His creatures. The glory of humanity
is the heritage of each one.

All men are the leaves and fruit of one same tree, they are all branches
of the tree of Adam, they all have the same origin. The same rain has
fallen upon them all, the same warm sun makes them grow, they are all
refreshed by the same breeze. The only differences that exist and that
keep them apart are these: there are the children who need guidance, the
ignorant to be instructed, the sick to be tended and healed; thus, I say
that the whole of humanity is enveloped by the Mercy and Grace of God. As
the Holy Writings tell us: All men are equal before God. He is no
respecter of persons.

III.--The third principle of Baha'u'llah is:

Religion should be the Cause of Love and Affection

Religion should unite all hearts and cause wars and disputes to vanish
from the face of the earth, give birth to spirituality, and bring life and
light to each heart. If religion becomes a cause of dislike, hatred and
division, it were better to be without it, and to withdraw from such a
religion would be a truly religious act. For it is clear that the purpose
of a remedy is to cure; but if the remedy should only aggravate the
complaint it had better be left alone. Any religion which is not a cause
of love and unity is no religion. All the holy prophets were as doctors to
the soul; they gave prescriptions for the healing of mankind; thus any
remedy that causes disease does not come from the great and supreme
Physician.

IV.--The fourth principle of Baha'u'llah is:

The Unity of Religion and Science

We may think of science as one wing and religion as the other; a bird
needs two wings for flight, one alone would be useless. Any religion that
contradicts science or that is opposed to it, is only ignorance--for
ignorance is the opposite of knowledge.

Religion which consists only of rites and ceremonies of prejudice is not
the truth. Let us earnestly endeavour to be the means of uniting religion
and science.

'Ali, the son-in-law of Muhammad, said: 'That which is in conformity with
science is also in conformity with religion'. Whatever the intelligence of
man cannot understand, religion ought not to accept. Religion and science
walk hand in hand, and any religion contrary to science is not the truth.

V.--The fifth principle of Baha'u'llah is:

Prejudices of Religion, Race or Sect destroy the foundation of Humanity

All the divisions in the world, hatred, war and bloodshed, are caused by
one or other of these prejudices.

The whole world must be looked upon as one single country, all the nations
as one nation, all men as belonging to one race. Religions, races, and
nations are all divisions of man's making only, and are necessary only in
his thought; before God there are neither Persians, Arabs, French nor
English; God is God for all, and to Him all creation is one. We must obey
God, and strive to follow Him by leaving all our prejudices and bringing
about peace on earth.

VI.--The sixth principle of Baha'u'llah is:

Equal opportunity of the means of Existence

Every human being has the right to live; they have a right to rest, and to
a certain amount of well-being. As a rich man is able to live in his
palace surrounded by luxury and the greatest comfort, so should a poor man
be able to have the necessaries of life. Nobody should die of hunger;
everybody should have sufficient clothing; one man should not live in
excess while another has no possible means of existence.

Let us try with all the strength we have to bring about happier
conditions, so that no single soul may be destitute.

VII.--The seventh principle of Baha'u'llah is:

The Equality of Men--equality before the Law

The Law must reign, and not the individual; thus will the world become a
place of beauty and true brotherhood will be realized. Having attained
solidarity, men will have found truth.

VIII.--The eighth principle of Baha'u'llah is:

Universal Peace

A Supreme Tribunal shall be elected by the peoples and governments of
every nation, where members from each country and government shall
assemble in unity. All disputes shall be brought before this Court, its
mission being to prevent war.

IX.--The ninth principle of Baha'u'llah is:

That Religion should not concern itself with Political Questions

Religion is concerned with things of the spirit, politics with things of
the world. Religion has to work with the world of thought, whilst the
field of politics lies with the world of external conditions.

It is the work of the clergy to educate the people, to instruct them, to
give them good advice and teaching so that they may progress spiritually.
With political questions they have nothing to do.

X.--The tenth principle of Baha'u'llah is:

Education and Instruction of Women

Women have equal rights with men upon earth; in religion and society they
are a very important element. As long as women are prevented from
attaining their highest possibilities, so long will men be unable to
achieve the greatness which might be theirs.

XI.--The eleventh principle of Baha'u'llah is:

The Power of the Holy Spirit, by which alone Spiritual Development is
achieved

It is only by the breath of the Holy Spirit that spiritual development can
come about. No matter how the material world may progress, no matter how
splendidly it may adorn itself, it can never be anything but a lifeless
body unless the soul is within, for it is the soul that animates the body;
the body alone has no real significance. Deprived of the blessings of the
Holy Spirit the material body would be inert.

Here are, very briefly explained, some of the principles of Baha'u'llah.

In short, it behoves us all to be lovers of truth. Let us seek her in
every season and in every country, being careful never to attach ourselves
to personalities. Let us see the light wherever it shines, and may we be
enabled to recognize the light of truth no matter where it may arise. Let
us inhale the perfume of the rose from the midst of thorns which surround
it; let us drink the running water from every pure spring.

Since I arrived in Paris, it has given me much pleasure to meet such
Parisians as you are, for praise be to God, you are intelligent,
unprejudiced, and you long to know the truth. You have in your hearts the
love of humanity, and as far as you are able, you exert yourselves in the
cause of charitable work and in the bringing about of unity; this is
especially what Baha'u'llah desired.

It is for this reason that I am so happy to be among you, and I pray for
you, that you may be receptacles for the Blessings of God, and that you
may be the means of spreading spirituality throughout this country.

You already have a wonderful material civilization and in like manner
shall spiritual civilization be yours.

Monsieur Bleck thanked 'Abdu'l-Baha, and he replied:

'I am very grateful to you for the kind sentiments which you have just
uttered. I hope that these two movements will ere long be spread all over
the earth. Then will the unity of humanity have pitched its tent in the
centre of the world.'




THE FIRST PRINCIPLE--SEARCH AFTER TRUTH


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris
November 10th

The first principle of the Teaching of Baha'u'llah is:

The Search after Truth

If a man would succeed in his search after truth, he must, in the first
place, shut his eyes to all the traditional superstitions of the past.

The Jews have traditional superstitions, the Buddhists and the
Zoroastrians are not free from them, neither are the Christians! All
religions have gradually become bound by tradition and dogma.

All consider themselves, respectively, the only guardians of the truth,
and that every other religion is composed of errors. They themselves are
right, all others are wrong! The Jews believe that they are the only
possessors of the truth and condemn all other religions. The Christians
affirm that their religion is the only true one, that all others are
false. Likewise the Buddhists and Muhammadans; all limit themselves. If
all condemn one another, where shall we search for truth? All
contradicting one another, all cannot be true. If each believe his
particular religion to be the only true one, he blinds his eyes to the
truth in the others. If, for instance, a Jew is bound by the external
practice of the religion of Israel, he does not permit himself to perceive
that truth can exist in any other religion; it must be all contained in
his own!

We should, therefore, detach ourselves from the external forms and
practices of religion. We must realize that these forms and practices,
however beautiful, are but garments clothing the warm heart and the living
limbs of Divine truth. We must abandon the prejudices of tradition if we
would succeed in finding the truth at the core of all religions. If a
Zoroastrian believes that the Sun is God, how can he be united to other
religions? While idolaters believe in their various idols, how can they
understand the oneness of God?

It is, therefore, clear that in order to make any progress in the search
after truth we must relinquish superstition. If all seekers would follow
this principle they would obtain a clear vision of the truth.

If five people meet together to seek for truth, they must begin by cutting
themselves free from all their own special conditions and renouncing all
preconceived ideas. In order to find truth we must give up our prejudices,
our own small trivial notions; an open receptive mind is essential. If our
chalice is full of self, there is no room in it for the water of life. The
fact that we imagine ourselves to be right and everybody else wrong is the
greatest of all obstacles in the path towards unity, and unity is
necessary if we would reach truth, for truth is one.

Therefore it is imperative that we should renounce our own particular
prejudices and superstitions if we earnestly desire to seek the truth.
Unless we make a distinction in our minds between dogma, superstition and
prejudice on the one hand, and truth on the other, we cannot succeed. When
we are in earnest in our search for anything we look for it everywhere.
This principle we must carry out in our search for truth.

Science must be accepted. No one truth can contradict another truth. Light
is good in whatsoever lamp it is burning! A rose is beautiful in
whatsoever garden it may bloom! A star has the same radiance if it shines
from the East or from the West. Be free from prejudice, so will you love
the Sun of Truth from whatsoever point in the horizon it may arise! You
will realize that if the Divine light of truth shone in Jesus Christ it
also shone in Moses and in Buddha. The earnest seeker will arrive at this
truth. This is what is meant by the 'Search after Truth'.

It means, also, that we must be willing to clear away all that we have
previously learned, all that would clog our steps on the way to truth; we
must not shrink if necessary from beginning our education all over again.
We must not allow our love for any one religion or any one personality to
so blind our eyes that we become fettered by superstition! When we are
freed from all these bonds, seeking with liberated minds, then shall we be
able to arrive at our goal.

'Seek the truth, the truth shall make you free.' So shall we see the truth
in all religions, for truth is in all and truth is one!




THE SECOND PRINCIPLE--THE UNITY OF MANKIND


November 11th

I spoke yesterday of the first principle of the Teaching of Baha'u'llah,
'The Search for Truth'; how it is necessary for a man to put aside all in
the nature of superstition, and every tradition which would blind his eyes
to the existence of truth in all religions. He must not, while loving and
clinging to one form of religion, permit himself to detest all others. It
is essential that he search for truth in all religions, and, if his
seeking be in earnest, he will assuredly succeed.

Now the first discovery which we make in our 'Search after Truth', will
lead us to the second principle, which is the 'Unity of Mankind'. All men
are servants of the One God. One God reigns over all the nations of the
world and has pleasure in all His children. All men are of one family; the
crown of humanity rests on the head of every human being.

In the eyes of the Creator all His children are equal; His goodness is
poured forth on all. He does not favour this nation nor that nation, all
alike are His creatures. This being so, why should we make divisions,
separating one race from another? Why should we create barriers of
superstition and tradition bringing discord and hatred among the people?

The only difference between members of the human family is that of degree.
Some are like children who are ignorant, and must be educated until they
arrive at maturity. Some are like the sick and must be treated with
tenderness and care. None are bad or evil! We must not be repelled by
these poor children. We must treat them with great kindness, teaching the
ignorant and tenderly nursing the sick.

Consider: Unity is necessary to existence. Love is the very cause of life;
on the other hand, separation brings death. In the world of material
creation, for instance, all things owe their actual life to unity. The
elements which compose wood, mineral, or stone, are held together by the
law of attraction. If this law should cease for one moment to operate
these elements would not hold together, they would fall apart, and the
object would in that particular form cease to exist. The law of attraction
has brought together certain elements in the form of this beautiful
flower, but when that attraction is withdrawn from this centre the flower
will decompose, and, as a flower, cease to exist.

So it is with the great body of humanity. The wonderful Law of Attraction,
Harmony and Unity, holds together this marvellous Creation.

As with the whole, so with the parts; whether a flower or a human body,
when the attracting principle is withdrawn from it, the flower or the man
dies. It is therefore clear that attraction, harmony, unity and Love, are
the cause of life, whereas repulsion, discord, hatred and separation bring
death.

We have seen that whatever brings division into the world of existence
causes death. Likewise in the world of the spirit does the same law
operate.

Therefore should every servant of the One God be obedient to the law of
love, avoiding all hatred, discord, and strife. We find when we observe
nature, that the gentler animals group themselves together into flocks and
herds, whereas the savage, ferocious creatures, such as the lion, the
tiger, and the wolf, live in wild forests, apart from civilization. Two
wolves, or two lions, may live amicably together; but a thousand lambs may
share the same fold and a large number of deer can form one herd. Two
eagles can dwell in the same place, but a thousand doves can gather into
one habitation.

Man should, at least, be numbered among the gentler animals; but when he
becomes ferocious he is more cruel and malicious than the most savage of
the animal creation!

Now Baha'u'llah has proclaimed the 'Unity of the World of Mankind'. All
peoples and nations are of one family, the children of one Father, and
should be to one another as brothers and sisters! I hope that you will
endeavour in your lives to show forth and spread this teaching.

Baha'u'llah said that we should love even our enemies and be to them as
friends. If all men were obedient to this principle, the greatest unity
and understanding would be established in the hearts of mankind.




THIRD PRINCIPLE


['That religion ought to be a Cause of Love and Affection' is much
emphasized in many of the Discourses of which the Notes are given in this
book, as well as in the explanation of several of the other Principles.]




FOURTH PRINCIPLE--THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE RELATION BETWEEN RELIGION AND
SCIENCE


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris,
November 12th

'Abdu'l-Baha said:

I have spoken to you of some of the principles of Baha'u'llah: The Search
after Truth and The Unity of Mankind. I will now explain the Fourth
Principle, which is The Acceptance of the Relation between Religion and
Science.

There is no contradiction between true religion and science. When a
religion is opposed to science it becomes mere superstition: that which is
contrary to knowledge is ignorance.

How can a man believe to be a fact that which science has proved to be
impossible? If he believes in spite of his reason, it is rather ignorant
superstition than faith. The true principles of all religions are in
conformity with the teachings of science.

The Unity of God is logical, and this idea is not antagonistic to the
conclusions arrived at by scientific study.

All religions teach that we must do good, that we must be generous,
sincere, truthful, law-abiding, and faithful; all this is reasonable, and
logically the only way in which humanity can progress.

All religious laws conform to reason, and are suited to the people for
whom they are framed, and for the age in which they are to be obeyed.

Religion has two main parts:

(1) The Spiritual.

(2) The Practical.

The spiritual part never changes. All the Manifestations of God and His
Prophets have taught the same truths and given the same spiritual law.
They all teach the one code of morality. There is no division in the
truth. The Sun has sent forth many rays to illumine human intelligence,
the light is always the same.

The practical part of religion deals with exterior forms and ceremonies,
and with modes of punishment for certain offences. This is the material
side of the law, and guides the customs and manners of the people.

In the time of Moses, there were ten crimes punishable by death. When
Christ came this was changed; the old axiom 'an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth' was converted into 'Love your enemies, do good to them
that hate you', the stern old law being changed into one of love, mercy
and forbearance!

In the former days the punishment for theft was the cutting off of the
right hand; in our time this law could not be so applied. In this age, a
man who curses his father is allowed to live, when formerly he would have
been put to death. It is therefore evident that whilst the spiritual law
never alters, the practical rules must change their application with the
necessities of the time. The spiritual aspect of religion is the greater,
the more important of the two, and this is the same for all time, it never
changes! It is the same, yesterday, today, and for ever! 'As it was the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be.'

Now, all questions of morality contained in the spiritual, immutable law
of every religion are logically right. If religion were contrary to
logical reason then it would cease to be a religion and be merely a
tradition. Religion and science are the two wings upon which man's
intelligence can soar into the heights, with which the human soul can
progress. It is not possible to fly with one wing alone! Should a man try
to fly with the wing of religion alone he would quickly fall into the
quagmire of superstition, whilst on the other hand, with the wing of
science alone he would also make no progress, but fall into the despairing
slough of materialism. All religions of the present day have fallen into
superstitious practices, out of harmony alike with the true principles of
the teaching they represent and with the scientific discoveries of the
time. Many religious leaders have grown to think that the importance of
religion lies mainly in the adherence to a collection of certain dogmas
and the practice of rites and ceremonies! Those whose souls they profess
to cure are taught to believe likewise, and these cling tenaciously to the
outward forms, confusing them with the inward truth.

Now, these forms and rituals differ in the various churches and amongst
the different sects, and even contradict one another; giving rise to
discord, hatred, and disunion. The outcome of all this dissension is the
belief of many cultured men that religion and science are contradictory
terms, that religion needs no powers of reflection, and should in no wise
be regulated by science, but must of necessity be opposed, the one to the
other. The unfortunate effect of this is that science has drifted apart
from religion, and religion has become a mere blind and more or less
apathetic following of the precepts of certain religious teachers, who
insist on their own favourite dogmas being accepted even when they are
contrary to science. This is foolishness, for it is quite evident that
science is the light, and, being so, religion truly so-called does not
oppose knowledge.

We are familiar with the phrases 'Light and Darkness', 'Religion and
Science'. But the religion which does not walk hand in hand with science
is itself in the darkness of superstition and ignorance.

Much of the discord and disunion of the world is created by these man-made
oppositions and contradictions. If religion were in harmony with science
and they walked together, much of the hatred and bitterness now bringing
misery to the human race would be at an end.

Consider what it is that singles man out from among created beings, and
makes of him a creature apart. Is it not his reasoning power, his
intelligence? Shall he not make use of these in his study of religion? I
say unto you: weigh carefully in the balance of reason and science
everything that is presented to you as religion. If it passes this test,
then accept it, for it is truth! If, however, it does not so conform, then
reject it, for it is ignorance!

Look around and see how the world of today is drowned in superstition and
outward forms!

Some worship the product of their own imagination: they make for
themselves an imaginary God and adore this, when the creation of their
finite minds cannot be the Infinite Mighty Maker of all things visible and
invisible! Others worship the sun or trees, also stones! In past ages
there were those who adored the sea, the clouds, and even clay!

Today, men have grown into such adoring attachment to outward forms and
ceremonies that they dispute over this point of ritual or that particular
practice, until one hears on all sides of wearisome arguments and unrest.
There are individuals who have weak intellects and their powers of
reasoning have not developed, but the strength and power of religion must
not be doubted because of the incapacity of these persons to understand.

A small child cannot comprehend the laws that govern nature, but this is
on account of the immature intellect of that child; when he is grown older
and has been educated he too will understand the everlasting truths. A
child does not grasp the fact that the earth revolves round the sun, but,
when his intelligence is awakened, the fact is clear and plain to him.

It is impossible for religion to be contrary to science, even though some
intellects are too weak or too immature to understand truth.

God made religion and science to be the measure, as it were, of our
understanding. Take heed that you neglect not such a wonderful power.
Weigh all things in this balance.

To him who has the power of comprehension religion is like an open book,
but how can it be possible for a man devoid of reason and intellectuality
to understand the Divine Realities of God?

Put all your beliefs into harmony with science; there can be no
opposition, for truth is one. When religion, shorn of its superstitions,
traditions, and unintelligent dogmas, shows its conformity with science,
then will there be a great unifying, cleansing force in the world which
will sweep before it all wars, disagreements, discords and struggles--and
then will mankind be united in the power of the Love of God.




THE FIFTH PRINCIPLE--THE ABOLITION OF PREJUDICES


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris,
November 13th

All prejudices, whether of religion, race, politics or nation, must be
renounced, for these prejudices have caused the world's sickness. It is a
grave malady which, unless arrested, is capable of causing the destruction
of the whole human race. Every ruinous war, with its terrible bloodshed
and misery, has been caused by one or other of these prejudices.

The deplorable wars going on in these days are caused by the fanatical
religious hatred of one people for another, or the prejudices of race or
colour.

Until all these barriers erected by prejudice are swept away, it is not
possible for humanity to be at peace. For this reason Baha'u'llah has
said, 'These Prejudices are destructive to mankind'.

Contemplate first the prejudice of religion: consider the nations of
so-called religious people; if they were truly worshippers of God they
would obey His law which forbids them to kill one another.

If priests of religion really adored the God of love and served the Divine
Light, they would teach their people to keep the chief Commandment, 'To be
in love and charity with all men'. But we find the contrary, for it is
often the priests who encourage nations to fight. Religious hatred is ever
the most cruel!

All religions teach that we should love one another; that we should seek
out our own shortcomings before we presume to condemn the faults of
others, that we must not consider ourselves superior to our neighbours! We
must be careful not to exalt ourselves lest we be humiliated.

Who are we that we should judge? How shall we know who, in the sight of
God, is the most upright man? God's thoughts are not like our thoughts!
How many men who have seemed saint-like to their friends have fallen into
the greatest humiliation. Think of Judas Iscariot; he began well, but
remember his end! On the other hand, Paul, the Apostle, was in his early
life an enemy of Christ, whilst later he became His most faithful servant.
How then can we flatter ourselves and despise others?

Let us therefore be humble, without prejudices, preferring others' good to
our own! Let us never say, 'I am a believer but he is an infidel', 'I am
near to God, whilst he is an outcast'. We can never know what will be the
final judgment! Therefore let us help all who are in need of any kind of
assistance.

Let us teach the ignorant, and take care of the young child until he grows
to maturity. When we find a person fallen into the depths of misery or sin
we must be kind to him, take him by the hand, help him to regain his
footing, his strength; we must guide him with love and tenderness, treat
him as a friend not as an enemy.

We have no right to look upon any of our fellow-mortals as evil.

Concerning the prejudice of race: it is an illusion, a superstition pure
and simple! For God created us all of one race. There were no differences
in the beginning, for we are all descendants of Adam. In the beginning,
also, there were no limits and boundaries between the different lands; no
part of the earth belonged more to one people than to another. In the
sight of God there is no difference between the various races. Why should
man invent such a prejudice? How can we uphold war caused by an illusion?

God has not created men that they should destroy one another. All races,
tribes, sects and classes share equally in the Bounty of their Heavenly
Father.

The only difference lies in the degree of faithfulness, of obedience to
the laws of God. There are some who are as lighted torches, there are
others who shine as stars in the sky of humanity. The lovers of mankind,
these are the superior men, of whatever nation, creed, or colour they may
be. For it is they to whom God will say these blessed words, 'Well done,
My good and faithful servants'. In that day He will not ask, 'Are you
English, French, or perhaps Persian? Do you come from the East, or from
the West?'

The only division that is real is this: There are heavenly men and earthly
men; self-sacrificing servants of humanity in the love of the Most High,
bringing harmony and unity, teaching peace and goodwill to men. On the
other hand there are those selfish men, haters of their brethren, in whose
hearts prejudice has replaced loving kindness, and whose influence breeds
discord and strife.

To which race or to which colour belong these two divisions of men, to the
White, to the Yellow, to the Black, to the East or to the West, to the
North or to the South? If these are God's divisions, why should we invent
others? Political prejudice is equally mischievous, it is one of the
greatest causes of bitter strife amongst the children of men. There are
people who find pleasure in breeding discord, who constantly endeavour to
goad their country into making war upon other nations--and why? They think
to advantage their own country to the detriment of all others. They send
armies to harass and destroy the land, in order to become famous in the
world, for the joy of conquest. That it may be said: 'Such a country has
defeated another, and brought it under the yoke of their stronger, more
superior rule'. This victory, bought at the price of much bloodshed, is
not lasting! The conqueror shall one day be conquered; and the vanquished
ones victorious! Remember the history of the past: did not France conquer
Germany more than once--then did not the German nation overcome France?

We learn also that France conquered England; then was the English nation
victorious over France!

These glorious conquests are so ephemeral! Why attach so great importance
to them and to their fame, as to be willing to shed the blood of the
people for their attainment? Is any victory worth the inevitable train of
evils consequent upon human slaughter, the grief and sorrow and ruin which
must overwhelm so many homes of both nations? For it is not possible that
one country alone should suffer.

Oh! why will man, the disobedient child of God, who should be an example
of the power of the spiritual law, turn his face away from the Divine
Teaching and put all his effort into destruction and war?

My hope is that in this enlightened century the Divine Light of love will
shed its radiance over the whole world, seeking out the responsive heart's
intelligence of every human being; that the light of the Sun of Truth will
lead politicians to shake off all the claims of prejudice and
superstition, and with freed minds to follow the Policy of God: for Divine
Politics are mighty, man's politics are feeble! God has created all the
world, and bestows His Divine Bounty upon every creature.

Are we not the servants of God? Shall we neglect to follow our Master's
Example, and ignore His Commands?

I pray that the Kingdom shall come on Earth, and that all darkness shall
be driven away by the effulgence of the Heavenly Sun.




THE SIXTH PRINCIPLE--MEANS OF EXISTENCE


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris

One of the most important principles of the Teaching of Baha'u'llah is:

The right of every human being to the daily bread whereby they exist, or
the equalization of the means of livelihood.

The arrangements of the circumstances of the people must be such that
poverty shall disappear, that everyone, as far as possible, according to
his rank and position, shall share in comfort and well-being.

We see amongst us men who are overburdened with riches on the one hand,
and on the other those unfortunate ones who starve with nothing; those who
possess several stately palaces, and those who have not where to lay their
head. Some we find with numerous courses of costly and dainty food; whilst
others can scarce find sufficient crusts to keep them alive. Whilst some
are clothed in velvets, furs and fine linen, others have insufficient,
poor and thin garments with which to protect them from the cold.

This condition of affairs is wrong, and must be remedied. Now the remedy
must be carefully undertaken. It cannot be done by bringing to pass
absolute equality between men.

Equality is a chimera! It is entirely impracticable! Even if equality
could be achieved it could not continue--and if its existence were
possible, the whole order of the world would be destroyed. The law of
order must always obtain in the world of humanity. Heaven has so decreed
in the creation of man.

Some are full of intelligence, others have an ordinary amount of it, and
others again are devoid of intellect. In these three classes of men there
is order but not equality. How could it be possible that wisdom and
stupidity should be equal? Humanity, like a great army, requires a
general, captains, under-officers in their degree, and soldiers, each with
their own appointed duties. Degrees are absolutely necessary to ensure an
orderly organization. An army could not be composed of generals alone, or
of captains only, or of nothing but soldiers without one in authority. The
certain result of such a plan would be that disorder and demoralization
would overtake the whole army.

King Lycurgus, the philosopher, made a great plan to equalize the subjects
of Sparta; with self-sacrifice and wisdom was the experiment begun. Then
the king called the people of his kingdom, and made them swear a great
oath to maintain the same order of government if he should leave the
country, also that nothing should make them alter it until his return.
Having secured this oath, he left his kingdom of Sparta and never
returned. Lycurgus abandoned the situation, renouncing his high position,
thinking to achieve the permanent good of his country by the equalization
of the property and of the conditions of life in his kingdom. All the
self-sacrifice of the king was in vain. The great experiment failed. After
a time all was destroyed; his carefully thought-out constitution came to
an end.

The futility of attempting such a scheme was shown and the impossibility
of attaining equal conditions of existence was proclaimed in the ancient
kingdom of Sparta. In our day any such attempt would be equally doomed to
failure.

Certainly, some being enormously rich and others lamentably poor, an
organization is necessary to control and improve this state of affairs. It
is important to limit riches, as it is also of importance to limit
poverty. Either extreme is not good. To be seated in the mean(13) is most
desirable. If it be right for a capitalist to possess a large fortune, it
is equally just that his workman should have a sufficient means of
existence.

A financier with colossal wealth should not exist whilst near him is a
poor man in dire necessity. When we see poverty allowed to reach a
condition of starvation it is a sure sign that somewhere we shall find
tyranny. Men must bestir themselves in this matter, and no longer delay in
altering conditions which bring the misery of grinding poverty to a very
large number of the people. The rich must give of their abundance, they
must soften their hearts and cultivate a compassionate intelligence,
taking thought for those sad ones who are suffering from lack of the very
necessities of life.

There must be special laws made, dealing with these extremes of riches and
of want. The members of the Government should consider the laws of God
when they are framing plans for the ruling of the people. The general
rights of mankind must be guarded and preserved.

The government of the countries should conform to the Divine Law which
gives equal justice to all. This is the only way in which the deplorable
superfluity of great wealth and miserable, demoralizing, degrading poverty
can be abolished. Not until this is done will the Law of God be obeyed.




SEVENTH PRINCIPLE--EQUALITY OF MEN


'The Laws of God are not imposition of will, or of power, or pleasure, but
the resolutions of truth, reason and justice.'

All men are equal before the law, which must reign absolutely.

The object of punishment is not vengeance, but the prevention of crime.

Kings must rule with wisdom and justice; prince, peer and peasant alike
have equal rights to just treatment, there must be no favour shown to
individuals. A judge must be no 'respecter of persons', but administer the
law with strict impartiality in every case brought before him.

If a person commit a crime against you, you have not the right to forgive
him; but the law must punish him in order to prevent a repetition of that
same crime by others, as the pain of the individual is unimportant beside
the general welfare of the people.

When perfect justice reigns in every country of the Eastern and Western
World, then will the earth become a place of beauty. The dignity and
equality of every servant of God will be acknowledged; the ideal of the
solidarity of the human race, the true brotherhood of man, will be
realized; and the glorious light of the Sun of Truth will illumine the
souls of all men.




THE EIGHTH PRINCIPLE--UNIVERSAL PEACE


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris

A Supreme Tribunal shall be established by the peoples and Governments of
every nation, composed of members elected from each country and
Government. The members of this Great Council shall assemble in unity. All
disputes of an international character shall be submitted to this Court,
its work being to arrange by arbitration everything which otherwise would
be a cause of war. The mission of this Tribunal would be to prevent war.

One of the great steps towards universal peace would be the establishment
of a universal language. Baha'u'llah commands that the servants of
humanity should meet together, and either choose a language which now
exists, or form a new one. This was revealed in the Kitab-i-Aqdas forty
years ago. It is there pointed out that the question of diversity of
tongues is a very difficult one. There are more than eight hundred
languages in the world, and no person could acquire them all.

The races of mankind are not isolated as in former days. Now, in order to
be in close relationship with all countries it is necessary to be able to
speak their tongues.

A universal language would make intercourse possible with every nation.
Thus it would be needful to know two languages only, the mother tongue and
the universal speech. The latter would enable a man to communicate with
any and every man in the world!

A third language would not be needed. To be able to talk with a member of
any race and country without requiring an interpreter, how helpful and
restful to all!

Esperanto has been drawn up with this end in view: it is a fine invention
and a splendid piece of work, but it needs perfecting. Esperanto as it
stands is very difficult for some people.

An international Congress should be formed, consisting of delegates from
every nation in the world, Eastern as well as Western. This Congress
should form a language that could be acquired by all, and every country
would thereby reap great benefit.

Until such a language is in use, the world will continue to feel the vast
need of this means of intercourse. Difference of speech is one of the most
fruitful causes of dislike and distrust that exists between nations, which
are kept apart by their inability to understand each other's language more
than by any other reason.

If everybody could speak one language, how much more easy would it be to
serve humanity!

Therefore appreciate 'Esperanto', for it is the beginning of the carrying
out of one of the most important of the Laws of Baha'u'llah, and it must
continue to be improved and perfected.




NINTH PRINCIPLE--THE NON-INTERFERENCE OF RELIGION WITH POLITICS


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris,
November 17th

In the conduct of life, man is actuated by two main motives: 'The Hope for
Reward' and 'The Fear of Punishment'.

This hope and this fear must consequently be greatly taken into account by
those in authority who have important posts under Government. Their
business in life is to consult together for the framing of laws, and to
provide for their just administration.

The tent of the order of the world is raised and established on the two
pillars of 'Reward and Retribution'.

In despotic Governments carried on by men without Divine faith, where no
fear of spiritual retribution exists, the execution of the laws is
tyrannical and unjust.

There is no greater prevention of oppression than these two sentiments,
hope and fear. They have both political and spiritual consequences.

If administrators of the law would take into consideration the spiritual
consequences of their decisions, and follow the guidance of religion,
'They would be Divine agents in the world of action, the representatives
of God for those who are on earth, and they would defend, for the love of
God, the interests of His servants as they would defend their own'. If a
governor realizes his responsibility, and fears to defy the Divine Law,
his judgments will be just. Above all, if he believes that the
consequences of his actions will follow him beyond his earthly life, and
that 'as he sows so must he reap', such a man will surely avoid injustice
and tyranny.

Should an official, on the contrary, think that all responsibility for his
actions must end with his earthly life, knowing and believing nothing of
Divine favours and a spiritual kingdom of joy, he will lack the incentive
to just dealing, and the inspiration to destroy oppression and
unrighteousness.

When a ruler knows that his judgments will be weighed in a balance by the
Divine Judge, and that if he be not found wanting he will come into the
Celestial Kingdom and that the light of the Heavenly Bounty will shine
upon him, then will he surely act with justice and equity. Behold how
important it is that Ministers of State should be enlightened by religion!

With political questions the clergy, however, have nothing to do!
Religious matters should not be confused with politics in the present
state of the world (for their interests are not identical).

Religion concerns matters of the heart, of the spirit, and of morals.

Politics are occupied with the material things of life. Religious teachers
should not invade the realm of politics; they should concern themselves
with the spiritual education of the people; they should ever give good
counsel to men, trying to serve God and human kind; they should endeavour
to awaken spiritual aspiration, and strive to enlarge the understanding
and knowledge of humanity, to improve morals, and to increase the love for
justice.

This is in accordance with the Teaching of Baha'u'llah. In the Gospel also
it is written, 'Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto
God the things which are God's'.

In Persia there are some amongst the important Ministers of State who are
religious, who are exemplary, who worship God, and who fear to disobey His
Laws, who judge justly and rule their people with Equity. Other Governors
there are in this land who have no fear of God before their eyes, who
think not of the consequences of their actions, working for their own
desires, and these have brought Persia into great trouble and difficulty.

Oh, friends of God, be living examples of justice! So that by the Mercy of
God, the world may see in your actions that you manifest the attributes of
justice and mercy.

Justice is not limited, it is a universal quality. Its operation must be
carried out in all classes, from the highest to the lowest. Justice must
be sacred, and the rights of all the people must be considered. Desire for
others only that which you desire for yourselves. Then shall we rejoice in
the Sun of Justice, which shines from the Horizon of God.

Each man has been placed in a post of honour, which he must not desert. A
humble workman who commits an injustice is as much to blame as a renowned
tyrant. Thus we all have our choice between justice and injustice.

I hope that each one of you will become just, and direct your thoughts
towards the unity of mankind; that you will never harm your neighbours nor
speak ill of any one; that you will respect the rights of all men, and be
more concerned for the interests of others than for your own. Thus will
you become torches of Divine justice, acting in accordance with the
Teaching of Baha'u'llah, who, during His life, bore innumerable trials and
persecutions in order to show forth to the world of mankind the virtues of
the World of Divinity, making it possible for you to realize the supremacy
of the spirit, and to rejoice in the Justice of God.

By His Mercy, the Divine Bounty will be showered upon you, and for this I
pray!




THE TENTH PRINCIPLE--EQUALITY OF SEX


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris,
November 14th

The Tenth Principle of the teaching of Baha'u'llah is the equality of the
sexes.

God has created all creatures in couples. Man, beast, or vegetable, all
the things of these three kingdoms are of two sexes, and there is absolute
equality between them.

In the vegetable world there are male plants and female plants; they have
equal rights, and possess an equal share of the beauty of their species;
though indeed the tree that bears fruit might be said to be superior to
that which is unfruitful.

In the animal kingdom we see that the male and the female have equal
rights; and that they each share the advantages of their kind.

Now in the two lower kingdoms of nature we have seen that there is no
question of the superiority of one sex over the other. In the world of
humanity we find a great difference; the female sex is treated as though
inferior, and is not allowed equal rights and privileges. This condition
is due not to nature, but to education. In the Divine Creation there is no
such distinction. Neither sex is superior to the other in the sight of
God. Why then should one sex assert the inferiority of the other,
withholding just rights and privileges as though God had given His
authority for such a course of action? If women received the same
educational advantages as those of men, the result would demonstrate the
equality of capacity of both for scholarship.

In some respects woman is superior to man. She is more tender-hearted,
more receptive, her intuition is more intense.

It is not to be denied that in various directions woman at present is more
backward than man, also that this temporary inferiority is due to the lack
of educational opportunity. In the necessity of life, woman is more
instinct with power than man, for to her he owes his very existence.

If the mother is educated then her children will be well taught. When the
mother is wise, then will the children be led into the path of wisdom. If
the mother be religious she will show her children how they should love
God. If the mother is moral she guides her little ones into the ways of
uprightness.

It is clear therefore that the future generation depends on the mothers of
today. Is not this a vital responsibility for the woman? Does she not
require every possible advantage to equip her for such a task?

Therefore, surely, God is not pleased that so important an instrument as
woman should suffer from want of training in order to attain the
perfections desirable and necessary for her great life's work! Divine
Justice demands that the rights of both sexes should be equally respected
since neither is superior to the other in the eyes of Heaven. Dignity
before God depends, not on sex, but on purity and luminosity of heart.
Human virtues belong equally to all!

Woman must endeavour then to attain greater perfection, to be man's equal
in every respect, to make progress in all in which she has been backward,
so that man will be compelled to acknowledge her equality of capacity and
attainment.

In Europe women have made greater progress than in the East, but there is
still much to be done! When students have arrived at the end of their
school term an examination takes place, and the result thereof determines
the knowledge and capacity of each student. So will it be with woman; her
actions will show her power, there will no longer be any need to proclaim
it by words.

It is my hope that women of the East, as well as their Western sisters,
will progress rapidly until humanity shall reach perfection.

God's Bounty is for all and gives power for all progress. When men own the
equality of women there will be no need for them to struggle for their
rights! One of the principles then of Baha'u'llah is the equality of sex.

Women must make the greatest effort to acquire spiritual power and to
increase in the virtue of wisdom and holiness until their enlightenment
and striving succeeds in bringing about the unity of mankind. They must
work with a burning enthusiasm to spread the Teaching of Baha'u'llah among
the peoples, so that the radiant light of the Divine Bounty may envelop
the souls of all the nations of the world!




THE ELEVENTH PRINCIPLE--THE POWER OF THE HOLY SPIRIT


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris,
November 18th

In the teaching of Baha'u'llah, it is written: 'By the Power of the Holy
Spirit alone is man able to progress, for the power of man is limited and
the Divine Power is boundless.' The reading of history brings us to the
conclusion that all truly great men, the benefactors of the human race,
those who have moved men to love the right and hate the wrong and who have
caused real progress, all these have been inspired by the force of the
Holy Spirit.

The Prophets of God have not all graduated in the schools of learned
philosophy; indeed they were often men of humble birth, to all appearance
ignorant, unknown men of no importance in the eyes of the world; sometimes
even lacking the knowledge of reading and writing.

That which raised these great ones above men, and by which they were able
to become Teachers of the truth, was the power of the Holy Spirit. Their
influence on humanity, by virtue of this mighty inspiration, was great and
penetrating.

The influence of the wisest philosophers, without this Spirit Divine, has
been comparatively unimportant, however extensive their learning and deep
their scholarship.

The unusual intellects, for instance, of Plato, Aristotle, Pliny and
Socrates, have not influenced men so greatly that they have been anxious
to sacrifice their lives for their teachings; whilst some of those simple
men so moved humanity that thousands of men have become willing martyrs to
uphold their words; for these words were inspired by the Divine Spirit of
God! The prophets of Judah and Israel, Elijah, Jeremiah, Isaiah and
Ezekiel, were humble men, as were also the apostles of Jesus Christ.

Peter, the chief of the apostles, used to divide the proceeds of his
fishing into seven parts, and when, having taken one part for each day's
use, he arrived at the seventh portion, he knew it was the Sabbath day.
Consider this! and then think of his future position; to what glory he
attained because the Holy Spirit wrought great works through him.

We understand that the Holy Spirit is the energizing factor in the life of
man. Whosoever receives this power is able to influence all with whom he
comes into contact.

The greatest philosophers without this Spirit are powerless, their souls
lifeless, their hearts dead! Unless the Holy Spirit breathes into their
souls, they can do no good work. No system of philosophy has ever been
able to change the manners and customs of a people for the better. Learned
philosophers, unenlightened by the Divine Spirit, have often been men of
inferior morality; they have not proclaimed in their actions the reality
of their beautiful phrases.

The difference between spiritual philosophers and others is shown by their
lives. The Spiritual Teacher shows His belief in His own teaching, by
Himself being what He recommends to others.

An humble man without learning, but filled with the Holy Spirit, is more
powerful than the most nobly-born profound scholar without that
inspiration. He who is educated by the Divine Spirit can, in his time,
lead others to receive the same Spirit.

I pray for you that you may be informed by the life of the Divine Spirit,
so that you may be the means of educating others. The life and morals of a
spiritual man are, in themselves, an education to those who know him.

Think not of your own limitations, dwell only on the welfare of the
Kingdom of Glory. Consider the influence of Jesus Christ on His apostles,
then think of their effect upon the world. These simple men were enabled
by the power of the Holy Spirit to spread the glad tidings!

So may you all receive Divine assistance! No capacity is limited when led
by the Spirit of God!

The earth of itself has no properties of life, it is barren and dry, until
fertilized by the sun and the rain; still the earth need not bewail its
own limitations.

May you be given life! May the rain of the Divine Mercy and the warmth of
the Sun of Truth make your gardens fruitful, so that many beautiful
flowers of exquisite fragrance and love may blossom in abundance. Turn
your faces away from the contemplation of your own finite selves and fix
your eyes upon the Everlasting Radiance; then will your souls receive in
full measure the Divine Power of the Spirit and the Blessings of the
Infinite Bounty.

If you thus keep yourselves in readiness, you will become to the world of
humanity a burning flame, a star of guidance, and a fruitful tree,
changing all its darkness and woe into light and joy by the shining of the
Sun of Mercy and the infinite blessings of the Glad Tidings.

This is the meaning of the power of the Holy Spirit, which I pray may be
bountifully showered upon you.




4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris, November 28th


4 Avenue de Camoeens, Paris,
November 28th

In these gatherings where we have met and spoken together you have all
become acquainted with the principles of this dispensation, and with the
reality of facts. Unto you it has been given to know these things, but
there are many still unenlightened and submerged in superstition. They
have heard but little of this great and glorious Cause, and the knowledge
they have is for the most part based only on hearsay. Alas, poor souls,
the knowledge they have is not based on truth, the foundation of their
belief is not the teaching of Baha'u'llah! There is, assuredly, a certain
amount of truth in what they have been told, but for the most part their
information has been inaccurate.

The true principles of the blessed Cause of God are the eleven rules which
I have given you, and I have carefully explained these, one by one.

You must endeavour always to live and act in direct obedience to the
teachings and laws of Baha'u'llah, so that every individual may see in all
the acts of your life that in word and in deed you are followers of the
Blessed Perfection.

Exert yourselves so that this glorious teaching may encircle the globe,
and that spirituality may be infused into the hearts of men.

The breath of the Holy Spirit shall confirm you, and although many will
arise against you, they shall not prevail!

When the Lord Christ was crowned with thorns, He knew that all the diadems
of the world were at His feet. All earthly crowns, however brilliant,
powerful and resplendent, bowed in adoration before the crown of thorns!
It was from this sure and certain knowledge He spoke, when He said: 'All
power is given unto Me, in Heaven and in earth'.(14)

Now I say unto you, bear this on your hearts and in your minds. Verily
your light shall illumine the whole world, your spirituality shall affect
the heart of things. You shall in truth become the lighted torches of the
globe. Fear not, neither be dismayed, for your light shall penetrate the
densest darkness. This is the Promise of God, which I give unto you. Rise!
and serve the Power of God!




THE LAST MEETING


15 Rue Greuze, Paris,
December 1st

When I arrived in Paris some time ago for the first time, I looked around
me with much interest, and in my mind I likened this beautiful city to a
large garden.

With loving care and much thought I examined the soil, and found it to be
very good and full of possibility for steadfast faith and firm belief, for
a seed of God's love has been cast into the ground.

Clouds of Heavenly Mercy showered their rain upon it, and the Sun of Truth
fell warmly upon the young seeds, and today one can see in your midst the
birth of belief. The seed cast into the ground has begun to spring up, and
day by day you will see it grow. The bounties of the Kingdom of
Baha'u'llah shall indeed bring forth a wondrous harvest!

Behold! I bring you glad and joyful tidings! Paris will become a garden of
roses! All kinds of beautiful flowers will spring up and flourish in this
garden, and the fame of their fragrance and beauty will be spread in all
lands. When I think of Paris in the future, I seem to see her bathed in
the light of the Holy Spirit! Verily, the day is dawning when Paris will
receive her illumination, and the Goodness and Mercy of God will be
visible to every living creature.

Do not allow your minds to dwell on the present, but with eyes of faith
look into the future, for in truth the Spirit of God is working in your
midst.

Since my arrival a few weeks ago, I can see the growth of spirituality. At
the beginning only a few souls came to me for Light, but during my short
sojourn among you the numbers have increased and doubled. This is a
promise for the future!

When Christ was crucified and left this world, He had only eleven
disciples and a very few followers; but as He served the Cause of truth,
look today at the result of His life's work! He has illumined the world,
and given life to dead humanity. After His ascension little by little His
Cause grew, the souls of His followers became more and more luminous, and
the exquisite perfume of their saintly lives spread on all sides.

Now today, thank God, a similar condition has begun in Paris. There are
many souls who have turned to the Kingdom of God, and who are attracted to
unity, love and truth.

Try so to work that the goodness and mercy of Abha may enfold the whole of
Paris. The Breath of the Holy Spirit will help you, the Celestial Light of
the Kingdom will shine in your hearts, and the blessed angels of God from
Heaven will bring you strength and will succour you. Then thank God with
all your hearts that you have attained to this supreme benefit. A great
part of the world is plunged in sleep, but you have been awakened. Many
are blind, but you see!

The call of the Kingdom is heard in your midst. Glory be to God, you have
been born again, you have been baptized by the fire of the Love of God;
you have been plunged in the Sea of Life and regenerated by the Spirit of
Love!

Having received such favour be thankful unto God, and never doubt His
Goodness and Loving Kindness but have undying faith in the Bounties of the
Kingdom. Consort together in brotherly love, be ready to lay down your
lives one for the other, and not only for those who are dear to you, but
for all humanity. Look upon the whole human race as members of one family,
all children of God; and, in so doing, you will see no difference between
them.

Humanity may be likened to a tree. This tree has branches, leaves, buds
and fruit. Think of all men as being flowers, leaves or buds of this tree,
and try to help each and all to realize and enjoy God's blessings. God
neglects none: He loves all.

The only real difference that exists between people is that they are at
various stages of development. Some are imperfect--these must be brought to
perfection. Some are asleep--they must be awakened; some are negligent--they
must be roused; but one and all are the children of God. Love them all
with your whole heart; no one is a stranger to the other, all are friends.
Tonight I come to say farewell to you--but bear this in your minds, that
although our bodies may be far apart, in spirit we shall always be
together.

I bear you one and all in my heart, and will forget none of you--and I hope
that none of you will forget me.

I in the East, and you in the West, let us try with heart and soul that
unity may dwell in the world, that all the peoples may become one people,
and that the whole surface of the earth may be like one country--for the
Sun of Truth shines on all alike.

All the Prophets of God came for love of this one great aim.

Look how Abraham strove to bring faith and love among the people; how
Moses tried to unite the people by sound laws; how the Lord Christ
suffered unto death to bring the light of love and truth into a darkened
world; how Muhammad sought to bring unity and peace between the various
uncivilized tribes among whom he dwelt. And last of all, Baha'u'llah has
suffered forty years for the same cause--the single noble purpose of
spreading love among the children of men--and for the peace and unity of
the world the Bab gave up his life.

Thus, strive to follow the example of these Divine Beings, drink from
Their fountain, be illumined by Their Light, and to the world be as
symbols of the Mercy and Love of God. Be unto the world as rain and clouds
of mercy, as suns of truth; be a celestial army, and you shall indeed
conquer the city of hearts.

Be thankful unto God that Baha'u'llah has given us a firm and solid
foundation. He left no place for sadness in hearts, and the writings of
His sacred pen contain consolation for the whole world. He had the words
of truth, and anything that is contrary to His teaching is false. The
chief aim of all His work was to do away with division.

The testament of Baha'u'llah is a Rain of Goodness, a Sun of Truth, Water
of Life, the Holy Spirit. Thus open your hearts to receive the full power
of His Beauty, and I will pray for you all that this joy may be yours.

Now I say 'Good-bye'.

This I say only to your outer selves; I do not say it to your souls, for
our souls are always together.

Be comforted, and rest assured that day and night I shall turn to the
Kingdom of Abha in supplication for you, that day by day you may grow
better and holier, nearer to God, and more and more illumined by the
radiance of His Love.




ADDRESS BY 'ABDU'L-BAHA AT THE FRIENDS' MEETING HOUSE, ST MARTIN'S LANE,
LONDON, W.C.


Sunday, January 12th, 1913

About one thousand years ago a society was formed in Persia called the
Society of the Friends, who gathered together for silent communion with
the Almighty.

They divided Divine philosophy into two parts: one kind is that of which
the knowledge can be acquired through lectures and study in schools and
colleges. The second kind of philosophy was that of the Illuminati, or
followers of the inner light. The schools of this philosophy were held in
silence. Meditating, and turning their faces to the Source of Light, from
that central Light the mysteries of the Kingdom were reflected in the
hearts of these people. All the Divine problems were solved by this power
of illumination.

This Society of Friends increased greatly in Persia, and up to the present
time their societies exist. Many books and epistles were written by their
leaders. When they assemble in their meeting-house they sit silently and
contemplate; their leader opens with a certain proposition, and says to
the assembly 'You must meditate on this problem'. Then, freeing their
minds from everything else, they sit and reflect, and before long the
answer is revealed to them. Many abstruse divine questions are solved by
this illumination.

Some of the great questions unfolding from the rays of the Sun of Reality
upon the mind of man are: the problem of the reality of the spirit of man;
of the birth of the spirit; of its birth from this world into the world of
God; the question of the inner life of the spirit and of its fate after
its ascension from the body.

They also meditate upon the scientific questions of the day, and these are
likewise solved.

These people, who are called 'Followers of the inner light', attain to a
superlative degree of power, and are entirely freed from blind dogmas and
imitations. Men rely on the statements of these people: by
themselves--within themselves--they solve all mysteries.

If they find a solution with the assistance of the inner light, they
accept it, and afterwards they declare it: otherwise they would consider
it a matter of blind imitation. They go so far as to reflect upon the
essential nature of the Divinity, of the Divine revelation, of the
manifestation of the Deity in this world. All the divine and scientific
questions are solved by them through the power of the spirit.

Baha'u'llah says there is a sign (from God) in every phenomenon: the sign
of the intellect is contemplation and the sign of contemplation is
silence, because it is impossible for a man to do two things at one
time--he cannot both speak and meditate.

It is an axiomatic fact that while you meditate you are speaking with your
own spirit. In that state of mind you put certain questions to your spirit
and the spirit answers: the light breaks forth and the reality is
revealed.

You cannot apply the name 'man' to any being void of this faculty of
meditation; without it he would be a mere animal, lower than the beasts.

Through the faculty of meditation man attains to eternal life; through it
he receives the breath of the Holy Spirit--the bestowal of the Spirit is
given in reflection and meditation.

The spirit of man is itself informed and strengthened during meditation;
through it affairs of which man knew nothing are unfolded before his view.
Through it he receives Divine inspiration, through it he receives heavenly
food.

Meditation is the key for opening the doors of mysteries. In that state
man abstracts himself: in that state man withdraws himself from all
outside objects; in that subjective mood he is immersed in the ocean of
spiritual life and can unfold the secrets of things-in-themselves. To
illustrate this, think of man as endowed with two kinds of sight; when the
power of insight is being used the outward power of vision does not see.

This faculty of meditation frees man from the animal nature, discerns the
reality of things, puts man in touch with God.

This faculty brings forth from the invisible plane the sciences and arts.
Through the meditative faculty inventions are made possible, colossal
undertakings are carried out; through it governments can run smoothly.
Through this faculty man enters into the very Kingdom of God.

Nevertheless some thoughts are useless to man; they are like waves moving
in the sea without result. But if the faculty of meditation is bathed in
the inner light and characterized with divine attributes, the results will
be confirmed.

The meditative faculty is akin to the mirror; if you put it before earthly
objects it will reflect them. Therefore if the spirit of man is
contemplating earthly subjects he will be informed of these.

But if you turn the mirror of your spirits heavenwards, the heavenly
constellations and the rays of the Sun of Reality will be reflected in
your hearts, and the virtues of the Kingdom will be obtained.

Therefore let us keep this faculty rightly directed--turning it to the
heavenly Sun and not to earthly objects--so that we may discover the
secrets of the Kingdom, and comprehend the allegories of the Bible and the
mysteries of the spirit.

May we indeed become mirrors reflecting the heavenly realities, and may we
become so pure as to reflect the stars of heaven.




PRAYER


97 Cadogan Gardens, London,
December 26th, 1912

'Should Prayer take the form of action?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'Yes: In the Baha'i Cause arts, sciences and all crafts are
(counted as) worship. The man who makes a piece of notepaper to the best
of his ability, conscientiously, concentrating all his forces on
perfecting it, is giving praise to God. Briefly, all effort and exertion
put forth by man from the fullness of his heart is worship, if it is
prompted by the highest motives and the will to do service to humanity.
This is worship: to serve mankind and to minister to the needs of the
people. Service is prayer. A physician ministering to the sick, gently,
tenderly, free from prejudice and believing in the solidarity of the human
race, he is giving praise'.

'What is the purpose of our lives?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'To acquire virtues. We come from the earth; why were we
transferred from the mineral to the vegetable kingdom--from the plant to
the animal kingdom? So that we may attain perfection in each of these
kingdoms, that we may possess the best qualities of the mineral, that we
may acquire the power of growing as in the plant, that we may be adorned
with the instincts of the animal and possess the faculties of sight,
hearing, smell, touch and taste, until from the animal kingdom we step
into the world of humanity and are gifted with reason, the power of
invention, and the forces of the spirit.'




EVIL


'What is evil?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'Evil is imperfection. Sin is the state of man in the world
of the baser nature, for in nature exist defects such as injustice,
tyranny, hatred, hostility, strife: these are characteristics of the lower
plane of nature. These are the sins of the world, the fruits of the tree
from which Adam did eat. Through education we must free ourselves from
these imperfections. The Prophets of God have been sent, the Holy Books
have been written, so that man may be made free. Just as he is born into
this world of imperfection from the womb of his earthly mother, so is he
born into the world of spirit through divine education. When a man is born
into the world of phenomena he finds the universe; when he is born from
this world to the world of the spirit, he finds the Kingdom.'




THE PROGRESS OF THE SOUL


'Does the soul progress more through sorrow or through the joy in this
world?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'The mind and spirit of man advance when he is tried by
suffering. The more the ground is ploughed the better the seed will grow,
the better the harvest will be. Just as the plough furrows the earth
deeply, purifying it of weeds and thistles, so suffering and tribulation
free man from the petty affairs of this worldly life until he arrives at a
state of complete detachment. His attitude in this world will be that of
divine happiness. Man is, so to speak, unripe: the heat of the fire of
suffering will mature him. Look back to the times past and you will find
that the greatest men have suffered most.'

'He who through suffering has attained development, should he fear
happiness?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'Through suffering he will attain to an eternal happiness
which nothing can take from him. The apostles of Christ suffered: they
attained eternal happiness.'

'Then it is impossible to attain happiness without suffering?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'To attain eternal happiness one must suffer. He who has
reached the state of self-sacrifice has true joy. Temporal joy will
vanish.'

'Can a departed soul converse with someone still on earth?'

'Abdu'l-Baha.--'A conversation can be held, but not as our conversation.
There is no doubt that the forces of the higher worlds interplay with the
forces of this plane. The heart of man is open to inspiration; this is
spiritual communication. As in a dream one talks with a friend while the
mouth is silent, so is it in the conversation of the spirit. A man may
converse with the ego within him saying: "May I do this? Would it be
advisable for me to do this work?" Such as this is conversation with the
higher self.'




THE FOUR KINDS OF LOVE


97 Cadogan Gardens, London,
Saturday, January 4th, 1913

What a power is love! It is the most wonderful, the greatest of all living
powers.

Love gives life to the lifeless. Love lights a flame in the heart that is
cold. Love brings hope to the hopeless and gladdens the hearts of the
sorrowful.

In the world of existence there is indeed no greater power than the power
of love. When the heart of man is aglow with the flame of love, he is
ready to sacrifice all--even his life. In the Gospel it is said God is
love.

There are four kinds of love. The first is the love that flows from God to
man; it consists of the inexhaustible graces, the Divine effulgence and
heavenly illumination. Through this love the world of being receives life.
Through this love man is endowed with physical existence, until, through
the breath of the Holy Spirit--this same love--he receives eternal life and
becomes the image of the Living God. This love is the origin of all the
love in the world of creation.

The second is the love that flows from man to God. This is faith,
attraction to the Divine, enkindlement, progress, entrance into the
Kingdom of God, receiving the Bounties of God, illumination with the
lights of the Kingdom. This love is the origin of all philanthropy; this
love causes the hearts of men to reflect the rays of the Sun of Reality.

The third is the love of God towards the Self or Identity of God. This is
the transfiguration of His Beauty, the reflection of Himself in the mirror
of His Creation. This is the reality of love, the Ancient Love, the
Eternal Love. Through one ray of this Love all other love exists.

The fourth is the love of man for man. The love which exists between the
hearts of believers is prompted by the ideal of the unity of spirits. This
love is attained through the knowledge of God, so that men see the Divine
Love reflected in the heart. Each sees in the other the Beauty of God
reflected in the soul, and finding this point of similarity, they are
attracted to one another in love. This love will make all men the waves of
one sea, this love will make them all the stars of one heaven and the
fruits of one tree. This love will bring the realization of true accord,
the foundation of real unity.

But the love which sometimes exists between friends is not (true) love,
because it is subject to transmutation; this is merely fascination. As the
breeze blows, the slender trees yield. If the wind is in the East the tree
leans to the West, and if the wind turns to the West the tree leans to the
East. This kind of love is originated by the accidental conditions of
life. This is not love, it is merely acquaintanceship; it is subject to
change.

Today you will see two souls apparently in close friendship; tomorrow all
this may be changed. Yesterday they were ready to die for one another,
today they shun one another's society! This is not love; it is the
yielding of the hearts to the accidents of life. When that which has
caused this 'love' to exist passes, the love passes also; this is not in
reality love.

Love is only of the four kinds that I have explained. (a) The love of God
towards the identity of God. Christ has said God is Love. (b) The love of
God for His children--for His servants. (c) The love of man for God and (d)
the love of man for man. These four kinds of love originate from God.
These are rays from the Sun of Reality; these are the Breathings of the
Holy Spirit; these are the Signs of the Reality.




TABLET REVEALED BY 'ABDU'L-BAHA


August 28th, 1913

O Thou my beloved daughter!

Thine eloquent and fluent letter was perused in a garden, under the cool
shade of a tree, while the gentle breeze was wafting. The means of
physical enjoyment was spread before the eyes and thy letter became the
cause of spiritual enjoyment. Truly, I say, it was not a letter but a
rose-garden adorned with hyacinths and flowers.

It contained the sweet fragrance of paradise and the zephyr of Divine Love
blew from its roseate words.

As I have not ample time at my disposal, I will give herein a brief,
conclusive and comprehensive answer. It is as follows:

In this Revelation of Baha'u'llah, the women go neck and neck with the
men. In no movement will they be left behind. Their rights with men are
equal in degree. They will enter all the administrative branches of
politics. They will attain in all such a degree as will be considered the
very highest station of the world of humanity and will take part in all
affairs. Rest ye assured. Do ye not look upon the present conditions; in
the not far distant future the world of women will become all-refulgent
and all-glorious, For His Holiness Baha'u'llah Hath Willed It so! At the
time of elections the right to vote is the inalienable right of women, and
the entrance of women into all human departments is an irrefutable and
incontrovertible question. No soul can retard or prevent it.

But there are certain matters, the participation in which is not worthy of
women. For example, at the time when the community is taking up vigorous
defensive measures against the attack of foes, the women are exempt from
military engagements. It may so happen that at a given time warlike and
savage tribes may furiously attack the body politic with the intention of
carrying on a wholesale slaughter of its members; under such a
circumstance defence is necessary, but it is the duty of men to organize
and execute such defensive measures and not the women--because their hearts
are tender and they cannot endure the sight of the horror of carnage, even
if it is for the sake of defence. From such and similar undertakings the
women are exempt.

As regards the constitution of the House of Justice, Baha'u'llah addresses
the men. He says: 'O ye men of the House of Justice!'

But when its members are to be elected, the right which belongs to women,
so far as their voting and their voice is concerned, is indisputable. When
the women attain to the ultimate degree of progress, then, according to
the exigency of the time and place and their great capacity, they shall
obtain extraordinary privileges. Be ye confident on these accounts. His
Holiness Baha'u'llah has greatly strengthened the cause of women, and the
rights and privileges of women is one of the greatest principles of
'Abdu'l-Baha. Rest ye assured! Ere long the days shall come when the men
addressing the women, shall say: 'Blessed are ye! Blessed are ye! Verily
ye are worthy of every gift. Verily ye deserve to adorn your heads with
the crown of everlasting glory, because in sciences and arts, in virtues
and perfections ye shall become equal to man, and as regards tenderness of
heart and the abundance of mercy and sympathy ye are superior'.






FOOTNOTES


    1 St. John xiv, II.

    2 St Matthew xxiv, 30. St Matthew xvi, 27.

    3 St John iii, 13

    4 St John xviii, 11.

    5 Manifestations of God.

    6 Exodus iii, 2.

    7 A certain man who was present when Badi was told he should carry the
      Epistle to the _Sh_ah saw him transfigured; he became radiant.

    8 St John iii, 5.

    9 St Matthew iii, 11.

   10 i.e.--All good actions bring their own reward.

   11 A small orange-tree on the table nearby.

   12 i.e.--Divine Manifestation.

   13 'Give me neither poverty nor riches.'--Prov. xxx., 8.

   14 Matthew xviii, 18.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARIS TALKS***



CREDITS


June 2006

            Converted from Microsoft Word document format to TEI master
            format.
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19284.txt or 19284.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/2/8/19284/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

