XI

THE ORDER OF NATURE


That the world which we inhabit is a _Cosmos_, ruled by law and order,
no one has ever attempted to deny. Only because laws are everywhere
found awaiting discovery, is natural science a possibility. What such
laws really are, we have already considered. They are, as Mr. Lewes puts
it, the paths along which the forces of nature travel to their results;
and it is only because these forces keep invariably each to its proper
path, that we are able to follow them with our minds, either to learn
anything concerning them, or to turn our knowledge to practical account.
In something of the same manner, it is because we are assured that our
railway trains will run on their appointed lines, that we can learn from
Bradshaw how to get to Exeter or to Edinburgh;--but the forces of Nature
are never derailed. It is, in fact, as we have heard, the first
principle of Science, that "the reign of law is universal, the principle
of continuity ubiquitous,"--and upon this the validity of all her
methods and conclusions wholly depends. It is taken for granted, with
absolute confidence, that what is once found to happen will be exactly
repeated in like circumstances,--that the laws experimentally observed,
regarding motion, heat, light, sound, chemical combination, electricity,
magnetism, and the rest, will be faithfully obeyed, in every minutest
particular, as certainly as suns will rise and set, or moons wax and
wane. Were it not so, were the forces of Nature to act spasmodically and
at random, and did not their common action so result as to establish or
subserve other laws of bewildering complexity,--as in molecular
dynamics, the mechanism of the heavens, and the processes of organic
life,--we could learn no more from the study of nature than from a page
of type which had been set up by an idiot, or an anthropoid ape.

Here is another factor in our problem, and one which has from the first
attracted the attention of thinking men. No feature of nature impressed
them more than this same reign of law and order, apparent everywhere;
and on this account they called the world _Cosmos_, instead of _Chaos_.
And, since it is self-evident that everything must have a reason for its
being, that whatever is not self-existent must have a cause other than
itself, they felt compelled to enquire what manner of cause would
account for law and order. The like enquiry we have still to pursue, and
by methods radically the same as ever; for amid all her discoveries
Science has found nothing which does anything whatever to furnish an
answer. All that has been done is enormously to multiply the aspects
under which the problem presents itself.

It is now not merely in the larger and more obvious operations of Nature
that we can trace this marvellous ubiquity of law, but in her most
hidden processes and inmost constitution. At every point, we are forced
to ask why things should be as they actually are, and how they came to
be subject to conditions which they cannot be supposed to have created
for themselves. Why, for example, should the ultimate elements of
matter,--be they atoms, or electrons, or whatever else,--always and
everywhere observe the same rules of the great game in which they serve
as counters? Why, to take a concrete instance, should atoms of Hydrogen
in Sirius, or in a star of the Milky Way, obey just the same laws as do
those with which we make coal-gas or spirit of salt? These various
atoms, as Lord Grimthorpe reminds us, have never been within billions of
miles of one another. What is the mysterious influence which links them
together across the depths of space? That they are so linked is obvious;
for if we can ascertain the existence of such a substance in other
spheres, it is only because the light it emits, exactly agrees when
analyzed in the spectroscope with that of hydrogen flames in our own
laboratories. How comes it, again, that the seventy different kinds of
atoms, (to speak in round numbers)--are distributed--according to
Mendeléeff's periodic law,--among some seven groups or families, the
members of each group resembling one another in various particulars,
wherein they differ from the rest? Or, to pass from atoms to molecules,
(in which atoms of the same or of different kinds combine, to build up
simple or compound substances respectively,)--how is it that molecules
of the same kind are always constructed upon exactly the same model,
resembling one another far more closely than sovereigns struck from the
same die, or different copies of this morning's _Times_? It was in this
uniformity of type, character and behaviour, repeated always and
everywhere, in instances multiplied "beyond the power of imagination to
conceive," that Sir John Herschel[125] saw a feature stamping atoms and
molecules as "manufactured articles, and subordinate agents," which, no
less than a line of spinning-jennies, or a regiment of soldiers clad in
the same uniform, and going through the same evolutions, imply a
controlling force directing things according to a definite system.

These and innumerable other particulars of detail has Science added to
the problem: but of anything which can supply an answer, she knows no
more than did the first man who ever mooted the question within his own
soul.

And if in the inorganic world we find food for such considerations, with
immensely greater instance are they forced upon us by a study of the
organic. Here we enter a new realm of mystery, for the laws we encounter
actively energizing at every point, are altogether different from those
with which hitherto we have had to deal. The matter which enters into
the constitution of living things,--animals or plants--is precisely the
same as that of which the inorganic world is constituted. No single atom
or molecule is found in the one which has not been drawn from the
other;--nor when incorporated in a living structure do atoms or
molecules suffer any alteration, or change their nature in any respect,
for, says Clerk-Maxwell,[126] throughout all changes and catastrophes
these remain "unbroken and unworn." Nevertheless, they fall at once
under the spell of a force which introduces into their operations an
order altogether new, for it somehow strikes across all the laws of dead
matter, setting up a new code of its own, which endures just so long as
life lasts, and is never met with apart from life. And these organic
laws issue in marvellous results. Professor Haeckel himself, after
endeavouring to show that from the inorganic world no arguments can be
drawn to favour the supposition of design in Nature, thus
continues:[127]

     But the idea of design has a very great significance and
     application in the _organic_ world. We do undeniably perceive a
     purpose in the structure and in the life of an organism. The plant
     and animal seem to be controlled by a definite design in the
     combination of their several parts, just as clearly as we see in
     the machines which man invents and constructs; as long as life
     continues, the functions of the several organs are directed to
     definite ends, just as is the operation of the various parts of a
     machine.

How Haeckel proceeds to argue that such appearance of purposive design
is merely fallacious, we need not here stay to enquire; our present
concern is to attempt to realize the evidence of law and order which the
world everywhere exhibits. As we have just heard, the parts of an
organism, like those of a motor-car, or a chronometer, combine their
operations for the production of definite ends; the attainment of which
depends in all instances upon the nicest correspondence of various
details of their work. Thus, that there should be eyes capable of
seeing, the laws of optics must be satisfied, reflection, refraction and
the rest, just as exactly in the making of an eye as in that of a
telescope. _De facto_ they _are_ satisfied. The eye, Mr. Darwin
styles[128] "a living optical instrument as superior to one of glass as
the works of the Creator[129] are to those of man." He speaks, moreover,
of "all its inimitable contrivances for adjusting the focus to different
distances, for admitting different amounts of light, and for the
correction of spherical and chromatic aberration."[130] Therefore,
however we are to account for them, the laws which govern the
production of eyes successfully solve a practical problem and satisfy
laws which were in force before an animal with eyes appeared on earth.

In just the same way, the requirements of sound are met by the
structure of the ear, which Sir Henry Holland, for example,[131] judged
more wonderful than that of the eye itself.

So again as to wings. They are in the first place such marvellous pieces
of workmanship that as Mr. Pettigrew writes concerning one of their
forms.[132] "There are few things in nature more admirably constructed
than the wing of a bird, and perhaps none where design can be more
readily traced." But, moreover, wings entirely different in plan, as of
birds, bats, and all the varieties of insects, alike satisfy the laws of
aerostatics, and successfully solve in practice the problem of flight, a
problem which we are unable to solve even theoretically. "It is
evident," writes Lord Grimthorpe,[133] "that nobody yet thoroughly
understands the whole theory of flying, though we are seeing it
continually, and have unlimited opportunities of examining all sorts of
wings. The explanation that appears plausible for one kind, not only
will not do for another but seems refuted by it." Yet in a multitude of
different ways, the forces of Nature succeed in effecting what with all
our Science we cannot shew to be possible.

And concerning not merely one portion of a creature's structure, but the
whole, Professor Huxley declares:[134]

     The horse is in many ways a remarkable animal; not least so in the
     fact that it presents us with an example of one of the most perfect
     pieces of machinery in the living world. In truth, among the works
     of human ingenuity it cannot be said that there is any locomotive
     so perfectly adapted to its purposes, doing so much work with so
     small a quantity of fuel, as this machine of Nature's
     manufacture--the horse.

These are but a few out of countless similar examples. "We are
constantly discovering," says Lord Grimthorpe, "new complications and
processes, and what to all common sense appear contrivances, in the
organs of all living things, and indeed we can find no limit to them."
In all these cases an instrument is fashioned precisely adapted to the
performance of a certain function, and it is therefore obvious on first
principles that there must exist _some_ power capable of producing such
instruments.

It will probably be answered that there are forces enough in Nature to
account for everything, and that these furnish the needful explanation.
But, as Mr. Croll rightly insists,[135] Force by itself explains
nothing. Its mere exercise has no tendency whatever to produce such
effects. There must likewise be Determination of Force in the one
definite direction required, and it is in the source of this
Determination that the true cause must be sought to which the result is
due. It is not simply because iron is hammered and filed that a
railway-engine is produced; nor is it sufficient that a block of marble
be chipped with mallet and chisel in order to obtain a statue of Apollo.
Unless some influence comes in to direct the forces in such cases to
their respective results, the results will never by any possibility be
secured. And in the processes of Nature such direction or determination
must be exercised in particulars inconceivably intricate, to which the
works of man furnish no parallel. As Mr. Croll writes:

     If a tree is to be formed, the lines of least resistance must all
     be determined and adjusted in relation to the objective idea of the
     tree; of the root; of the branches; of the leaves; of the bud; of
     the fruit; and of every part of the tree. But this is not all: the
     tree is built up molecule by molecule, each of which requires a
     special determination, and, beyond all this, we have the
     structureless protoplasm, which must be differentiated according to
     the objective idea of the whole. What produces this marvellous
     adjustment of means to ends?

And as he insists in another passage:

     The determinations which take place in nature occur not at random,
     but according to a plan--an objective idea. Thus the question is
     not simply what causes a body to take some direction, but what
     causes it to take, among the infinite number of possible
     directions, the proper direction in relation to the idea. In the
     formation of, say, the leaf of a tree, no two molecules move in
     identically the same direction or take identically the same path.
     But each molecule must move in relation to the objective idea of
     the leaf, or no leaf would be formed. The grand question,
     therefore, is, What is it that selects from among the infinite
     number of possible directions the proper one in relation to this
     idea?

And this sort of thing is going on in every blossom and leaf and blade
of grass, in every hair and every feather over the surface of the earth.

Truly does our author find here "The Grand Question," for in it we touch
the very heart of our whole problem, and are forced to consider more
closely than we have hitherto done of what character must be the
ultimate Cause which alone can explain the world.

It is, as we have seen, a first principle of Science, that in enquiries
such as this, we must proceed from experience to inference, from the
known to the unknown. Arguing thus, we may legitimately gather from
observed phenomena, that something exists, which even though it be not
directly within the range of our senses, must certainly be capable of
producing such phenomena: just as the perturbations of one planet have
revealed the existence of another; and the lines in their spectra have
taught us the chemical constitution of the sun and stars.

This principle being borrowed by Science from common-sense, has
instinctively been ever adopted by those who set themselves to enquire
of what kind must be that unseen Power at the back of Nature to which
the fact of law and order may be ascribed. And as there is but one
force or power within the range of our experience capable of producing
such an effect, it is but natural that this should have been constantly
assumed to represent, at least by analogy, the nature of the power
required. That there is but one cause known to us experimentally, which
can determine the operation of force towards the attainment of a
preconditioned result, none will deny--namely the purposive action of an
intelligent will, as known to us in ourselves and in our
fellow-men;--and to Will accordingly, immensely more intelligent than
ours, has been ascribed the establishment of those laws which the
highest intellects of our race are able partially and dimly to
apprehend.

It is thus that we are led to the fundamental doctrine of Theism, to
belief in an intelligent First Cause, according to whose design the
universe has been fashioned; a cause which must have all that is found
in the universe or any part of it, including man, and more--for it has
of itself what all else derives from it--whose purposes necessarily
transcend our mental grasp--but whose modes of thought are reflected in
our own, by which they can in some measure be followed through a study
of their results.

If such a belief, so grounded, be unscientific, as is constantly
assumed, there must be good arguments to the contrary. It should be
demonstrable, either that Science has shown such a line of reasoning to
be unsound, or that she has discovered within her own domain something
which, at least conceivably, can do the work thus attributed to
Intelligence--in which case the much-quoted dictum of Lord Kelvin will
be in point,--that if a probable solution of any problem can be found
which is consistent with the ordinary course of Nature, we must not go
beyond Nature in search of one.

If, on the other hand, the above line of reasoning cannot be
invalidated, and if scientific methods can discover nothing competent to
effect what has undoubtedly been effected, it is not easy to see how it
can be unscientific to proceed by inference to what is confessedly
beyond the scope of observation and experiment.

That "Teleology," or the doctrine of Final Causality,[136] is unworthy
of serious consideration, is without doubt a common assumption, and some
writers seem to think that an argument is sufficiently discredited if it
be styled "teleological." Yet this rather formidable term represents no
more than the belief that the infinite adaptations of means to results
observed in Nature are the effect of purpose, not of chance. And if we
eliminate purpose, what is there left to furnish an explanation, beyond
the indubitable fact that such adaptations have always been found in
organic nature, and that we have learnt confidently to anticipate that
they will appear generation after generation according to the "law of
heredity"? But this obviously only tells us that they have been produced
and are likewise transmitted, and throws no light whatever on the cause
of the marvellous processes to which their production and their
transmission are due. If we have any rational grounds for expecting that
such processes will continue to occur, it cannot be merely that they
have occurred before, but we instinctively infer that the cause to which
they are ultimately due continues to operate. We are thus as far as ever
from an answer to the question, What is that cause?

     It may be urged [says Newman][137] if a thing happens once it must
     happen always; for what is to hinder it? Nay, on the contrary, why,
     because one particle of matter has a certain property, should all
     particles have the same? Why, because particles have instanced the
     property a thousand times, should the thousand and first instance
     it also? It is _prima facie_ unaccountable that an accident should
     happen twice, not to speak of it happening always. If we expect a
     thing to happen twice, it is because we think it is not an
     accident, but has a cause. What has brought about a thing once, may
     bring it about twice. _What_ is to hinder its happening? rather
     what is to make it happen? Here we are thrown back from the
     question of Order to that of Causation. A law is not a cause, but a
     fact; but when we come to the question of cause, then we have no
     experience of any cause but Will.

Here is the crucial point: "We have no experience of any cause but
Will;" and it follows that if, as Science bids us, we base inference on
experience alone, there can be no doubt about the conclusion to which we
shall be led.

       *       *       *       *       *

No different is the verdict of Sir John Herschel:

     The presence of _Mind_ [he writes][138] is what solves the whole
     difficulty: so far, at least, as it brings it within the sphere of
     our consciousness, and into conformity with our own experience of
     what action is.

That the introduction of intelligent purpose, as a factor, sufficiently
meets the requirements of our reason cannot be denied. As Bishop Butler
insists, it is even impossible for any man in his senses to say that the
problem can be more easily solved without it. And witnesses not merely
unfriendly, but positively and even bitterly hostile, are compelled to
admit that on whatever other grounds they may reject Theism, it is not
because this doctrine is inadequate as an explanation of the world we
know.

     It seems to me [says Professor Huxley][139] that "creation," in the
     ordinary sense of the word, is perfectly conceivable. I find no
     difficulty in imagining that, at some former period, this universe
     was not in existence; and that it made its appearance ... in
     consequence of the volition of some pre-existent Being. The
     so-called _à priori_ arguments against Theism, and given a Deity,
     against the possibility of creative acts, appear to me to be devoid
     of reasonable foundation.

Similarly, that uncompromising foe of religious belief in any shape,
Professor W. K. Clifford, replying to Dr. Martineau who based his
argument on the existence of the moral law, as well as the evidence of
design in Nature, wrote thus:[140]

     I fully admit that the theistic hypothesis, so grounded, and
     considered apart from objections elsewhere arising, is a reasonable
     hypothesis and an explanation of the facts. The idea of an external
     conscious being is unavoidably suggested, as it seems to me, by the
     categorical imperative of the moral sense; and moreover in a way
     quite independent, by the aspect of nature, which seems to answer
     to our questionings with an intelligence akin to our own.

On the other hand, where is an alternative hypothesis to be found of
which as much can be said,--which will justify itself to reason, by
accounting for the facts? That no purely materialistic or mechanical
theory will suffice is not only obvious to common-sense, but is
acknowledged by those who would gladly find such a theory sufficient.

     It would be a great delusion [writes Weismann][141] if any one
     were to believe that he had arrived at a comprehension of the
     universe by tracing the phenomena of Nature to mechanical
     principles. He would thereby forget that the assumption of eternal
     matter with its eternal laws by no means satisfies our intellectual
     need for causality.

Similarly, Professor Huxley admits that even his primeval cosmic nebula
with the world potential in its womb, leaves something to desire.

     The more purely a mechanist the speculator is [he writes][142] the
     more firmly does he assume a primordial molecular arrangement of
     which all the phenomena of the universe are the consequences, and
     the more completely is he thereby at the mercy of the teleologist,
     who can always defy him to disprove that this primordial molecular
     arrangement was not[143] intended to evolve the phenomena of the
     universe.

Accordingly, although he was clearly persuaded that Theism is a doctrine
which we can never have sufficient grounds for accepting, Professor
Huxley repudiated the notion that scientific discovery has done anything
to disprove it. Thus he tells us,[144] that, in order to be a
teleologist, and yet accept Evolution, it is only necessary

     to suppose that the original plan was sketched out ... that the
     purpose was foreshadowed in the molecular arrangements out of which
     the animals have come.

And again,[145] he thus expressed himself regarding two objections
commonly brought against Darwinism, namely that it introduces "chance"
as a factor in nature, and that it is atheistic:

     Both assertions are utter bosh. None but parsons believe in
     "chance"; and the philosophical difficulties of Theism now are
     neither greater nor less than they have been ever since Theism was
     invented.

Accordingly, as has already been urged, in regard of this question we
are precisely where men have always been,--dependent upon arguments such
as satisfied philosophers like Cicero, who declared that when we regard
the starry heavens the existence of a Deity of surpassing intelligence
must appear no less obvious than that of the sun in the sky.[146]

That scientific enlightenment is not incompatible with such reasoning,
we have sufficient evidence in the fact that amongst those whose
conclusions are wholly in accord with Cicero's, men are to be found
standing in the very front rank of Science.

Like the Roman orator, Sir Isaac Newton declared that the existence of a
Being endowed with intelligence and wisdom is a necessary inference from
a study of celestial mechanics, and that to treat of God is therefore a
part of Natural Philosophy.[147]

     We assume, as absolutely self-evident [say Professors Stewart and
     Tait][148] the existence of a Deity, who is the Creator and
     Upholder of all things.

     When we contemplate the phenomena of vision, [says Sir G. G.
     Stokes,][149] it seems difficult to understand how we can fail to
     be impressed with the evidence of design thus imparted to us. But
     design is altogether unmeaning without a designing mind. The study
     then of the phenomena of nature leads us to the contemplation of a
     Being from whom proceeded the orderly arrangement of natural things
     that we behold.

Lord Kelvin's recent declaration is even more vigorous.[150]

     I cannot say that with regard to the origin of life Science neither
     affirms nor denies creative power. Science positively affirms
     creating and directive power, which she compels us to accept as an
     article of belief.

Thirty years earlier Clerk-Maxwell in concluding his famous lecture
before the British Association[151] thus spoke concerning Molecules:

     They continue this day as they were created, perfect in number and
     measure and weight, and from the ineffaceable characters impressed
     on them we may learn that those aspirations after accuracy in
     measurement, truth in statement, and justice in action, which we
     reckon among our noblest attributes as men, are ours because they
     are essential constituents of the image of Him who in the beginning
     created, not only the heaven and the earth, but the materials of
     which heaven and earth consist.

It is of course not to be denied that there are eminent men of science
who altogether dissent from such opinions, and reject Theism as false,
or at least as lacking any rational claim on our acceptance. That,
however, is not the point. The above testimonies have not been adduced
as if their authority could settle the question, which is one to be
determined not by authority, but by argument. At the same time, it is
abundantly evident that it is not argument but supposed authority which
influences the great majority of those who style themselves
rationalists. By what modes of reasoning their creed is supposed to be
established they have usually little idea: but they firmly believe, as
they are constantly assured, that no one who knows what Science is can
pretend to credit an antiquated doctrine which she has entirely
exploded. It is to show what degree of truth attaches to such
statements, that our witnesses have been called--and for this purpose
their testimony is undoubtedly sufficient. As Lord Rayleigh in his
Presidential address told the British Association:[152]

     It is true that among scientific men, as in other classes, crude
     views are to be met with as to the deeper things of Nature; but
     that the life-long beliefs of Newton, of Faraday, and of Maxwell,
     are inconsistent with the scientific habit of mind, is surely a
     proposition which I need not pause to refute.

And when from authority we turn to the line of argument adopted by those
who would impugn that upon which Theists rely, and who reject the idea
of an intelligent First Cause either as superfluous, or as incapable of
verification, we find but two courses one or other of which they feel
themselves compelled to adopt, although it is not very easy to
understand the state of mind which can rest satisfied with either.

Some, on the one hand, frankly admit that Science has not by her own
proper methods discovered any ultimate principle of things, and never
will. But on that very account, they maintain, this ultimate principle,
whatever it may be, must remain utterly unknown to us--for we can never
_know_ anything except by the methods of Science. Accordingly, although
the theistic hypothesis would confessedly furnish such an explanation as
is lacking, we must not adopt it because we cannot test it
experimentally.

And yet in ordinary life we have no difficulty in arguing from effect to
cause in just the same manner, and satisfying ourselves of the existence
of what we can as little touch or see as the First Cause itself. Thus we
are convinced of the genius of Shakespeare and Napoleon, and that there
was a difference between the character of Robespierre and that of Howard
the Philanthropist. But no man ever saw or touched either genius or
character, which can be known only by their results. It is by inference
far less legitimate that those proceed who, like Haeckel, seek in the
forces of Nature themselves an explanation of phenomena which, as we
know them, they are wholly incapable of producing. Instead of arguing
that a cause must therefore exist which is beyond Nature, but whose
character our own experience enables us in some measure, and
analogically, to learn, these philosophers start with the assumption
that no such cause is possible, and then proceed to draw the consequence
that the condition of Nature must once have been totally different from
what it actually is, enabling her forces to produce results which no
experience of any sort indicates as possible.

Those who adopt such an attitude of nescience, and in the proper sense
of the word are termed Agnostics, find themselves compelled accordingly
to leave their system in the air, with no basis more solid than the
elephant and tortoise on which Hindoo astronomers rested the world. They
must ignore the fundamental principle of Causation, from which we
started our present enquiry, and in consequence it is impossible that
their systems should, as Professor Weismann says, satisfy our
intellectual needs.

Others, on the other hand, declare that the Theistic hypothesis must be
dismissed, because a better has been found, Science having discovered
within her own sphere an effectual substitute for the supposed First
Cause. When we enquire what this may be, we are told that it is the "Law
of Substance," or "Evolution," or "Nature" herself, or an "Infinite
Eternal Energy unknown and unknowable," but devoid of intellect and
will--or "Monism," or some other similar abstraction which can represent
no idea at all, unless--as often happens--it be clad in the robes of its
rival, and credited with the very powers and attributes denied to the
First Cause, so as to become practically the same thing under another
and misleading name. Regarding this point there will be more to be said
presently. Here, it will be sufficient to note that this is in truth the
only meaning which can be attached to much of the language of so-called
scientific writers.

     Who [asks Mr. Wollaston][153] is this Nature ... who has such
     tremendous power, and to whose efficiency such marvellous
     performances are ascribed? What are her image and attributes when
     dragged from her wordy lurking-place? Is she aught but a pestilent
     abstraction, like dust cast in our eyes to obscure the workings of
     an intelligent First Cause?

So at the end of his life Clerk-Maxwell characteristically observed,
that he had studied many queer religions and philosophies, but had
found none of them that would work without God concealed somewhere.

Finally, a warning uttered by Lord Rayleigh in the address quoted above
must not be forgotten. After acknowledging that "unfortunately" there
are writers speaking in her name who have set themselves to foster the
prevailing belief that Science necessarily tends towards materialism, he
thus continued:

     It would be easy, however, to lay too much stress upon the opinions
     of even such distinguished workers as these. Men who devote their
     lives to investigation cultivate a love of truth for its own sake,
     and endeavour instinctively to clear up, and not, as is too often
     the object in business and politics, to obscure, a difficult
     question. So far the opinion of a scientific worker may have a
     special value; but I do not think that he has a claim superior to
     that of other educated men, to assume the attitude of a prophet. In
     his heart he knows that underneath the theories that he constructs
     there lie contradictions which he cannot reconcile. The higher
     mysteries of being, if penetrable at all by the human intellect,
     require other weapons than those of calculation and experiment.




