XIII

MONISM


All systems of philosophy that reject the idea of an intelligent First
Cause, which alone is self-existent, and whose being is of a higher
order than that of aught else,--base their denial on the assumption that
no such distinction of nature either exists or is possible,--that there
is but one reality, namely the substance whereof the sensible world
consists,--that this has always existed with the same forces it has now,
and that it is the source of all phenomena. This assumption of the
unreality of whatever is beyond the scope of sense, which has ever been
at the bottom of materialistic systems, is now elaborately formulated as
a creed, declared by Professor Haeckel and his following to be the only
creed which science can tolerate. This is termed _Monism_,--from the
Greek Μὁνος, "single," and is opposed to _Dualism_, or the
doctrine that there are two orders of being, or two distinct substances,
material and spiritual.[164]

According to monistic teaching, therefore, there exists but one _Thing_,
that which we usually call Matter, but might equally well call
Mind,--for all phenomena whatever, whether mental or material, are but
various shapes which it assumes, exhibiting diverse aspects of itself.
Thus all the objects which appear to have a being of their own,--as the
globe we inhabit, the furniture of earth and heaven, we ourselves,--are
but the forms momentarily assumed by this protean entity in its
ceaseless transfigurations, and have no more existence of their own than
the ripples on a pool of water or the faces we see in the fire. It
follows that when the particular phase of this basic substance is ended
which brings us into being, (or rather which we _are_,) we like
everything else, sink into blank nothing,--so that the mighty dead whom
nations honour, or the loved ones whose memory we cherish, are blotted
out of existence as utterly as the days and nights which made up the
span of their lives. But amongst its permutations and combinations this
solitary reality can produce the phenomena which we call thought, just
as much as those which we call motion, and accordingly the _Aeneid_ or
_Hamlet_ is its work, a mechanical product of evolution, no less than a
seam of coal, or an eclipse of the moon.

Such, in outline, is the philosophical system which commends itself, as
Professor Haeckel assures us,[165] to all men of science, who combine
the necessary conditions, of scientific knowledge, mental acumen, moral
courage, and intellectual independence. It may be rightly described as
materialistic pantheism; for while, according to it, everything is
equally divine, in the only sense in which anything can be so,
everything is likewise equally material, as falling under the category
of what we know as matter, and within the direct cognizance of physical
science.

Accurately to sketch a doctrine such as this is a task of no slight
difficulty. It undoubtedly contradicts the instinctive teaching of our
consciousness, so that, as Professor Haeckel admits[166] in the
primitive stages of both religion and philosophy Monism is unknown.
Moreover, even those who most loudly profess it, have by no means as yet
succeeded in realizing their own system, and after having from time to
time formally enunciated its articles, proceed forthwith to ignore them,
and in the staple of their discourse speak like other men in terms which
have no meaning if the tenets of their creed have any. As a natural
result their exposition of monistic doctrine is not very easy of
apprehension, but it seems to be not unfairly reflected in the above
summary.

Professor Haeckel himself thus expounds "that unifying conception of
nature as a whole which we designate in a single word as Monism."[167]

     By this we unambiguously express our conviction that there lives
     "one spirit in all things," and that the whole cognizable world is
     constituted, and has been developed, in accordance with one common
     fundamental law. We emphasize by it, in particular, the essential
     unity of inorganic and organic nature, the latter having been
     evolved from the former only at a comparatively late period. We
     cannot draw a sharp line of distinction between these two great
     divisions of nature, any more than we can recognize an absolute
     distinction between the animal and the vegetable kingdom, or
     between the lower animals and man. Similarly, we regard the whole
     of human knowledge as a structural unity; in this sphere we refuse
     to accept the distinction usually drawn between the natural and the
     spiritual. The latter is only a part of the former (or _vice
     versâ_); both are one. Our monistic view of the world belongs,
     therefore, to that group of philosophical systems which from other
     points of view have been designated also as mechanical or as
     pantheistic.

More concisely and clearly, Professor Romanes tells us:[168]

     Mental phenomena and physical phenomena, although apparently
     diverse, are really identical.

And in a work recently issued for the express purpose of expounding and
diffusing the new gospel, we read:[169]

     Just as the same particles of matter may at one time form parts of
     a rose, and at another time parts of a mushroom, so the same force
     may at one time strike a church as lightning, and at another time
     may be the mother-love that rocks the cradle.

If such conceptions are not easy to grasp, there can be no doubt as to
the practical conclusions to which they lead. We have already heard from
Professor Haeckel that human freedom is an utter delusion. We have
likewise seen that the only term in prospect is utter annihilation,
which Professor Haeckel endeavours to persuade us is the consummation we
ought to wish.

"The best we can desire," he says,[170] "after a courageous life, spent
in doing good according to our light, is the eternal peace of the grave.
'Lord give them an eternal rest.'"

It is evident however that in order to secure such a reward it is not
necessary to show any courage, or attempt any sort of good-work, for
according to him it equally awaits the most selfish and abandoned
voluptuary.

Finally,[171]

     At our death there disappears only the individual form in which the
     nerve-substance was fashioned, and the personal "soul" which
     represented the work performed by this. The complicated chemical
     combinations of that nervous mass pass over into other
     combinations--by decomposition, and the kinetic energy produced by
     them is transformed into other forms of nature.

      Imperial Cæsar, dead and turned to clay,
      Might stop a hole to keep the wind away, etc.--



       *       *       *       *       *

which lines others besides Haeckel are fond of quoting on this subject
as if they had any possible connexion with it. It would be more to the
point, and far more interesting, were some indication afforded of the
chemical equivalent of the qualities which made Cæsar imperial, or those
which distinguished the author of the above lines from the bards of our
Music Halls. That, when a man is no more, his material part may serve
various material purposes, is no more than was known to the first savage
who made a drum with his enemy's skin, or used his skull for a
drinking-cup.

As has been said, the Monistic philosophy claims to be above all things
scientific, and upon this ground are we bidden to accept it. But what is
the meaning of this claim? The one argument, apart from mere assertion,
brought to show that spirit is not distinct from matter, is drawn from
the part undoubtedly played by the brain in the process of thought,
though we see far less in this, as in other connexions, than the
assertions made by unscientific writers might lead us to imagine. But
when all this is most fully acknowledged can it be said that the state
of the question is changed from what it was? To listen to Monists, it
might be supposed that the intimate connexion between soul and body is
a new discovery, undreamt of in former ages,--and that we have now
arrived at a demonstration that it is our material part that actually
does our thinking. But, as a matter of fact, like other fundamental
questions, this is exactly as it has ever been, and so far as Science is
concerned, we are just as much in the dark respecting it as men ever
were. Though the philosophers of former days were unaware of all the
departmental details of brain activity, they understood as well as we do
the essential point, that in our composite nature soul and body form
_one_ being, whose every operation is of mixed character like itself.
The soul alone is the intelligent principle, yet all objects of
knowledge must come to it through sense, and in the senses it can be
reached only by the mechanical media of light, or sound, or touch. So
firm was their grip of this principle that the Schoolmen styled the soul
the "substantial form" of the body, and in their mouth this term
expressed a union more essential and intimate than modern philosophers
can perhaps imagine.

And, on the other hand, have all the results of modern research brought
anything to light which tends to show that matter can by any possibility
_think_? We are assured on the contrary, upon unimpeachable authority,
that however we may succeed in tracing the mechanical processes of
sensation to their furthest limit, it remains absolutely inconceivable
to us how the gulf is crossed that lies between this and rational
perception. So Professor Tyndall tells us:[172]

     The passage from the physics of the brain to the corresponding
     facts of consciousness is unthinkable. Granted that a definite
     thought and a definite molecular action in the brain occur
     simultaneously, we do not possess the intellectual organ, nor
     apparently any rudiments of an organ, which would enable us to pass
     by a process of reasoning from one to the other. They appear
     together, but we do not know why. Were our minds and senses so
     expanded as to enable us to see and feel the very molecules of the
     brain, were we capable of following all their motions, all their
     groupings and electrical discharges, if such there be, and were we
     intimately acquainted with the corresponding states of thought and
     feeling, we should be as far as ever from the solution of the
     problem--"How are these physical processes connected with the facts
     of consciousness?" The chasm between the two classes remains still
     intellectually impassable.

With these views Professor Huxley[173] expresses his agreement, and
although he contrives to confuse the issue very considerably, as is not
unusual when he undertakes to philosophize, he lays down in the clearest
possible terms that nothing whatever is _known_ as to the connexion of
mechanical processes with thought, whence it follows that on this point
Science has nothing to tell us.

"I really know nothing whatever [he writes] and never hope to know
anything, of the steps by which the passage from molecular movement to
states of consciousness is effected."

It should be needless to repeat that if nothing is known regarding all
this, it is mere charlatanism to pretend that Science tells us anything
about it, and those who make such assertions use words to which no
meaning can attach. Unfortunately such a practice is far from uncommon
in connexion with these questions. What sense can there be conceivable
in the well-known materialistic doctrine that the brain secretes
thought, just as the proper organs secrete bile or saliva? Bile and
saliva are material substances, with a definite chemical constitution,
each adapted to one definite function. But, Thought! It would be as
intelligible to talk of secreting the British Constitution, the Steam
Engine, and the Differential Calculus.

So much for the sole basis of Monistic argument. When we turn to some
other considerations it certainly becomes no easier to understand the
claim of Monism to be scientific. In the first place, as we have seen,
in order to furnish the system with any semblance of truth, it has been
found necessary to attribute to the ultimate elements of matter
qualities which all our experience denies them; for Professor Haeckel
has told us that "the two fundamental forms of substance, ponderable
matter and ether, are not dead, and only moved by extrinsic force, but
they are endowed with sensation and will." Of such attributes, and that
of self-mobility, it is unnecessary to add anything to what has been
said already. Assuredly nothing can look less like the great ultimate
reality, of whose ceaseless metamorphoses, we are but a flitting phase,
than the material substances with which we can do what we like,
investigating their laws, exploring their constitution, and setting them
tasks which we know exactly how they will accomplish.

Another point in the same connexion is no less important. What is this
one _Thing_, this Ultimate and Solitary Self-existent Reality, from
which Monism takes its title? Professor Haeckel has told us of two
fundamental forms of substance,--ponderable matter and ether. These he
evidently supposes, as his creed requires, to be radically the same: but
what right has he to take such a supposition for a fact? and unless this
unity be a fact, what becomes of Monism? What has Science ever
discovered that can justify any one in speaking of Ether and Matter as
one and the same? How, then, can a theory that assumes their identity be
termed "scientific?"

Or, leaving Ether alone, "that half-discovered entity," as Lord
Salisbury styled it on a famous occasion, and restricting our attention
to ponderable matter, concerning which we know a little more,--how can
even this be spoken of as "One"? As we have seen already it is only by a
figure of speech that the term "Matter" can be used at all. It stands
not for a single thing, but for countless millions and billions of
atoms, dispersed through space, some of one kind some of another, no one
of which can be imagined to owe its existence or its properties to any
other. To say that matter is self-existent is to say that every several
atom is self-existent. If this be so, and if this be the ultimate
Reality,--then there are as many first principles, or first causes, as
there are atoms. Yet none of these could do anything to the purpose
towards the evolution of anything, without the concurrence of a
multitude of others, nor would such concurrence be possible but for the
reign of law, which none of them can have instituted, but to which all
alike are subject. Were matter the great reality, even matter composed
of "animated atoms," the term _Monism_ would be sadly out of keeping,
and should yield its place to _Myriadism_. If, on the other hand, there
_is_ a unifying principle amid such diversity, this it must be which can
control and direct all to one end.

It is undoubtedly hard to understand how the First Principle of all
things can be supposed to consist of Atoms, but this is one of the
perplexities in which monistic doctrines abound. That atoms _are_, so
far as we know, the ultimate constituents of the Fundamental Reality,
Professor Haeckel admits. It is true, he adds, that our knowledge of
these ultimate elements is still far from satisfying, and he likewise
anticipates that atoms will someday be discovered not really to be
ultimate, but forms of something, more primal still.

     Although [he says][174] Monism is on the one hand for us an
     indispensable and fundamental conception in science, and although,
     on the other hand, it strives to carry back all phenomena, without
     exception, to the mechanism of the atom, we must nevertheless still
     admit that as yet we are by no means in a position to form any
     satisfactory conception of the exact nature of these atoms, and
     their relation to the general space-filling, universal ether.
     Chemistry long ago succeeded in reducing all the various natural
     substances to combinations of a relatively small number of
     elements; and the most recent advances of that science have made it
     in the highest degree probable that these elements ... are
     themselves in turn only different combinations of a varying number
     of atoms of one single original element. But in all this we have
     not as yet obtained any further light as to the real nature of
     these original atoms or their primal energies.

From which it is clear, that, while the considerations above presented
lose none of their force, the Monistic system, by the avowal of its
chief apostle, is based on complete ignorance concerning all which could
furnish it with a foundation.

But by far the most serious consideration yet remains. If, according to
Monistic teaching men are but bubbles on the surface of reality, and are
inevitably carried as it wills,--there is an end of all distinction
between good and evil, right and wrong, merit and guilt. One man, or one
line of conduct, is as good, or as bad, as another, being all equally
the products of Evolution, and aspects of the great Monistic
principle;--"Jack the Ripper," and Socrates, Messalina and Queen
Victoria, Chief Justice Scroggs and Sir Thomas More, are none of them in
any possible sense one whit better or worse than the others,--inasmuch
as they all did but act as puppets actuated by one and the same
original, playing its own part in them all.

And in like manner as regards Truth. It must follow that a man's
beliefs, like his actions, are as much beyond his own control as his
stature or the colour of his hair. If Professor Haeckel calls Monism
supreme wisdom, and I call it nonsense, we are equally right, for each
is the mouthpiece of the same one all-embracing first-principle. What
each believes is the only thing possible for him to believe, and, so far
as he is concerned, is the only truth.

But here comes in a perplexity. If such be the case, if there be no
Free-will, and no possibility whatever of doing or believing anything
but what is predetermined for us as a necessary part of our
being,--where is the sense of all the strenuous efforts that are being
made to convert the people to a belief which, according to its own
principles, nothing in the world can make them accept, unless nothing in
the world can prevent them from accepting it? What again is the meaning
of organizations, such as we hear of, for giving ethical instruction to
the young on a Monistic and determinist basis? What can be the possible
sense of giving ethical lectures to young people, if it is really
believed that the course of each is marked out for him more rigorously
than the path of a city omnibus? "If" said Professor Paul Darnley in Mr.
Mallock's clever satire,--"If we would be solemn, and high, and happy,
and heroic, and saintly, we have but to strive and struggle to do what
we cannot for an instant avoid doing,"--namely, conform to the laws of
matter. If Monists were to limit their aspirations to this, their
teaching would at least be intelligible. It ceases to be so, when they
feel compelled to graft on their Monistic stock the Dualistic notions of
Right and Wrong, Truth and Error. But, as Dr. Johnson said respecting
Free-will, no one ever believes the arguments on the other side, however
loudly he may profess to do so. And in the same way it is quite clear
that no Monist can get himself really to accept Monism.[175]




