X

ANIMAL AND MAN


Leaving for later consideration the fourth of Du Bois-Reymond's Unsolved
Enigmas, namely the seemingly pre-ordained order of the universe, we may
conveniently group together the three which follow it, as much
resembling that which has just occupied our attention. These problems,
it will be remembered, are (_a_) the origin of simple sensation and
consciousness, or, in other words, of the faculties possessed by
animals; (_b_) that of rational thought and speech; (_c_)
Free-will.--Here again we are bound to ask, in the name of right reason
and common-sense, what light has really been thrown on such questions by
Science, and how far she has changed their aspect,--that so we may guard
against the delusion of imagining ourselves to be in possession of more
knowledge than we actually possess.

(_a_) _Simple sensation and consciousness._ As regards the actual origin
of the higher form of life which distinguishes the animal from the
vegetable, we are obviously no better informed than we have found
ourselves to be concerning the first beginnings of life in any form,--no
evidence as to the actual facts being available, or even possible, for
our enlightenment. Once more we can only argue from the present to the
past, and enquire whether the progress of science has made it more
reasonable to suppose than it seemed in pre-scientific days that animal
life has been spontaneously evolved, either from inanimate matter or
from the vegetative life of plants. This enquiry so much resembles that
which we have just concluded as to make it unnecessary to pursue it at
any length.

We find, in fact, that men of Science who have no prepossessions
whatever against Evolution, and would willingly accept the Law of
Continuity at all points, if only evidence were forthcoming, find here
not only an unsolved problem, but one even more difficult than the
Origin of Life itself. Du Bois-Reymond for example places this amongst
his "transcendental" enigmas, to which an answer will never be found,
whereas he thinks that the origin of vegetable life, although at present
a mystery, may one day be explained. The expression of his
opinion,--that by no possibility can we ever understand how
consciousness could be evolved from matter--has, he tells us[107] been
vehemently contradicted, but, he adds, nothing in the way of argument,
or beyond mere assumptions, has been brought against him. Of these
assumptions he notices only that of Professor Haeckel, "the Prophet of
Jena," who protests against such limitations of our possibilities as
treason to the sacred cause of Evolution. The progress we have made in
intellect, says Haeckel, beyond our barbarous progenitors, is sufficient
to show that we are on the high road of development towards a stage as
far in advance of the present, as this is of the past; and when that is
attained, our knowledge will be full and will embrace all this. But,
asks Du Bois-Reymond in reply, is this mighty progress of ours so very
evident within the period concerning which we have any information? Has
the mental capacity of our race notably improved since Homer?[108] or
its faculty of thinking since Plato and Aristotle? At our present rate
of progress, long before the high-water mark prophesied by Haeckel is
reached, the earth will have become uninhabitable. And, were it
otherwise, the highest point of intellect to which conceivably man could
attain, would be that of the "sufficient intelligence" whereof we have
been told, which, from an inspection of the cosmic nebula could foretell
all that was to issue from it. And, adds Du Bois-Reymond, even could we
do this, we should still be unable to understand the origin of
consciousness, which would require intelligence of another order than
ours, however magnified.

So again Mr. Wallace tells us,[109] after speaking of the beginning of
life as we have already heard,

     The next stage is still more marvellous, still more completely
     beyond all possibility of explanation by matter, its laws and
     forces. It is the introduction of sensation or consciousness,
     constituting the fundamental distinction between the animal and
     vegetable kingdoms. Here all idea of mere complication of structure
     producing the result is out of the question. We feel it to be
     altogether preposterous to assume that at a certain stage of
     complexity of atomic constitution, and as a necessary result of
     that complexity alone, an _ego_ should start into existence, a
     thing that _feels_, that is conscious of its own existence. Here we
     have the certainty that something new has arisen, a being whose
     nascent consciousness has gone on increasing in power and
     definiteness till it has culminated in the higher animals. No
     verbal explanation or attempt at explanation--such as the statement
     that life is the result of the molecular forces of the protoplasm,
     or that the whole existing organic universe from the amœba up to
     man was latent in the fire-mist from which the solar system was
     developed--can afford any mental satisfaction, or help us in any
     way to a solution of the mystery.

Unquestionably, there is no lack of speakers and writers who flatly
contradict such views, and assert that animal life, equally with
vegetable, could be, and must have been, naturally evolved from
inorganic nature. The above testimonies, however, amply suffice for our
present purpose, and with them we may be satisfied; for at least they
make it plain that Science has found no evidence as to the origin of
sensation and consciousness conclusive enough to compel belief. And
where there is no scientific evidence even alleged, such as might
require the training of a specialist for its due appreciation, one man
of ordinary intelligence is as competent a judge as another, and
scientific experts are on a level with the rest of us.

(_b_) _Rational thought and speech._ What has just been said applies
with equal force to this matter likewise. Unless Science have some
positive evidence to bring, demonstrating how the gulf can be bridged
which separates the intelligence of the most degraded races of men from
the highest of the brutes, and how articulate language can spontaneously
have arisen, which is the necessary appanage of reason, we have all
equally the means of forming our conclusions on the subject.

That the gulf between man and the lower animals is here immense we have
the evidence of Mr. Darwin.

     No doubt [he writes][110] the difference is in this respect
     enormous, even if we compare the mind of one of the lowest savages,
     who has no words to express any number higher than four, and who
     uses no abstract terms for the commonest objects or affections,
     with that of the most highly organized ape. The difference would,
     no doubt, still remain immense, even if one of the highest apes had
     been improved and civilized as much as a dog has been in comparison
     with its parent form, the wolf or jackal. The Fuegians rank
     amongst the lowest barbarians; but I was continually struck with
     surprise how closely the three natives on board H.M.S. _Beagle_,
     who had lived some years in England and could talk a little
     English, resembled us in disposition and in most of our mental
     faculties.

Mr. Darwin goes on to argue, however, that the difference between man
and beast is one of degree only and not of kind; that this can be
"clearly shewn"; and that there is unquestionably

     a much wider interval in mental power between one of the lowest
     fishes, as a lamprey or lancelet, and one of the higher apes, than
     between an ape and a man; yet this immense interval is filled up by
     numberless gradations,

from which he concludes that by a like series of steps, of which,
however, no trace is left, our progenitors have been able to mount from
the simian to the human level.

Clear however as Mr. Darwin pronounces the evidence to be, it is very
far from being so considered by other eminent naturalists. So convinced
an Evolutionist as Mr. Mivart, for example, declared on various
occasions that his reason abundantly sufficed to convince him that there
was a wider break in nature between man and the highest ape, than
between the highest ape and an oyster or even a mushroom.

It is evident that the evidence which permits judgments so diverse as
these cannot be said conclusively to prove the former existence of a
bridge every vestige of which has, by the acknowledgment of all parties,
entirely disappeared. We are therefore left to determine for ourselves,
whether the powers of our own mind, as each knows them in himself, are
of a totally different nature from those of dogs and horses, and
chimpanzees such as the late lamented "Consul," or whether we are
superior only in degree, as a sheep-dog is more intelligent than a
sheep, or a fox than a goose.

If in any respect such an enquiry can be made definite and therefore
profitable, it is clearly in regard of Language. This, as said above, is
an essential adjunct of reason such as ours, and on the other hand it
forms the plainest boundary between the domain of the human race and
that of the brutes. It is, says Professor Max Müller, our Rubicon on the
hither side of which men alone are found. Given reason such as ours,
whatever mode of communication might be open to them, we cannot suppose
its possessors failing to establish a medium of intercourse. In existing
conditions, man can make an alphabet out of the clicks of a needle or
the flashes of a mirror, and if his vocal organs were no better than
those of a baboon, we cannot imagine him content generation after
generation with inarticulate howls and yells. But this is just the case
of the animals. They are _never_ found to make the smallest progress in
the direction of a code of signals. Dogs indeed, as Mr. Darwin
says,[111] having developed in captivity the new art of barking, have
further learnt to vary this accomplishment according to the
circumstances that provoke it, and have distinct tones to express the
diversity of their feelings, as when hunting, or angry, or setting out
for a walk, or shut up in a kennel or out of a house. Some dogs, he
might have added, refine still further, and will betray by their style
of bark not only that they are hunting something, but what it is that
they have come upon, whether a rabbit, a cat, or a hedgehog. But, as the
Chevalier Bunsen observes,[112] and his observation includes such
manifestations as the above:

     Animal sounds are the echoes of blind instincts within, or of the
     phenomena of the outward world, uttered by suffering or satisfied
     animal nature, and in all cases resulting from mere passiveness.

By rational language, on the other hand, is signified, to quote Mr.
Mivart:[113]

     The external manifestation, whether by sound or gesture, of general
     conceptions:--not emotional expressions or the manifestations of
     sensible impressions, but enunciations of distinct judgments as to
     "the what," "the how," and "the why."

Consequently, as Bunsen declares:

     The theories about the origin of language have followed those
     about the origin of thought, and have shared their fate. The
     materialists have never been able to show the possibility of the
     first step. They attempt to veil their inability by the easy but
     fruitless assumption of an infinite space of time, destined to
     explain the gradual development of animals into men; as if millions
     of years could supply the want of the agent necessary for the first
     movement, for the first step in the line of progress! No numbers
     can effect a logical impossibility. How indeed could reason spring
     out of a state which is destitute of reason? How can speech, the
     expression of thought, develop itself in a year or in millions of
     years, out of unarticulated sounds which express feelings of
     pleasure, pain, and appetite? The common-sense of mankind will
     always shrink from such theories.

Bunsen's words were echoed even more forcibly by professor Max Müller,
speaking as President of the Anthropological Section of the British
Association at Cardiff in 1889.

     What [he asked] does Bunsen consider the real barrier between man
     and beast? It is language, which is unattainable, or at least
     unattained, by any animal except man.

     You know [he continued] how for a time, and chiefly owing to
     Darwin's predominating influence, every conceivable effort was made
     to reduce the distance which language places between man and beast,
     and to treat language as a vanishing line in the mental evolution
     of animal and man. It required some courage at times to stand up
     against the authority of Darwin, but at present all serious
     thinkers agree, I believe, with Bunsen, that no animal has ever
     developed what we mean by rational language, as distinct from mere
     utterances of pleasure or pain, a subject lately treated with great
     fulness by Professor Romanes. Still, if all true science is based
     on facts, the fact remains that no animal has ever found what we
     mean by a language; and we are fully justified, therefore, in
     holding with Bunsen and Humboldt, as against Darwin and Romanes,
     that there _is_ a specific difference between the human animal and
     all other animals, and that that difference consists in language as
     the outward manifestation of what the Greeks meant by _Logos_.

It is moreover evident that, far from speech having generated reason, as
some have preposterously maintained, it is reason which generates
speech, no less inevitably than sunlight produces the spectrum when it
passes through a prism. The seeming paradox of Wilhelm von Humboldt is
in fact a sober truth: "Man is man only through speech, but in order to
invent it he must already be man." We have plain evidence that before
means for the internal expression of it are found, the mental word
(_verbum mentale_) is awaiting them, and that without this it would be
as impossible for any sort of rational speech to be produced as for an
apple to be grown without an apple-tree.

Evidence to this effect is furnished by recorded instances of persons
who from early childhood, or even from birth, were deaf, dumb, and
blind, and appeared to be cut off from all possibility of human
converse, the "gates of Mansoul" being thus almost entirely closed. Such
are the well-known cases of Laura Bridgman, Miss Keller, and Martha
Obrecht, who had been thus afflicted since their earliest childhood, the
two first named from the age of two, and the last from that of three
years.[114] Also the more recent instance of Marie Heurtin, who was so
born, and consequently could not have even the faintest glimmer of any
knowledge these senses could convey.[115] Yet, by the exercise of
ingenious and unwearied charity, a means of communication was elaborated
through the sense of touch, and the souls which had seemingly been
buried alive, shewed themselves responsive to such advances,--often
astonishingly so,--and revealed their possession of faculties identical
with those of their rescuers. We are told, for example, of Marie Heurtin
that her intelligence proved to be quick, that she was even "unusually
clever, evidently eager for knowledge, and, as sometimes happens, her
faculties being prevented by her infirmity from wasting their powers on
external objects, were all the more fresh and vigorous." Even more
wonderful is the case of Miss Keller, who attained a degree of culture
and accomplishment far beyond the common level of those possessing the
use of all their senses.

Somewhat akin to such instances is that of the savages from Tierra del
Fuego mentioned above by Mr. Darwin. In their case likewise, when they
were brought into communication with people possessed of higher culture
than their own degraded race, it was found that the corresponding
faculties within them were not dead, or as yet non-existent, but only
starved into lethargy; and, the opportunity being given, they speedily
caused surprise by unmistakable proofs how closely they resemble
ourselves.

Thus we find that in this branch of our enquiry there is one broad fact,
which all must recognize and none can deny. No race of men has ever been
known which could not speak, nor any race of animals which could, or
which had made the first beginnings of intelligent language. Facts being
the only groundwork of Science here is undoubtedly something whereon she
may build an inference, and this inference will certainly not be that
the faculties of men and animals are radically identical. And if we are
told, as we constantly are, that it is more truly scientific to admit
such identity, should there not be some other facts, still more
significant and equally well established, to exhibit on the other side?

But of what character are the arguments actually adduced? It will be
sufficient to quote a few which come with the highest authority.

We may start with the almost classical specimen contributed by Mr.
Darwin himself.

     It does not [he says][116] appear altogether incredible that some
     unusually wise ape-like animal should have thought of imitating the
     growl of a beast of prey, so as to indicate to his fellow monkeys
     the nature of the expected danger. And this would have been a first
     step in the formation of a language.

Similarly Professor Whitney writes of some supposed "pithecoid"[117]
men:

     There is no difficulty in supposing them to have possessed forms of
     speech, more rudimentary and imperfect than ours.[118]

And so again Professor Romanes:[119]

     Let us try to imagine a community considerably more intelligent
     than the existing anthropoid apes, although still considerably
     below the intellectual level of existing savages. It is certain
     that in such a community natural signs of voice, gesture, and
     grimace would be in vogue to a greater or less extent. As their
     numbers increased ... such signs would require to become more and
     more conventional, or acquire more and more the character of
     sentence-words.

Of course, as Mr. Mivart replies,[120] there is no difficulty in
supposing anything we choose, or in seeing animals in imagination
performing feats which never yet have they been known to achieve in
fact. But no amount of such suppositions or imaginations will furnish
Science with the scantiest apology for a foothold, nor can the germs of
language attributed to pithecoid communities or the sagest of their
patriarchs, be considered as of any greater value than the speeches put
into the mouths of the animals by Æsop or "Uncle Remus."

It is also to be noticed that in these accounts of the origin of
language, the essential element of reason is always quietly smuggled in
as a matter of course. Thus Mr. Darwin's wisest of the pithecoids was
able to "think of" a device for the information of his fellows. There is
not the smallest doubt that any creature which had got so far as _that_
would find what he wanted. It is but the old case of the man who was
sure he could have written Hamlet had he had a mind to do so. Like him,
the ape might have made the invention, if he had a mind to make
it;--only he had not got the mind. So too, Professor Romanes' missing
links use tones and signs which acquire "more and more" the character of
true speech: which could not be unless they contained some measure of
that character already. But it is just the first step thus ignored which
spans the gulf between man and brute.

There is another factor upon which, in conjunction with these
suppositions, great stress is wont to be laid, namely that of time; it
being apparently taken for granted that if only time enough be given
anything whatever may come about. Thus Professor Romanes tells us[121]
that his imaginary _Homo alalus_, or speechless man, must probably have
lived for an "inconceivably long time," before getting far enough on the
road towards speech to give him such an advantage as enabled him to
crush out his less accomplished congeners; and that even after this
point was reached, another "inconceivable lapse of time" must have been
required to turn him into _Homo sapiens_, or man as he actually is.
Immense intervals, he further tells us, must have been consumed in the
passage through various grades of mental evolution; "The epoch during
which sentence-words prevailed was probably immense"; "It was not until
æons of ages had elapsed that any pronouns arose."

Meanwhile, there is no scrap of evidence that as a matter of fact any
thing of all this ever happened at all, and as Bunsen has observed no
millions of years, even were millions available at discretion, could
ever supply the want of the faculty without which nothing in the way of
language could ever be accomplished.

(_c_) _Free-will._--Here is another human faculty which Du Bois-Reymond
declares never to have been accounted for by natural causation, and he
greatly doubts whether it should not be classed among the problems that
must be for ever insoluble.

Professor Haeckel, as we have seen, gets rid of all difficulties on this
score by laying it down that "the freedom of the will is not an object
for critical scientific inquiry at all, for it is a pure dogma, based
on an illusion, and has no real existence."

It is plain that for his purpose this is the only course possible. If
the will be really free, there can be no question of finding a
mechanical explanation of it. There is therefore no alternative but to
cut the Gordian knot, and to declare that the liberty which the vast
majority of men believe themselves to exercise every instant, is proved
by Science to be no better than a pure dogma, that is to say, a mere
figment.

When we seek for his indication of the line of argument whereby this
position is made good, the information supplied is less full than might
be desired. He begins[122] with a rather lengthy sketch of the history
of controversy in this regard,--which contains the remarkable statement
that "Some of the first teachers of the Christian Churches--such as St.
Augustine and Calvin--rejected the freedom of the will as decidedly as
the famous leaders of pure Materialism, Holbach in the eighteenth, and
Büchner in the nineteenth century." Then he proceeds:

     The great struggle between the determinist and the indeterminist,
     between the opponent and the sustainer of the freedom of the will,
     has ended to-day after more than 2,000 years, completely in favour
     of the determinist. The human will has no more freedom than that of
     the higher animals, from which it differs only in degree, not in
     kind. In the last [i.e. the eighteenth] century the doctrine of
     liberty was fought with general philosophic and cosmological
     arguments. The nineteenth century has given us very different
     weapons for its definitive destruction--the powerful weapons which
     we find in the arsenal of comparative physiology and evolution. We
     now know that each act of the will is as fatally determined by the
     organization of the individual, and as dependent on the momentary
     condition of his environment, as every other psychic activity. The
     character of the inclination was determined long ago by _heredity_
     from parents and ancestors; the determination to each particular
     act is an instance of _adaptation_ to the circumstances of the
     moment wherein the strongest motive prevails, according to the laws
     which govern the statics of emotion. Ontogeny teaches us to
     understand the evolution of the will in the individual child.
     Phylogeny reveals to us the historical development of the will
     within the ranks of our vertebrate ancestors.[123]

That is all. It is needless to observe that jargon like this proves
nothing. Of anything approaching to evidence there is here, manifestly,
no vestige, and there is consequently nothing which can avail to win our
assent as rational men.

It is likewise obvious that we have here a question as to which every
human being has the means of judging equally with the most eminent man
of Science, and modern improvement of the methods and instruments of
research leaves us just where we always were. The final evidence on the
subject every man has within himself, in the most vital facts of his own
experience. Into the philosophy of the matter it is neither necessary
nor advisable at present to go. In dealing with profound yet elementary
questions, regarding which our means of knowledge are thus simple and
direct, men are apt to bewilder themselves when they begin to
philosophize, and to persuade themselves that they cannot be sure
precisely of those things that are most certain. George Borrow is by no
means the only one who has tormented himself with doubts as to his own
existence.[124] A still larger number have professed to believe
themselves mere machines compelled to go like clocks, and to do only
what has been predetermined for them. But such beliefs are for the
lecture-room or the study only, and in practical life every one behaves
as if both he himself and others--especially others--were responsible
for their conduct. So common-sense teaches, than which we shall not find
a safer guide. "Sir," said the eminently common-sense Dr. Johnson, "we
_know_ our will is free; and _there's_ an end on't. All theory is
against the freedom of the will; all experience for it.... But, Sir, as
to the doctrine of necessity, no man believes it. If a man should give
me arguments that I cannot answer to prove that I cannot see; because I
cannot answer his arguments, do I believe that I have no eyes?"

Thus we find once again that the doctrines which some would force upon
us in the name of Science, on whatever they are founded, have no basis
of fact, and cannot therefore rightly call themselves scientific.




