Project Gutenberg's The Old Riddle and the Newest Answer, by John Gerard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Old Riddle and the Newest Answer

Author: John Gerard

Release Date: October 15, 2010 [EBook #33859]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD RIDDLE ***




Produced by Chuck Greif, Peter Vachuska and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE OLD RIDDLE AND THE NEWEST ANSWER

     The Lord St. Alban would say to some philosophers--"Gentlemen,
     nature is a labyrinth, in which the very haste you move with, will
     make you lose your way."
                                     BACON, _Apophthegms_.




THE OLD RIDDLE
AND THE NEWEST
ANSWER

BY
JOHN GERARD, S.J., F.L.S.

_FOURTH EDITION_

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON,
NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA

1907




ROEHAMPTON:

PRINTED BY JOHN GRIFFIN.




PREFACE


The enemies of Science are not the philistines alone--if any still
remain--who would muzzle or stifle her. More numerous and dangerous are
those--professedly of her own household--who ascribe to her pretensions
of which she herself knows nothing, and strive to make her responsible
for a philosophy entirely beyond her scope. With this object efforts are
assiduously made to popularize the idea that nothing in heaven or earth
is beyond her ken, and that she has rendered all such beliefs impossible
as alone can satisfy the deeper cravings of humanity. At the same time
the very brilliance of her achievements is apt to dazzle our eyes,
blinding them to the extremely narrow limits of the field in which she
can operate, and making us rush to the conclusion that she has solved
the riddle which from the beginning of time Nature has offered to every
thinking mind,--or at least that what her search-light cannot illumine
must for ever remain unknowable.

How far such assumptions are rational, it is the object of the present
enquiry to examine by means of the evidence furnished by Science herself
in her own regard.

I have to thank Mr. W. E. Darwin for permission to use the illustration
of feathers of the Argus Pheasant from his illustrious father's _Descent
of Man_, and for the loan of blocks for the purpose. Through the
courtesy of Messrs. Macmillan I am allowed to copy a portion of the
plate in the late Professor Huxley's _Lectures on Evolution_,
illustrating his pedigree of the Horse. If I forbear to mention others
who have kindly supplied me with information, it is only lest it might
be supposed that they are anywise responsible for the use I have made of
it. The design on the cover of the present volume I owe to my friend Mr.
Paul Woodroffe.

J. G.

_March_ 10, 1904.




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


In this edition, which has been thoroughly revised throughout, a few
corrections have had to be made, especially in the Index, and in one or
two instances alterations or additions have appeared advisable for the
sake of clearness or accuracy of expression. Nothing has, however, as
yet been brought to the author's notice which affects any substantial
point in what he has written.

_July_ 28, 1904.




PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION


This edition has again been thoroughly revised, and some new matter
appended which bears on various points raised in the original volume,
especially the establishment of the important group of the
_Cycado-filices_, as affecting the succession of plant life on the
earth, and recent evidence concerning the pedigree of the horse.

_December_ 21, 1906.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
                                                                PAGES

TO BEGIN AT THE BEGINNING

Certainty that there was a Beginning of the World--What
was there before?--The Great Problem, to be
answered by Reason and Science                                    1-3

CHAPTER II

REASON AND SCIENCE

Principles of Reasoning--Scope and method of Science              4-7

CHAPTER III

EVOLUTION

Term variously used for a Process and a Principle. We
commence with the latter                                          8-9

CHAPTER IV

"THE LAW OF EVOLUTION"

Evolution as a Philosophy--Main features of the
system                                                          10-14

CHAPTER V

WHAT IS A "LAW OF NATURE"?

Erroneous use of the term frequent: its scientific use          15-19

CHAPTER VI

"THE LAW OF SUBSTANCE"

A combination of two other "Laws," viz.--The indestructibility
of Matter, and the Conservation of
Energy--But there is also Dissipation of Energy--Consequences
inferred from this as to the Duration
of the Universe                                                 20-28

CHAPTER VII

"THE SEVEN ENIGMAS"

The "Law of Continuity"--Alleged breaches--Seven
evolutionary stages deduced to be scientifically
unexplained, or even inexplicable                               29-34

CHAPTER VIII

MATTER AND MOTION

Constitution and Properties of Matter inconsistent with
Haeckel's evolutionary system--Also the Laws of
Motion--Radium and its revelations                              35-44

CHAPTER IX

THE PROBLEM OF LIFE

Evolution here considered as a process--In its larger
sense, postulates spontaneous generation--which,
however, Science disallows--Protoplasm and Crystallization      45-66

CHAPTER X

ANIMAL AND MAN

Origin of simple sensation and consciousness even less
explicable than that of life--Gulf between man
and the lower animals--Language exclusively
human--The significance of Free-will can be impugned
only by the absurdity of denying its existence                  67-85

CHAPTER XI

THE ORDER OF NATURE

The order of the _Cosmos_ requires a Cause--No cause
known to us can produce such a result except Intelligence--Hence
we infer Purpose or Design and
are led to Theism--Scientific evidence as to this,
"the Grand Question"                                           86-109

CHAPTER XII

PURPOSE AND CHANCE

What "Chance" means--It is the sole alternative to
Purpose or Design--Arguments against Purposive
Creation--The Existence of Pain--The Mysteries
of Generation                                                 110-125

CHAPTER XIII

MONISM

The Monistic Philosophy--Its utter lack of a scientific
basis--Contradicted by the ideas of morality and
truth--Not really adopted by Monists themselves               126-139

CHAPTER XIV

ORGANIC EVOLUTION

"Evolution" now to be considered in its most restricted
signification--Organic Evolution, or "Transformism,"
not identical with Darwinism--The
nature of the questions before us                             140-148

CHAPTER XV

DARWINISM

Though no essential part of our enquiry, Darwinism
must be studied on account of importance ascribed
to it--Baseless claims on its behalf--True character
of the system--Natural Selection and its mode of
action--Phenomena which seem to favour Darwinism--Difficulties
on the other side--Limits of
Variation--Specific stability--Adverse probabilities--Natural
selection can produce nothing--Transitional
developments useless or harmful--Artistic
ornaments unexplained--Flaws in argument--Organic
progress--Rudimentary Organs--Embryology--Scientific
opinion as to Darwinism                                       149-203

CHAPTER XVI

THE FACTS OF EVOLUTION

Palæontology furnishes the only sound basis for argument--The
nature of the evidence required--The
history of Life as known to us is inconsistent
with evolutionary theories--Haeckel's "ante-periods"--Conclusion
to which facts point                                          204-238

CHAPTER XVII

"AUDI ALTERAM PARTEM"

Arguments on behalf of Evolution--The genealogy of
the Horse--Haeckel's Pedigree of Man--Darwin's
plea of imperfection of the geological record--No
evolutionary process is yet demonstrated; Still less
has anything been done to establish Evolution as a
creative force                                                239-269

CHAPTER XVIII

TO SUM UP

Reason leads to conclusions which physical science cannot
reach--The recognition of a First Cause beyond the
Sensible Universe an intellectual necessity--Knowledge
of this cause attainable by reason--Conclusion                270-280

APPENDICES

A. Recent Scientific Verdicts concerning Darwinism and
Transformism                                                      281

B. Development of Plant life--the _Cycadofilices_                 284

C. The Course of Evolution                                        285

D. The pedigree of the Horse: further evidence                    286

INDEX                                                             289

FOOTNOTES




I

TO BEGIN AT THE BEGINNING


That the world as we know it had a beginning is a truth which there is
no denying. Not only have philosophers always argued that it must be so:
the researches of physical science assure us that it has been so in
fact. Astronomy, says Professor Huxley,[1] "leads us to contemplate
phenomena the very nature of which demonstrates that they must have had
a beginning." The hypothesis that phenomena of Nature similar to those
exhibited by the present world have always existed, the same authority
assures us,[2] "is absolutely incompatible with such evidence as we
have, which is of so plain and so simple a character that it is
impossible in any way to escape from the conclusions which it forces
upon us." This conclusion, physicists tell us, is inevitable when we
study the laws by which the operations of Nature are governed, and as
Professor Balfour Stewart writes,[3] we thus become "absolutely certain"
that these operations cannot have existed for ever, and that a time
will come when they must cease. In like manner, a recent and competent
witness to the conclusions of contemporary Science, lays down,[4] as one
of the truths which her latest discoveries compel us to accept, that the
world is not eternal, that the earth is cooling from a state of heat
rendering life impossible, to one of physical exhaustion equally fatal
to it. Accordingly "Life must have had a beginning and must come to an
end,"--and our whole Solar System (he adds) must similarly have had a
commencement, at a period not infinitely remote.

But, if the world had a beginning, what was there before it began?
Something there must have been, and something which had the power of
producing it. Had there ever been nothing, there could never have been
anything, for, _Ex nihilo nihil fit_. That nothing should turn into
something is an idea which the mind refuses to entertain. Nor is the
case any better even if we suppose that matter had no beginning, that it
has existed for ever as we know it now, and that at first there was
nothing else. For if so, whence have all these things arisen which,
according to all observation and experiment, matter cannot produce, as,
organic life, sensitive life, consciousness, reason, moral goodness? Had
matter been always what it now is, and had there been no source beyond
matter whence the power of producing all these things could be derived,
they could never have been produced at all, or else they would have
come into being without a cause. It would be like a milestone growing
into an apple-tree, or a mountain spontaneously giving birth to a mouse.

We are therefore compelled by common-sense to ask when we consider
Nature, What is the force or power at the back of her, which first set
her going, and whence she draws the capability of performing the
operations which we find her performing every day; that force or power
which must be the ultimate origin of everything that is in the world?
This is the great fundamental problem which the student of Nature has to
face, and beside it all others fade into insignificance. It is with this
that we are now engaged. We have to ask how our reason bids us answer
it, and the first question which arises naturally is, What light is
thrown on the subject by modern Science, of whose achievements we are
all so justly proud?




