XVIII

TO SUM UP


It is time to return to the point from which we started our whole
enquiry, and to ask what has been gathered in the course of it towards a
solution of the question with which we began. That the Cosmos in which
we dwell, the world of law, order, and life, has not existed for ever,
we saw to be a truth enforced by the researches of physical Science, no
less than by the clear teaching of reason. It certainly had a beginning,
and there must be a cause to which that beginning was due,--a cause
capable of producing all which we find to have been actually produced.
The material Universe and the mechanism of the heavens,--organic life
with all its infinite marvels and varieties--animal sensation--human
intelligence--canons of beauty, the law of good and evil--all these must
have existed potentially in the First Cause, as in the Source whence
alone they could be derived.

The Nature of this Cause was the object of our quest. In particular we
set ourselves to examine the assertion now so loudly made that Science
has found a full explanation in the forces of the Universe itself as
they come within her cognizance, that is to say, the material forces
which she can directly observe, and upon which she can experiment. In
particular we have studied the Law of Evolution, in its various
significations, and other laws subsidiary to it, in order to determine,
from the point of view of reason and Science alone, whether it can be
said that the prime factor of which we are in search is thus supplied.

The result has been to make it evident that while modern discovery has
immensely multiplied and magnified the marvels which have to be
accounted for, it has disclosed nothing which can be supposed to account
for them in a manner to satisfy our reason. So far as the forces of
Nature are concerned, the mysteries that lie beyond are even darker than
they were. The origin and nature of matter and force, the source of
motion, of life, of sensation and consciousness, of rational
intelligence and language, of Free-will, of the reign of law and order
to which all Nature testifies,--all these are for Science utterly
unsolved problems, which, as some amongst her teachers tell us, must
remain for ever insoluble. Even less prospect, if possible, can there be
that any mechanical forces will ever account for perception of the
sublime and beautiful,--and above all--of the distinction between right
and wrong.

Here, then, Science stops,--confessing that she can be our guide no
farther, and lending no colour whatever to the unscientific pretensions
which are so noisily advanced by some persons in her name. Her domain
is the world of sense, and it is evident that nothing existing within
that realm can possibly furnish an explanation which will satisfy our
intellectual need for causality.

Are we therefore to say that we can know nothing concerning the First
Cause to which the phenomena of the Universe are due? Such is the
Agnostic's position. What we have no means of knowing, he says, we must
not pretend to know. It were irrational and dishonest to do so. When
Science fails us, the true wisdom is to profess ignorance,--thus only
can our position still be scientific.

But is such a principle itself scientific? Is it not a gratuitous and
monstrous assumption that we can know nothing but that of which our
senses directly tell us? That the Universe has a cause is no less
certain than that the Universe exists, for of that cause it is the
monument. And, as of the whole, so of every part or element which it
contains, it is absolutely certain that there must be a cause, and one
adequate to the production of what has actually been produced; for as
the proverb says, "Nothing is to be got out of a sack but what is in
it." From such conclusions there is no escape;--and since it is
impossible to find the cause required within the world of material
forces and sensible phenomena, it becomes no less obvious that it must
lie beyond, across the frontier which nothing material can pass.

       *       *       *       *       *

Therefore, also, we know something concerning that Cause,--very little,
perhaps, in comparison with what we cannot know,--but still something
very substantial. We know that such a Cause exists. We know that it must
possess every excellence which we discover in Nature,--all that she has,
and more; since what she derives from it, the Cause of Nature has of
itself. In it must be all power, for except as flowing from it there is
no power possible. Finally, as a capable Cause of law and order in
Nature, and of Intellect and Will in man, the First Cause must be
supereminently endowed with Understanding, and Freedom in the exercise
of its might,--or it would be inferior to its own works.

     Since there must have been something from eternity, [says
     Bolingbroke][321] because there is something now, the eternal Being
     must be an intelligent Being, because there is intelligence now;
     for no man will venture to assert that non-entity can produce
     entity, or non-intelligence, intelligence. And such a Being must
     exist necessarily, whether things have been always as they are, or
     whether they have been made in time: because it is no more easy to
     conceive an infinite than a finite progression of effects without a
     cause.

It is therefore not easy to understand how we can avoid the conclusion
of the distinguished men of Science whom we have heard declare that they
assume "as absolutely self-evident" the existence of a Deity who is the
Creator and Upholder of all things.

It will probably be answered that this is mere Anthropomorphism; which
formidable term appears by many to be considered sufficient to close the
whole question, and to rule the idea of a personal God out of court. Did
not Voltaire remark that if in the beginning God made man to His own
image and likeness, man has well repaid Him ever since? And what can be
more conclusive than that?

But what--after all--does "Anthropomorphism" mean in this connexion?
Simply, that being men we have to speak in human terms, even of what is
superhuman. By no possibility can we do anything else. Limited as we are
by the conditions of our nature, we can find no mode of expression
except such as is based upon sensible experience; and although we can
convince ourselves by rational inference of the existence, and to some
extent of the character, of what is beyond sense, we can frame no
description of it, nor even a phantasm or image by means of imagination,
except so far as we are able to draw upon the phenomena of the external
world. Thus it is that artists who endeavour to represent an immaterial
being, as an angel, a djinn or a sprite, though the essence of the
object they would depict is that it has no body, have perforce to give
it one, though they make it as little gross as possible, for otherwise
they could not portray it at all. But however such images may be
refined and etherealized they are intended to be understood only as
conventional figures to suggest to the mind its own concept, which is as
different from them as the notes produced by a singer are from those on
the score from which he sings. No one imagines that the genius of Music
is a young woman holding a shell to her ear, or that the Cherubim are
heads and wings and nothing more. So it is with statements of the
Theistic belief concerning the First Cause, or God. To put this into
words we are compelled to use the only materials within our reach, and
to borrow our phraseology from that which, within our experience is the
highest and noblest element found in the Universe,--namely our own
intelligence and will. These beyond question must be transcendentally
possessed by the Cause on which they depend. So far Anthropomorphism is
sound sense; that is to say, so long as it attributes all possible
excellence to the source of all. It is foolish and unscientific only
when it attributes to the Absolute and Unconditioned the limitations of
an inferior order of being. We may truly say that a penny is contained
in a pound,--but it does not follow that a sovereign must be of copper.
According to the scientific doctrine that all our familiar forms of
energy are ultimately derived from the Sun, it might well be argued from
observation of a farthing rushlight that Solar Energy includes heat and
light; but not that it is fed on tallow. This appears to be plain and
obvious enough, often as it is forgotten or ignored. As Sir Oliver
Lodge has lately put the matter:[322]

     Shall we possess these things and God not possess them? Let no
     worthy human attribute be denied to the Deity. There are many
     errors, but there is one truth in Anthropomorphism. Whatever worthy
     attribute belongs to man, be it personality or any other, its
     existence in the universe is thereby admitted; we can deny it no
     more.

Or as Professor Baden Powell expresses the same argument:[323]

     That which requires thought and reason to understand must be itself
     thought and reason. That which mind alone can investigate or
     express must be itself mind. And if the highest conception attained
     be but partial, then the mind and reason studied is greater than
     the mind and reason of the student. If the more it be studied the
     more vast and complex is the necessary connexion in reason
     disclosed, then the more evident is the vast extent and compass of
     the intelligence thus partially manifested, and its reality, as
     existing in the immutably connected order of objects examined,
     independently of the mind of the investigator.

The reluctance frequently manifested by scientific men to admit the
force of so plain an argument, appears to be generally due to a
fundamental misconception. It is constantly assumed that to introduce
the element of purpose in Nature is to deny the continuity of Natural
law, and that to speak of design in regard of a process or a structure,
is equivalent to saying that a non-natural agent intervenes at that
particular point and takes the work out of Nature's hands. This, it may
be supposed, was Professor Huxley's idea when he spoke of "the commoner
and coarser forms of teleology," giving as an instance the supposition
that eyes were constructed for the purpose of enabling their possessors
to see. It might indeed be replied that, at any rate, it is less
difficult to suppose this, than that eyes were constructed without any
purpose of seeing, or knowledge of the laws of optics;--but evidently it
is taken for granted that Theists imagine every purposive item in nature
to be violently introduced from without, like the forms of lions or
peacocks into which topiarian gardeners clip their shrubs. But, as has
been said, the laws of Nature are the expression of the mind of God: it
is through them that He accomplishes His design. As Professor Romanes
came to see at the close of his life, it is strange what jealousy there
is of admitting the Creator into Creation. "It is still assumed on both
sides," he wrote,[324] "that there must be something inexplicable or
miraculous about a phenomenon in order to its being divine,"--and
although we must utterly demur to such a description of the position of
Theists, it undoubtedly is true of their adversaries. Their objections
on this head can only signify that it is with the laws of Nature as
with a railway locomotive from which the driver, having got up steam and
set it going, jumps off, leaving it entirely to its own devices. But, as
a legislator, if rightly interpreted, speaks by the mouth of every judge
who administers the law in practice, and applies it to concrete
cases,--so the Author of Nature, whose laws cannot be perverted,
provides through them for all that is to be operated by the forces He
has instituted.

So it is that, as Professors Stewart and Tait have told us, we must
conceive of Him as not the Creator only, but likewise the Upholder of
all things, while Lord Kelvin declares[325] we are unmistakably shown
through Nature that she depends upon one "ever-acting Creator and
Ruler." It is in this omnipresence of Divine influence that Monism finds
the modicum of plausibility which serves it for a foundation. It runs,
indeed, into the absurdity of endeavouring to explain such Omnipresence
by identifying the finite with the Infinite, and attributing to matter
qualities which all experience, and very specially all scientific
experience, contradicts; but, for all that, it scores a distinct point
as against mere materialism, which Comte declares to be "the most
illogical form of metaphysics," and the late Sir Leslie Stephen, "not so
much error as sheer nonsense." Theism avoids the error of either
extreme. While it teaches the essential and fundamental distinction
between the Absolute and the contingent, between the Creator and His
creatures, it teaches likewise that He is ever present in His works, and
that in their every operation He is manifested.

And so, in the words of Rivarol, God is the explanation of the world,
and the world is the demonstration of God. The acceptance of a
Self-existent, All-powerful, and intelligent Being can alone serve as a
basis for any system of Cosmogony which satisfies our intellectual need
of causation; while, on the other hand, the nature of this Being, as
necessarily beyond the scope of our senses, can be known to us only
indirectly through the effects of which He is the cause.

By no one has this conclusion been more clearly stated than by Lamarck,
the real father of Organic Evolutionism, whom many would therefore
represent as an atheist. His words are so much to the point that with
them we may conclude.[326]

     Of the Supreme Being, in a word of God, to whom all infinitude is
     seen to belong, man has thus conceived an idea, which, though
     indirect, is sound, and which necessarily follows from what he
     observes. In the same manner, he has formed another idea, equally
     solid, namely of the boundless power of this Being, suggested by
     the consideration of His works....

     Nature not being intelligent, nor even a being, but an order of
     things constituting a power subject to law, cannot therefore be
     God. She is the wondrous product of His Almighty will: and for us,
     of all created things she is the grandest and most admirable. Thus
     the will of God is everywhere expressed by the laws of Nature,
     since these laws originate from Him.




APPENDIX


_A._ _Evolution and the lower forms of life_ (_p. 165_).

A singularly instructive field for the study of the mutability or
stability of species should be afforded by the lower forms of life, in
which organization is reduced to a minimum, they being mere masses of
protoplasm without even a containing envelope, while their nourishment
is of the simplest. It would therefore appear that environment should be
all-potent to modify them and produce specific modifications, while the
extreme rapidity with which they propagate their kind, and that
unisexually, ought to require no vast extent of time to make such
transmutations apparent.

It is found, however, on the contrary, that nowhere in organic nature
does the type remain more rigidly persistent. Professor Macbride, for
example, tells us,[327]

"The Myxomycetæ may be regarded as the organic group in which the forces
of heredity,--whatever these forces may be--are at their maximum: they
have responded as little as possible to the influence of their
environment."

To the same effect speaks Professor Paulesco of Bucharest, of other
elementary organisms.[328]

What is still more remarkable, these same organisms are extremely
sensitive to altered conditions of environment, which have a direct and
immediate influence, gravely modifying their morphological and
physiological characters, changes in respect of light, minute
alterations of temperature, or the introduction of a new chemical
substance, even in infinitesimal quantity, frequently causing them to
assume forms very different from the specific type, and profoundly
modifying their nutritive processes.

Here, it was at first thought, when Pasteur revealed their history, is
clear evidence of specific transformation. But he presently convinced
himself and others that it is not so, for although liable to assume such
polymorphic forms according to the conditions in which they find
themselves, there is no alteration of specific nature, and if the
original circumstances be restored, the original forms reappear--"une
élasticité functionelle de la cellule lui permettant de se plier à des
conditions variées d'existence sans changer d'être." (Pasteur.)

As M. Duclaux adds:[329]

"La notion d'espèce ne disparait pas pour cela. La variabilité est un
caractère comme un autre, bien que plus difficile à inscrire dans la
classification, et une espèce est aussi bien définie par les
sensibilités diverses qu'elle manifeste que par la petite liste des mots
et de propriétés dans laquelle on croyait pouvoir autrefois enfermer
toute son histoire.... La lien de l'espèce c'est la loi qui préside à
ces changements, et la variété des formes et des fonctions n'est pas du
tout en contradiction avec l'unité de l'espèce."


_B._ _Note on Chap. XV. p. 203._

Since the foregoing pages have been in type there has come to hand the
New York _Literary Digest_ of January 23, 1904, containing the following
article (p. 119).

"ARE THE DAYS OF DARWINISM NUMBERED?"

The recent death of Herbert Spencer lends special timeliness to the
above topic, which is being actively debated just now in German
theological circles. The immediate cause of the revival of interest in
the present status of the Darwinian theory is found in a lengthy article
by the veteran philosopher, Edward von Hartmann, which appears in
Oswald's _Annalen der Naturphilosophie_ (vol. ii. 1903), under the title
'Der Niedergang der Darwinismus' ('The Passing of Darwinism'). That the
famous 'philosopher of the unconscious' is not prejudiced in favour of
biblical views has been more than clear since the publication of his
_Selbstzersetzung der Christentums_ ('Disintegration of Christianity')
in 1874. Hartmann in his new article has this to say--

'In the sixties of the past century the opposition of the older group of
savants to the Darwinian hypothesis was still supreme. In the seventies,
the new idea began to gain ground rapidly in all cultured countries. In
the eighties, Darwin's influence was at its height, and exercised an
almost absolute control over technical research. In the nineties, for
the first time, a few timid expressions of doubt and opposition were
heard, and these gradually swelled into a great chorus of voices, aiming
at the overthrow of the Darwinian theory. In the first decade of the
twentieth century it has become apparent that the days of Darwinism are
numbered. Among its latest opponents are such savants as Eimer, Gustav
Wolf, De Vries, Hoocke, von Wellstein, Fleischmann, Reinke, and many
others.'

These facts, according to Hartmann's view, while they do not indicate
that the Darwinian theory is doomed, undermine its most radical
features:

'The theory of descent is safe, but Darwinism has been weighed and found
wanting. Selection can in general not achieve any positive results, but
only negative effects; the origin of species by minimal changes is
possible, but has not been demonstrated. The pretensions of Darwinism as
a pure mechanical explanation of results that show purpose are totally
groundless.'

Other scholars think that Hartmann does not do full justice to the
reaction that has set in, particularly in Germany, against Darwinism.
This sentiment is voiced by Professor Zoeckler, of the University of
Greifswald, in the _Beweis des Glaubens_ (No. xi.), a journal which
recently published a collection of anti-Darwinian views from German
naturalists. He calls the article of Hartmann 'the tombstone-inscription
[_Grabschrift_] for Darwinism,' and goes on to say:

     'The claim that the hypothesis of descent is secured scientifically
     must most decidedly be denied. Neither Hartmann's exposition nor
     the authorities he cites have the force of moral conviction for the
     claim for purely mechanical descent. The descent of organisms is
     not a scientifically demonstrated proposition, although descent in
     an ideal sense can be made to harmonize with the biblical account
     of creation.'

Views of a similar kind are voiced in many quarters. The Hamburg savant,
Edward Hoppe, has written a brochure, _Ist mit der Descendenz-Theorie
eine religiöse Vorstellung vereinbar?_ [Is the Theory of Evolution
reconcilable with the Religious Idea?] in which he takes issue, in the
name of religion, with the purely naturalistic type of Darwinian
thought. The most pronounced convert to anti-Darwinian views is
Professor Fleischmann, of Erlangen, who has not only discarded the
mechanical conception of the origin of being, but the whole Darwinian
theory. He recently delivered a course of lectures, entitled 'Die
Darwin'sche Theorie,' which have appeared in book form in Leipsic. He
comes to this conclusion: 'The Darwinian theory of descent has not a
single fact to confirm it in the realm of nature. It is not the result
of scientific research, but purely the product of the imagination.'

       *       *       *       *       *

From another article in the same journal (p. 116), entitled 'A Study of
Creation,' the following paragraphs may be cited:

     "The French have never been enthusiastic Darwinians. It is,
     perhaps, not surprising, therefore, to find a French geologist, M.
     Stanislas Meunier, arguing in the _Revue Scientifique_ (December
     19) against all schools of transformism and stoutly maintaining
     what is practically a doctrine of special creation. He admits that
     living beings form a connected series; but the connexion, he
     believes, is not one of physical descent, but inheres in something
     outside of and pre-existent to the earth. He does not name it, but
     he would probably not object to the inference that it is the mind
     of a creator.

     "M. Meunier gives at some length his reasons for rejecting
     Darwin's, Lamarck's, and all other theories of transformism. All we
     can be sure of, he thinks, is that, as in the case of the various
     kinds of pottery, we have to do with an orderly development,
     although he thinks it is not a development by descent. He closes,
     thus:

     "'Doubtless we cannot usefully risk any hypothesis on the mechanism
     of the production of living things; but it is, perhaps, a step in
     advance only to come to the conclusion that the cause of life and
     its manifestations on the earth is exterior to the earth; that it
     is anterior to our world, just as are doubtless the laws of physics
     and chemistry, which govern the relations of matter and force
     throughout space.

     "'The philosophy of science can lose nothing by the admission of
     points of view that, far from narrowing our subjects of study,
     enlarge them beyond all limits; and this is, perhaps, the occasion
     to show once more to persons who are turning toward metaphysics in
     their thirst for mystery, that they will find in pure science that
     wherewith they may satisfy their legitimate aspirations.'"


_C._ _Succession of Plant forms p. 220._

Recent investigations have led to the remarkable discovery that many
fern-like plants of the Carboniferous rocks, hitherto classed as
Cryptogams, were in reality seed-bearers, and thus intermediate between
Cryptogams and Cycads, the most primitive of existing seed-plants. They
have accordingly been placed in a special group "Cycadofilices," or
"Fern-Cycads," and regarded as transitional types, the view that they
are the remains of a natural bridge connecting the Ferns with the
Gymnosperms having received wide support,[330] and at first sight this
conclusion would appear natural and obvious. But here, as in other
cases, the difficulty is that the seeds which have been found are all
fully developed; there are none in the intermediate stages between true
spores and true seeds; we have the finished article, but no trace of
seeds in the making; which upon any theory of evolution must have been
exceedingly numerous. Hence Dr. Scott tells us:[331]

"The important discoveries of the seeds of the Pteridosperms scarcely
touch the question of descent, for these organs are of too advanced a
type to throw light on the probable derivation of the group."

In this instance, therefore, as in others, it remains true that in no
case is any trace found of rudimentary character in the earliest fossil
specimens of any class.

It is undoubtedly a further puzzle that some of the Carboniferous
cryptogams which did not bear real seeds, yet simulated them, a habit
not easily explained on evolutionary principles.


_D._ _The Course of Evolution._

The evidence of Professor Vines quoted in the text (pp. 202, 237)
receives a remarkable confirmation from that of Dr. Smith Woodward,
Keeper of Geology in the National Museum of Natural History. Speaking
before the International Congress of Arts and Science, St. Louis,
U.S.A., September 22nd, 1904, he thus touched upon the same question,
which he illustrated especially from the history of fossil fishes, which
he has made his special study.[332]

     "It must be confessed that repeated discoveries have now left faint
     hope that exact and gradual links will ever be forthcoming between
     most of the families and genera. The 'imperfection of the record,'
     of course, may still render some of the negative evidence
     untrustworthy; but even approximate links would be much commoner in
     collections than they actually are if the doctrine of gradual
     evolution were correct. Palæontology, indeed, is clearly in favour
     of the theory of discontinuous mutation, or advance by sudden
     changes, which has lately received so much support from the
     botanical experiments of H. de Vries.

     "Further results obtained from the study of fossils have a bearing
     even on the deepest problems of Biology, namely, those connected
     with the nature of life itself. For instance, it is allowable to
     infer, from the statements already made, that the main factor in
     the evolution of organisms is some inherent impulse--the 'bathmic
     force' of Cope--which acts with unerring certainty whatever be the
     conditions of the moment."


_E._ _Pedigree of the Horse._

Some recent evidence on this subject certainly does not clear away the
difficulties set forth in the text.

From _Nature_, Sept. 8, 1904, p. 474.

     "Professor Osborn (in a lecture before the British Association)
     mentioned that more than a hundred more or less complete skeletons
     of horses and horse-like animals had been found in North America.
     He thought he had established the fact that horses were
     polyphyletic, there being four or five contemporary series in the
     Miocene, but that the direct origin of the genus _Equus_ in North
     America was not established with certainty."

Professor Sedgwick, _Student's Text Book of Zoology_, p. 599.

     "Much has been written on the ancestry of the horse. It has been
     maintained by many authors that a continuous series of forms
     connecting it with the four-toed, brachyodont Hyracothoridæ of the
     Eocene has been discovered, and that here if anywhere a
     demonstrative historical proof has been obtained of the doctrine of
     organic evolution. Without desiring in the smallest degree to
     impugn that doctrine, it may be permitted us here to examine rather
     closely the view that the series of forms which recent
     palæontological research has undoubtedly brought to light
     constitute that historical proof which has been claimed for them."

[After an examination of the structural characters of these intermediate
forms, viz., _Pliohippus_, _Protohippus_, _Desmathippus_, _Miohippus_,
_Mesohippus_, _Orohippus_, and _Hyracotherium_, the author proceeds]:

     "So far as the characters mentioned are concerned, we have here a
     very remarkable series of forms which at first sight seem to
     constitute a linear series with no cross-connections. Whether,
     however, they really do this is a difficult point to decide. There
     are flaws in the chain of evidence, which require careful and
     detailed consideration. For instance, the genus _Equus_ appears in
     the Upper Siwalik beds, which have been ascribed to the Miocene
     age. It has, however, been maintained that these beds are in
     reality Lower Pliocene, or even Upper Pliocene. It is clear that
     the decision of this question is of the utmost importance. If
     _Equus_ really existed in the Upper Miocene, it was antecedent to
     some of its supposed ancestors. Again in the series of equine
     forms, _Mesohippus_, _Miohippus_, _Desmathippus_, _Protohippus_,
     which are generally regarded as coming into the direct line of
     equine descent, Scott[333] points out that each genus is, in some
     respect or other, less modified than its predecessor. In other
     words, it would appear that in this succession of North American
     forms the earlier genera show, in some points, closer resemblance
     to the modern _Equus_ than to their immediate successors. It is
     possible that these difficulties and others of the same kind will
     be overcome with the growth of knowledge, but it is necessary to
     take note of them, for in the search after truth nothing is gained
     by ignoring such apparent discrepancies between theory and fact."

Besides the structure of limbs and teeth, another argument for the
descent of the horse has been drawn from certain phenomena of
colouration. Stripings are found not unfrequently to occur in the legs
and withers, which Darwin took for a reversion to the character of a
very remote ancestor, the common parent, in fact, of horses and asses,
which he supposed to have been striped all over like a zebra. Like other
such common ancestors, this hypothetical animal had never been seen, but
was thought to be most nearly represented by the Kathiwar horse, with
stripes on a dun ground, a specimen of which is exhibited as
illustrating the hypothesis in the National Museum of Zoology.

Recently, however, Professor Ridgeway, who has devoted special attention
to the problem, has satisfied himself that there is no sufficient
foundation for these suppositions. He thus sums up the evidence which he
has been able to collect:[334]

     "Darwin's view that the original ancestor of the Equidæ was a
     dun-coloured animal, striped all over, was based, not merely on the
     occurrence of stripes in horses, but on his belief that such
     stripes were common in dun horses, and that there was a tendency in
     horses to revert to dun colour. But it must be confessed that the
     facts do not warrant his conclusion.... It is clear that stripes
     are at least as often a concomitant of dark as of dun colour.
     Moreover, if Darwin's hypothesis of a dun-coloured ancestor with
     stripes is sound, dark colours such as bay and brown must be of
     more recent origin, and accordingly there ought to be a great
     readiness on the part of a progeny of a light-coloured animal when
     mated with a dark to revert to the light. But Professor Ewart's
     zebra stallion has never been able to stamp his own peculiar
     pattern or his own colours on his hybrid offspring. The ground
     colour has been determined by the dams of the hybrids."




INDEX


_Abiogenesis_, 49-51

_Ætiology_, 197

Agnosticism, Huxley's first principle of, 4
  Its fundamental principle unreasonable, 272

American Museum and the pedigree of the Horse, 248

Amphibians, embryology, 195

"Anthropomorphism," 274, 275

_Archæopteryx_, 171

_Archebiosis_, 53

Argus pheasant, ornamentation, 175

_Arsinoetherium_, 267

Atlantic cable, an illustration from, of chance and purpose, 115

Atoms, 37, 41, 88, 89, 90, 136

Augustine, St.--on creation _causaliter et seminaliter_, 141, 207

_Axolotl_, 195


Baden-Powell, Prof.--on the nature of the First Cause, 276

Bastian, Dr. H. C.--on spontaneous generation, 21, 50, 53

_Bathybius Haeckelii_, 21

Batrachians, appearance of, 225

Bats, an evolutionary puzzle, 229, 257

Bee, cell-making instinct, 156, 179

Bickerton, Prof.,--on dissipation of energy, 27 n.

_Biogenesis_, 49, 50

Blanchard, M.--on variation, 164;
  on Darwinian argumentation, 181;
  on fecundity as a factor in survival, 188;
  on the problem of creation, 268

Bolingbroke, Viscount,--on the nature of the first cause, 273

Bridgman, Laura, 77

Bunsen, Chevalier,--on animal sounds and language, 74

Butler, Bishop,--on intelligence as a factor in cosmogony, 100


Carruthers, Mr. W.--on specific stability of _Salix polaris_, 164;
  on classification of plants, 214;
  on the geological record, 216, 265;
  on past history of plant-life, 216 _seq._; on
  an assertion of Haeckel's, 221;
  on the evidence supplied by fossil plants, 223

Case,  Prof.--on the meaning of "fortuitous," 125

Causation, principle of, 2, 87, 94, 107

Cause, the First. See _First Cause_

Chance, 110 _seq._, 151, 174

Cicero--on the evidence for a Deity, 103

Clerk-Maxwell, Prof.--on force and energy, 23n;
  on Molecules, 90, 104;
  on evidence of design, _ibid._

Clifford, Prof. W. K.--on design in Nature, 101

Clodd, Mr. E.--on atoms, 41

Comte, Auguste--on materialism, 278

Consciousness, origin of, 67

_Cosmos_ and its Cause, 86 _seq._

Croll, Mr.--on force and its determination, 94-96

Crookes, Sir W.--on renovation of energy, 26;
  on radium and radio-activity, 42, 43

Cryptogamous plants, fossil history, 219

Crystallization, 63, 64


Darwin, Mr.--on the "law of continuity," 57;
  on spontaneous generation, 58;
  on the mental gulf between man and brute, 71;
  on the origin of language, 79, 178;
  on "creation," 91;
  on the structure of the eye, 91;
  on chance as a factor of the world, 116;
  on pain and suffering as an objection to design, 119;
  disclaims achievements attributed to him, 150;
  his system, 153 _seq._ (see _Darwinism_);
  his mode of arguing, 178;
  dogmatism, 179;
  pleads lack of knowledge as an argument, 182;
  on single origin of every species, 210, 254;
  on genealogy of the Horse, 259;
  on the imperfection of the geological record, 264

Darwinism, 149 _seq._;
  false representations of, 149-151;
  sketch of system, 151-157;
  facts favouring, 158-160;
  difficulties of, 160 _seq._;
  explains no origins, 161;
  ignores the prime factor, _ibid._;
  improbabilities, 166, 173;
  does not explain initial developments, 170 _seq._;
  nor artistic ornamentation, 175;
  specious arguments too easily forthcoming, 177;
  does not account for organic progression, 187;
  scientific opinions concerning, 198 _seq._, 281

Dawson, Sir J. W.--on the first origin of life, 208;
  on the history of animal life, 223; on genealogy of the _Equidæ_, 247;
  of the _Cetacea_, 257;
  of bats,
  258;
  on lack of palæontological evidence for evolution, 260

Design, evidence of, in Nature, 90, 97 _seq._;
  Kant on the necessity of, 150

Determination of force, its necessity, 94-96, 114

Determinism of the will, 81 _seq._

Development of organic types, 146

Dicotyledons, appearance of, 220

Diderot--on evidence of intelligence in Nature, 125

_Dinotherium_, classification of, 259 n

Dogs, their vocal expression of emotions, 73

Du Bois-Reymond, Herr,--on the "Seven Enigmas," 31-33;
  on the progress of human development, 68, 69;
  on Haeckel's genealogies, 264

_Dysteleology_, 190


Ear, structure of, 93

_Electrons_, 42

Elephant and Tortoise of Hindu astronomy, 107

Embryology and Evolution, 158-160, 192 _seq._

"Energy," 23; conservation of, _ibid._;
  dissipation of, 24 _seq._;
  renovation of, 26-28

"Enigmas, the Seven," 32

_Entropy_, 25

_Equidæ_. See _Horse_

Ether, a constituent of the universe, 36

Evil, Origin of, the darkest of mysteries, 120

"Evolution," different meanings of term, 8;
    as an operative law, 10-14;
    eternal, 11;
    as a philosophy, 22 _seq._;
    formula of, 145
  As a process, 45 _seq._
  Organic, 142 _seq._;
    essential characters of theory, 147, 206;
    nature of evidence required, 208 _seq._;
    history of in vegetable and animal kingdoms, 216 _seq._

Eye, origin of, 91, 154
  Helmholtz, on defects of, 91 n.;
    structure of, 155 n.;
    evolution of, 168


Fabre, M.--on Darwin's facts, 200 n.;
  on our ignorance of Nature, 203

Faraday, Prof.--on gravitation, 125

Final causality (Teleology), 98 _seq._

First Cause, the object of inference, 96, 97;
  nature of as shown by reason, 270 _seq._

Fish, appearance of, 225;
  problems presented by, 233

Flight, problem of, 93

Flower, Sir W.--on the extinct American horse, 254

Force, nature of, 23

Free-will, Prof. Haeckel on, 33, 81;
  Dr. Johnson on, 84

Fuegians, mental likeness to ourselves, 72


Garnett, Prof.--on force, 23

Gaudry, M.--on ancestry of whales, 257;
 of bats, 258;
 of proboscidians, 259

Genera and species, 244 n.

_Generatio aequivoca_, 65

Generation, mysteries of, 123 _seq._

Geological formations, succession of, 213

Geological record, 216, 264, _seq._

Giraffe, evolution of, 154

Glass, fortuitously discovered, 115

Goethe--on "iron law," 14

Gore, Dr. G.--on machinery as excluding idea of design, 118

"Grand Question," the, 96

Grimthorpe, Lord (Sir E. Beckett)--on matter, 37; on the problem of flight, 93;
  on evidences of purpose, 94;
  on generation, 124;
  on the structure of the eye, 155 n.

Gymnosperms, appearance of, 219


Haeckel, Prof. E.--on "rational view of the world," 10-14;
  on the "magic word evolution," 16;
  on scientific method, 18, 20;
  on the law of substance, 13, 23;
  on the conservation of energy, 23, 24, 26;
  on the "Seven Enigmas," 33;
  on the nature and properties of matter, 35, 39;
  on the artificial manufacture of protoplasm, 59;
  on free-will and determinism, 81;
  on design in Nature, 90, 150;
  on chance, 117;
  on Monism, 128;
  on annihilation as a desirable end, 130;
  on the ultimate reality, 135;
  unfounded claims on behalf of Darwin, 150;
  bases arguments on lack of knowledge, 183;
  on rudimentary organs and "Dysteleology," 190;
  on single origin of every species, 210;
  on the appearance of the _Apetalæ_, 221;
  invents geological "ante-periods," 236;
  and intermediate forms, 261;
  his pedigree of man, 261;
  his method of solving the riddles of Nature, 264

Heredity, 83, 99

Herschel, Sir J.--on molecules as manufactured articles, 89;
  on evidence of mind in Nature, 100;
  on gravitation, 125

_Hesperornis_, 171

Heurtin, Marie, 77

_Hippops_, 246, 252

Hird, Mr. D.--on the omnipotence of Evolution, 14;
  on transformations of force, 129

Holland, Sir H.--on structure of ear, 93

Homer, a "half-savage Greek," 69 n.

_Homo alalus_, and _sapiens_, 81

Horse, structure of, 94, 240
  Genealogy of, 236, 241 _seq._

Hudson, Dr.--on neglect of
  study of present life in favour of evolutionary speculations, 185

Humboldt, W. von--on human speech, 76

Hutton, F. W.--on finite duration of the world, 2;
  and of the universe, 28;
  on dissipation of energy, 27 n.

Huxley, Prof.--on finite duration of the world, 1;
  on the nature of science, 5;
  on "Laws of Nature," 16-18;
  on Evolution as a philosophy, 21, 22;
  on matter, 38;
  on the beginning of life, 46;
  on faith and verification, 47;
  on the fundamental principle of Evolution, 48;
  on spontaneous generation, 50-54;
  on protoplasm, 59, 60;
  on structure of the Horse, 93;
  on theism and creation, 100;
  on teleology, 102;
  on theism and chance, 103;
  on the non-existence of chance, 111;
  on seeming waste in nature, 121;
  on mind and matter, 133;
  on Saurian birds, 172;
  on _Dysteleology_, 191;
  on embryology and ætiology, 197;
  on the Darwinian theory, 200, 201;
  on facts as the only sound basis of theory, 204;
  on the fundamental doctrine of organic evolution, 206;
  on evolutionary evidence, 235;
  on Haeckel's "Ante-periods," 236;
  claims palæontological evidence as demonstrative of Evolution, 239, 261;
  his pedigree of the Horse, 236, 242 _seq._;
  discussed, 244 _seq._

_Hydra_, structure of, 146


_Icthyornis_, 171

_Inertia_, a property of matter, 39

Inference, 5 n.; 96, 272

Insects, insular, as an argument for Natural Selection, 154, 167

Invertebrate life, history of, 225


Johnson, Dr.--on free-will, 84

Julius Cæsar, his polydactyle charger, 241


Kant--on necessity of design, 150

Keller, Miss 77

Kelvin, Lord (Sir W. Thomson),--on the dissipation of energy, 25, 26;
  his Law of Parsimony, 98;
  on science and theism, 104, 278


Laing, Mr. S.--on matter and motion, 35

Lamarck--on Nature's witness to God, 279

Language, our "Rubicon," 73;
  distinctively human, 73-78;
  essential character, 74;
  theories as to origin, 79

Lankester, Prof. Ray--on evolution of _Proboscideae_, 259

Laws of Nature--what? 16,
  17, 86;
  expressions of creative intelligence, 123, 277

Lewes, Mr.--on Laws of Nature, 86

Liddon, Canon--on Laws of Nature, 16

Life had a beginning, 46;
  origin of, 46-66;
  laws of, 90

Link forms wanting in Nature, 208 _seq._, 228 _seq._

Lodge, Sir O.--on non-purposive Evolution, 202;
  on anthropomorphism and the First Cause, 276

Lydekker, Mr. R.--on pedigree of the Horse, 248

Lyell, Sir C.--on the need of creation, 269


Mallock, Mr. W.--on human conduct, 139

Mammals, appearance of, 226;
  problems suggested by, 255

Man, faculties, 71 _seq._;
  appearance of, 227

Marsh, Prof.--on Evolution, 47;
  on _Hippops_, 252

Marshall, Prof. Milnes--on the teachings of Evolution, 15;
  on embryology, 159;
  on Haeckel's treatment of the same, 195

Marsupials, first appearance, 226

_Materia Prima_, 42 n

Matter, 35;
  indestructibility, 13, 23;
  properties, 36 _seq._;
  constitution, 37, 41 _seq._, 135;
  and motion, 39;
  dissolution of, 43;
  and mind, 131 _seq._

Max Müller, Prof.--on language, 73, 75

Mendeléeff's Periodic Law, 88

Mind and matter, connexion of, 131 _seq._

Mivart, Mr. St. G.--on the gulf between man and brute, 72;
  on the essence of language, 74;
  on theories as to its origin, 79;
  on the ease with which Darwinian arguments can be found, 177;
  on embryology of Salamander, 193;
  on incompatibility of geological evidence with theory of Evolution by minute and gradual modification, 228, 230;
  on evolution of the Horse, 255;
  on the failure of apparent links, 267

Mole, evolution of, 181

Molecules, 88;
  "manufactured articles," 89;
  Clerk-Maxwell on, 90, 104

Monism, 126 _seq._, 278;
  and morality, 137;
  and Truth, 138

Monocotyledons, appearance of, 219

Motion, as a property of matter, 39

_Myriadism_, a better term for _Monism_, 136


"Natural Selection," what it is, 152 _seq._;
  its powers discussed, 165 _seq._;
  can produce nothing, 168;
  a misnomer, 174. See _Darwinism_.

"Nature," 6

Nebular hypothesis, 11, 45, 48

Newman, Cardinal--on the nature of laws, 17;
  on law and causality, 99

Newton, Sir I., his laws of motion, 39;
  on evidence for theism, 103

_North British_ Reviewer--on the limits of variation, 162;
  on the facility with which Darwinian arguments can be found, 177;
  on Darwinism and geographical distribution, 184;
  on the "maybe's" of Darwinism, _ibid._;
  on incompatibility of geological evidence with evolutionary theory, 228


Obrecht, Martha, 77

_Ontogeny,_ 83 n.

Organic progression--and Darwinism, 186;
  not evidenced by palæontology, 234

Organs, vestigial or rudimentary as an argument for evolution, 158, 189

_Origin of Species_, appearance of, 151

Owen, Sir R.--on the _Archæopteryx_, 172


Pain and suffering, as an objection to Design, 119, 121

Palæontology--the only sound basis for evolutionary theory, 204;
  its evidence adverse to progressive developments, 234

Paley--his "watch argument" disproved by machine-made watches, 118

Pasteur, M.--on spontaneous generation, 50;
  on initial temperature of life, 57 n.

Peacock's feathers and Natural Selection, 155 n., 175

Perrier, M. E.--on the evidence for Evolution, 237

Pettigrew, Mr.--on wings of birds, 93

_Phylogeny_, 83 n.

_Prothyle_, 42

Protoplasm, 59-63

Purpose and natural laws, 122


Quatrefages, M. de--on life and non-life, 63;
  on crystallization, 64;
  on variation in Nature, 162;
  on Darwinian argumentation, 180, 182, 183;
  on embryology, 194;
  on absence of intermediate forms in Nature, 212, 229

Quinton, M.--new doctrine of life development, 57 n.


_Rana opisthodon_--embryology, 195

Rayleigh, Lord--on atheistic science, 105;
  on scientific authority, 109

Reason generates speech, not _vice versa_, 76

Reptiles, age of, 226

Reptilian birds, 171

Rivarol--on God and the world, 279

Robin, M. Ch.--on Darwinism, 198

Romanes, Prof.--on continuity and universality of natural causation, 29, 30;
  on origin of language, 79;
  on Monism, 129;
  on the inadequacy of Natural Selection, 201;
  on jealousy of admitting the Creator into creation, 277

Roscoe, Sir H.--on artificial production of protoplasm, 62


Salamander, embryological features, 193

_Salix polaris_, its specific stability, 164, 222

Saporta, Comte de--on parallel development of animal and vegetable life, 228;
  on the problem of Creation, 268

Schoolmen, the--on relation of soul and body, 132

Scorpion, maternal and unfilial instincts, 122

Selous, Mr. E.--exemplifies Monistic doctrines, 139 n.

Sensation and consciousness,--origin of, 67

Snakes, embryological features, 194

Species, on evolutionary principles must each derive from a single origin, 210;
  isolation of, 211;
  and genera, 244 n.

Specific stability in Nature, 164

Spencer, Mr. Herbert--on the beginning of life, 56;
  his "Formula of Evolution," 145;
  on the process of organic evolution, 147

Spontaneous Generation. See _Life, origin of_

Stephen, Sir L.--on materialism, 78

Stewart, Prof. Balfour--on finite duration of the world, 1;
  on dissipation of energy, 25.
  See also _Stewart and Tait_

Stewart and Tait--on self-evidence of theism, 104, 273

Stirling, Mr.--on protoplasm, 59, 61

Stokes, Sir G. G.--on evidence for design, 104

Suarez--on creative power and natural law, 207

Substance, law of, 13, 14, 22, 23, 33, 41, 118

Survival of the fittest, and organic progression, 186


Tait, Prof. P.--On the scope of science, 18, 20;
  on force and energy, 23 n.;
  on the properties of matter, 39;
  on "pseudoscience," 40;
  on scientific methods, 47;
  on mechanical theories of life, 65.
  See also _Stewart and Tait_.

Teleology--98 _seq._

Theism, 97 _seq._, 277

Thiselton-Dyer, Sir W.--on protoplasm, 60-62

_Thyroid_ gland--its lesson, 191 n.

Time, as a factor in Evolution, 80, 169

Transformism, 142, etc.
  See _Evolution, organic_

_Triton alpestris_, 195

Tyndall, Prof.--on the material origin of life, 38;
  on the beginning of life, 46;
  on scientific method, 47;
  on spontaneous generation, 54-56;
  on the potentialities of matter, 54;
  on mind and matter, 133


Ungulates, structure of limbs, 241


Variation, the basis of Darwin's calculations, 162;
  its limitations, _ibid._;
  minute at each stage, 165

_Verbum mentale_, 76

Vines, Prof. S. H.--on speculations and facts, 185;
  on the present status of the Darwinian theory, 202;
  on our present knowledge, 237

Virchow, Prof.--on the beginning of life, 46;
  on spontaneous generation, 65

Vogt, Carl--on embryology, 194;
  on Haeckel's genealogies, 264


Wallace, Mr. A. R.--on breaches of natural causation, 64;
  on the origin of life, _ibid._;
  on the origin of animal life, 69, 70

Weismann, Prof.--on our intellectual need for causality, 101

Weldon, Prof.--on Huxley's scientific method, 21, 197

Whales, appearance of, 257

Whitney, Prof.--on origin of language, 79

Will, the only cause known to us, 99, 100.
  See also _Free-will_

Williamson, Prof. W. C.--on missing links, 231;
  on an unrecognized factor in life-developments, 232;
  on the geological history of fishes, 233;
  on genealogy of the _equidæ_, 251;
  on lack of palæontological support for the Evolution theory, 260

Wings, as machines, 93

Wollaston, Mr.--on "Nature" as an agent, 108

World, beginning of, 1


_Zeuglodon_, 257




A LIST OF WORKS

MAINLY BY

ROMAN CATHOLIC

WRITERS


TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                   PAGE

THE WESTMINSTER LIBRARY                               2

THE CATHOLIC CHURCH                                   3

FOR THE CLERGY AND STUDENTS                           4

BIOGRAPHY                                             6

HISTORY                                               8

THE BEGINNINGS OF THE CHURCH                          8

EDUCATIONAL                                           9

STONYHURST PHILOSOPHICAL SERIES                      10

POETRY, FICTION, ETC.                                10

NOVELS BY M. E. FRANCIS (MRS. FRANCIS BLUNDELL)      11

WORKS BY THE VERY REV. CANON SHEEHAN, D.D.           11

WORKS BY CARDINAL NEWMAN                             12


LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.

91-93 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK

8 HORNBY ROAD, BOMBAY

303 BOWBAZAR STREET, CALCUTTA.

1909

The Westminster Library.

A Series of Manuals for Catholic Priests and Students.

Edited by the Right Rev. Mgr. BERNARD WARD, President of St. Edmund's
College, and the Rev. HERBERT THURSTON, S.J.

THE TRADITION OF SCRIPTURE: its Origin, Authority and Interpretation. By
the Very Rev. WILLIAM BARRY, D.D., Canon of St. Chads, Birmingham. Crown
8vo. 3s. 6d. _net._

THE HOLY EUCHARIST. By the Right Rev. JOHN CUTHBERT HEDLEY, Bishop of
Newport. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. _net._

THE LEGENDS OF THE SAINTS: An Introduction to Hagiography. From the
French of Père H. DELEHAYE, S.J., Bollandist. Translated by Mrs. V. M.
CRAWFORD. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. _net._

THE PRIEST'S STUDIES. By the Very Rev. THOMAS SCANNELL, D.D., Canon of
Southwark Cathedral, Editor of _The Catholic Dictionary_. Crown 8vo. 3s.
6d. _net._

The following Volumes are in Preparation:--

THE CHRISTIAN CALENDAR. By the Rev. HERBERT THURSTON, S.J.

THE STUDY OF THE FATHERS. By the Rev. Dom JOHN CHAPMAN, O.S.B.

THE ORIGIN OF THE GOSPELS. By the Right Rev. Mgr. A. S. BARNES, M.A.

THE BREVIARY. By the Rev. EDWARD MYERS, M.A.

THE INSTRUCTION OF CONVERTS. By the Rev. SYDNEY F. SMITH, S.J.

THE MASS. By the Rev. ADRIAN FORTESCUE, Ph.D., D.D.


The Catholic Church.

THE CATHOLIC CHURCH FROM WITHIN. With a Preface by His Eminence CARDINAL
VAUGHAN, late Archbishop of Westminster. Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d. _net._

LETTERS FROM THE BELOVED CITY. TO S. B. FROM PHILIP. By the Rev. KENELM
DIGBY BEST. Cr. 8vo. 1s. 6d.

CONTENTS.--Why Philip writes these Letters to S. B.--S. B.'s
Difficulties fully stated--The Good Shepherd--I come that they may have
life--Feed my Lambs--Feed my Sheep--One Fold and One Shepherd--Christ's
Mother and Christ's
Church--Unity--Holiness--Catholicity--Apostolicity--Our Lady's
Dowry--War--Pacification.

LENT AND HOLY WEEK: Chapters on Catholic Observance and Ritual. By
HERBERT THURSTON, S.J. Crown 8vo. 6s. _net._

BISHOP GORE AND THE CATHOLIC CLAIMS. By Dom JOHN CHAPMAN, O.S.B. 8vo.
Paper covers, 6d. _net_; cloth, 1s. _net._

ASPECTS OF ANGLICANISM; or, Some Comments on Certain Incidents in the
'Nineties. By Mgr. JAMES MOYES, D.D., Canon of Westminster Cathedral.
Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. _net._ Paper Covers 2s. _net._

*** _This book is a free comment from a Roman Catholic
standpoint upon certain incidents in the religious life of Anglicanism
in the 'Nineties. It deals incidentally with the Lambeth Judgment, and
with the question of continuity. It represents the criticism which, from
the point of view of history and theology, some of the later
developments of Anglicanism would suggest to a Roman Catholic mind._

DIVINE AUTHORITY. By J. F. SCHOLFIELD, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge,
late Rector of St. Michael's, Edinburgh. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. _net._

INFALLIBILITY: a Paper read before the Society of St. Thomas of
Canterbury. By the Rev. VINCENT McNABB, O.P. Crown 8vo. Sewed, 1s.
_net._

SELF-KNOWLEDGE AND SELF-DISCIPLINE. By the Rev. B. W. MATURIN. Crown
8vo. 5s. _net._

LAWS OF THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. By the same Author. Crown 8vo. 5s. _net._

THE INNER LIFE OF THE SOUL. Short Spiritual Messages for the
Ecclesiastical Year. By S. L. EMERY. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. _net._


For the Clergy and Students.

THE TRAINING OF A PRIEST: an Essay on Clerical Education. By the Rev.
JOHN TALBOT SMITH, LL.D., President of the Catholic Summer School of
America. Crown 8vo. 6s. _net._

SCHOLASTICISM, Old and New: an Introduction to Scholastic Philosophy,
Mediæval and Modern. By M. de WULF, Doctor of Laws, Doctor of Philosophy
and Letters, Professor at the University of Louvain. Translated by P.
COFFEY, Ph.D., Professor of Philosophy, Maynooth College, Ireland. 8vo.
6s. _net._

OUTLINES OF DOGMATIC THEOLOGY. By SYLVESTER JOSEPH HUNTER, S.J. Crown
8vo. Three vols., 6s. 6d. each.

THE SERMON OF THE SEA, and Other Studies. By the Rev. ROBERT KANE, S.J.
Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

STUDIES ON THE GOSPELS. By VINCENT ROSE, O.P., Professor in the
University of Fribourg. Authorised English Version, by ROBERT FRASER,
D.D., Domestic Prelate to H.H. Pius X. Crown 8vo. 6s. _net._

ESSAYS IN PASTORAL MEDICINE. By AUSTIN O'MALLEY, M.D., Ph.D., LL.D.,
Pathologist and Ophthalmologist to Saint Agnes's Hospital, Philadelphia;
and JAMES J. WALSH, Ph.D., LL.D., Adjunct Professor of Medicine at the
New York Polytechnic School for Graduates in Medicine. 8vo. 10s. 6d.
_net._

*** _The term "Pastoral Medicine" may be said to represent that
part of medicine which is of import to a pastor in his cure, and those
divisions of ethics and moral theology which concern a physician in his
practice. This book is primarily intended for Roman Catholic
confessors._

THE SCIENCE OF ETHICS. By Rev. MICHAEL CRONIN, M.A., D.D., Ex-Fellow,
Royal University of Ireland; Professor, Clonliffe College, Dublin. 8vo.

Vol. 1., General Ethics. 12s. 6d. net.

THE KEY TO THE WORLD'S PROGRESS: an Essay on Historical Logic, being
some Account of the Historical Significance of the Catholic Church. By
CHARLES STANTON DEVAS, M.A. Crown 8vo. 5s. _net._

Popular Edition. Paper covers, 6d.

*** _The object of this book is to give to the logic and
history of Newman an economic or sociological setting, and thus to show
that "for the explanation of World-history we must first have the true
theory of the Christian Church and her life through eighteen centuries".
