IV

"THE LAW OF EVOLUTION"


That there is a self-existing and self-sufficing "Law of Evolution" to
which everything in the world must be ascribed, is the doctrine of those
Evolutionists who are most active in propagating their creed and who
most loudly proclaim that it alone is scientific. The great leader and
prophet of this school, Professor Ernst Haeckel, assures us[9] that he
gives expression,

     to that rational view of the world which is being forced upon us
     with such logical rigour by the modern advancements in our
     knowledge of nature as a unity, a view in reality held by almost
     all unprejudiced and thinking men of science, although but few have
     the courage (or the need) to declare it openly.

The plain and rational conclusion thus exhibited is, he tells us,[10]
the special glory of modern research.

     It is true [he writes] that there were philosophers who spoke of
     the evolution of things a thousand years ago; but the recognition
     that such a law dominates the entire universe, and that the world
     is nothing else than an eternal "evolution of substance," is a
     fruit of the nineteenth century.

So far as concerns the world which we actually inhabit, its first
beginning, we must, he tells us, suppose[11] to have been a vast nebula
of infinitely attenuated and light material, rotating upon its own
axis.[12]

     Given this first beginning of the cosmogonic movement, it is easy,
     on mathematical principles, to deduce and mathematically establish
     the further phenomena of the foundation of the cosmic bodies, the
     separation of the planets, and so forth.

Nor are we to suppose that the beginning of this particular process was
in any true sense a beginning at all. Evolutionary philosophy such as
Professor Haeckel's, necessarily teaches that beginnings and endings
succeed one another everlastingly, one world-system arising phoenix-like
from the ashes of another.

     The nebular hypothesis above described has recently [we are
     told][13] been strongly confirmed and enlarged by the theory that
     this cosmogonic process did not simply take place once, but is
     periodically repeated. While new cosmic bodies arise and develop,
     out of rotating masses of nebula in some parts of the universe, in
     other parts old, extinct, frigid suns come into collision, and are
     once more reduced by the heat generated to the condition of nebulæ.

It appears, in fact, to be assumed that this cyclic process has been
actually demonstrated, for we are told[14] that astronomy reveals, in
the endless depths of space, "Millions of circling spheres, larger than
our earth, and, like it, in an eternal rhythm of life and death."

Moreover, "life" is here to be understood literally, for it is a
cardinal article of such evolutionary belief that equally with the
foundation of cosmic bodies and the separation of planets, the
production of organic life, of plants and animals, has been wrought by
forces which the material universe contains within itself,[15] and
accordingly,[16]

     We now definitely know that the organic world on our earth has been
     continuously developed "in accordance with eternal iron laws." ...
     An unbroken series of natural events, following an orderly course
     of evolution according to fixed laws, now leads the reflecting
     human spirit through long aeons from a primeval chaos to the
     present order of the cosmos.

Finally, at the back of all these processes, we are to recognize the one
ultimate reality, the universe itself, which originates and undergoes
all these evolutions. In its regard Professor Haeckel tells us[17] that,

     The universe, or cosmos, is eternal, infinite, and illimitable. Its
     substance, with its two attributes (matter and energy) fills
     infinite space and is in eternal motion. This motion runs on
     through infinite time as an unbroken development, with a periodic
     change from life to death, from evolution to devolution....

And again:[18]

     The two fundamental forms of substances, ponderable matter and
     ether, are not dead and moved only by extrinsic force, but they are
     endowed also with sensation and will (though naturally of the
     lowest grade); they experience an inclination for condensation, a
     dislike of strain; they strive after the one and struggle against
     the other.

Moreover,

     Movement[19] is as innate and original a property of substances as
     is sensation.

Such is the raw material whose metamorphoses produce, or rather
constitute, all possible worlds, while paramount over every thing
dominates the "Law of Substance," under which title Professor Haeckel
unites the scientific principles of the indestructibility of matter,
and the conservation of energy. Thus is the conclusion reached,[20]

     Towering above all the achievements and discoveries of the century
     we have the great comprehensive "law of substance," the fundamental
     law of the constancy of matter and force. The fact that substance
     is everywhere subject to eternal movement and transformation gives
     it the character also of the universal law of evolution. As this
     supreme law has been firmly established and all others are
     subordinate to it, we arrive at a conviction of the universal unity
     of nature and the eternal validity of its laws.

Accordingly we are to conclude with Goethe that all proceeds by iron law
to the fulfilling of inevitable destiny; or as an ardent disciple
proclaims, who undertakes to expound the new creed to the people,[21]

     We rest in sure and certain hope that no force and no combination
     of forces can stop the process of Evolution, which from a speck of
     jelly has developed such living forms as Charles Darwin and Herbert
     Spencer, and which has produced the beauty of the earth and the
     heavens from formless ether.

This outline of the Evolutionary system in its widest and fullest sense
will enable us to judge upon what grounds it can claim the sanction of
Science. Various points here present themselves for consideration, which
demand separate treatment.




