VIII

MATTER AND MOTION


In the forefront of the problems which have been pronounced to be not
only unsolved but insoluble, are the nature and origin of the ultimate
factors arrived at by Science in her study of the constitution of the
universe,--Matter, Force, and Motion.

With the first and last of these alone need we at present concern
ourselves, for "Force," as Science knows it, is always associated with
Matter, and signifies no more in her terminology than that which
produces, or tends to produce Motion. On the other hand, we are
told,[48] that "The contents of the material universe may be expressed
in terms of Matter and Motion."

By "Matter" is understood "Sensible Substance," the stuff composing all
of which our senses tell us, and which forms the object of Scientific
investigation. What do we know concerning this raw material whereof
worlds are made?

As we have seen, Professor Haeckel and his school are ready to tell us.
Matter, we are assured,[49] is self-existent and imperishable, "it has
no beginning and no end; it is eternity." Together with Ether, it
occupies infinite and boundless space. It is in ceaseless motion; and
its interminable modifications produce everything that ever was or ever
will be. Movement[50] is one of the "innate and original properties" of
Matter. So are Sensation and Will,[51] but these, we are warned,[52] are
"unconscious."

Obviously, however, it is not enough that these things should be said,
they require likewise to be proved; and the question must immediately
suggest itself, Whence is proof to come? Not, by any possibility, from
observation and experiment. For who can speak, of his own knowledge, to
eternity or infinity? The only conceivable supposition is that Science
has so thoroughly mastered the nature and properties of Matter here and
now, as to be furnished with evidence unmistakably pointing to the above
conclusions. Thus alone can she be quoted on their behalf; and it must
always be remembered that the philosophy which we are examining is
nothing if not scientific.

But, in the first place, is it quite clear of what our philosophers are
speaking? They use the term "Matter" as though it represented some one
definite thing: but this is very far from being the case.

     We must remember [says Lord Grimthorpe][53] that matter is not an
     unit, as a creator is, and that talking of it so is merely a
     rhetorical artifice when used in philosophical inquiries.... Matter
     is nothing but the sum of all the ultimate particles or atoms
     contained in the universe, or in any particular mass that we are
     dealing with.... A very large proportion of the atoms of the
     universe have never been within millions and billions of miles of
     each other.

Therefore, he goes on to urge, the doctrine of the self-existence of
Matter, must mean that each several atom is self-existent, or "every
atom its own god." How comes it then that they all obey the same "Laws"?
How have their various provinces been allotted? Above all, how are they
not all the same, but--so far as we know--divided into classes widely
different from one another? For, according to our present
knowledge,--and we cannot too frequently remind ourselves that upon this
alone can any sound conclusion be based,--there are, in round numbers,
some seventy different species of atoms, whose diverse qualities are
absolutely necessary for the production of the world. Had all atoms been
of one kind, we could have had none even of what used to be called the
Four Elements,--neither Earth, Air, Fire, nor Water.

But,--apart from this,--What is known concerning this same "Matter"? Has
Science so thoroughly fathomed its constitution as to be able to
declare that it possesses all the properties we have heard assigned to
it,--Sensation and Will, even of the unconscious kind, whatever that may
be,--locomotive power,--eternity,--and, in its collective capacity,
immensity?

So far from this being the case, scientific men who were most willing,
and even anxious, to assign to Matter a foremost, if not _the_ foremost,
place in Nature, have done so precisely upon the ground, not of our
knowledge, but of our ignorance. No better examples need be sought than
Professor Huxley, and Professor Tyndall, who alike agreed, in the words
of the latter,[54] "to discern in Matter the promise and potency of
every form and quality of life." But Huxley took his stand on the
declaration, that we know so little about Matter as to make it
impossible to say of what it may not be capable, for we cannot so much
as be certain of its existence, and use the term only "for the unknown
and hypothetical causes of our own states of consciousness,"[55] while
Tyndall described the process, whereby the promise and potency are
realized, as "the manifestation of a Power absolutely inscrutable to the
intellect of man."

Speculations thus founded upon the absence of evidence, whatever else
they may be, are certainly no part of Science; and when we turn to what,
being established by scientific methods, is a possible basis of
scientific argument, we find that in every instance it contradicts
instead of supporting the assertions we have heard.

To begin with the question of Motion, as being both of supreme
importance, and one more open than some others to observation and
experiment. According to Professor Haeckel's teaching, "movement is an
innate and original property of substance," that is to say of Matter,
and in consequence, "Substance is everywhere and always in uninterrupted
movement and transformation." It is by thus attributing to matter an
inherent determination to move that he meets Du Bois-Reymond's
difficulty as to the origin of motion.

But this is in direct opposition to the first of Newton's Laws, which
are universally recognized as the most firmly established and
unquestionable of all scientific conclusions. This law tells us that a
body at rest will continue at rest for ever, unless compelled by some
force to move; just as a body in motion will continue to move at the
same rate and in the same direction, unless compelled by force to arrest
or alter its course. Upon the universal certainty of this law the whole
of our Natural Philosophy depends: but it absolutely blocks the way for
the idea that Matter has an innate tendency to move itself, which is
thus quite unscientific. Not self-movement but _Inertia_ is the property
which Science ascribes to Matter.[56] It may further be observed that
the idea of inherent motion is absurd and unintelligible; for movement
cannot be in more than one direction at a time: so that a mass, or an
atom, of Matter could tend to move only by having an intrinsic impulse
in a straight line towards some one particular point. If it should tend
to move indifferently, in all directions at once, it would remain
motionless, each such tendency being neutralized by its opposite.

As to the further claim made on behalf of Matter to be endowed with
Sensation and Will, of any description, it must be enough to say that no
one has ever pretended to find any evidence whatever to this effect, or
to detect the faintest trace of such properties;--and that on the
contrary, all experience shows inorganic Matter, (that is, Matter not
incorporated in living animals or plants,) to be utterly lifeless and
inert. It is a mere abuse and perversion of terms to speak of Science as
countenancing any conclusion but that to which such experience points.
The attempt to invest Matter with these attributes Professor Tait
stigmatizes as "non-science," or "pseudo-science."[57]

     The Pygmalions of modern days [he writes] do not require to beseech
     Aphrodité to animate the ivory for them. Like the savage with his
     _Totem_, they have themselves already attributed life to it.... The
     latest phase of this peculiar non-science tells us that all Matter
     is _alive_; or at least that it contains "the promise and potency"
     (whatever these may be) "of all terrestrial life." ... So much for
     the attempts to introduce into Science an element altogether
     incompatible with the fundamental conditions of its existence.

In fine, to make us realize not merely how extremely narrow are the
bounds of our knowledge, but even how much narrower they may be than we
suppose, there enters upon the scene Radium, like the golden apple that
came to disturb the harmony of the celestials. What lessons this
turbulent and unconventional element will ultimately be found to teach,
and how far it will revolutionize the laws of Nature as hitherto
accepted, remains, of course, to be seen: but this at least is clear. In
presence of it, scientific men find that they are sure of nothing they
thought most certain, not of the indestructibility of matter itself, on
which is based that Law of Substance which we have seen made responsible
for so much.

It had been thought that whatever else might change or perish the atoms
of which we have heard, as the ultimate constituents of Matter, were
beyond the reach of any vicissitude. "No man," said Dalton, their
discoverer, "can split an atom." Thus too Mr. Clodd, while acknowledging
that the constitution even of atoms may some day be found to be liable
to disorder and decay, clearly teaches that, as a practical certainty,
we have in them got to something final. Taking one particular kind, an
oxygen atom, as a text, he thus discourses:[58]

     It matters not into how many myriad substances--animal, plant, or
     mineral--an atom of oxygen may have entered, nor what isolation it
     has undergone: bond or free, it retains its own qualities. It
     matters not how many millions of years have elapsed during these
     changes, age cannot wither or weaken it; amidst all the fierce play
     of the mighty agencies to which it has been subjected it remains
     unbroken and unworn; to it we may apply the ancient words, "the
     things which are not seen are eternal."

But now, with the recognition of radio-activity, and the disintegration
of atoms into their constituent "electrons" which this is held to
evidence, we have changed all that. Such disintegration, it is affirmed,
must imply dissolution and death, alike of the atoms themselves and of
the universe which they compose. As Sir William Crookes told the
physicists assembled at Berlin, June, 1903:

     This fatal quality of atomic dissociation appears to be universal,
     and operates whenever we brush a piece of glass with silk; it works
     in the sunshine and raindrops, in lightnings and flame; it prevails
     in the waterfall and the stormy sea.

Matter he consequently regards as doomed to destruction.[59] Sooner or
later, it will have dissolved into the "formless mist" of "prothyle"[60]
and "the hour-hand of eternity will have completed one revolution."

Consequently, we are told,[61]

     The "dissipation of energy" has found its correlative in the
     "dissolution of matter." We are confronted with an appalling sense
     of desolation--of quasi-annihilation.

It is no doubt true, here again, that such judgments cannot be called
final, and that not all scientific men will accept them as they stand.
But all alike are forced to agree that our previous notions are
completely upset, and that we are compelled to recognize the fact that
of these fundamental questions we know far less than the little we
seemed to know. What, then, is to be thought of Professor Haeckel's
confident utterances, which could be justified only on the supposition
that we know everything? And what becomes of the famous Law of
Substance, if both its parts are found thus to contradict the conclusion
he would draw from it?

The case is thus summed up by the writer of the article just cited:

     The discovery of radio-activity is one of the most momentous in the
     history of science. "There has been a vivid new start" (we again
     borrow Sir William Crookes' expression). "Our physicists have
     remodelled their views as to the constitution of matter." The
     remodelling indeed has hardly commenced.... What is undeniable is
     that the Daltonian atom has, within a century of its acceptance as
     a fundamental reality, suffered disruption. Its proper place in
     nature is not that formerly assigned to it, ... its reputation for
     inviolability and indestructibility is gone for ever. Each of these
     supposed "ultimates" is now known to be the scene of indescribable
     activities, a complex piece of mechanism composed of thousands of
     parts, a star-cluster in miniature, subject to all kinds of
     dynamical vicissitudes, to perturbation, acceleration, internal
     friction, total or partial disruption. And to each is appointed a
     fixed term of existence. Sooner or later, the balance of
     equilibrium is tilted, disturbance eventuates in overthrow; the
     tiny exquisite system finally breaks up. Of atoms, as of men, it
     may be said with truth, "_Quisque suos patitur manes_."

"Here," in fact, "we meet the impenetrable secret of creative
agency."[62]




