IX

THE PROBLEM OF LIFE


The question concerning the origin and nature of Life is of supreme and
vital importance not only for those who speak of Evolution as a force or
principle by which everything is guided and governed, but also for such
as understand by the term no more than a process which they say has
actually occurred. Evolutionists of this second class disclaim, with
Huxley, any "philosophy of Evolution." They are content to take the
world as a going concern, at the farthest point in the past to which,
even speculatively, Science can trace it, as that vast primordial nebula
of which we have heard.[63] Given this,--assuming the existence of such
a nebula, constituted as they suppose,--they believe that the whole
subsequent history of the world is fully explained by the uniform action
of the same laws of matter which we find in operation to-day. Not only
is the establishment of our Solar System, of sun and planets, to be
thus accounted for, but likewise the production of life, of the organic
world of plants and animals.

Hence it necessarily follows that life must originally have been evolved
naturally from lifeless matter, for all are agreed that not only in the
nebula, but on the earth when it first started its independent career,
life did not, and could not, exist.

     There has been [says Virchow][64] a beginning of life, since
     geology points to epochs in the formation of the earth when life
     was impossible, and when no vestige of it is to be found.

     If the evolution hypothesis is true, [says Huxley][65] living
     matter must have arisen from not-living matter; for by the
     hypothesis the condition of the globe was at one time such that
     living matter could not have existed in it, life being entirely
     incompatible with the gaseous state.

     There was a time [says Tyndall][66] when the earth was a red-hot
     molten globe, on which no life could exist.

Accordingly, as Professor Huxley acknowledges, spontaneous generation is
an evolutionary necessity. Unless such generation can be shown to have
taken place, or at the very least unless it can be shown to be naturally
possible, the theory which requires it cannot be an established truth.
But it is precisely as a scientifically established truth that the
doctrine of Evolution is presented to us, so firmly established indeed
that we are warned "to doubt it is to doubt science."[67] It presents
itself, moreover, as the most precious result of modern research, the
appearance of which is as a sunrise illuminating the field of
knowledge.[68]

This being so, and it being the first principle of Science that we
should take nothing on faith and accept only what can be proved, it is
our plain duty to satisfy ourselves, as scientific methods alone can
rightly satisfy us, that a doctrine of such paramount importance is
entitled to demand our acceptance.

What methods can claim to be scientific, all are agreed. Advances in
science, Professor Tait warns us,[69]

     come or not, as we remember or forget that our Science is to be
     based entirely upon experiment, or mathematical deduction from
     experiment.

     Men of science [says Tyndall] prolong the method of nature from the
     present into the past. The observed uniformity of nature is their
     only guide.[70]

     The man of science [says Huxley] has learned to believe in
     justification, not by faith, but by verification.[71]

In this manner must we test the Evolution theory, and spontaneous
generation as an essential element thereof. We will begin with
Professor Huxley's statement of what he styles "the fundamental
proposition of Evolution."[72]

     That proposition is [he writes] that the whole world, living and
     not-living, is the result of the mutual interaction, according to
     definite laws, of the forces possessed by the molecules of which
     the primitive nebulosity of the universe was composed. If this be
     true, it is no less certain that the existing world lay,
     potentially, in the cosmic vapour; and that a sufficient
     intelligence could, from a knowledge of that vapour, have
     predicted, say the state of the Fauna of Britain in 1869[73] with
     as much certainty as one can say what will happen to the breath in
     a cold winter's day.

That is to say, the supposed nebula was a vast piece of mechanism, of
unimaginable complexity, the component parts of which under the
influence of such forces as gravitation, heat, chemical affinity,
electricity and magnetism, have produced everything that has since
appeared on earth, vegetable and animal life amongst the rest. How are
we to assure ourselves that such was really the case?

Professor Tyndall has told us that the only scientific method is to
prolong the method of nature from the present into the past, taking her
observed uniformity for our only guide, and in like manner we have heard
it laid down by Professor Romanes, that we must assume as a first
principle that the laws of nature are always and everywhere the same,
and that by their uniform operation everything is done. It is therefore
quite clear that as no man was present when life first made its
appearance, to observe and record whence it came, the only way in which
we can possibly proceed, without violating every scientific canon, is to
argue from what happens now, to what must have happened then,--to show
that inorganic matter can in fact generate organic life, and to conclude
that the same laws must have worked the same results in the past as they
do in the present.

But this is precisely what cannot be done, for one of the most
conclusive results of modern research has been to show that in the
present world spontaneous generation never occurs, that living things
come only from living parents, and that from organic matter alone can
the smallest particle of organic matter be derived. _Omne vivum e vivo,
omnis cellula e cellula, omnis nucleus e nucleo._ Upon this point there
is now complete agreement amongst scientific authorities, and what is
most remarkable, none are more strenuous in upholding the doctrine of
_Biogenesis_,[74] than some of those who with equal vehemence proclaim
the doctrine of Evolution for which the occurrence of spontaneous
generation is a necessity.

Never, for example, were there Evolutionists more pronounced than
Professors Huxley and Tyndall, and they both saw clearly that without
spontaneous generation there could not have been evolution such as they
maintained. Yet when the occurrence of spontaneous generation, here and
now, was asserted by Bastian and Burdon Sanderson, they, following in
the wake of Pasteur, repudiated the notion, and Tyndall in particular
conclusively disproved the experiments by which it was supported.[75] As
Huxley wrote to Charles Kingsley:[76]

     I am glad you appreciate the rich absurdities of spontogenesis.
     Against the doctrine of spontaneous generation in the abstract I
     have nothing to say. Indeed it is a necessary corollary from
     Darwin's views if legitimately carried out.

A few years later, writing to Dr. Dohrn[77] upon the same subject, he
made use of a phrase--which in his mouth expressed the uttermost limit
of disbelief: "Transubstantiation will be nothing to this if it turns
out true."

In the same year as President of the British Association he chose for
the subject of his inaugural address, "Biogenesis and Abiogenesis," and,
after a careful examination of the case for each, pronounced the former
"to be victorious all along the line."

In spite of all this, however, he assured himself as an Evolutionist
that spontaneous generation must once have been not only a possibility
but a fact. In the same Presidential address, after piling up evidence
against it--he thus continued:[78]

     But though I cannot express this conviction of mine too strongly, I
     must carefully guard myself against the supposition that I intend
     to suggest that no such thing as Abiogenesis has ever taken place
     in the past, or ever will take place in the future. With organic
     chemistry, molecular physics and physiology yet in their infancy,
     and every day making prodigious strides, I think it would be the
     height of presumption for any man to say that the conditions under
     which matter assumes the properties we call "vital" may not, some
     day, be artificially brought together. All I feel justified in
     affirming is that I see no reason for affirming that the feat has
     been performed yet.

     And looking back through the prodigious vista of the past, I find
     no record of the commencement of life, and therefore I am devoid of
     any means of forming a definite conclusion as to the conditions of
     its appearance. Belief, in the scientific sense of the word, is a
     serious matter, and needs strong foundations. To say, therefore, in
     the admitted absence of evidence, that I have any belief as to the
     mode in which the existing forms of life have originated, would be
     using words in a wrong sense. But expectation is permissible where
     belief is not; and if it were given me to look beyond the abyss of
     geologically recorded time to the still more remote period when the
     earth was passing through physical and dynamical conditions, which
     it can no more see again than a man can recall his infancy, I
     should expect to be a witness of the evolution of living protoplasm
     from not living matter.... That is the expectation to which
     analogical reasoning leads me; but I beg you once more to recollect
     that I have no right to call my opinion anything but an act of
     philosophical faith.

Here we have the whole state of the case put for us in a nutshell. On
the one hand, all known facts are against the idea of spontaneous
generation, and therefore, so far as she can at present go, the verdict
of Science must condemn that supposition. But, on the other hand, the
fundamental principle of Evolution cannot be justified unless
spontaneous generation has taken place, and accordingly, although
Evolution is the very thing which we should be engaged in establishing
by the evidence of facts, it is held to be reasonable and scientific to
infer that facts which we cannot verify must exist because they are
wanted. It is admitted that the requisite evidence is lacking, and
therefore we must not go so far as to express belief in the facts: but
we may indulge in expectations,--which seem, however, to imply belief in
the thing expected,--and meanwhile we may go on believing firmly in the
Evolution theory itself, which includes belief in the missing facts.
This, we are told, is "philosophical faith." But, to say nothing of what
we have heard from others, Professor Huxley elsewhere[79] warns us
against faith as the one unpardonable sin: and as we have heard him
declare the man of science has learned to believe in justification, not
by faith, but by verification.

And as to the expectation which he avowed, there appears to be no slight
force in the response of his adversary Dr. Bastian:[80]

     What reason [he asks] does Professor Huxley give in explanation of
     his supposition?... The only reason distinctly implied is because
     the physical and chemical conditions of the earth's surface were
     different in the past from what they are now. And yet, concerning
     the exact nature of their differences, or the degree in which the
     different sets of conditions would respectively favour the
     occurrence or arrest of an evolution of living matter, Professor
     Huxley cannot possess even the vaguest knowledge. He chooses to
     assume that the unknown conditions existing in the past were more
     favourable to _Archebiosis_ (life-evolution) than those now in
     operation. This, however, is an assumption which may be entirely
     opposed to the facts.

It is thus hard to understand how Professor Huxley could profess to
justify his expectations by verification, for that the above account of
the matter is no-wise overstated we have his own acknowledgment:[81]

     Of the causes which have led to the origination of living matter,
     it may be said that we know absolutely nothing.... Science has no
     means to form an opinion on the commencement of life; we can only
     make conjectures without any scientific value.

Such a witness as Huxley might well suffice, but the question is so
important as to make it advisable to call some others, though only a few
amongst many who testify to the same effect.

Like his friend and ally Huxley, Professor Tyndall believed that
spontaneous generation had once occurred, and denied that it occurs now.
As to the former article of his creed he was even more pronounced in his
materialism. We have already heard him proclaim that in matter is to be
discerned the promise and potency of all terrestrial life. He likewise
inclined to believe that not only life but consciousness is immanent
everywhere, in the vegetable and mineral no less than in the animal
world,[82] and that not merely life and consciousness, but:

     All our philosophy, all our poetry, all our science, and all our
     art--Plato, Shakespeare, Newton, and Raphael--are potential in the
     fires of the sun.[83]

Beliefs such as these might be thought to imply that the genesis of life
is a simple affair, but Tyndall was no less convinced than Huxley that,
as things are, it cannot be obtained without antecedent life on which
to draw. Having described the experiments devised to test the matter, he
thus concludes:[84]

     Here, as in all other cases, the evidence in favour of spontaneous
     generation crumbles in the grasp of the competent enquirer.

At the same time, he was equally certain that life must have had an
inorganic origin and that Science bids us so to believe. His various
utterances are not, it is true, very easily reconciled. On the one hand
he lays it down that "Without verification a theoretic conception is a
mere figment of the intellect." On the other hand in his Belfast Address
he thus expressed himself:

     Believing, as I do, in the continuity of nature, I cannot stop
     abruptly where our microscopes cease to be of use. Here the vision
     of the mind authoritatively supplements the vision of the eye. By a
     necessity engendered and justified by Science I cross the boundary
     of the experimental evidence.... If you ask me whether there exists
     the least evidence to prove that any form of life can be developed
     out of matter, without demonstrable antecedent life.... [men of
     science] will frankly admit their inability to point to any
     satisfactory experimental proof that life can be developed, save
     from demonstrable antecedent life.

Far, however, from being a mere figment, his mental vision is
represented as the most unalloyed product of reason. He writes:[85]

     Were not man's origin implicated, we should accept without a murmur
     the derivation of animal and vegetable life from what we call
     inorganic nature. The conclusion of pure intellect points this way
     and no other.

The conclusion of pure intellect, however, having nothing to show for
itself in the way of evidence, we are again referred to a condition of
things concerning which we know, and can know, nothing.

     Supposing [writes the Professor][86] a planet carved from the sun,
     set spinning round an axis, and revolving round the sun at a
     distance from him equal to that of our earth, would one of the
     consequences of its refrigeration be the development of organic
     forms? I lean to the affirmative.

It is no doubt interesting to know to what opinion the Professor
inclined, but is this sort of thing Science?

In the same manner Mr. Herbert Spencer, the philosopher of evolution
_par excellence_, thus reports:[87]

     Biologists in general agree that in the present state of the world
     no such thing happens as the rise of a living creature out of
     non-living matter. They do not deny, however, that at a remote
     period in the past, when the temperature of the surface of the
     earth was much higher than at present, and other physical
     conditions were _unlike those we know_,[88] inorganic matter,
     through successive complications, gave origin to organic
     matter.[89]

Mr. Darwin himself, who is constantly supposed to have upheld, or even
to have demonstrated, the fact of spontaneous generation, is amongst the
strongest witnesses against it. He was indeed disposed to believe that
the living will some day be found to be producible from the lifeless,
the ground of his expectation being the "Law of Continuity,"[90] or the
assumption that from the beginning of nature to the end one only kind of
law uniformly operates, namely the same as we now experience. But this
is to assume the whole question at issue, for unless it can be shewn
that there has been spontaneous generation, we cannot be assured that
there is such a Law of Continuity. And despite his expectation Darwin
always denied that the origin of life has been--sometimes even that it
can be--explained. Thus he wrote on various occasions:

     It is mere rubbish thinking at present of the origin of life; one
     might as well think of the origin of matter.[91]

     As for myself I cannot believe in spontaneous generation, and
     though I expect that at some future time the principle of life will
     be rendered intelligible, at present it seems to me beyond the
     confines of Science.[92]

     No evidence worth anything has as yet, in my opinion, been advanced
     in favour of a living being, being developed from inorganic
     matter.[93]

Here we may conveniently pause and take stock of our results. On the one
hand, we are bidden in the name of Science to learn the past from the
present, and the present from observation and experiment alone. On the
other, we are invited to believe in an occurrence which observation and
experiment negative in the present, on the ground that the circumstances
must once have been entirely different from any with which we are
acquainted. Obviously, the real motive of belief is that naïvely
expressed by Professor Haeckel, who tells us that spontaneous generation
is proved by the doctrine of Evolution;[94] which then in its turn is
proved by spontaneous generation.

Two points must however be noticed in which it is attempted to find
present evidence in favour of spontaneous generation.

First, there is Protoplasm--the "Physical Basis of Life," or Living
Matter, being that form of matter by which life is always accompanied.
In this no chemical element unknown elsewhere, is to be found; the cells
of which it consists are compounded of Oxygen, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, and
Carbon; and it has been argued, especially by Huxley, that it is
therefore not different in kind from other compounds; that as Oxygen and
Hydrogen form water, Oxygen and Carbon, Carbonic Acid, Hydrogen and
Nitrogen, Ammonia,--so the four combined, in proper circumstances and
proportions, make Living Matter, without the aid of any vital force or
principle. And Haeckel with his habitual audacity foretells the
artificial production of Protoplasm for purposes of commerce. But, as
Mr. Stirling observes,[95] man has always known that he is made of dust,
and that the only part of him perceptible to sense is substantially the
same as the earth beneath his feet. All that he now learns in addition
is that when such matter is wedded to life it undergoes marvellous
transformations which in part at least we are able to recognize, but are
wholly unable to comprehend. This Professor Huxley himself admits:


     The properties of living matter [he writes][96] distinguish it
     absolutely from all other kinds of things, and the present state of
     knowledge furnishes us with no link between the living and the
     not-living.

Not only that: the subject is full of complexities of which Professor
Huxley gives no hint, and which it would even seem he did not himself
perceive. In his celebrated lecture on the Physical Basis of Life[97] he
gives his hearers to understand that all Protoplasm is the same, that
its particles are as the bricks with which any sort of edifice may be
constructed, a cathedral or a gin-shop, a palace or a hovel. The
protoplasm of a mushroom, for instance, he declares to be essentially
identical with that of him who eats it, into which it is most readily
convertible. He also speaks of the effect of eating mutton being to
"transubstantiate sheep into man." But, positive as are these
statements, they are far from representing scientific truths, and we are
told by Sir William Thiselton-Dyer that he himself would not know what
to do with a candidate who should advance such views in an
examination.[98] As to the mushroom and the mutton, Sir William adds,
that except the definition of a crab, as a red fish that runs backwards,
attributed to the French Academy, he can call to mind no statement "so
compact of error."

In reality, instead of all Protoplasm being the same, the differences
are infinite. Particles from different sources may be indistinguishable
by the microscope or by any test that chemistry can apply, but this only
increases the mystery of their nature, for each has its own functions
and will perform no others. The Protoplasm of a plant will do what that
of an animal, seemingly identical, cannot do. That of a fish will
convert the same nutriment into quite a different formation from that of
a man.

     It is no doubt true that a particle of fungoid differs in no
     appreciable physical respect from one of human protoplasm, yet the
     former will never emerge from the fate of the humble mushroom,
     while the other may be instinct with the thoughts of a Prime
     Minister.[99]

As Mr. Stirling sums up the matter:[100]

     There is nerve-protoplasm, brain-protoplasm, bone-protoplasm,
     muscle-protoplasm, and protoplasm of all the other tissues, no one
     of which but produces only its own kind, and is uninterchangeable
     with the rest. Lastly, we have the overwhelming fact that there is
     the infinitely different protoplasm of the various infinitely
     different plants and animals, in each of which its own protoplasm,
     as in the case of the various tissues, but produces its own kind,
     and is uninterchangeable with that of the rest.

It thus appears that the character of Protoplasm, far from making it
easier to conceive the mechanical production of living things, does but
immensely aggravate the difficulty. As Sir William Thiselton-Dyer avows:
"I do not see even the beginning of a materialistic theory of
protoplasm." And Haeckel's idea that we shall succeed in creating
organic life does not commend itself to such an authority as Sir Henry
Roscoe:

     It is true [he says][101] that there are those who profess to
     foresee that the day will arise when the chemist, by a succession
     of constructive efforts may pass beyond albumen, and gather the
     elements of lifeless matter into a living structure. Whatever may
     be said of this from other standpoints, the chemist can only say
     that at present no such problem lies within his province.
     Protoplasm, with which the simplest manifestations of life are
     associated, is not a compound, but a structure built up of
     compounds. The chemist may successfully synthesize any of its
     component compounds, but he has no more reason to look forward to
     the synthetic production of the structure than to imagine that the
     synthesis of gallic acid leads to the artificial production of
     gall-nuts.

And M. de Quatrefages thus sums up the conclusions at which he arrives
from minute study of the lowest forms of life:[102]


     I make bold to affirm that the deeper Science penetrates into the
     secrets of organization and phenomena, the more does she
     demonstrate how wide and how profound is the abyss which separates
     brute matter from living things.

The other point requiring notice is crystallization. Inorganic matter,
as we know, can build up crystals, the wonderful structure of which
results from the molecular properties of the substance crystallized. Why
then, some would ask, may not matter in the same manner produce
Protoplasm?

But, in the first place, this, as we have heard, is what it is never
found to do. Crystals we can produce at pleasure, in what quantity we
will. But all efforts have not yet succeeded in obtaining the most
minute speck of living matter. Moreover, nothing can be more widely
different from organic structures than crystals. The latter are always
mathematical, the former never: the latter grow by outside accretion, of
the one kind of particles whereof they consist: the former by absorption
and assimilation of various foreign substances: the latter are wholly
independent of anything like an ancestor: for the former an ancestor is
in our experience indispensable: crystals can be dissolved and
recrystallized: living matter once destroyed can never be reconstituted.
Above all, the particles incorporated in the crystal are absolutely
quiescent, so far as any portion of matter can be said to be so, no more
able to change their position without external force than the bricks in
a wall, while those in living tissue at once become subject to "the
whirlwind of life," involving constant change the cessation of which is
death.

     It is inexplicable to me [says M. de Quatrefages][103] that some
     men whose merits I otherwise acknowledge, should have compared
     crystals to the simplest living forms.... These forms are the
     antipodes of the crystal from every point of view.

To the same effect speaks Mr. A. R. Wallace, Mr. Darwin's associate in
the discovery of the Darwinian theory. In a work expressly devoted to
the vindication of that theory, Mr. Wallace declares that far from the
way of evolution being made clear by Science from end to end--"there are
at least three stages in the development of the organic world where some
new cause or power must necessarily have come into action." And at the
head of them he places that which we are now considering, writing
thus:[104]

     The first stage is the change from inorganic to organic, when the
     earliest vegetable cell, or the living protoplasm out of which it
     arose, first appeared.... There is in this something quite beyond
     and apart from chemical changes however complex; and it has been
     well said that the first vegetable cell was a new thing in the
     world, possessing altogether new powers....[105]

Such testimonies are sufficient for our present purpose. In face of them
it cannot be pretended that Science _knows_ anything of spontaneous
generation or gives her verdict in its favour. On the contrary, as
Professor Tait declares:[106]

     To say that even the very lowest form of life, not to speak of its
     higher forms, still less of volition and consciousness, can be
     fully _explained_ on physical principles alone, ... is simply
     unscientific. There is absolutely nothing known in physical science
     which can lend the slightest support to such an idea.... To suppose
     that life, even in its lowest form, is wholly material, involves
     either a denial of the truth of Newton's laws of motion, or an
     erroneous use of the term "Matter." Both are alike unscientific.

Yet it is precisely in the name of Science that we have been told to
accept the spontaneous origin of life from inorganic matter, as a
clearly demonstrated truth, and no riddle at all.

But as Professor Virchow, Evolutionist and Materialist as he was, well
said in regard of this very point in the Munich Congress of 1877:

     If we would speak frankly, we must admit that naturalists may well
     have some little sympathy for the _generatio aequivoca_
     [spontaneous generation]. If it were capable of proof, it would
     indeed be beautiful! But, we must acknowledge, it has not yet been
     proved. The proofs of it are still wanting.... Whoever recalls to
     mind the lamentable failure of all the attempts to discover a
     decided support for the _generatio aequivoca_ in the lower forms of
     transition from the inorganic to the organic world, will feel it
     doubly serious to demand that this theory, so utterly discredited,
     should be in any way accepted as the basis of all our views of
     life.




