CHAPTER II.

SELF-SUGGESTION.

    "In thy soul, as in a sleep,
    Gods or fiends are hidden deep,
    Awful forms of mystery,
    And spirits, all unknown to thee:
    Guard with prayer, and heed with care,
    Ere thou wak'st them from their lair!"

The records of the human race, however written, show that Man has
always regarded himself as possessed of latent faculties, or
capacities of a mysterious or extraordinary nature: that is to say,
transcending in scope or power anything within the range of ordinary
conscious mental capacity. Such for example is the Dream, in which
there occurs such a mingling of madness with mysterious intuitions or
memories that it is no wonder it has always been regarded as allied to
supernatural intelligence. And almost as general as the faith in
dreams as being _weird_ (in the true sense of the much-abused word) or
"strangely prophetic," is that in _fascination_, or that one human
being can exercise over another by a mystic will and power a strong
influence, even to the making the patient do whatever the actor or
superior requires.

However interesting it may be, it is quite needless for the purpose
which I have in view to sketch the history of occultism, magic or
sorcery from the earliest times to the present day. Fascination was,
however, its principal power, and this was closely allied to, or the
parent of, what is now known as Suggestion in Hypnotism. But ancient
magic in its later days certainly became very much mixed with
magnetism in many phases, and it is as an off-shoot of Animal
Magnetism that Hypnotism is now regarded, which is to be regretted,
since it is in reality radically different from it, as several of the
later writers of the subject are beginning to protest. The definition
and differences of the two are as follows: Animal Magnetism, first
formulized by ANTON MESMER from a mass of more or less confused
observations by earlier writers, was the doctrine that there is a
magnetic fluid circulating in all created forms, capable of flux and
reflux, which is specially active or potent in the human body. Its
action may be concentrated or increased by the human will, so as to
work wonders, one of which is to cause a person who is magnetized by
another to obey the operator, this obedience being manifested in many
very strange ways.

Still there were thousands of physiologists or men of science who
doubted the theory of the action or existence of Animal Magnetism, and
the vital fluid, as declared by the Mesmerists, and they especially
distrusted the marvels narrated of clairvoyance, which was too like
the thaumaturgy or wonder-working attributed to the earlier magicians.
Finally, the English scientist, BRAID, determined that it was not a
magnetic fluid which produced the recognized results, "but that they
were of purely subjective origin, depending on the nervous system of
the one acted on." That is to say, in ordinary language, it was "all
imagination"--but here, as in many other cases, a very comprehensive
and apparently common-sensible word is very far from giving an
adequate or correct idea of the matter in question--for what the
imagination itself really is in this relation is a mystery which is
very difficult to solve. I have heard of an old French gentleman
who, when in a circus, expressed an opinion that there was nothing
remarkable in the wonderful performances of an acrobat on a
tight-rope, or trapeze. "_Voyez-vous monsieur_" he exclaimed;
"_Ce n'est que la mathematique--rien que ca_!" And only the
Imagination--"all your Imagination" is still the universal solvent in
Philistia for all such problems.

Hypnotism reduced to its simplest principle is, like the old
Fascination, the action of mind upon mind, or of a _mind upon itself_,
in such a manner as to produce a definite belief, action, or result.
It is generally effected by first causing a sleep, as is done in
animal magnetism, during which the subject implicitly obeys the will
of the operator, or performs whatever he suggests. Hence arose the
term Suggestion, implying that what the patient takes into his head to
do, or does, must first be submitted to his own mental action.

Very remarkable results are thus achieved. If the operator, having put
a subject to sleep (which he can do in most cases, if he be clever,
and the experiments are renewed often enough), will say or suggest to
him that on the next day, or the one following, or, in fact, any
determined time, he shall visit a certain friend, or dance a jig, or
wear a given suit of clothes, or the like, he will, when the hypnotic
sleep is over, have forgotten all about it. But when the hour
indicated for his call or dance, or change of garment arrives, he will
be haunted by such an irresistible feeling that he _must_ do it; that
in most cases it will infallibly be done. It is no exaggeration to say
that this has been experimented on, tested and tried thousands of
times with success and incredible ingenuity in all kinds of forms and
devices. It would seem as if spontaneous attention went to sleep, but,
like an alarm clock, awoke at the fixed hour, and then _reflex_
action.

Again--and this constitutes the chief subject of all I here discuss--
we can _suggest_ to ourselves so as to produce the same results. It
seems to be a curious law of Nature that if we put an image or idea
into our minds with the preconceived determination or intent that it
shall recur or return at a certain time, or in a certain way, after
sleeping, it will _do so_. And here I beg the reader to recall what I
said regarding the resolving to begin any task, that it can be greatly
aided by even a brief pre-determination. In all cases it is a kind of
self-suggestion. There would seem to be some magic virtue in sleep, as
if it preserved and ripened our wishes, hence the injunction in the
proverbs of all languages to sleep over a resolve, or subject--and
that "night brings counsel."

It is not necessary that this sleep shall be _hypnotic_, or what is
called hypnotic slumber, since, according to very good authorities,
there is grave doubt as to whether the so-called condition is a sleep
at all. _Hypnotism_ is at any rate a suspension of the faculties,
resembling sleep, caused by the will and act of the operator. He
effects this by fixing the eyes on the patient, making passes as in
Mesmerism, giving a glass of water, or simply commanding sleep. And
this, as Dr. COCKE has experienced and described, can be produced to a
degree by anyone on himself. But as I have verified by experiment, if
we, after retiring to rest at night, will calmly yet firmly resolve to
do something on the following day, or be as much as possible in a
certain state of mind, and if we then fall into ordinary natural
sleep, just as usual, we may on waking have forgotten all about it,
yet will none the less feel the impulse and carry out the
determination.

What gives authority for this assertion, for which I am indebted
originally to no suggestion or reading, is the statement found in
several authorities that a man can "hypnotize" another without putting
him to sleep; that is, make him unconsciously follow suggestion.

I had read in works on hypnotism of an endless number of experiments,
how patients were made to believe that they were monkeys or madmen, or
umbrellas, or criminals, women or men, _a volonte_, but in few of them
did I find that it had ever occurred to anybody to turn this wonderful
power of developing the intellect to any permanent benefit, or to
increasing the moral sense. Then it came to my mind since
Self-Suggestion was possible that if I would resolve to work _all_ the
next day; that is, apply myself to literary or artistic labor without
once feeling fatigue, and succeed, it would be a marvelous thing for
a man of my age. And so it befell that by making an easy beginning I
brought it to pass to perfection. What I mean by an easy beginning
is not to will or resolve _too_ vehemently, but to simply and very
gently, yet assiduously, impress the idea on the mind _so as to fall
asleep while thinking of it as a thing to be_. My next step was to
_will_ that I should, all the next  day, be free from any nervous or
mental worry, or preserve a hopeful, calm, or well-balanced state of
mind. This led to many minute and extremely curious experiences and
observations. That the imperturbable or calm state of mind promptly
set in was undeniable, but it often behaved, like the Angel in H. G.
Wells' novel, "The Wonderful Visit," as if somewhat frightened at, or
of, with, or by its new abode, and no wonder, for it was indeed a
novel guest, and the goblins of "Worry and Tease, Fidget and Fear,"
who had hitherto been allowed to riot about and come and go at their
own sweet mischievous wills, were ill-pleased at being made to keep
quiet by this new lady of the manor. And indeed no mere state of
mind, however well maintained, can resist everything, and the
mildest mannered man may cut a throat under great provocation. I
had my lapses, but withal I was simply astonished to find how, by
perseverance, habitual calm not only grew on me, but how decidedly it
increased. I most assuredly have experienced it to such a degree as to
marvel that the method is not more employed as a cure for nervous
suffering and insomnia.

But far beyond perseverance in labor, or the inducing a calmer and
habitually restful state of mind, was the Awakening of the Will, which
I found as interesting as any novel or drama, or series of active
adventures which I have ever read or experienced. I can remember when
most deeply engaged in it, re-reading DE QUINCEY'S "Confessions of an
Opium Eater." I took it by chance on my birthday, August 15, which was
also his, and as I read I longed from my very heart that he were
alive, that I might consult with him on the marvelous Fairyland which
it seemed to me had been discovered--and then I remembered how Dr.
TUCKEY, the leading English hypnotist, had once told me how easy it
was for his science to completely cure the mania for opium and other
vices.

And this is the discovery: Resolve before going to sleep that if there
be anything whatever for you to do which requires Will or Resolution,
be it to undertake repulsive or hard work or duty, to face a
disagreeable person, to fast, or make a speech, to say "No" to
anything; in short, to keep up to the mark or make any kind of effort
that _you_ WILL _do it_--as calmly and unthinkingly as may be. Do not
desire to do it sternly or forcibly, or in spite of obstacles--but
simply and coolly make up your mind to _do it_--and it will much more
likely be done. And it is absolutely true--_crede experto_--that if
persevered in, this willing yourself to will by easy impulse unto
impulse given, will lead to marvelous and most satisfactory results.

There is one thing of which the young or oversanguine or heedless
should be warned. Do not expect from self-suggestion, nor anything
else in this life, prompt perfection, or the _maximum_ of success. You
may pre-determine to be cheerful, but if you are very susceptible to
bad weather, and the day should be dismal, or you should hear of the
death of a friend, or a great disaster of any kind, some depression of
spirits _must_ ensue. On the other hand, note well that forming habit
by frequent repetition of willing yourself to equanimity and
cheerfulness, and also to the banishing of repulsive images when they
come, will infallibly result in a very much happier state of mind. As
soon as you actually begin to realize that you are acquiring such
control remember that is the golden hour--and redouble your efforts.
_Perseverando vinces_.

I have, I trust, thus far in a few words explained to the reader the
rationale of a system of mental discipline based on the will, and how
by a very easy process the latter may, like Attention and Interest, be
gradually awakened. As I have before declared, everyone would like to
have a strong or vigorous will, and there is a library of books or
sermons in some form, exhorting the weak to awaken and fortify their
wills or characters, but all represent it as a hard and vigorous
process, akin to "storm and stress," battle and victory, and none
really tell us how to go about it. I have indeed only indicated that
it is by self-suggestion that the first steps are taken. Let us now
consider the early beginning of the art or science ere discussing
further developments.



