CHAPTER IV.

FORETHOUGHT.

    "Post fata resurgo."

    "What is forethought may sleep--'tis very plain,
    But rest assured that it will rise again."

    "Forethought is plan inspired by an absolute Will to carry
    it out."

It may have struck the reader as an almost awful, or as a very
wonderful idea, that man has within himself, if he did but know it,
tremendous powers or transcendental faculties of which he has really
never had any conception. One reason why such bold thought has been
subdued is that he has always felt according to tradition, the
existence of superior supernatural (and with them patrician) beings,
by whose power and patronage he has been effectively restrained or
kept under. Hence gloom and pessimism, doubt and despair. It may seem
a bold thing to say that it did not occur to any philosopher through
the ages that man, resolute and noble and free, might _will_ himself
into a stage of mind defying devils and phantasms, or that amid the
infinite possibilities of human nature there was the faculty of
assuming the Indifference habitual to all animals when not alarmed.
But he who will consider these studies on Self-Hypnotism may possibly
infer from them that we have indeed within us a marvelous power of
creating states of mind which make the idea of Pessimism ridiculous.
For it renders potent and grand, pleasing or practically useful, to
all who practice it, a faculty which has the great advantage that it
may enter into all the relations or acts of life; will give to
everyone something to do, something to occupy his mind, even in
itself, and if we have other occupations, Forethought and Induced Will
may be made to increase our interest in them and stimulate our skill.
In other words, we can by means of this Art increase our ability to
practice all arts, and enhance or stimulate Genius in every way or
form, be it practical, musical or plastic.

Since I began this work there fell into my hands an ingenious and
curious book, entitled "Happiness as found in _Forethought minus
Fearthought_," by HORACE FLETCHER, in which the author very truly
declares that _Fear_ in some form has become the arch enemy of Man,
and through the fears of our progenitors developed by a thousand
causes, we have inherited a growing stock of diseases, terrors,
apprehensions, pessimisms, and the like, in which he is perfectly
right.

But as Mr. FLETCHER declares, if men could take _Forethought_ as their
principle and guide they would obviate, anticipate or foresee and
provide for so many evil contingencies and chances that we might
secure even peace and happiness, and then man may become brave and
genial, altruistic and earnest, in spite of it all, by _willing_ away
his Timidity.

I have not assumed a high philosophical or metaphysical position in
this work; my efforts have been confined to indicating how by a very
simple and well-nigh mechanical process, perfectly intelligible to
every human being with an intellect, one may induce certain states of
mind and thereby create a Will. But I quite agree with Mr. FLETCHER
that Forethought is strong thought, and the point from which all
projects must proceed. As I understand it, it is a kind of impulse or
projection of will into the coming work. I may here illustrate this
with a curious fact in physics. If the reader wished to ring a
door-bell so as to produce as much sound as possible he would probably
pull it as far back as he could and then let it go. But if he would in
letting it go simply give it a tap with his forefinger he would
actually redouble the noise.

Or, to shoot an arrow as far as possible, it is not enough to merely
draw the bow to its utmost span or tension. If just as it goes you
will give the bow a quick _push_, though the effort be trifling, the
arrow will fly almost as far again as it would have done without it.

Or, if, as is well known, in wielding a very sharp saber, we make the
_draw-cut_, that is if we add to the blow or chop, as with an axe, a
certain slight pull and simultaneously, we can cut through a silk
handkerchief or a sheep.

Forethought is the tap on the bell, the push of the bow, the draw on
the saber. It is the deliberate yet rapid action of the mind when
before falling to sleep or dismissing thought we _bid_ the mind to
subsequently respond. It is more than merely thinking what we are to
do; it is the bidding or ordering self to fulfill a task before
willing it.

Forethought in the senses employed or implied as here described means
much more than mere previous consideration or reflection, which may be
very feeble. It is, in fact, "constructive," which, as inventive,
implies _active_ thought. "Forethought stimulates, aids the success of
honest aims." Therefore, as the active principle in mental work, I
regard it as a kind of self-impulse, or that minor part in the
division of the force employed which sets the major into action. Now,
if we really understand this and can succeed in employing Forethought
as the preparation for, and impulse to, Self-Suggestion, we shall
greatly aid the success of the latter, because the former insures
attention and interest. Forethought may be brief, but it should always
be energetic. By cultivating it we acquire the enviable talent of
those men who take in everything at a glance, and act promptly, like a
NAPOLEON. This power is universally believed to be entirely innate or
a gift; but it can be induced or developed in all minds in proportion
to the will by practice.

Be it observed that as the experimenter progresses in the development
of will by suggestion, he can gradually lay aside the latter, or all
_processes_, especially if he work to such an end, anticipating it.
Then he simply acts by clear will and strength, and Forethought
constitutes all his stock-in-trade, process or aid. He preconceives
and wills energetically at once, and by practice and repetition
_Forethought_ becomes a marvelous help on all occasions and
emergencies.

To make it of avail the one who frequently practices self-suggestion,
at first with, and then without sleep, will inevitably find ere long
that to facilitate his work, or to succeed he _must_ first write, as
it were, or plan a preface, synopsis, or epitome of his proposed work,
to start it and combine with it a resolve or decree that it must be
done, the latter being the tap on the bell-knob. Now the habit of
composing the plan as perfectly, yet as succinctly as possible, daily
or nightly, combined with the energetic impulse to send it off, will
ere long give the operator a conception of what I mean by Foresight
which by description I cannot. And when grown familiar and really
mastered its possessor will find that his power to think and act
promptly in all the emergencies of life has greatly increased.

Therefore Forethought means a great deal more, as here employed, than
seeing in advance, or deliberate prudence--it rather implies, like
divination or foreknowledge, sagacity and mental _action_ as well as
mere perception. It will inevitably or assuredly grow with the
practice of self-suggestion if the latter be devoted to mental
improvement, but as it grows it will qualify the operator to lay aside
the sleep and suggest to himself directly.

All men of great natural strength of mind, gifted with the will to do
and dare, the beings of action and genius, act directly, and are like
athletes who lift a tree by the simple exertion of the muscles. He who
achieves his aim by self-culture, training, or suggestion, is like one
who raises the weight by means of a lever, and if he practice it often
enough he may in the end become as strong as the other.

There is a curious and very illustrative instance of Forethought in
the sense in which I am endeavoring to explain it, given in a novel,
the "Scalp-Hunters," by MAYNE REID, with whom I was well acquainted in
bygone years. Not having the original, I translate from a French
version:

"His aim with the rifle is infallible, and it would seem as if the
ball obeyed his Will. There must be a kind of _directing principle_ in
his mind, independent of strength of nerve and sight. He and one other
are the only men in whom I have observed this singular power."

This means simply the exercise in a second, as it were, of "the tap on
the bell-knob," or the projection of the will into the proposed shot,
and which may be applied to any act. Gymnasts, leapers and the like
are all familiar with it. It springs from resolute confidence and
self-impulse enforced; but it also creates them, and the growth is
very great and rapid when the idea is much kept before the mind. In
this latter lies most of the problem.

In Humanity, mind, and especially Forethought, or reflection, combined
in one effort with will and energy, enters into all acts, though often
unsuspected, for it is a kind of unconscious _reflex_ action or
cerebration. Thus I once discovered to my astonishment in a gymnasium
that the extremely mechanical action of putting up a heavy weight from
the ground to the shoulder and from the shoulder to the full reach of
the arm above the head, became much easier after a little practice,
although my muscles had not grown, nor my strength increased during
the time. And I found that whatever the exertion might be there was
always some trick or knack, however indescribable, by means of which
the man with a brain could surpass a dolt at _anything_, though the
latter were his equal in strength. But it sometimes happens that the
trick can be taught and even improved on. And it is in all cases
Forethought, even in the lifting of weights or the willing on the
morrow to write a poem.

For this truly weird power--since "the weird sisters" in "Macbeth"
means only the sisters who _foresee_--is, in fact, the energy which
projects itself in some manner, which physiology can as yet only very
weakly explain, and even if the explanation _were_ perfect, it would
amount in fact to no more than showing the machinery of a watch, when
the main object for us is that it should _keep time_, and tell the
hour, as well as exhibit the ingenuity of the maker--which thing is
very much lost sight of, even by many very great thinkers, misled by
the vanity of showing how much they know.

Yes, Foresight or Forethought projects itself in all things, and it is
a serious consideration, or one of such immense value, that when
really understood, and above all subjected to some practice--such as I
have described, and which, as far as I can see, is _necessary_--one
can bring it to bear _intelligently_ on all the actions of life, that
is to say, to _much_ greater advantage than when we use it ignorantly,
just as a genius endowed with strength can do far more with it than an
ignoramus. For there is nothing requiring Thought in which it cannot
aid us. I have alluded to Poetry. Now this does not mean that a man
can become a SHAKESPEARE or SHELLEY by means of all the forethought
and suggestion in the world, but they will, if well developed and
directed, draw out from the mystic depths of mind such talent as he
_has_--doubtless in some or all cases more than he has ever shown.

No one can say what is hidden in every memory; it is like the sounding
ocean with its buried cities, and treasures and wondrous relics of the
olden time. This much we may assume to know, that every image or idea
or impression whichever reached us through any of our senses entered a
cell when it was ready for it, where it sleeps or wakes, most images
being in the former condition. In fact, every brain is like a
monastery of the Middle Ages, or a beehive. But it is built on a
gigantic scale, for it is thought that no man, however learned or
experienced he might be, ever contrived during all his life to so much
as even half fill the cells of his memory. And if any reader should be
apprehensive lest it come to pass with him in this age of unlimited
supply of cheap knowledge that he will fill all his cells let him
console himself with the reflection that it is supposed that Nature,
in such a case, will have a further supply of new cells ready, she
never, as yet, having failed in such rough hospitality, though it
often leaves much to be desired!

Yes, they are all there--every image of the past, every face which
ever smiled on us--the hopes and fears of bygone years--the rustling
of grass and flowers and the roar of the sea--the sound of trumpets in
processions grand--the voices of the great and good among mankind--or
what you will. Every line ever read in print, every picture and face
and house is there. Many an experiment has shown this to be true; also
that by mesmerizing or hypnotizing processes the most hidden images or
memories can be awakened. In fact, the idea has lost much of its
wonder since the time of Coleridge, now that every sound can be
recorded, laid away and reproduced, and we are touching closely on an
age when all that lies _perdu_ in any mind can or will be set forth
visibly, and all that a man has ever _seen_ be shown to the world. For
this is no whit more wonderful than that we can convey images or
pictures by telegraph, and when I close my eyes and recall or imagine
a form it does not seem strange that there might be some process by
means of which it might be photographed.

And here we touch upon the Materialization of Thought, which
conception loses a part of the absurdity with which Spiritualists and
Occultists have invested it, if we regard all nature as one substance.
For, in truth, all that was ever perceived, even to the shadow of a
dream by a lunatic, had as real an existence while it lasted as the
Pyramids of Egypt, else it could not have been perceived. Sense
cannot, even in dreams, observe what is not for the time an effect on
matter. If a man _imagines_ or makes believe to himself that he has a
fairy attendant, or a dog, and _fancies_ that he sees it, that man
does really see _something_, though it be invisible to others. There
is some kind of creative brain-action going on, some employment of
atoms and forces, and, if this be so, we may enter it among the
Possibilities of the Future that the Material in any form whatever may
be advanced, or further materialized or made real.

It is curious that this idea has long been familiar to believers in
magic. In more than one Italian legend which I have collected a
sorceress or goddess evolves a life from her own soul, as a fire emits
a spark. In fact, the fancy occurs in some form in all mythologies,
great or small. In one old Irish legend a wizard turns a Thought into
a watch-dog. The history of genius and of Invention is that of
realizing ideas, of making them clearer and stronger and more
comprehensive. Thus it seems to me that the word _Forethought_ as
generally loosely understood, when compared to what it has been shown
capable of expressing, is almost as much advanced as if like the fairy
HERMELINA, chronicled by GROSIUS, it had been originally a vapor or
mere fantasy, and gradually advanced to fairy life so as to become the
companion of a wizard.

If an artist, say a painter, will take forethought for a certain
picture, whether the subject be determined or not, bringing himself to
that state of easy, assured confidence, as a matter of course that he
will _retain_ the subject he will, if not at the first effort, almost
certainly at last find himself possessed of it. Let him beware of
haste, or of forcing the work. When he shall have secured suggestive
Interest let him will that Ingenuity shall be bolder and his spirit
draw from the stores of memory more abundant material. Thus our powers
may be gradually and gently drawn into our service. Truly it would
seem as if there were no limit to what a man can evolve out of himself
if he will take Thought thereto.

Forethought can be of vast practical use in cases where confidence is
required. Many a young clergyman and lawyer has been literally
frightened out of a career, and many an actor ruined for want of a
very little knowledge, and in this I speak from personal experience.
Let the aspirant who is to appear in public, or pass an examination,
and is alarmed, base his forethought on such ideas as this, that he
would not be afraid to repeat his speech to _one_ person or two--why
should he fear a hundred? There are some who can repeat this idea to
themselves till it takes hold strongly, and they rise almost feeling
contempt for all in court--as did the old lady in Saint Louis, who
felt so relieved when a witness at _not_ feeling frightened that she
bade judge and jury cease looking at her in that impudent way.

Having read the foregoing to a friend he asked me whether I believed
that by Forethought and Suggestion a gentleman could be induced
without diffidence to offer himself in marriage, since, as is well
known, that the most eligible young men often put off wedding for
years because they cannot summon up courage to propose. To which I
replied that I had no great experience of such cases, but as regarded
the method I was like the Scotch clergyman who, being asked by a
wealthy man if he thought that the gift of a thousand pounds to the
Kirk would save the donor's soul, replied: "I'm na prepairet to
preceesly answer thot question--but I wad vara warmly advise ye to
_try_ it."

It must be remembered that for the very great majority of cases, if
really not for all, the practicer of this process must be of temperate
habits, and never attempt after a hearty meal, or drinking freely, to
exercise Forethought or Self-Suggestion. Peaceful mental action during
sleep requires that there shall be very light labor of digestion, and
disturbed or troublesome dreams are utterly incompatible with really
successful results. Nor will a single day's temperance suffice. It
requires many days to bring the whole frame and constitution into good
fit order. Here there can be no evasion, for more than ordinary
temperance in food and drink is _absolutely indispensable_.

It is a principle, recognized by all physiologists, that digestion and
fixed thought cannot go on together; it is even unadvisable to read
while eating. Thus in all the old magical operations, which were, in
fact, self-hypnotism, a perfect fast is insisted on with reason. This
is all so self-evident that I need not dwell on it. It will be
needless for anyone to take up this subject as a trifling pastime, or
attempt self-suggestion and development of will with as little
earnestness as one would give to a game of cards; for in such a
half-way effort time will be lost and nothing come of it. Unless
entered on with the most serious resolve to persevere, and make
greater effort and more earnestly at every step, it had better be let
alone.

All who will persevere with calm determination cannot fail ere long to
gain a certain success, and this achieved, the second step is much
easier. However, there are many people who after doing all in their
power to get to the gold or diamond mines, hasten away even when in
the full tide of success, because they are fickle--and it is precisely
such people who easily tire who are most easily attracted, be it to
mesmerism, hypnotism, or any other wonder. And they are more wearisome
and greater foes to true Science than the utterly indifferent or the
ignorant.

This work will not have been written in vain should it induce the
reader to reflect on what is implied by patient repetition or
perseverance, and what an incredible and varied _power_ that man
acquires who masters it. He who can lead himself, or others, into a
_habit_ can do anything. Even Religion is, in fact, nothing else.
"Religion," said the reviewer of "The Evolution of the Idea of God,"
by GRANT ALLEN, "he defines as Custom or Practice--not theory, not
theology, not ethics, not spiritual aspirations, but a certain set of
more or less similar observances: propitiation, prayer, praise,
offerings, the request for Divine favors, the deprecation of Divine
anger, or other misfortunes"--in short, Ritual. That is to say, it is
the aggregate of the different parts of religion, of which many take
one for the whole. But this aggregation was the result of earnest
patience and had good results. And it is by the careful analysis and
all-round examination of Ideas that we acquire valuable knowledge, and
may learn how very few there are current which are more than very
superficially understood--as I have shown in what I have said of the
Will, the Imagination, Forethought, and many other faculties which are
flippantly used to explain a thousand problems by people who can
hardly define the things themselves.



