The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Life of the Spirit and the Life of To-day
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Life of the Spirit and the Life of To-day

Author: Evelyn Underhill


        
Release date: February 16, 2005 [eBook #15082]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/15082

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Garrett Alley, and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team.






Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Garrett Alley, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.







THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

AND

THE LIFE OF TO-DAY

BY

EVELYN UNDERHILL

Author of "MYSTICISM," "THE ESSENTIALS OF MYSTICISM," etc.



NEW YORK

E.P. DUTTON & COMPANY

681 FIFTH AVENUE


Copyright, 1922.

BY E.P. DUTTON & COMPANY

_All rights reserved_


IN MEMORIAM

E.R.B.




PREFACE


This book owes its origin to the fact that in the autumn of 1921 the
authorities of Manchester College, Oxford invited me to deliver the
inaugural course of a lectureship in religion newly established under
the will of the late Professor Upton. No conditions being attached to
this appointment, it seemed a suitable opportunity to discuss, so far as
possible in the language of the moment, some of the implicits which I
believe to underlie human effort and achievement in the domain of the
spiritual life. The material gathered for this purpose has now been
added to, revised, and to some extent re-written, in order to make it
appropriate to the purposes of the reader rather than the hearer. As the
object of the book is strictly practical, a special attempt has been
made to bring the classic experiences of the spiritual life into line
with the conclusions of modern psychology, and in particular, to suggest
some of the directions in which recent psychological research may cast
light on the standard problems of the religious consciousness. This
subject is still in its infancy; but it is destined, I am sure, in the
near future to exercise a transforming influence on the study of
spiritual experience, and may even prove to be the starting point of a
new apologetic. Those who are inclined either to fear or to resent the
application to this experience of those laws which--as we are now
gradually discovering--govern the rest of our psychic life, or who are
offended by the resulting demonstrations of continuity between our most
homely and most lofty reactions to the universe, might take to
themselves the plain words of Thomas a Kempis: "Thou art a man and not
God, thou art flesh and no angel."

Since my subject is not the splendor of historic sanctity but the normal
life of the Spirit, as it may be and is lived in the here-and-now, I
have done my best to describe the character and meaning of this life in
the ordinary terms of present day thought, and with little or no use of
the technical language of mysticism. For the same reason, no attention
has been given to those abnormal experiences and states of
consciousness, which, too often regarded as specially "mystical," are
now recognized by all competent students as representing the unfortunate
accidents rather than the abiding substance of spirituality. Readers of
these pages will find nothing about trances, Ecstasies and other rare
psychic phenomena; which sometimes indicate holiness, and sometimes only
disease. For information on these matters they must go to larger and
more technical works. My aim here is the more general one, of indicating
first the characteristic experiences--discoverable within all great
religions--which justify or are fundamental to the spiritual life, and
the way in which these experiences may be accommodated to the
world-view of the modern man: and next, the nature of that spiritual
life as it appears in human history. The succeeding sections of the book
treat in some detail the light cast on spiritual problems by mental
analysis--a process which need not necessarily be conducted from the
standpoint of a degraded materialism--and by recent work on the
psychology of autistic thought and of suggestion. These investigations
have a practical interest for every man who desires to be the "captain
of his soul." The relation in which institutional religion does or
should stand to the spiritual life is also in part a matter for
psychology; which is here called upon to deal with the religious aspect
of the social instincts, and the problems surrounding symbols and cults.
These chapters lead up to a discussion of the personal aspect of the
spiritual life, its curve of growth, characters and activities; and a
further section suggests some ways in which educationists might promote
the up springing of this life in the young. Finally, the last chapter
attempts to place the fact of the life of the Spirit in its relation to
the social order, and to indicate some of the results which might follow
upon its healthy corporate development. It is superfluous to point out
that each of these subjects needs, at least, a volume to itself: and to
some of them I shall hope to return in the future. Their treatment in
the present work is necessarily fragmentary and suggestive; and is
intended rather to stimulate thought, than to offer solutions.

Part of Chapter IV has already appeared in "The Fortnightly Review"
under the title "Suggestion and Religious Experience." Chapter VIII
incorporates several passages from an article on "Sources of Power in
Human Life" originally contributed to the "Hubert Journal." These are
reprinted by kind permission of the editors concerned. My numerous debts
to previous writers are obvious, and for the most part are acknowledged
in the footnotes; the greatest, to the works of Baron Von Hugely, will
be clear to all students of his writings. Thanks are also due to my old
friend William Scott Palmer, who read part of the manuscript and gave me
much generous and valuable advice. It is a pleasure to express in this
place my warm gratitude first to the Principal and authorities of
Manchester College, who gave me the opportunity of delivering these
chapters in their original form, and whose unfailing sympathy and
kindness so greatly helped me: and secondly, to the members of the
Oxford Faculty of Theology, to whom I owe the great Honor of being the
first woman lecturer in religion to appear in the University list.

  E.U.

  _Epiphany_, 1922.

[** Transcriber's Note: This text contains just a few instances of a
    character with a diacritical mark. The character is a lower-case
    'u' with a macron (straight line) above it. In the text, that
    character is depicted thusly: [=u] **]




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                  PAGE

      PREFACE                                             vii

   I. THE CHARACTERS OF SPIRITUAL LIFE                      1

  II. HISTORY AND THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT                   38

 III. PSYCHOLOGY AND THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT:
     (I) THE ANALYSIS OF MIND                              74

  IV. PSYCHOLOGY AND THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT:
     (II) CONTEMPLATION AND SUGGESTION                    112

   V. INSTITUTIONAL RELIGION AND THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT   153

  VI. THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT IN THE INDIVIDUAL            191

 VII. THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT AND EDUCATION                228

VIII. THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT AND THE SOCIAL ORDER         266

      PRINCIPAL WORKS USED AND CITED                      300

      INDEX                                               307




THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

AND

THE LIFE OF TO-DAY

  Initio tu, Domine, terram fundasti; et opera manuum tuarum sunt caeli.
  Ipsi peribunt, tu autem permanes; et omnes sicut vestimentum
        veterascent.
  Et sicut opertorium mutabis eos, et mutabuntur;
  Tu autem idem ipse es, et anni tui non deficient.
  Filii servorum tuorum habitabunt; et semen eorum in seculum dirigetur.

                                 --Psalm cii: 25-28




CHAPTER I

THE CHARACTERS OF SPIRITUAL LIFE


This book has been called "The Life of the Spirit and the Life of
To-day" in order to emphasize as much as possible the practical,
here-and-now nature of its subject; and specially to combat the idea
that the spiritual life--or the mystic life, as its more intense
manifestations are sometimes called--is to be regarded as primarily a
matter of history. It is not. It is a matter of biology. Though we
cannot disregard history in our study of it, that history will only be
valuable to us in so far as we keep tight hold on its direct connection
with the present, its immediate bearing on our own lives: and this we
shall do only in so far as we realize the unity of all the higher
experiences of the race. In fact, were I called upon to choose a motto
which should express the central notion of these chapters, that motto
would be--"There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit." This
declaration I would interpret in the widest possible sense; as
suggesting the underlying harmony and single inspiration of all man's
various and apparently conflicting expressions of his instinct for
fullness of life. For we shall not be able to make order, in any hopeful
sense, of the tangle of material which is before us, until we have
subdued it to this ruling thought: seen one transcendent Object towards
which all our twisting pathways run, and one impulsion pressing us
towards it.

As psychology is now teaching us to find, at all levels of our craving,
dreaming, or thinking, the diverse expressions of one psychic energy; so
that type of philosophy which comes nearest to the religion of the
Spirit, invites us to find at all levels of life the workings and
strivings of one Power: "a Reality which both underlies and crowns all
our other, lesser strivings."[1] Variously manifested in partial
achievements of order and goodness, in diversities of beauty, and in our
graded apprehensions of truth, this Spirit is yet most fully known to us
in the transcendent values of holiness and love. The more deeply it is
loved by man, the nearer he draws to its heart: and the greater his
love, the more fully does he experience its transforming and energizing
power. The words of Plotinus are still true for every one of us, and are
unaffected by the presence or absence of creed:

"Yonder is the true object of our love, which it is possible to grasp
and to live with and truly to possess, since no envelope of flesh
separates us from it. He who has seen it knows what I say, that the soul
then has another life, when it comes to God, and having come possesses
Him, and knows when in that state that it is in the presence of the
dispenser of true life and that it needs nothing further."[2]

So, if we would achieve anything like a real integration of life--and
until we have done so, we are bound to be restless and uncertain in our
touch upon experience--we are compelled to press back towards contact
with this living Reality, however conceived by us. And this not by way
of a retreat from our actual physical and mental life, but by way of a
fulfilment of it.

More perhaps than ever before, men are now driven to ask themselves the
searching question of the disciple in Boehme's Dialogue on the
Supersensual Life: "Seeing I am in nature, how may I come through nature
into the supersensual ground, without destroying nature?"[3] And such a
coming through into the ground, such a finding and feeling of Eternal
Life, is I take it the central business of religion. For religion is
committed to achieving a synthesis of the eternal and the ever-fleeting,
of nature and of spirit; lifting up the whole of life to a greater
reality, because a greater participation in eternity. Such a
participation in eternity, manifested in the time-world, is the very
essence of the spiritual life: but, set as we are in mutability, our
apprehensions of it can only be partial and relative. Absolutes are
known only to absolute mind; our measurements, however careful and
intricate, can never tally with the measurements of God. As Einstein
conceives of space curved round the sun we, borrowing his symbolism for
a moment, may perhaps think of the world of Spirit as curved round the
human soul; shaped to our finite understanding, and therefore presenting
to us innumerable angles of approach. This means that God can and must
be sought only within and through our human experience. "Where," says
Jacob Boehme, "will you seek for God? Seek Him in your soul, which has
proceeded out of the Eternal Nature, the living fountain of forces
wherein the Divine working stands."[4]

But, on the other hand, such limitation as this is no argument for
agnosticism. For this our human experience in its humbling imperfection,
however we interpret it, is as real within its own system of reference
as anything else. It is our inevitably limited way of laying hold on the
stuff of existence: and not less real for that than the monkeys' way on
one hand, or the angels' way on the other. Only we must be sure that we
do it as thoroughly and completely as we can; disdaining the indolence
which so easily relapses to the lower level and the smaller world.

And the first point I wish to make is, that the experience which we call
the life of the Spirit is such a genuine fact; which meets us at all
times and places, and at all levels of life. It is an experience which
is independent of, and often precedes, any explanation or
rationalization we may choose to make of it: and no one, as a matter of
fact, takes any real interest in the explanation, unless he has had some
form of the experience. We notice, too, that it is most ordinarily and
also most impressively given to us as such an objective experience,
whole and unanalyzed; and that when it is thus given, and perceived as
effecting a transfiguration of human character, we on our part most
readily understand and respond to it.


Thus Plotinus, than whom few persons have lived more capable of
analysis, can only say: "The soul knows when in that state that it is in
the presence of the dispenser of true life." Yet in saying this, does he
not tell us far more, and rouse in us a greater and more fruitful
longing, than in all his disquisitions about the worlds of Spirit and of
Soul? And Kabir, from another continent and time, saying "More than all
else do I cherish at heart the love which makes me to live a limitless
life in this world,"[5] assures us in these words that he too has known
that more abundant life. These are the statements of the pure religious
experience, in so far as "pure" experience is possible to us; which is
only of course in a limited and relative sense. The subjective element,
all that the psychologist means by apperception, must enter in, and
control it. Nevertheless, they refer to man's communion with an
independent objective Reality. This experience is more real and
concrete, therefore more important, than any of the systems by which
theology seeks to explain it. We may then take it, without prejudice to
any special belief, that the spiritual life we wish to study is _one
life_; based on experience of one Reality, and manifested in the
diversity of gifts and graces which men have been willing to call true,
holy, beautiful and good. For the moment at least we may accept the
definition of it given by Dr. Bosanquet, as "oneness with the Supreme
Good in every facet of the heart and will."[6] And since without
derogation of its transcendent character, its vigour, wonder and worth,
it is in human experience rather than in speculation that we are bound
to seek it, we shall look first at the forms taken by man's intuition of
Eternity, the life to which it seems to call him; and next at the actual
appearance of this life in history. Then at the psychological machinery
by which we may lay hold of it, the contributions which religious
institutions make to its realization; and last, turning our backs on
these partial explorations of the living Whole, seek if we can to seize
something of its inwardness as it appears to the individual, the way in
which education may best prepare its fulfilment, and the part it must
play in the social group.

We begin therefore at the starting point of this life of Spirit: in
man's vague, fluctuating, yet persistent apprehension of an enduring and
transcendent reality--his instinct for God. The characteristic forms
taken by this instinct are simple and fairly well known. Complication
only comes in with the interpretation we put on them.

By three main ways we tend to realize our limited personal relations
with that transcendent Other which we call divine, eternal or real; and
these, appearing perpetually in the vast literature of religion, might
be illustrated from all places and all times.

First, there is the profound sense of security: of being safely held in
a cosmos of which, despite all contrary appearance, peace is the very
heart, and which is not inimical to our true interests. For those whose
religious experience takes this form, God is the Ground of the soul, the
Unmoved, our Very Rest; statements which meet us again and again in
spiritual literature. This certitude of a principle of permanence within
and beyond our world of change--the sense of Eternal Life--lies at the
very centre of the religious consciousness; which will never on this
point capitulate to the attacks of philosophy on the one hand (such as
those of the New Realists) or of psychology on the other hand, assuring
him that what he mistakes for the Eternal World is really his own
unconscious mind. Here man, at least in his great representatives--the
persons of transcendent religious genius--seems to get beyond all
labels. He finds and feels a truth that cannot fail him, and that
satisfies both his heart and mind; a justification of that
transcendental feeling which is the soul alike of philosophy and of art.
If his life has its roots here, it will be a fruitful tree; and whatever
its outward activities, it will be a spiritual life, since it is lived,
as George Fox was so fond of saying, in the Universal Spirit. All know
the great passage In St. Augustine's Confessions in which he describes
how "the mysterious eye of his soul gazed on the Light that never
changes; above the eye of the soul, and above intelligence."[7] There is
nothing archaic in such an experience. Though its description may depend
on the language of Neoplatonism, it is in its essence as possible and as
fruitful for us to-day as it was in the fourth century, and the doctrine
and discipline of Christian prayer have always admitted its validity.

Here and in many other examples which might be quoted, the spiritual
fact is interpreted in a non-personal and cosmic way; and we must
remember that what is described to us is always, inevitably, the more or
less emotional interpretation, never the pure immediacy of experience.
This interpretation frequently makes use of the symbolisms of space,
stillness, and light: the contemplative soul is "lost in the ocean of
the Godhead," "enters His silence" or exclaims with Dante:

        "la mia vista, venendo sincera,
      e piu e piu entrava per lo raggio
    dell' alta luce, che da se e vera."[8]

But in the second characteristic form of the religious experience, the
relationship is felt rather as the intimate and reciprocal communion of
a person with a Person; a form of apprehension which is common to the
great majority of devout natures. It is true that Divine Reality, while
doubtless including in its span all the values we associate with
personality, must far overpass it: and this conclusion has been reached
again and again by profoundly religious minds, of whom among Christians
we need only mention Dionysius the Areopagite, Eckhart, and Ruysbroeck.
Yet these very minds have always in the end discovered the necessity of
finding place for the overwhelming certitude of a personal contact, a
prevenient and an answering love. For it is always in a personal and
emotional relationship that man finds himself impelled to surrender to
God; and this surrender is felt by him to evoke a response. It is
significant that even modern liberalism is forced, in the teeth of
rationality, to acknowledge this fact of the religious experience. Thus
we have on the one hand the Catholic-minded but certainly unorthodox
Spanish thinker, Miguel de Unamuno, confessing--

"I believe in God as I believe in my friends, because I feel the breath
of His affection, feel His invisible and intangible hand, drawing me,
leading me, grasping me.... Once and again in my life I have seen myself
suspended in a trance over the abyss; once and again I have found myself
at the cross-roads, confronted by a choice of ways and aware that in
choosing one I should be renouncing all the others--for there is no
turning back upon these roads of life; and once and again in such unique
moments as these I have felt the impulse of a mighty power, conscious,
sovereign and loving. And then, before the feet of the wayfarer, opens
out the way of the Lord."[9]

Compare with this Upton the Unitarian: "If," he says, "this Absolute
Presence, which meets us face to face in the most momentous of our
life's experiences, which pours into our fainting the elixir of new
life-mud strength, and into our wounded hearts the balm of a quite
infinite sympathy, cannot fitly be called a personal presence, it is
only because this word personal is too poor and carries with it
associations too human and too limited adequately to express this
profound God-consciousness."[10]

Such a personal God-consciousness is the one impelling cause of those
moral struggles, sacrifices and purifications, those costing and heroic
activities, to which all greatly spiritual souls find themselves drawn.
We note that these souls experience it even when it conflicts with their
philosophy: for a real religious intuition is always accepted by the
self that has it as taking priority of thought, and carrying with it so
to speak its own guarantees. Thus Blake, for whom the Holy Ghost was an
"intellectual fountain," hears the Divine Voice crying:

    "I am not a God afar off, I am a brother and friend;
    Within your bosoms I reside, and you reside in me."[11]

Thus in the last resort the Sufi poet can only say:

    "O soul, seek the Beloved; O friend, seek the Friend!"[12]

Thus even Plotinus is driven to speak of his Divine Wisdom as the Father
and ever-present Companion of the soul,[13] and Kabir, for whom God is
the Unconditioned and the Formless, can yet exclaim:

"From the beginning until the end of time there is love between me and
thee: and how shall such love be extinguished?"[14]

Christianity, through its concepts of the Divine Fatherhood and of the
Eternal Christ, has given to this sense of personal communion its
fullest and most beautiful expression:

    "Amore, chi t'ama non sta ozioso,
    tanto li par dolce de te gustare,
    ma tutta ora vive desideroso
    como te possa stretto piu amare;
    che tanto sta per te lo cor gioioso,
    chi nol sentisse, nol porria parlare
    quanto e dolce a gustare lo tuo sapore."[15]

On the immense question of _what_ it is that lies behind this sense of
direct intercourse, this passionate friendship with the Invisible, I
cannot enter. But it has been one of the strongest and most fruitful
influences in religious history, and gives in particular its special
colour to the most perfect developments of Christian mysticism.

Last--and here is the aspect of religious experience which is specially
to concern us--Spirit is felt as an inflowing power, a veritable
accession of vitality; energizing the self, or the religious group,
impelling it to the fullest and most zealous living-out of its
existence, giving it fresh joy and vigour, and lifting it to fresh
levels of life. This sense of enhanced life is a mark of all religions
of the Spirit. "He giveth power to the faint," says the Second Isaiah,
"and to them that hath no might he increaseth strength ... they that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary; and they shall walk,
and not faint."[16] "I live--yet not I," "I can do all things," says St.
Paul, seeking to express his dependence on this Divine strength invading
and controlling him: and assures his neophytes that they too have
received "the Spirit of power." "My life," says St. Augustine, "shall be
a real life, being wholly full of Thee."[17] "Having found God," says a
modern Indian saint, "the current of my life flowed on swiftly, I gained
fresh strength."[18] All other men and women of the Spirit speak in the
same sense, when they try to describe the source of their activity and
endurance.

So, the rich experiences of the religious consciousness seem to be
resumed in these three outstanding types of spiritual awareness. The
cosmic, ontological, or transcendent; finding God as the infinite
Reality outside and beyond us. The personal, finding Him as the living
and responsive object of our love, in immediate touch with us. The
dynamic, finding Him as the power that dwells within or energizes us.
These are not exclusive but complementary apprehensions, giving
objectives to intellect feeling and will. They must all be taken into
account in any attempt to estimate the full character of the spiritual
life, and this life can hardly achieve perfection unless all three be
present in some measure. Thus the French contemplative Lucie-Christine
says, that when the voice of God called her it was at one and the same
time a Light, a Drawing, and a Power,[19] and her Indian contemporary
the Maharishi Devendranath Tagore, that "Seekers after God must realize
Brahma in these three places. They must see Him within, see Him without,
and see Him in that abode of Brahma where He exists in Himself."[20] And
it seems to me, that what we have in the Christian doctrine of the
Trinity, is above all the crystallization and mind's interpretation of
these three ways in which our simple contact with God is actualized by
us. It is, like so many other dogmas when we get to the bottom of them,
an attempt to describe experience. What is that supernal symphony of
which this elusive music, with its three complementary strains, forms
part? We cannot know this, since we are debarred by our situation from
knowledge of wholes. But even those strains which we do hear, assure us
how far we are yet from conceiving the possibilities of life, of power,
of beauty which are contained in them.

And if the first type of experience, with the immense feeling of
assurance, of peace, and of quietude which comes from our intuitive
contact with that world which Ruysbroeck called the "world that is
unwalled,"[21] and from the mind's utter surrender and abolition of
resistances--if all this seems to lead to a merely static or
contemplative conception of the spiritual life; the third type of
experience, with its impulse towards action, its often strongly felt
accession of vitality and power, leads inevitably to a complementary and
dynamic interpretation of that life. Indeed, if the first moment in the
life of the Spirit be man's apprehension of Eternal Life, the second
moment--without which the first has little worth for him--consists of
his response to that transcendent Reality. Perception of it lays on him
the obligation of living in its atmosphere, fulfilling its meaning, if
he can: and this will involve for him a measure of inward
transformation, a difficult growth and change. Thus the ideas of new
birth and regeneration have always been, and I think must ever be,
closely associated with man's discovery of God: and the soul's true path
seems to be from intuition, through adoration, to moral effort, and
thence to charity.

Even so did the Oxford Methodists, who began by trying only to worship
God and _be_ good by adhering to a strict devotional rule, soon find
themselves impelled to try to _do_ good by active social work.[22] And
at his highest development, and in so far as he has appropriated the
full richness of experience which is offered to him, man will and should
find himself, as it were, flung to and fro between action and
contemplation. Between the call to transcendence, to a simple self-loss
in the unfathomable and adorable life of God, and the call to a full, rich
and various actualization of personal life, in the energetic strivings of a
fellow worker with Him: between the soul's profound sense of transcendent
love, and its felt possession of and duty towards immanent love--a paradox
which only some form of incarnational philosophy can solve. It is said
of Abu Said, the great S[=u]fi, at the full term of his development,
that he "did all normal things while ever thinking of God."[23] Here, I
believe, we find the norm of the spiritual life, in such a complete
response both to the temporal and to the eternal revelations and demands
of the Divine nature: on the one hand, the highest and most costing
calls made on us by that world of succession in which we find ourselves;
on the other, an unmoved abiding in the bosom of eternity, "where was
never heard quarter-clock to strike, never seen minute glasse to
turne."[24]

There have been many schools and periods in which one half of this dual
life of man has been unduly emphasized to the detriment of the other.
Often in the East--and often too in the first, pre-Benedictine phase of
Christian monasticism--there has been an unbalanced cultivation of the
contemplative life, resulting in a narrow, abnormal, imperfectly
vitalized a-social type of spirituality. On the other hand, in our own
day the tendency to action usually obliterates the contemplative side of
experience altogether: and the result is the feverishness, exhaustion
and uncertainty of aim characteristic of the over-driven and the
underfed. But no one can be said to live in its fulness the life of the
Spirit who does not observe a due balance between the two: both
receiving and giving, both apprehending and expressing, and thus
achieving that state of which Ruysbroeck said "Then only is our life a
whole, when work and contemplation dwell in us side by side, and we are
perfectly in both of them at once."[25] All Christian writers on the
life of the Spirit point to the perfect achievement of this two-fold
ideal in Christ; the pattern of that completed humanity towards which
the indwelling Spirit is pressing the race. His deeds of power and
mercy, His richly various responses to every level of human existence,
His gift to others of new faith and life, were directly dependent on the
nights spent on the mountain in prayer. When St. Paul entreats us to
grow up into the fulness of His stature, this is the ideal that is
implied.

In the intermediate term of the religious experience, that felt
communion with a Person which is the _clou_ of the devotional life, we
get as it were the link between the extreme apprehensions of
transcendence and of immanence, and their expression in the lives of
contemplation and of action; and also a focus for that
religious-emotion which is the most powerful stimulus to spiritual
growth. It is needless to emphasize the splendid use which Christianity
has made of this type of experience; nor unfortunately, the
exaggerations to which it has led. Both extremes are richly represented
in the literature of mysticism. But we should remember that Christianity
is not alone in thus requiring place to be made for such a conception of
God as shall give body to all the most precious and fruitful experiences
of the heart, providing simple human sense and human feeling with
something on which to lay hold. In India, there is the existence, within
and alongside the austere worship of the unconditioned Brahma, of the
ardent personal Vaishnavite devotion to the heart's Lord, known as
Bhakti Marga. In Islam, there is the impassioned longing of the S[=u]fis
for the Beloved, who is "the Rose of all Reason and all Truth."

    "Without Thee, O Beloved, I cannot rest;
    Thy goodness towards me I cannot reckon.
    Tho' every hair on my body becomes a tongue
    A thousandth part of the thanks due to Thee I cannot tell."[26]

There is the sudden note of rapture which startles us in the
Neoplatonists, as when Plotinus speaks of "the name of love for what is
there to know--the passion of the lover testing on the 'bosom of his
love."[27] Surely we may accept all these, as the instinctive responses
of a diversity of spirits to the one eternal Spirit of life and love:
and recognize that without such personal response, such a discovery of
imperishable love, a fully lived spiritual life is no more possible than
is a fully lived physical life from which love has been left out.

When we descend from experience to interpretation, the paradoxical
character of such a personal sense of intimacy is eased for us, if we
remember that the religious man's awareness of the indwelling Spirit, or
of a Divine companionship--whatever name he gives it--is just his
limited realization, achieved by means of his own mental machinery, of a
universal and not a particular truth. To this realization he brings all
his human--more, his sub-human--feelings and experiences: not only those
which are vaguely called his spiritual intuitions, but the full weight
of his impulsive and emotional life. His experience and its
interpretation are, then, inevitably conditioned by this apperceiving
mass. And here I think the intellect should show mercy, and not probe
without remorse into those tender places where the heart and the spirit
are at one. Let us then be content to note, that when we consult the
works of those who have best and most fully interpreted their religion
in a universal sense, we find how careful they are to provide a category
for this experience of a personally known and loved indwelling
Divinity--man's Father, Lover, Saviour, ever-present Companion--which
shall avoid its identification with the mere spirit of Nature, whilst
safeguarding its immanence no less than its transcendent quality. Thus,
Julian of Norwich heard in her meditations the voice of God saying to
her, "See! I am in all things! See! I lift never mine hand from off my
works, nor ever shall!"[28] Is it possible to state more plainly the
indivisible identity of the Spirit of Life? "See! I am in _all_ things!"
In the terrific energies of the stellar universe, and the smallest song
of the birds. In the seething struggle of modern industrialism, as much
a part of nature, of those works on which His hands are laid, as the
more easily comprehended economy of the ant-heap and the hive. This
sense of the personal presence of an abiding Reality, fulfilling and
transcending all our highest values, here in our space-time world of
effort, may well be regarded as the differential mark of real spiritual
experience, wherever found. It chimes well with the definition of
Professor Pratt, who observes that the truly spiritual man, though he
may not be any better morally than his non-religious neighbour, "has a
confidence in the universe and an inner joy which the other does not
know--is more at-home in the universe as a whole, than other men."[29]

If, in their attempt to describe their experience of this companioning
Reality, spiritual men of all types have exhausted all the resources and
symbols of poetry, even earthly lovers are obliged to do that, in order
to suggest a fraction of the values contained in earthly love. Such a
divine presence is dramatized for Christianity in the historic
incarnation, though not limited by it: and it is continued into history
by the beautiful Christian conception of the eternal indwelling Christ.
The distinction made by the Bhakti form of Hinduism between the Manifest
and the Unmanifest God seeks to express this same truth; and shows that
this idea, in one form or another, is a necessity for religious thought.

Further and detailed illustration of spiritual experience in itself, as
a genuine and abiding human fact--a form of life--independent of the
dogmatic interpretations put on it, will come up as we proceed. I now
wish to go on to a second point: this--that it follows that any complete
description of human life as we know it, must find room for the
spiritual factor, and for that religious life and temper in which it
finds expression. This place must be found, not merely in the phenomenal
series, as we might find room for any special human activity or
aberration, from the medicine-man to the Jumping Perfectionists; but
deep-set in the enduring stuff of man's true life. We must believe that
the union of this life with supporting Spirit cannot _in fact_ be
broken, any more than the organic unity of the earth with the universe
as a whole. But the extent in which we find and feel it is the measure
of the fullness of spiritual life that we enjoy. Organic union must be
lifted to conscious realization: and this to do, is the business of
religion. In this act of realization each aspect of the psychic
life--thought, will and feeling--must have its part, and from each must
be evoked a response. Only in so far as such all-round realization and
response are achieved by us do we live the spiritual life. We do it
perhaps in some degree, every time that we surrender to pure beauty or
unselfish devotion; for then all but the most insensitive must be
conscious of an unearthly touch, and hear the cadence of a heavenly
melody. In these partial experiences something, as it were, of the
richness of Reality overflows and is experienced by us. But it is in the
wholeness of response characteristic of religion--that uncalculated
response to stimulus which is the mark of the instinctive life--that
this Realty of love and power is most truly found and felt by us. In
this generous and heart-searching surrender of religion, rightly made,
the self achieves inner harmony, and finds a satisfying objective for
all its cravings and energies. It then finds its life, and the
possibilities before it, to be far greater than it knew.

We need not claim that those men and women who have most fully realized,
and so at first hand have described to us, this life of the Spirit, have
neither discerned or communicated the ultimate truth of things; nor need
we claim that the symbols they use have intrinsic value, beyond the
poetic power of suggesting to us the quality and wonder of their
transfigured lives. Still less must we claim this discovery as the
monopoly of any one system of religion. But we can and ought to claim,
that no system shall be held satisfactory which does not find a place
for it: and that only in so far as we at least apprehend and respond to
the world's spiritual aspect, do we approach the full stature of
humanity. Psychologists at present are much concerned to entreat us to
"face reality," discarding idealism along with the other phantasies that
haunt the race. Yet this facing of reality can hardly be complete if we
do not face the facts of the spiritual life. Certainly we shall find it
most difficult to interpret these facts; they are confused, and more
than one reading of them is possible. But still we cannot leave them out
and claim to have "faced reality."

Hoeffding goes so far as to say that any real religion implies and must
give us a world-view.[30] And I think it is true that any vividly lived
spiritual life must, as soon as it passes beyond the level of mere
feeling and involves reflection, involve too some more or less
articulated conception of the spiritual universe, in harmony with which
that life is to be lived. This may be given to us by authority, in the
form of creed: but if we do not thus receive it, we are committed to the
building of our own City of God. And to-day, that world-view, that
spiritual landscape, must harmonize--if it is needed to help our
living--with the outlook, the cosmic map, of the ordinary man. If it be
adequate, it will inevitably transcend this; but must not be in hopeless
conflict with it. The stretched-out, graded, striving world of
biological evolution, the many-faced universe of the physical
relativist, the space-time manifold of realist philosophy--these great
constructions of human thought, so often ignored by the religious mind,
must on the contrary be grasped, and accommodated to the world-view
which centres on the God known in religious experience. They are true
within their own systems of reference; and the soul demands a synthesis
wide enough to contain them.

It is true that most religious systems, at least of the traditional
type, do purport to give us a world-view, a universe, in which
devotional experience is at home and finds an objective and an
explanation. They give us a self-consistent symbolic world in which to
live. But it is a world which is almost unrelated to the universe of
modern physics, and emerges in a very dishevelled state from the
explorations of history and of psychology. Even contrasted with our
every-day unresting strenuous life, it is rather like a conservatory in
a wilderness. Whilst we are inside everything seems all right.

Beauty and fragrance surround us. But emerging from its doors, we find
ourselves meeting the cold glances of those who deal in other kinds of
reality; and discover that such spiritual life as we possess has got to
accommodate itself to the conditions in which they live. If the claim of
religion be true at all, it is plain that the conservatory-type of
spiritual world is inconsistent with it. Imperfect though any conception
we frame of the universe must be--and here we may keep in mind Samuel
Butler's warning that "there is no such source of error as the pursuit
of absolute truth"--still, a view which is controlled by the religious
factor ought to be, so to speak, a hill-top view. Lifting us up to
higher levels, it ought to give us a larger synthesis. Hence, the wider
the span of experience which we are able to bring within our system, the
more valid its claim becomes: and the setting apart of spiritual
experience in a special compartment, the keeping of it under glass, is
daily becoming less possible. That experience is life in its fullness,
or nothing at all. Therefore it must come out into the open, and must
witness to its own most sacred conviction; that the universe as a whole
is a religious fact, and man is not living completely until he is living
in a world religiously conceived.

More and more, as it seems to me, philosophy moves toward this reading
of existence. The revolt from the last century's materialism is almost
complete. In religious language, abstract thought is again finding and
feeling God within the world; and finding too in this discovery and
realization the meaning, and perhaps--if we may dare to use such a
word--the purpose of life. It suggests--and here, more and more,
psychology supports it--that, real and alive as we are in relation to
this system with which we find ourselves in correspondence, yet we are
not so real, nor so alive, as it is possible to be. The characters of
our psychic life point us on and up to other levels. Already we perceive
that man's universe is no fixed order; and that the many ways in which
he is able to apprehend it are earnests of a greater transfiguration, a
more profound contact with reality yet possible to him. Higher forms of
realization, a wider span of experience, a sharpening of our vague,
uncertain consciousness of value--these may well be before us. We have
to remember how dim, tentative, half-understood a great deal of our
so-called "normal" experience is: how narrow the little field of
consciousness, how small the number of impressions it picks up from the
rich flux of existence, how subjective the picture it constructs from
them. To take only one obvious example, artists and poets have given us
plenty of hints that a real beauty and significance which we seldom
notice lie at our very doors; and forbid us to contradict the statement
of religion that God is standing there too.

That thought which inspires the last chapters of Professor 'Alexander's
"Space, Time, and Deity," that the universe as a whole has a tendency
towards deity, does at least seem true of the fully awakened human
consciousness.[31] Though St. Thomas Aquinas may not have covered all
the facts when he called man a contemplative animal,[32] he came nearer
the mark than more modern anthropologists. Man has an ineradicable
impulse to transcendence, though sometimes--as we may admit--it is
expressed in strange ways: and no psychology which fails to take account
of it can be accepted by us as complete. He has a craving which nothing
in his material surroundings seems adequate either to awaken or to
satisfy; a deep conviction that some larger synthesis of experience is
possible to him. The sense that we are not yet full grown has always
haunted the race. "I am the Food of the full-grown. _Grow,_ and thou
shalt feed on Me!"[33] said the voice of supreme Reality to St.
Augustine. Here we seem to lay our finger on the distinguishing mark of
humanity: that in man the titanic craving for a fuller life and love
which is characteristic of all living things, has a teleological
objective. He alone guesses that he may or should be something other;
yet cannot guess what he may be. And from this vague sense of being _in
via,_ the restlessness and discord of his nature proceed. In him, the
onward thrust of the world of becoming achieves self-consciousness.

The best individuals and communities of each age have felt this craving
and conviction; and obeyed, in a greater or less degree, its persistent
onward push. "The seed of the new birth," says William Law, "is not a
notion, but a real strong essential hunger, an attracting, a magnetic
desire."[34] Over and over again, rituals have dramatized this, desire
and saints have surrendered to it. The history of religion and
philosophy is really the history of the profound human belief that we
have faculties capable of responding to orders of truth which, did we
apprehend them, would change the whole character of our universe;
showing us reality from another angle, lit by another light. And time
after time too--as we shall see, when we come to consider the testimony
of history--favourable variations have arisen within the race and proved
in their own persons that this claim is true. Often at the cost of great
pain, sacrifice, and inward conflict they have broken their attachments
to the narrow world of the senses: and this act of detachment has been
repaid by a new, more lucid vision, and a mighty inflow of power. The
principle of degrees assures us that such changed levels of
consciousness and angles of approach may well involve introduction into
a universe of new relations, which we are not competent to
criticize.[35] This is a truth which should make us humble in our
efforts to understand the difficult and too often paradoxical utterances
of religious genius. It suggests the puzzlings of philosophers and
theologians--and, I may add, of psychologists too--over experiences
which they have not shared, are not of great authority for those whose
object is to find the secret of the Spirit, and make it useful for life.
Here, the only witnesses we can receive are, on the one part, the
first-hand witnesses of experience, and on the other part, our own
profound instinct that these are telling us news of our native land.

Baron von Huegel has finely said, that the facts of this spiritual life
are themselves the earnests of its objective. These facts cannot be
explained merely as man's share in the cosmic movement towards a yet
unrealized perfection; such as the unachieved and self-evolving Divinity
of some realist philosophers. "For we have no other instance of an
unrealized perfection producing such pain and joy, such volitions, such
endlessly varied and real results; and all by means of just this vivid
and persistent impression that this Becoming is an already realized
Perfection."[36] Therefore though the irresistible urge and the effort
forward, experienced on highest levels of love and service, are plainly
one-half of the life of the Spirit--which can never be consistent with a
pious indolence, an acceptance of things as they are, either in the
social or the individual life--yet, the other half, and the very
inspiration of that striving, is this certitude of an untarnishable
Perfection, a great goal really there; a living God Who draws all
spirits to Himself. "Our quest," said Plotinus, "is of an End, not of
ends: for that only can be chosen by us which is ultimate and noblest,
that which calls forth the tenderest longings of our soul."[37]

There is of course a sense in which such a life of the Spirit is the
same yesterday, to-day and for ever. Even if we consider it in relation
to historical time, the span within which it has appeared is so short,
compared with the ages of human evolution, that we may as well regard it
as still in the stage of undifferentiated infancy. Yet even babies
change, and change quickly, in their relations with the external world.
And though the universe with which man's childish spirit is in contact
be a world of enduring values; yet, placed as we are in the stream of
succession, part of the stuff of a changing world and linked at every
point with it, our apprehensions of this life of spirit, the symbols we
use to describe it--and we must use symbols--must inevitably change too.
Therefore from time to time some restatement becomes imperative, if
actuality is not to be lost. Whatever God meant man to do or to be, the
whole universe assures us that He did not mean him to stand still. Such
a restatement, then, may reasonably be called a truly religious work;
and I believe that it is indeed one of the chief works to which religion
must find itself committed in the near future. Hence my main object In
this book is to recommend the consideration of this enduring fact of the
life of the Spirit and what it can mean to us, from various points of
view; thus helping to prepare the ground for that synthesis which we may
not yet be able to achieve, but towards which we ought to look. It is
from this stand-point, and with this object of examining what we have,
of sorting out if we can the permanent from the transitory, of noticing
lacks and bridging cleavages, that we shall consider in turn the
testimony of history, the position in respect of psychology, and the
institutional personal and social aspects of the spiritual life.

In such a restatement, such a reference back to actual man, here at the
present day as we have him--such a demand for a spiritual interpretation
of the universe, which will allow us to fit in all his many-levelled
experiences--I believe we have the way of approach to which religion
to-day must look as its best hope. Thus only can we conquer that
museum-like atmosphere of much traditional piety which--agreeable as it
may be to the historic or aesthetic sense--makes it so unreal to our
workers, no less than to our students. Such a method, too, will mean the
tightening of that alliance between philosophy and psychology which is
already a marked character of contemporary thought.

And note that, working on this basis, we need not in order to find room
for the facts commit ourselves to the harsh dualism, the opposition
between nature and spirit, which is characteristic of some earlier forms
of Christian thought. In this dualism, too, we find simply an effort to
describe felt experience. It is an expression of the fact, so strongly
and deeply felt by the richest natures, that there _is_ an utter
difference in kind between the natural life of use and wont, as most of
us live it, and the life that is dominated by the spiritual
consciousness. The change is indeed so great, the transfiguration so
complete, that they seize on the strongest language in which to state
it. And in the good old human way, referring their own feelings to the
universe, they speak of the opposing and incompatible worlds of matter
and of spirit, of nature and of grace. But those who have most deeply
reflected, have perceived that the change effected is not a change of
worlds. It is rather such a change of temper and attitude as will
disclose within our one world, here and now, the one Spirit in the
diversity of His gifts; the one Love, in homeliest incidents as well as
noblest vision, laying its obligations on the soul; and so the true
nature and full possibilities of this our present life.

Although it is true that we must register our profound sense of the
transcendental character of this spirit-life, its otherness from mere
nature, and the humility and penitence in which alone mere nature
receive it; yet I think that our movement from one to the other is more
naturally described by us in the language of growth than in the language
of convulsion. The primal object of religion is to disclose to us this
perdurable basis of life, and foster our growth into communion with it.
And whatever its special, language and personal colour be--for all our
news of God comes to us through the consciousness of individual men, and
arrives tinctured by their feelings and beliefs--in the end it does
this by disclosing us to ourselves as spirits growing up, though
unevenly and hampered by our past, through the physical order into
completeness of response to a universe that is itself a spiritual fact.
"Heaven," said Jacob Boehme, "is nothing else but a manifestation of the
Eternal One, wherein all worketh and willeth in quiet love."[38] Such a
manifestation of Spirit must clearly be made through humanity, at least
so far as our own order is concerned: by our redirection and full use of
that spirit of life which energizes us, and which, emerging from the
more primitive levels of organic creation, is ours to carry on and
up--either to new self-satisfactions, or to new consecrations.

It is hardly worth while to insist that the need for such a redirection
has never been more strongly felt than at the present day. There is
indeed no period in which history exhibits mankind as at once more
active, more feverishly self-conscious, and more distracted, than is our
own bewildered generation; nor any which stood in greater need of
Blake's exhortation: "Let every Christian as much as in him lies, engage
himself openly and publicly before all the World in some Mental pursuit
for the Building up of Jerusalem."[39]

How many people do each of us know who work and will in quiet love, and
thus participate in eternal life?

Consider the weight of each of these words. The energy, the clear
purpose, the deep calm, the warm charity they imply. Willed work; not
grudging toil. Quiet love, not feverish emotionalism. Each term is quite
plain and human, and each has equal importance as an attribute of
heavenly life. How many politicians--the people to whom we have confided
the control of our national existence--work and will in quiet love? What
about industry? Do the masters, or the workers, work and will in quiet
love? that is to say with diligence and faithful purpose, without
selfish anxiety, without selfish demands and hostilities? What about the
hurried, ugly and devitalizing existence of our big towns? Can we
honestly say that young people reared in them are likely to acquire this
temper of heaven? Yet we have been given the secret, the law of
spiritual life; and psychologists would agree that it represents too the
most favourable of conditions for a full psychic life, the state in
which we have access to all our sources of power.

But man will not achieve this state unless he dwells on the idea of it;
and, dwelling on that idea, opening his mind to its suggestions, brings
its modes of expression into harmony with his thought about the world of
daily life. Our spiritual life to-day, such as it is, tends above all to
express itself in social activities. Teacher after teacher comes forward
to plume himself on the fact that Christianity is now taking a "social
form"; that love of our neighbour is not so much the corollary as the
equivalent of the love of God, and so forth. Here I am sure that all can
supply themselves with illustrative quotations. Yet is there in this
state of things nothing but food for congratulation? Is such a view
complete? Is nothing left out? Have we not lost the wonder and poetry of
the forest in our diligent cultivation of the economically valuable
trees; and shall we ever see life truly until we see it with the poet's
eyes? There is so much meritorious working and willing; and so little
time left for quiet love. A spiritual fussiness--often a material
fussiness too--seems to be taking the place of that inward resort to the
fontal sources of our being which is the true religious act, our chance
of contact with the Spirit. This compensating beat of the fully lived
human life, that whole side of existence resumed in the word
contemplation, has been left out. "All the artillery of the world," said
John Everard, "were they all discharged together at one clap, could not
more deaf the ears of our bodies than the clamourings of desires in the
soul deaf its ears, so you see a man must go into the silence, or else
he cannot hear God speak."[40] And until we remodel our current
conception of the Christian life in such a sense as to give that silence
and its revelation their full value, I do not think that we can hope to
exhibit the triumphing power of the Spirit in human character and human
society. Our whole notion of life at present is such as to set up
resistances to its inflow. Yet the inner mood, the consciousness, which
makes of the self its channel, are accessible to all, if we would but
believe this and act on our belief. "Worship," said William Penn, "is
the supreme act of a man's life."[41] And what is worship but a
reach-out of the finite spirit towards Infinite Life? Here thought must
mend the breach which thought has made: for the root of our trouble
consists in the fact that there is a fracture in our conception of God
and of our relation with Him. We do not perceive the "hidden unity in
the Eternal Being"; the single nature and purpose of that Spirit which
brought life forth, and shall lead it to full realization.

Here is our little planet, chiefly occupied, to our view, in rushing
round the sun; but perhaps found from another angle to fill quite
another part in the cosmic scheme. And on this apparently unimportant
speck, wandering among systems of suns, the appearance of life and its
slow development and ever-increasing sensitization; the emerging of pain
and of pleasure; and presently man with his growing capacity for
self-affirmation and self-sacrifice, for rapture and for grief. Love
with its unearthly happiness, unmeasured devotion, and limitless pain;
all the ecstasy, all the anguish that we extract from the rhythm of life
and death. It is much, really, for one little planet to bring to birth.
And presently another music, which some--not many perhaps yet, in
comparison with its population--are able to hear. The music of a more
inward life, a sort of fugue in which the eternal and temporal are
mingled; and here and there some, already, who respond to it. Those who
hear it would not all agree as to the nature of the melody; but all
would agree that it is something different in kind from the rhythm of
life and death. And in their surrender to this--to which, as they feel
sure, the physical order too is really keeping time--they taste a larger
life; more universal, more divine. As Plotinus said, they are looking at
the Conductor in the midst; and, keeping time with Him, find the
fulfilment both of their striving and of their peace.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Von Huegel: "Essays and Addresses on the Philosophy of
Religion," p. 60.]

[Footnote 2: Ennead I, 6. 7.]

[Footnote 3: Jacob Boehme: "The Way to Christ," Pt. IV.]

[Footnote 4: Op. cit., loc. cit.]

[Footnote 5: "One Hundred Poems of Kabir," p. 31.]

[Footnote 6: Bernard Bosanquet: "What Religion Is" p. 32.]

[Footnote 7: Aug.: Conf. VII, 27.]

[Footnote 8: "My vision, becoming more purified, entered deeper and
deeper into the ray of that Supernal Light, which in itself is
true"--Par. XXXIII, 52.]

[Footnote 9: "The Tragic Sense of Life In Men and Peoples," p. 194.]

[Footnote 10: T. Upton: "The Bases of Religious Belief," p. 363.]

[Footnote 11: Blake: "Jerusalem," Cap. i.]

[Footnote 12: Nicholson: "The Divani Shamsi Tabriz," p. 141.]

[Footnote 13: Ennead V. i. 3.]

[Footnote 14: Kabir, op. cit., p. 41.]

[Footnote 15: "Love, whoso loves thee cannot idle be, so sweet to him to
taste thee; but every hour he lives in longing that he may love thee
more straitly. For in thee the heart so joyful dwells, that he who feels
it not can never say how sweet it is to taste thy savour"--Jacopone da
Todi: Lauda 101.]

[Footnote 16: Isaiah xl, 29-31.]

[Footnote 17: Aug.: Conf. X, 28.]

[Footnote 18: "Autobiography of the Maharishi Devendranath Tagore," Cap.
12.]

[Footnote 19: "Le Journal Spirituel de Lucie-Christine," p. ii.]

[Footnote 20: "Autobiography of Maharishi Devendranath Tagore," Cap.
20.]

[Footnote 21: Ruysbroeck: "The Book of the XII Beguines;" Cap. 8.]

[Footnote 22: Overton: "Life of Wesley." Cap. 2.]

[Footnote 23: R.A. Nicholson: "Studies In Islamic Mysticism," Cap. I.]

[Footnote 24: "Donne's Sermons," edited by L. Pearsall Smith, p. 236.]

[Footnote 25: Ruysbroeck, "The Sparkling Stone," Cap. 14.]

[Footnote 26: Bishr-i-Yasin, cf. Nicholson, op. cit., loc. cit.]

[Footnote 27: Ennead VI. 9. 4.]

[Footnote 28: "Revelations of Divine Love," Cap. II.]

[Footnote 29: Pratt: "The Religious Consciousness," Cap. 2.]

[Footnote 30: Hoeffding: "Philosophy of Religion," Pt. II, A]

[Footnote 31: Op. cit., Bk. 4, Cap. 1.]

[Footnote 32: "Summa contra Gentiles," L. III. Cap. 37.]

[Footnote 33: Aug: Conf. VII, 10.]

[Footnote 34: "The Liberal and Mystical Writings of William Law," p.
154.]

[Footnote 35: Cf. Haldane, "The Reign of Relativity," Cap. VI.]

[Footnote 36: Von Huegel: "Eternal Life," p. 385.]

[Footnote 37: Ennead I. 4. 6.]

[Footnote 38: Boehme: "The Way to Christ," Pt. IV.]

[Footnote 39: Blake: "Jerusalem": To the Christians.]

[Footnote 40: "Some Gospel Treasures Opened," p. 600.]

[Footnote 41: William Penn, "No Cross, No Crown."]




