CHAPTER II.


Why is it that a human document ten thousand years old has the same
effect upon us, as a newspaper story of yesterday? Why is it that we
love or hate the men and women who live in the songs of Homer? Why do we
grieve, or rejoice with those who live in the pages of Plutarch; and
feel deeply moved when David and Jonathan are forced apart; when Joseph
is sold by his brethren; when the song of Solomon voices the deathless
devotion of the country girl for her mountain lover; and when the
fanatical Jeptha is about to slay his innocent, beautiful daughter?

It is because human nature has never changed; what our fathers were, we
are: what Absolom and David felt, we feel.

When the brilliant, wayward Jewish boy goes astray and meets his
untimely fate, we mourn with his broken father as he wails--"O Absolom
my son, O my son Absolom!"

That which women have already been, women continue to be. Helen of Troy
was not essentially different from Madame de Pompadour; Cleopatra was a
more refined Catherine of Russia; Aspasia was the forerunner of Madame
Maintenon: Sappho was another "George Sand;" Lilly Langtry was a modern
Phryne; and Pauline Bonaparte had all the charm and voluptousness of
Nell Gwynne.

One reason why the Old Testament continues to be a modern book is, that
it is so full of human nature. Our first instinct, when we became
violently enraged is, _to kill_. In the Old Testament, they do it.
Considered as a mere human document, there is more raw slaughter in the
Old Testament than any book you ever read, and the details are given
with frightfully fascinating realism.

No cloak is thrown around Jacob and Abraham and Lot. Those citizens are
painted with all the warts on. In some of them, indeed, the warts fill
most of the canvass. That affair of David and the other man's wife: how
modern it is! If you will glance over the daily newspaper, you will find
that somewhere or other in this world of today, another David has seen
the loveliness of Uriah's wife; and the first thing you know this modern
David (in a Derby hat and tailor-made clothes) is running away with
Bathsheba in an automobile. As to Solomon and his harem--including the
Ethiopian woman--the subject is too delicate for polite treatment in a
high class publication. I must leave such matters to Mr. William
Randolph Hearst, whose Sunday editions and monthly outputs deal in "sex"
novels, Gaby Deslys, Lina Cavalieri, Evelyn Thaw, Mrs. Keppel, and
scarlet people generally.

The point I desired to make is that _God made men and women to mate with
one another_, and thus reproduce and perpetuate the human species.

There are no bachelor eagles, no spinster swans, no monks among the
lions, no nuns among the deer. When we want to make a bachelor out of a
horse, we resort to surgery. Most of us know what Mooley, the cow, does
in the Spring time, if she is shut up in the pasture with no other
company than other Mooley cows.

Without pursuing this line of illustration farther, it is sufficient to
say that _all animal nature is under the same law_. Of course, there are
exceptions to all rules. Some men repel women: some women abhor men.
Some men actually marry, believing that they are fit for it and then
discover that they are not. A tragic instance of this was Thomas
Carlyle: another was Frederick the Great. Our President James Buchanan
was wise enough _not_ to marry; and Charles Sumner was so fatuous as to
do so.

But the great law of Nature is, _Mate and reproduce_! It applies to the
flowers, to the plants, to the insects, to the fishes of the sea, and to
the fowls of the air. I have often wondered why we become so accustomed
to the outrageously informal conduct of hens and roosters, pigeons,
ducks, turkeys, &c., that we see it and don't see it: we know it, and
don't know it: it happens right under our eyes, and yet we never learn
anything from it, or think anything about it.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

Once again, let me say, men and women in their animal natures are just
like other animals. They hunger, they thirst, they are hot, they are
cold, they are sick, they are well, they love, they hate, they fight,
they yearn for mates, and having found mates, _they mate_. Allowed
liberty, this natural tendency leads to wedlock, and legitimate
children. The husband and wife make the Home: the Home is the Gibraltar
of organized civilization; and the children are Posterity, in its
beginning. Thus marriage, the home, and the children are the
conservators of Society.

If a so-called "religion" _forces_ 71,000 American marriageable men and
women into hiding places, where they have physical contact with one
another but cannot marry, _what happens_?

You _know_ what happens. Your common sense tells you what happens. Your
own natural passions tell you what happens.

Those marriageable men and women--many of them young, handsome,
buxom,--are shut off from all the world, by thick walls, barred windows,
locked doors. The young buxom men can get to the young buxom women.
Either in the day-time or in the night, this physical access can be had,
_in secret_.

The men have been taught that they are gifted with supernatural powers;
and that they can forgive each other's sins. The women have been taught
that these men cannot sin, and that in serving these men they will be
serving God. Besides, if they _do_ sin with the priests, the priests can
forgive the sins. This being so, what happens, when the lustful young
priest slips into the cloistered convent, goes to the nun's bed-room and
solicits her to yield to _him_, as Mary yielded to the angel?

(See "Why Priests Should Wed." Page 103.)

The cloistered convent is built like a huge dungeon. The encircling
walls about it, are thick and high. No one enters in unto the unmarried
women excepting the bachelor priests.

_The Law does not enter!_

The Italian Pope draws his line around the dungeons of darkness and
mystery, and the civil authorities dare not go in.

Everybody knows that young women are caged in those hell-holes.
Everybody knows that burly, beefy, red-faced, thick-lipped young priests
glide in and out.

Everybody knows what _he_ would do, if _he_ had the pick of a score of
buxom girls, in a secret place, he being a bachelor and they being
without access to any man but _himself_.

If you were young and had no wife, you know what would happen, if you
were alone in a pretty girl's bed-room, and she were educated to yield
to you in _everything_.

Yet, these impudent rascals, the beefy Irish, Italian and German
priests, ask you to believe that they never even think of touching
those 56,000 American girls that are caged inside those walls:

Nevertheless, you _know_ it is against Nature for these young men not to
want to mate with those women. You _know_ that the cloistered convents
would not be built like Bastilles, and the world shut out, if there were
not something going on in there which they are afraid for the world to
see.

You _know_ that where cloistered convents are _built and managed like
jails, THEY ARE JAILS_!

Yet, those impudent rascals, gliding into the women, and coming out from
the women, tell you that although the women are taught to obey the
priest in all things, the priest never does say or do what every
full-sexed man would do and say, under the same circumstances.

The Turks had their harems, and they knew women--likewise, they knew
men. The Turks had walls, and bars, and locked gates, and sentinels
outside to watch. But the Turks knew how vain are walls, and barred
windows, locked gates and vigilant sentinels. Therefore, the Turks
always kept eunuchs in the harem itself, eunuchs whose watchful eyes
were ever upon those ladies of the harem. And the eunuchs were powerful
men, strong and fierce, _but unsexed_. They had the strength to guard
the women, _without the desire to enjoy_.

But the Roman Pope builds harems in all Christian lands--_harems for his
priests to whom he denies marriage_.

There are no eunuchs to guard these women. The men who go in unto them
are men of like passions as ourselves; and there is no eye to watch, no
tongue that will tell, _after_ the priest has gone inside.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

Our common sense condemns this enforced celibacy which pagan popes
invented for their own selfish, ambitious purposes. Or rather, the Popes
borrowed it from the Turkish Sultans who would not allow their chosen
body-guard, the Janissaries, to marry. In course of time, the
Janissaries became more powerful than the Sultan, and they had to be
exterminated. The Pope's Janissaries are now more powerful than the
Pope; and the wretchedness of his position is that he can neither
massacre them, nor rob them of their women. Of all the exalted slaves
the world ever saw, the Pope is perhaps the most conspicuous example.

The Jesuits rule the priesthood; the Jesuits rule the cardinals; the
Jesuits rule the Pope--and the Jesuits have the pick of the most
beautiful women throughout the Christian world.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

On such a system as this--a system which has denied so many millions of
men and women _the God-given right to live according to Nature_, history
ought to have much to say. What is the evidence and the verdict of
impartial History?

Let us try the case: let us call the witnesses and hear their evidence.
If the other side wants to be heard, the court is open. I will give them
as much space for the defense as I take for the prosecution. It shall be
a perfectly fair investigation. Remember, however, that the unmarried
men and the unmarried women have been hiding within the walls of
monasteries and convents, ever since Pope Gregory abolished God's
ordinance of marriage, and declared, virtually, that the Pope's will,
and not that of God Almighty, should govern priests and nuns. Remember
that there has been every effort made at concealment: that the dungeons
could not tell their awful secrets; that the light of day was jealously
shut out. Remember that the nun who willingly submitted to the priest
did not wish to expose their mutual guilt. Remember that the nun who was
_forced_, could seldom escape and give the alarm. Remember that the
babes born in the cloistered convents were seldom seen of men, and that
they could easily be thrown into the hidden vault, where the quick-lime
was ready to eat their bones. Remember that it was to the interest of
popery to screen the priests, and that the rulers of States were in
deadly fear of the wrath of Popes--wrath which sent death to Henry III.
of France, William of Orange, and Henry of Navarre. Remember further,
that when Popes kept acknowledged paramours and bastards in the Vatican,
the priests had nothing to fear on account of their turning the
nunneries into brothels. Those nuns whose vows were not broken, were the
ugly ones, the old and the ailing. The monks had such complete power
over wives through the Confessional, that many women inside the cloister
owed their immunity to the women outside.

There was a time, under popery, when no Italian husband was certain that
his wife's children were _his_: hence, for a time paternal affection in
Italy almost became extinct. There was a time, under popery, when every
Italian wife had an acknowledged lover--her _cicisbeo_--the priests
having paved the way. The husband kept a mistress; the wife, a lover;
and the priest enjoyed both wife and mistress, without bearing the
expense of either.

(See Sismondi's Hist. des Repub. d'Ital.)

There was a time, under popery, when it was assumed that every Spanish
woman had yielded to a priest. And of course a woman who takes one lover
will take another; and thus Spain went to moral perdition, with the
priests and the nuns in the lead.

The same thing was true of Portugal, and of all Southern Europe. Of
Mexico, Central and South America and Cuba, it would be a waste of words
to speak.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

Pope Gregory VII. introduced the unnatural requirement of celibacy--the
forbidding of men and women to do what God had equipped them to do, and
prompted them, by sexual passions to do--the most powerful passions
known to humanity--passions which if not naturally gratified lead to
crimes of revolting enormity, to loss of health, to loss of mental
balance, to loss of shame, of normal desires, and of reason itself.

(Consult such books as Dr. Sanger's "History of Prostitution;"
Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis, &c.)

Soon after enforced celibacy was introduced, an honest priest, Honorius
of Antrim wrote--

"Look at the convents of the nuns, places of debauchery! These
abominable women have not chosen the Virgin, but Phryne and Messalina as
their models. They prostrate themselves before the idol of Priapus!"

(Priapus was the male organ of generation, and was formerly to be seen
throughout Europe, especially at public fountains.)

King Edgar of England wrote--

"What shall I say of the clergy? We find nothing among them but
debauchery, excesses, orgies, and unchastity. Their abodes are
propitious for solitude, and yet they dwell there not for pious
meditation, but in order to lead lives of debauchery."

Pope Benedict VIII. at the Council of Pavia deplored the awful vices of
the unmarried clergy.

Nicholas Clemangis says--

"The monasteries are no longer sanctuaries devoted to the divinity, but
places of abomination and debauchery--rendezvous of young libertines.
Indeed, _to make a girl take the veil is equivalent to forcing her into
prostitution_."

The monks of the Middle Ages led a life full of orgies, equalling the
dissipations of Tiberius at Capri. "The concubines and prostitutes were
mistresses of the wealth of the monasteries and convents."

The good Catholic, Anselm of Bisate, wrote--

"The nuns are not more virtuous than the monks. Widows took the veil in
order to be free, and not bound to one man."

Instead of being the wife of one man, the nun could be the mistress of
several.

(Dr. Angelo Rappaport, p. 36.)

Why was it that Irenæus and Epiphanius poured out such unprintable
descriptions of the immorality of those "heretics" who refused to marry
and who professed to be virgins? Did these Fathers of the Christian
Church grossly slander those celibate heretics? Were the men and the
women who indulged in those sexual excesses, while pretending to be
chaste, any better or any worse than the human creatures of today?

Was Cyprian libelling his own brethren and sisters when he described how
depraved, how licentious, how sodom-like was the conduct of the
so-called "virgins" of his time? Cyprian lived in the third century
after Christ, and he was speaking of the same phase of Christianity
which provoked the immortal passage in Gibbon. Carrying their brazen
hypocrisy to unheard of lengths, the monks and the nuns occupied the
same beds, and yet unblushingly vowed that they had passed through this
fiery furnace without the smell of fire on their garments!

If I were to quote the Latin in which Cyprian exposes these shameless
harlots and libertines, the great and good U. S. Government would
perhaps _again_ prosecute me for telling the truth on Roman Catholicism.

_Popery is the one thing that you must not tell the truth about, unless
you are prepared to withstand boycott, abuse, persecution and threats
against your property and life!_

(The curious are cited to "Elliott on Romanism," Vol. II., p. 408, and
to Cyprian to Pompanius, Book II., p. 181.)

So well understood was it that young men and young women needed each
other, sexually, that both in the Latin and in the Greek there was a
distinctive name given to these "holy virgins." The "soul marriage" of
the ancient church was as much like the affinity doings of the present
day, as Solomon's carryings on were like those of the Sultan of Turkey.

To the testimony of Cyprian may be added that of Chrysostom, who
bewailed the utter licentiousness of the "virgins."

Since Bishop Udalric in the year 606 wrote of the skulls of the six
thousand infants found in draining off some fish ponds at the command of
Gregory the Great, the slaughter of the babes has gone steadily on.
"When Pope Gregory ascertained that _the infants thus killed were born
from the concealed fornications of and adulteries of the priests_, he
recalled his decree, extolling the apostolic command. It is better to
marry than to burn." (Elliott II., p. 409.)

Yet, when we are told the same story by Father Chiniquy, Dr. Justin
Fulton, ex-priest William Hogan, ex-priest Fresenborg, ex-priest Manuel
Ferrando, ex-nun Margaret Shepherd, ex-nun Maria Monk, ex-priest Blanco
White, ex-priest Seguin, and by such submissive Catholics as Erasmus,
Rabelais, Campanella and scores of other unimpeachable witnesses, we are
more inclined to listen to the impudent denials of the lecherous priests
than to the evidence of _those who escape AND TELL_!

The denial made by the unmarried priests is at variance with their
looks, is at variance with admitted facts, is at variance with what we
ourselves know of the overwhelming strength of our carnal desires: yet
the impudent denial is _so_ brazen, _so_ persistent, and _so_
threatening, that we either accept it, or enter the plea of _nolle
contendere_.

The accusation against the pretended virgins involves so many apparently
good men and chaste women, that we shrink from remembering the
difference between publicity and privacy; we forget that the treacherous
inclination is not felt in the church and in the crowd, but that it
creeps to the secret couch, under cover of night, when there is silence,
freedom from interruption and security from detection.

We forget how this passion takes advantage of night, of undress, and of
secret contact of the physical man and woman, to heat their normal
blood, _no matter how sanctified they may really be in their daily
visible life_.

"Saint" Bernard of the 10th century exhausts his wrath upon the hideous
vices of the monks and nuns "behind the partition." "What abominable
lust!" cries this stern old anchorite. He exclaims--

"Would that those who cannot rule their sexuality would fear to give
their conduct the name of celibacy. It is better to marry than to
burn.... Take away from the church honorable marriage and the undefiled
bed, and do you not fill it with concubines, incestuous persons,
onanists, male concubines, and with every kind of unclean person?"

(Bernard's Sermons V. 29, cited in Elliott, II., 410.)

Take away honorable marriage from the priests, and what do you get in
place of the bed undefiled? Read again that tremendous sentence of Saint
Bernard, and then ask yourself, _Has human nature changed_?

A typical illustration of priestly seduction is the following:

"A lady of the name of Maria Catharine Barni, of Santa Croe, declared on
her death-bed, that she had been seduced through the confessional, and
that she had during twelve years maintained a continual intercourse with
priest Pachiani. He had assured her _that by means of the supernatural
light which he had received from Jesus and the holy virgin_, he was
perfectly certain that neither of them was guilty of sin, &c." (Secrets
of Female Convents, p. 58, cited by Elliott, Vol. II., p. 448.)

Substantially, that is the way every priest seduces every nun who yields
to him.

Almost the very formula is mentioned in Dr. Justin D. Fulton's book
which was submitted to Anthony Comstock, the modern Cato, before it was
published. And Dr. Fulton asserts that Pope Pius IX. authorized this
concubinage of priests with nuns, _by a formal Vatican decree of 1866_.

Dr. Fulton says--page 97 of "Why Priests Should Wed"--

"In the year 1866, Pope Pius IX. sanctioned the establishment of one of
the most appalling institutions of immorality and wickedness ever
countenanced under the form and garb of religion."

Briefly, this institution authorized priests and nuns who had been in
service long enough to inspire confidence, to live in sexual relations,
like man and wife. Dr. Fulton proceeds at length to describe how the
priest selects his nun, how he makes his wishes known to her, how he
quotes Scripture to overcome her scruples, how the "love room" is
adorned with holy emblems and images, how the priest sprinkles holy
water over the bed, how he then kneels and prays for a blessing on the
union about to take place, and then----!

As I have said a number of times, Dr. Fulton submitted his manuscript to
Anthony Comstock. The chaste Cato of New York, advised the omission of
many passages; but the whole of this hideous chapter describing how
Pope Pius IX. authorized the priests to make use of the nuns, sexually,
appears in the book with sufficient clearness to lay it in parallel
columns with the abominations of Sodom, Gomorrha, the White Slave
Traffic, the Decameron, the Heptameron, and Balzac's Merry Tales of the
Abbeys of Touraine.

Dr. Fulton's book was published in 1888. _He was never prosecuted for
that terrible charge against Pope Pius IX._ He was never sued for
libelling the priests and nuns. His charges were never officially
denied.

Cardinal Gibbons wrote his mendacious book, "The Faith of our Fathers,"
for the purpose of answering all that had been said against Popery. He
mentioned Maria Monk by name, and denounced her true story as false.
Yet, although Gibbons published his book _sixteen years after Dr. Fulton
had hurled his awful charge against Pope Pius IX._, the Baltimore priest
dared not challenge the statement of Dr. Fulton!

Maria Monk--poor, outraged, persecuted woman, was dead: Dr. Justin D.
Fulton, a fearless, powerful man, _was alive_! Gibbons was brave enough
to vilely attack the dead woman: he was too much of a contemptible
coward to attack the living man.

The living man was ready with his evidence, _and he was a fighter_--and
the catlike Gibbons knew it.

Says Dr. Fulton--

"At first the female may be a little timid, &c. She may object, &c. But
the priest, representing God's angel in this office, gently soothes the
mind and quiets the fears of his future spouse by saying to her, He who
will _come upon thee_ is not man, but is the holy one of God, and this
union is pleasing to him;----."

(At this point Anthony Comstock must have blushed and raised an
objection, as the nun was doing, for the remainder of the sentence is
stricken out.)

But the text continues--"It will be holy and blessed; therefore I say
unto thee, as the angel said unto Mary, Fear not."

After this, the woman, being convinced by the language of heaven's
messenger that all is right, gives the priest complete assurance of her
willingness to submit by saying, as Mary said to the angel, "Be it done
unto me according to thy word."

Then Dr. Fulton so frankly indicates what takes place in that private
room, and upon that consecrated bed, that I really am curious to know
what it was that made Comstock blush, a few lines above those which thus
tell of the soliciting priest, the yielding nun, and the ready bed.

Now, if you will compare one case with another, from the time of the
early Fathers down to the present day, you will detect a similarity that
is appalling.

The testimony of Edward Gibbon, the skeptical historian, exactly accords
with that of Saint Cyprian, Chrysostom, Jerome and Bernard.

The memorable investigation which Duke Leopold of Tuscany caused to be
made of the cloistered convents of Italy revealed identically the same
cess-pools of vice that came to light in England when Henry VII.
uncovered the monasteries.

All the literature of the Renaissance, after men's minds and pens freed
themselves from the ignoble fear of popery, bear witness to the same
universal everlasting truth--_Men and women were made for each other,
and no so-called religion can annul the laws of Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

When a "religion" sets up the claim that it can pardon sins, educate the
children to believe it, _destroys those who deny it_, and fixes a scale
of money-payments for the pardon of sins, what sort of fruit is that
kind of tree likely to bear?

If penance and payment rids me of sin, my conscience, like an unused
muscle, becomes enfeebled, and my proneness to sin is encouraged.

Pope Leo X. was the Vicar of Christ who ordered lists of sin to be drawn
up, with the price of the pardon opposite each sin.

(See History of Auricular Confession, by Count C. P. De Lasteyrie, Vol.
II., p. 132.)

I will quote only a few of these tariff rates established by this
Infallible Pope.

For allowing a ship to sail to convey merchandise to infidels, 100 d.

For the absolution of any one practising usury, 7 d.

For concubinage, 7 d.

For intimacy with a woman _in a church_, 6 d.

For pardon of him who has violated a virgin, 6 d.

For one who has committed incest, 5 d.

(The d. stands for the coin known as the ducat.)

Can you imagine anything more conducive to immorality, than a
"religion," sanctified by the name of Christ, which teaches that its
priests can forgive sins, and which publishes a list of market prices
for such forgiveness? Do you marvel that Roman Catholic countries are
the immoral countries? Do you wonder at the mania for vice and crime
among the lower Italians, Spaniards and Portuguese?

When a man could ravish a virgin for six ducats, what girl had any
safety except in the fear that libertines might have of her father or
her brother, or her sweetheart?

What sort of hell would we have in America if popery gained the upper
hand, _and the negro bucks were taught that they could buy pardons for
violating white women_?

God Almighty! It makes one sick to think that even now they are
admitting young black men to the priesthood.

What will _they do_, inside the cloistered convents?

No scream from within can be heard outside. Those dead walls tell no
tales. The Law dares not scrutinize the interiors where the negro
priests can penetrate; and we have no legal process to wring the dread
Secret out of the nun's cell!

The Pope's Empire has been erected inside our Republic; and those who
represent our State, and our Law, are afraid of the Italian Pope and the
laws of the Italian church!

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

When the Commissioners sent by King Henry VII. visited the monasteries,
the guilt of the inmates was so overwhelmingly evident that hardly any
attempt at denial was made. The Confession of the Prior and Benedictines
of St. Andrew's in Northampton is yet of record, and it is a fair
example. They confessed that they "had lived in idleness, gluttony, and
sensuality, for which the Pit of Hell was ready to swallow them up."

(Burnett, Book III., p. 227.)

Among the false "relics" that were found and which had long been used to
swindle ignorant believers out of their money, were a Wing of the Angel
that had brought to England the Spear which pierced Christ's side; some
of the coals that had roasted the Most Blessed Saint Anthony; numerous
pieces of "the true Cross;" a small bottle filled with Christ's blood; a
Crucifix which would sometimes bow its head, sometimes roll its eyes and
sometimes move its lips.

(All this fraudulent rubbish was seized, taken to London, and publicly
destroyed.)

Bishop Burnett says--

"But for the lewdness of the confessors of the Nunneries, and the great
corruption of that state, _whole houses being found almost all with
child_."

That was in the year 1535, in England! In the year 1910, when the
nunneries were suddenly broken up in Spain, exactly the same state of
affairs was discovered! Some of the nuns came out leading their
children: some were so far advanced in pregnancy that their condition
was evident to all--and as to how many little bones were left in the
underground vaults, God alone knows.

Bishop Burnett continues--

"The dissoluteness of Abbots, and the other monks, and the friars, not
only with whores, but married women, and their unnatural lusts and other
brutal practices, _these are not fit to be spoken of_, much less
enlarged on, in a work of this nature." ...

_The full report was destroyed_ by the fanatical papist Bishop Bonner,
at the beginning of the reign of Bloody Mary. (See "English
Reformation.") But Bishop Burnett saw extracts from it "concerning 144
Houses, that contains abominations in it, equal to any that were in
Sodom!"

Put this original evidence side by side with the confession already
quoted: put with it the testimony gathered by Duke Leopold of Tuscany:
add what Blanco White and Erasmus say; add what S. J. Mahoney and Manuel
Ferrando say: buttress this mass of evidence with what the Fathers of
the Church said, what all the escaped nuns and priests have alleged, and
compare this mountain of proof with what you _know_ about human
nature--and how can you harbor a doubt that nunneries and monasteries
are today what they always have been? They are houses of hidden
iniquity, and nameless crimes--_AND YOU KNOW IT_!

That marvellous man of letters, Erasmus, who _wrote_ for the
Reformation, but who left Luther and others to _fight for it_, says this
in his "Colloquies."--

"I hold up to censure those who entice lads and girls into monasteries
against their parents' wills, abusing their simplicity or superstition,
and persuading them that there is no chance of salvation but in the
cloister. If the world were not full of such anglers; if countless minds
had not been most miserably _buried alive_ in such places, then I have
been wrong in my conclusions. But if ever I am forced to _speak out_
what I feel upon this subject, I will paint the portrait of _these
kidnappers_, and so represent _the magnitude of the evil_, that every
one shall confess I have not been wrong."

(Quoted in Day's "Monastic Institutions," p. 239.)

The infamous Liguori--a Roman Catholic "Saint"--calmly assumes that many
inmates of the convents are captives, just as Erasmus had said they
were, and he lays down the law to these helpless, kidnapped captives
with all the malevolence of a grinning devil.

"Now that you are professed in a convent, and that _it is impossible for
you to leave it_," &c. (Monastic Institutions, p. 294.)

Liguori threatens the captive, telling the poor creature that if she
abandons herself to sadness and regret, _she will be made to suffer a
hell here_, and another hereafter.

In other words, _Smile, prisoner, smile! or we will make the convent a
hell to you_!

So says Saint Liguori, whose instructions to the priests, telling them
what filthy questions they must ask the Catholic women, are so "obscene"
that I was prosecuted by the Catholic Knights of Columbus for having
quoted some of them. If I had quoted all that Liguori wrote in coaching
the priests, _and teaching them virtually how to disrobe women of their
modesty as a prelude to their ruin_, I suppose the Government would have
ordered out the troops and had me shot.


Several times, Erasmus has been mentioned as one of the most terrific
accusers of the papal system, its frauds, impostures, greed, ferocity,
its fake miracles, its pagan adoration of images and relics, and its
rotten immorality. Perhaps it is due to the reader that I cite him to
"The Life and Letters of Erasmus," by the historian James A. Froude,
published in this country by Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, in 1895.

From this comparatively recent work, the student can most readily obtain
a general idea of Popery, as described by one who was a devout Catholic,
but not a blind, servile papist. Erasmus was practically an orphan boy,
of somewhat uncertain parentage, whose life mystery and romance inspired
Charles Read to write the greatest of all novels, "The Cloister and the
Hearth."

Mr. Froude tells the painful story of the forcing of Erasmus into
monastic vows; and then follows him as he develops into the most learned
and brilliant scholar of Europe.

Never a robust man, always more or less an invalid, Erasmus remained
inside the Roman pale, but abhorred the inherent vices of _the system_,
denounced those vices with a pen of fire, endured the terrors and
agonies of persecution within his church, was bitterly abused by the
vile priesthood whose putrid lives he uncovered, was menaced by the
dread Inquisition, and really suffered more keenly the penalties than
Luther did, _for telling the truth on popery_.

Luther, a bull-necked, fearless _Man_, broke out, and fought popery from
the outside. Erasmus, like many of his predecessors, tried to reform it
_from within_, and he discovered at last that he might as well have been
trying to reform hell.

The enraged monks and monkesses did not murder Erasmus, as they had
murdered Savonarola, Huss, Jerome, &c.; but it was because the Pope had
his hands full of other matters, and the time was not favorable for
burning the most illustrious scholar of Christendom.

What did Erasmus say and write and publish against the vast parasitical
growth of paganism, fraud and imposture that had overgrown Christianity
under the pope?

Read his "Praise of Folly," which has been translated into English and
can be had through any book-dealer.

When you read it, remember that Erasmus was never answered, save by
_abuse and threats_.

In his letters to the Prothonotary of the Pope, letters written for the
Pope to read, and which the Pope did read, Erasmus arraigns the
unmarried clergy of Rome, her monks and her nuns, her monasteries and
her convents, in the same terms that are used by the Preamble to the Act
of the British Parliament which stated that reasons for the dissolution
of these Romish hell-holes.

The accusations fathered by Erasmus and laid before the Pope, agree in
every essential particular with the revelations of Blanco White, of S.
J. Mahoney, William Hogan, Joseph McCabe, Bishop Manuel Ferrando,
Margaret Shepherd, Maria Monk, and every other witness who has had the
courage to uncover these papal dens of infamy, torture, vice and crime.

I have not the space to quote at any length from the Letters of Erasmus:
get the book and read it for yourself.

But weigh this passage--

"Men are threatened or tempted into vows of celibacy. _They can have
license to go with harlots_, but they must not marry wives.

They may keep concubines and remain priests. If they take wives, they
are thrown to the flames.

Parents who design their children for a celibate priesthood _should
emasculate them in their infancy_, instead of forcing them, reluctant or
ignorant, _into a furnace of licentiousness_."

What was this furnace of licentiousness? The cloistered convent, or the
monastery.

In his notes to the New Testament, a Greek translation of which Erasmus
made, he said, after alluding to St. Paul's injunction about the "one
wife," that the priests could commit homicide, parricide, incest,
piracy, sodomy and sacrilege: "_these_ can be got over, but _marriage is
fatal_."

He adds that of all the enormous herds of priests, "very few of them are
chaste."

In his letter to Lambert Grunnius, (in the year 1514) Erasmus gives an
awful picture of monastic slavery in houses "_which are worse than
brothels_."

But once a young man is entrapped, there is no escape. "They may repent,
but the superiors will not let them go, _lest they should betray the
orgies which they have witnessed_."

Then Erasmus tells of instances where men were buried alive inside the
monasteries to prevent their escape. "Dead men tell no tales!"

Remember, reader! Erasmus was writing to the Pope's own Prothonotary, in
order that the "Holy Fathers" might of a surety _know_ what was going on
inside the monastic houses! And in reply, the Prothonotary, Lambert
Grunnius, writes to Erasmus--

"I read your letter aloud to the Pope, from end to end: several
cardinals and other great persons were present. The Holy Father was
charmed with your style!"

And the Holy Father waxes wroth at some personal grievances of Erasmus,
and granted _him_ relief from monkish diabolism; but what was done to
correct the frightful conditions which Erasmus had brought to the Pope's
personal attention?

Nothing! Absolutely nothing. It was the same way when the exposures were
made in Spain, when they were made in Tuscany, when they were made in
England, when they were made in the Philippines! The answer of Rome is
ever the same: _Nothing can be done_.

The Pope _knows_ what enforced male celibacy does, when screened from
the civil law behind thick walls, _and given unlimited license among
young women, who cannot resist, and who cannot tell_!

And you _know_ that the Pope _does_ know--for he also is a male like me
and you.


Again, Erasmus asks what would Saint Augustine say _now_, if he were to
see these convents and monasteries become "public brothels."

In those standard works, "The History of Prostitution" and "Human
Sexuality," you will learn the fearful fact that the utter lewdness of
nuns and of wives who had been debauched by the priests, became so
universal that _the trade of the professional harlot was almost entirely
taken away from her_. Why should loose men _pay_, when there were so
many places of gratuitous entertainment?

(Lest you heed the deceptive talk which endeavors to convince you that
the old tree is now bearing different fruit, read Hogan's "Popish
Nunneries," McCabe's "Ten Years in a Monastery," McCarthy's up-to-date
"Priests and People in Ireland;" and the astounding, undenied statements
of Bishop Manuel Ferrando, in "The Converted Catholic" magazine of New
York City.)

In Delisser's powerful book, "Pope, or President?" there is a masterly
summing up against "Romanism as revealed by its own writers."

Among other witnesses, he cites the evidence of Mahoney, the priest who
was examined by a Committee of the House of Commons.

"A very nefarious use was made of convents," testified this honest
Irishman. His disclosures corroborated what another honest Irish priest,
Hogan, said several centuries later.

"A woman ... is seduced into a convent to live in sin with the bishop
and other confessors. It is not human to place a priest where he is
allowed to fall, and suppose him innocent. Reader, commit your daughter
to the soldier or hussar who can marry her, rather than to a Romish
priest." ("Pope, or President," p. 59.)

In fact, Delisser's chapter on "Convent Exposed" is one of the most
frightful that I ever read--doubly frightful because the Romanist
writers therein quoted _assume it to be their right_ to mistreat women,
just as they please!

It is only in such a chapter, composed of citations from orthodox Roman
Catholics, that you can obtain anything like a true conception of _the
priest's point of view_.

They have the right to kidnap children: they have a right to restrain
prisoners; they have a right to compel obedience: they have a right to
shut out the State and its law: they have a right to punish the
refractory, to flog the unruly girl, to starve her into submission, to
degrade her with disgusting services, to use her person for their lusts!

_That is the priest's point of view!_

Study the horrible "theology" of Dens and Liguori: read what popes have
said in denial of a layman's right to criticise a priest; read what Rev.
Blanco White said of the systematic depravity of Romanism.

Cardinal Newman had to acknowledge that Blanco White was a man or
irreproachable character, "a man you can trust." "I have the fullest
confidence in his word," &c.

And what does this ex-Catholic, for whom Cardinal Newman vouched, have
to say about convents?

"I cannot," says he, "find tints sufficiently dark to portray the
miseries which I have witnessed in convents. Crime, in spite of the
spiked walls and prison gates is there. The gates of the holy prison are
forever closed upon the inmates: _force and shame_ await them wherever
they might fly."

Then the ex-priest tells the tragic story of his two sisters, virtually
tortured to death in the Spanish convent, he being a witness to their
misery and powerless to relieve it. The system held them all!

He continues--

"Of all the victims of the church of Rome, _the nuns_ deserve the
greatest sympathy."

White's book was published in 1826. Like "Pope, or President," published
in 1859, it is now out of print. Only at long intervals may you see a
copy advertised in the catalogues of Old-book stores. _Some_ agency has
been most active in destroying anti-Catholic books, and keeping them out
of our Public Libraries.


Consider this sentence in Hume's "History of England," Vol. II., p.
592.

"Monstrous disorders are therefore said to have been found in many of
the religious houses, _whole convents of women abandoned to lewdness_;
signs of abortions procured, _OF INFANTS MURDERED_, of unnatural lusts
between persons of the same sex."

Did poor Margaret Shepherd, or Maria Monk make any accusations that were
worse than these which we find in a standard history of England?

In Aubrey's "Rise and Growth of the English People," the indictment
against the convents and the monasteries is equally severe. See Vol. I.,
p. 80 and 81.

In Lecky's "History of European Morals," we have exactly the same
arraignment of this unnatural and polluting system.

In Bower's "History of the Popes," in Hallam's "Constitutional History
of England," and in every trustworthy account of the system of enforced
celibacy we have the same horrible, _but natural_, description of the
lives led by those full-sexed members of both sexes, who cannot mate
legally and decently, but who are given access to each other under cover
of night, behind the curtain of thick walls, and with the assurance
that, _so long as no scandal leaks out_, no notice will be taken of what
is done inside the "holy" brothel.

The very language in which the virgin girl is made to pledge herself as
"the spouse of Christ," is so abominably obscene and suggestive that it
is bound to plant impure curiosity in her mind--and, with a girl,
_impure curiosity_ is the lure to the fall. Not especially wishing to be
again indicted for quoting the Pope's nasty language, I will forbear.
Even in the Latin, it is so vile, lewd, lascivious, filthy, _and nasty_,
that I marvel how any white woman, under any circumstances, can allow a
beast of a man to use that language to her, _and not slap his face_.

The language is quoted in "Pope, or President," pages 86 and 360. The
"Nun Sanctified," of "Saint" Alphonsus Liguori, and the Theology of
Peter Dens will give the reader a fairly correct idea of what sort of a
slave the priests make of a woman, _after_ she has been ensnared into
taking the black veil.

In the famous investigation of the convents of Tuscany, in 1775, one of
the nuns gave testimony which, is singularly piquant and unique.
Besides, it remained uncontradicted. The name of the witness was Sister
Flavia Peraccini. After telling of many escapades she had witnessed
inside the convents, and of many merry times the priests and the nuns
had with one another, Sister Flavia Peraccini deposed--

"A monk said to me that if a nun's veil were placed on one pole, and a
monk's cowl on another, so great is the sympathy between the veil and
the cowl they would come together, _and unite_." ("Unite" is the modest
word: "copulate," is _meant_.)

"I say," continues the Sister, "I say, and repeat it, that whatever the
Superiors know, they do not know _the least portion_ of the great evils
that pass between the monks and the nuns."

The foregoing is a mere trifle compared to the whole amount of the
undisputed testimony taken by Duke Leopold of Tuscany in 1775. Have men
and women changed? Is human nature the same?

It was for all people and all ages that the inspired writer wrote--

"Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let _every man_ have his own wife;
and let _every woman_ have her own husband." (I. Cor. 7:12.)

The most powerful argument and authority against the Roman papacy on
this question _is that of Jesus Christ_.

Virtually, he said that _a man must make himself a eunuch_--if not born
so--_before he could live like a eunuch_!

If the word of Christ is not conclusive and binding, where shall we seek
the truth?

The trouble with papists is, they are educated outside of the Bible and
common sense; and they seldom free their minds from the priestly
domination established in childhood.


(THE END.)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Vices of Convents and Monasteries,
Priests and Nuns, by Thos. E. Watson

