CHAPTER IV

THE FAMILIARITY OF THE REGIONS OF THE EARTH WITH THE FIXED STARS


In addition to the rules which have been already given, respecting the
familiarity of the regions of the earth with the signs and planets,
it must be observed, that all fixed stars which may be posited on any
line, drawn from one zodiacal pole to the other, through such parts of
the zodiac as may be connected with any particular country, are also in
familiarity with that particular country.

And, with regard to metropolitan cities, it is necessary to state,
that those points or degrees of the zodiac, over which the Sun and
Moon were in transit, at the time when the construction of any such
city was first undertaken and commenced, are to be considered as
sympathizing with that city in an especial manner; and that, among the
angles, the ascendant is principally in accordance with it. In certain
cases, however, where the date of foundation of a metropolis cannot be
ascertained, the mid-heaven in the nativity of the reigning king, or
other actual chief magistrate, is to be substituted, and considered as
that part of the zodiac with which it chiefly sympathizes.[82]

[82] Whalley remarks on this passage, that the gradual progress of
the fixed stars “from one sign to another, is in an especial manner
to be regarded in considering the mutations, manners, customs, laws,
government, and fortune of a kingdom.”




CHAPTER V

MODE OF PARTICULAR PREDICTION IN ECLIPSES


After having gone through the necessary preliminary topics, it is now
proper to speak of the manner in which predictions are to be formed
and considered; beginning with those which relate to general events,
affecting either certain cities, or districts, or entire countries.

The strongest and principal cause of all these events exists in the
ecliptical conjunctions of the Sun and Moon, and in the several
transits made by the planets during those conjunctions.

One part of the observations, required in forming predictions in cases
of this nature, relates to the locality of the event, and points out
the cities or countries liable to be influenced by particular eclipses,
or by occasional continued stations of certain planets, which at times
remain for a certain period in one situation. These planets are Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars; and they furnish portentous indications, when they
are stationary.

Another branch relates to time, and gives pre-information of the period
at which the event will occur, and how long it will continue to operate.

The third branch is generic; and points out the classes, or kinds,
which the event will affect.

The last part is specific; and foreshows the actual quality and
character of the coming event.




CHAPTER VI

THE REGIONS OR COUNTRIES TO BE CONSIDERED AS LIABLE TO BE COMPREHENDED
IN THE EVENT


The first of the several branches of consideration just enumerated
relates to locality, and is to be exercised in the following manner:—

In all eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and especially in such as are
fully visible, the place in the zodiac, where the eclipse happens, is
to be noted; and it must be seen what countries are in familiarity
with that place, according to the rules laid down regarding the
quadrants and the triplicities; and in like manner it must be observed
what cities are under the influence of the sign in which the eclipse
happens; either by means of the ascendant, and the situations of
the luminaries at the time of their foundation, or by means of the
mid-heaven of their kings or governors, actually ruling at the time of
the eclipse; although such time may be subsequent to the building of
the said cities. Whatever countries or cities shall be thus found in
familiarity with the ecliptical place, will all be comprehended in the
event; which will, however, principally attach to all those parts which
may be connected with the identical sign of the eclipse,[83] and in
which it was visible while above the earth.[84]

[83] As shown in the Table at page 51.

[84] It does not appear that the text here warrants the conclusion
which Whalley has drawn from it, viz. “that wherever eclipses are not
visible, they have no influence, and therefore subterranean eclipses
cannot have any.” Ptolemy declares, that _all_ countries in familiarity
with the ecliptical place will be comprehended in the event; and,
with regard to the visibility or invisibility of the eclipse, he says
merely that its effects will be _principally_ felt in such of the said
countries as might have obtained a view of the eclipse.




