CHAPTER I

PROEM


All those circumstances have now been set forth, which occur previously
to the birth, as well as at the actual birth, and after it, and which
it seemed necessary to mention, as conducing to a knowledge of the
general quality of the contemperament produced. And of the other
points, now remaining, by which extrinsic events[213] are contemplated,
those regarding the several fortunes of wealth and of rank claim to be
taken first into consideration. Each of these fortunes has a distinct
relationship; for instance, that of wealth relates to the body, and
that of rank to the mind.

[213] That is to say, such events as are independent of the will, and
not necessarily consequent on any peculiar conformation of the mind or
body.




CHAPTER II

THE FORTUNE OF WEALTH


The circumstances regulating the fortune of wealth are to be judged
of from that part alone, which is expressly denominated the Part of
Fortune; the position of which is, in all cases, whether arising in the
day or in the night, always as far removed from the ascendant as the
Sun is distant from the Moon.[214]

[214] _Vide_ Chapter XIII of the 3rd Book.

When the Part of Fortune has been determined, it must be ascertained to
what planets the dominion of it belongs; and their power and connexion,
as also the power and connexion of others configurated with them, or in
elevation above them, whether of the same or of an adverse condition,
are then to be observed: for, if the planets which assume dominion of
the Part of Fortune be in full force, they will create much wealth, and
especially should the luminaries also give them suitable testimony in
addition.

In this manner, Saturn will effect the acquirement of wealth by means
of buildings, agriculture, or navigation; Jupiter, by holding some
government, or office of trust, or by the priesthood; Mars, by the
army and military command; Venus by means of friends, by the dowry of
wives, or by other gifts proceeding from women[215]; and Mercury by the
sciences and by trade.

Should Saturn, however, when thus in influence over the fortune of
wealth, be also configurated with Jupiter, he particularly provides
wealth through inheritance; especially, if the configuration should
exist in the superior angles, Jupiter being also in a bicorporeal sign
and receiving the application of the Moon; for, in such a case, the
native will also be adopted by persons unallied to him, and will become
heir to their property.

And, further, if other stars, of the same condition as those which rule
the Part of Fortune, should likewise exhibit testimonies of dominion,
the wealth will be permanent: but, on the other hand, if stars of
an adverse condition should either be in elevation above the ruling
places, or ascend in succession to them, the wealth will not continue.
The general period of its duration is, however, to be calculated by
means of the declination of the stars, which operate the loss, in
respect of the angles and succedent houses.[216]

[215] I have considered the words, γυναικειων δωρερεων, as comprising
“_the dowry of wives_,” as well as other “_gifts from women_.”

[216] That is to say, its duration will depend on the time requisite
to complete the arc of direction or prorogation between the stars,
operating the loss, and the places which give the wealth. And the
calculation is to be made as pointed out in the 14th and 15th Chapters
of the 3rd Book.




CHAPTER III

THE FORTUNE OF RANK


The disposition of the luminaries and the respective familiarities,
exercised by the stars attending them, are to be considered as
indicative of the degree of rank or dignity.[217]

For example, should the two luminaries be found in masculine signs and
in angles, or even if only one of them be in an angle,[218] they being
at the same time specially attended by a doryphory[219] composed of
all the five planets; the Sun by such as are oriental, but the Moon by
occidental, the persons then about to be born will consequently become
kings or princes. And, if the attendant stars themselves should also
be in angles, or configurated with the angle above the earth,[220] the
said persons will become great, powerful, and mighty in the world: and
even yet more abundantly so, provided the configurations, made by the
attendant stars with the angles above the earth, be dexter. But, when
both luminaries may not be found in masculine signs as aforesaid, but
the Sun only in a masculine and the Moon in a feminine sign, and only
one of them posited in an angle, the other concomitant circumstances
still existing in the mode above described, the persons about to be
born will then become merely chieftains, invested with the sovereignty
of life and death.

[217] It seems that there have been different opinions on this point.
Placidus makes the following remark on the subject: “I do not take
the dignities from the horoscope, but from the Sun and Medium Cœli,
according to Ptolemy and others.” (Cooper’s Translation, p. 121.)

[218] The Perugio Latin, of 1646, says, “If either both luminaries, or
only that one of the _chief quality_” (which Whalley defines to be the
Sun by day, and the Moon by night) “be in an angle,” &c.

[219] _Doryphory._ _Vide_ Chapter V of the 3rd Book. On the present
passage, Placidus has the following words: “You are not to observe
what is generally alleged by professors, respecting the satellites”
(_quasi_ doryphory) “of the luminaries, for dignities; viz. that the
satellites are those planets which are found within 30°, on either side
of the luminaries; but that a satellite is (also) any kind of aspect
of the stars to the luminaries of what kind soever: which, if it be
made by application, its power extends inwardly over the whole orb of
light of the aspecting planet, and the more so, as the proximity is
greater; but, by separation, it is not so. This doctrine may be seen
in several chapters of Ptolemy; for, an aspecting star influences the
significator, and disposes him to produce effects co-natural to him,
by a subsequent direction. But a star of no aspect does not predispose
the significator, and produces very little or no effect of its nature,
by a subsequent direction; this is the true doctrine of the stars.”
(Cooper’s Translation, pp. 124, 125.)

[220] The angle of the mid-heaven; see the first note to this Chapter.

And if the attendant stars, while the luminaries may be situated in
the manner last-mentioned, should be neither actually in angles, nor
bear any testimony to the angles, the persons then born, although they
will still enjoy eminence, will attain only some limited dignity or
distinction; such as that of a delegated governor, or commander of an
army, or dignitary of the priesthood; and they will not be invested
with sovereignty.

If, however, neither of the luminaries be in an angle, and it happen
that most of the attendant stars be either themselves in angles, or
configurated with the angles, the persons then born will not attain to
any very eminent rank; yet they will take a leading part in ordinary
civil and municipal affairs: but, should the attendant stars have
no configuration with the angles, they will then remain altogether
undistinguished and without advancement; and provided, further, that
neither of the luminaries be found situated in a masculine sign, nor
in an angle, nor be attended by any benefics, they will be born to
complete obscurity and adversity.

The general appearance of exaltation or debasement of rank is to
be contemplated as before stated, but there are many gradations
intermediate to those already specified, and requiring observation
of the particular interchanges and variations, incidental to the
luminaries themselves and their doryphory, and also to the dominion of
the planets which compose their doryphory. For instance, should the
benefics, or stars of the same condition, exercise the chief dominion,
the dignities to be acquired will be not only important, but also more
securely established; and, on the other hand, if the chief dominion
be claimed by the malefics, or by stars of an adverse condition, the
dignities will be more subordinate, and more dangerous and evanescent.

The species of dignity may be inferred by observing the peculiar
qualities of the attendant stars. And, if Saturn have chief dominion
of the doryphory, the power and authority derived therefrom will lead
to wealth and profit: authority proceeding from Jupiter and Venus will
be pleasurable, and attended by presents and honours: that proceeding
from Mars will consist in commanding armies, in obtaining victories,
and in overawing the vanquished: and that proceeding from Mercury will
be intellectual, superintending education and study, and directing the
management of business.




