CHAPTER X

COLOURS IN ECLIPSES; COMETS, AND SIMILAR PHENOMENA


In investigating general events, it is necessary further to observe the
colours or hues displayed during an eclipse, either in the luminaries,
or around them; in the shape of rods or rays, or in other similar
forms. For, if these colours or hues should be black, or greenish, they
portend effects similar to those produced by Saturn’s nature; if white,
to those operated by Jupiter; if reddish, to those by Mars; if yellow,
to those by Venus; and if of various colours, to those by Mercury.

And, if the entire bodies of the luminaries be thus coloured, or should
the hues extend over all the parts immediately circumjacent to the
luminaries, it is an indication that the effects will attach to most
parts of the region, or countries, with which the eclipse and its
ruling places may be in familiarity. If, however, the colouring should
not spread over the whole surface of the luminaries, nor over all the
parts around them, but be limited to some particular quarter, then
only such a portion of the said countries, as may be indicated by the
situation of the visible hues, will be comprehended in the event.

It is also requisite to notice, with respect to general events, the
risings or first appearances of those celestial phenomena called
comets, whether presenting themselves at ecliptical times or at any
other periods. They are displayed in the shape of beams, trumpets,
pipes, and in other similar figures, and operate effects like those
of Mars and Mercury; exciting wars, heated and turbulent dispositions
in the atmosphere, and in the constitutions of men, with all their
evil consequences. The parts of the zodiac[97] in which they may be
posited when they first appear, and the direction and inclination of
their trains, point out the regions or places liable to be affected by
the events which they threaten; and the form of the signs indicates
the quality and nature of those events, as well as the genus, class,
or kind, on which the effect will fall. The time of their continuance
shows the duration of their effect; and their position, with regard to
the Sun, the period when it will commence; as, if they first appear
matutine, they denote an early commencement; but, if vespertine, that
it will be late and tardy.

[97] When a comet appears out of the zodiac, a line should be drawn
from one zodiacal pole to the other, through the spot where it appears;
and that spot is to be considered as being in familiarity with the
same countries as those parts of the zodiac which may be on the same
line.—_Vide_ Chap. IV of this Book, relative to the manner in which
fixed stars out of the zodiac hold familiarity with certain regions and
countries.

The general and more comprehensive parts of the consideration
regarding regions, countries, and cities, having now been explained,
it becomes necessary to discuss certain particular points of the same
consideration; that is to say, the annual occurrences which take place
at certain fixed seasons, and the chief of which is that called the New
Moon of the Year.




CHAPTER XI

THE NEW MOON OF THE YEAR


In every annual revolution made by the Sun, the first new Moon of
the year is to be considered as the point of the commencement of his
circuit; this is evident not only from its denomination, but from its
virtue also.[98]

The case stands thus: In the ecliptic, which, as circle, has in fact no
actual or definite beginning, the two equinoctial and the two tropical
points, marked by the equator and the tropical circles, are reasonably
assumed as beginnings. And to obviate any doubt as to which of these
four points should preferably be considered as the primary beginning
(since in the regular simple motion of a circle no part of it has any
apparent precedence), the appropriate quality naturally belonging
to each of these four points has been taken into consideration by
the writers on this subject. And the point of the vernal equinox has
been consequently designated by them as the beginning of the year;
because, from that time, the duration of the day begins to exceed that
of the night, and because the season then produced partakes highly
of moisture, which is always a predominant quality in all incipient
generation and growth. After the vernal equinox comes the summer
solstice; when the day attains its greatest length, and in Ægypt,
at the same period, the rise of the Nile takes place and the Dog
Star appears. Then follows the autumnal equinox, when all fruits are
gathered in, and the sowing of seeds recommences anew; lastly, comes
the winter solstice, when the day proceeds from its shortest duration
towards its increase.

[98] The Neomenia, or new Moon, was observed as a festival with much
solemnity in earlier ages and by the most ancient nations. It was
celebrated by the Israelites, as well as by Pagan; and it may perhaps
be gathered from the 5th and 6th verses of the 20th Chapter of the 1st
Book of Samuel, that it was kept once in a year with greater ceremony
than at other times: this was done, probably, at the “New Moon of the
Year,” as Ptolemy calls it; or, in other words, at the new Moon nearest
to the vernal equinox.

Although the foregoing arrangement has been adopted by men of science
to denote the commencement of the several seasons of the year, it
yet seems to be more consonant to nature, and more consistent with
the facts, that the combined positions of the Sun, and the new, or
full, Moon, which happen when the Sun is nearest to the points above
mentioned, should mark the four beginnings; and more especially if such
combined positions should produce eclipses: thus, from the new or full
Moon, taking place when the Sun is nearest to the first point of Aries,
the spring should be dated; from that when the Sun is nearest to the
first point of Cancer, the summer; from that when he is nearest to the
first point of Libra, the autumn; and from that when he is nearest to
the first point of Capricorn, the winter. The Sun not only produces
the general qualities and constitutions of the seasons, by means of
which very illiterate persons are enabled, in a certain degree, to
form predictions, but he also regulates the proper significations
of the signs with regard to the excitation of the winds, as well
as other general occurrences, more or less subjected to occasional
variation. All these general effects are usually brought about by the
new or full Moon which takes place at the aforesaid points, and by the
configurations then existing between the luminaries and the planets:
but there are certain particular consequences which result from the new
and full Moon in every sign,[99] and from the transits of the planets;
“and which require monthly investigation.”[100]

It therefore becomes necessary to explain, in the first instance, the
particular natures and attributes exercised by each sign in influencing
the several constitutions of the weather, as it exists at various times
of the year; these natures and attributes shall now be immediately
detailed. It will be recollected, that the particular properties of the
planets and the fixed stars, as affecting the wind and the atmosphere,
as well as the manner in which the entire signs hold familiarity with
the winds and the seasons, have been already set forth.

[99] That is to say, at the new and full Moon taking place during the
Sun’s progress through each sign.

[100] The passage marked thus “ ” is not in the Greek, but is found in
two Latin translations.




