CHAPTER XII

THE PARTICULAR NATURES OF THE SIGNS BY WHICH THE DIFFERENT
CONSTITUTIONS OF THE ATMOSPHERE ARE PRODUCED[101]


The sign of Aries has a general tendency, arising from the presence
of the Equinox, to promote thunder and hail. Certain of its parts,
however, operate in a greater or less degree, according to the nature
of the stars which compose the sign: for instance, the front parts
excite rain and wind; the middle are temperate; and those behind are
heating and pestilential. The northern parts, also, are heating and
pernicious, but the southern cooling and frosty.

[101] According to Wing, in his “Instructions to the Ephemerides,”
printed in 1652, the signs, as mentioned in this chapter by Ptolemy,
are to be considered in their quality as constellations, and not
as spaces of the heavens. This opinion, however, seems to me to be
erroneous; for Ptolemy has already devoted a chapter in the 1st Book
to the detail of the influences of the several stars in the respective
constellations of the zodiac; and he moreover speaks, in the present
chapter, of the operation of Aries, as owing to the presence of the
Equinox. This he could not have done, had he spoken of the signs as
constellations instead of spaces.

The sign of Taurus, in its general character, partakes of both
temperaments,[102] but is nevertheless chiefly warm. Its front parts,
and especially those near the Pleiades, produce earthquakes, clouds
and winds: the middle parts are moistening and cooling; those behind,
and near the Hyades, are fiery, and cause meteors and lightnings. The
northern parts are temperate; the southern turbulent and variable.

[102] The temperaments here alluded to are, probably, heat and cold.

Gemini, in its general tendency, is temperate; but its leading parts
produce mischief by moisture; its middle parts are entirely temperate;
its latter parts mixed and turbulent. The northern parts promote
earthquakes and wind; and the southern are dry and heating.

Cancer is, in the whole, serene and warm, but its anterior part near
the Præsepe are oppressively hot and suffocating; the middle parts are
temperate, and the latter parts excite wind. And both its northern and
southern parts are equally fiery and scorching.

Leo has a general tendency operative of stifling heat. The anterior
parts are oppressively and pestilentially hot; yet the middle parts are
temperate; and those behind are injurious by means of moisture. The
northern parts produce variation and heat, and the southern moisture.

Virgo, in its general tendency, excites moisture and thunder. The front
parts, however, are chiefly warm and noxious; the middle temperate; and
the latter parts watery. The northern parts promote wind; the southern
are temperate.

Libra has a general tendency to produce change and variation. Its front
and middle parts are temperate; its hinder parts watery. The northern
parts cause variable winds, and the southern are moistening and
pestilential.

Scorpio, in its general character, is fiery and productive of thunder.
The front parts cause snow; the middle are temperate; the latter parts
excite earthquakes. Its northern parts are heating; its southern,
moistening.

Sagittarius, generally, is effective of wind. The front parts are
moistening; the middle temperate; and the hinder parts fiery. The
northern parts promote wind, and the southern variation and moisture.

Capricorn’s general tendency is to operate moisture. But its anterior
parts are pernicious by means of heat, its middle parts are temperate,
and its latter parts promote rain. Both its northern and southern parts
are injurious by means of moisture.

Aquarius, in its general character, is cold and watery. The front parts
are moistening; the middle temperate; and the latter parts productive
of wind. The northern parts are heating; the southern cause snow.

Pisces, in its general character, is cold and effective of wind. The
front parts are temperate; the middle moistening; the hinder parts
highly heating. The northern parts excite wind, and the southern are
watery.




CHAPTER XIII

MODE OF CONSIDERATION FOR PARTICULAR CONSTITUTIONS OF THE ATMOSPHERE


The first part of the consideration, requisite to form an estimate of
the various constitutions liable to take effect in the atmosphere,
applies to the general qualities pervading the several quarters of the
year, and has therefore the most extended scope. In order to learn
these qualities, it is necessary, in every quarter, to observe, as
above directed, the new or full Moon which may happen before[103] the
period of the Sun’s transit through either tropical or equinoctial
point, whichever it may be; and to arrange the angles (as in the
case of a nativity) according to the degree and hour at which the
new or full Moon may be found to happen, in every latitude for which
the consideration may be desired. Such planets and stars as may have
dominion over the places where the said new or full Moon happens, and
over the following angle, are then to be noted, in the same manner as
that stated with regard to eclipses. And after these preliminary steps
have been attended to, a general inference may be drawn as to the
proper qualities of the whole quarter; and the intensity or relaxation
of their operation is to be contemplated from the natures of the ruling
planets and stars, distinguished by the faculties they possess, and by
the mode in which they affect the atmosphere.

[103] “_Before._” Although I have thus Englished the word, προ, I
think it properly requires to be here rendered, by “_at_” or “_near
to_” rather than “_before_.” Firstly, because my author (in speaking
of the commencement of each quarter of the year, in the 11th Chapter,
p. 93), has expressly stated that “the spring is to be dated from the
new or full Moon taking place when the Sun is _nearest_ (εγγιζα) to
the first point of Aries; the summer from that, when he is _nearest_
the first point of Cancer,” &c., &c.; and (in p. 94) he states that
certain general effects are brought about by the new or full Moon
occurring _at_ (κατα) the aforesaid points. Secondly, because, in a
few lines further on, in speaking of the monthly consideration, p. 98,
he again uses only εγγιζα, in reference to the present passage, in
which, however, he has used only προ. Thirdly, it is a proper inference
that he meant to point out here the new or full Moon which may happen
_nearest_ to the tropical or equinoctial points, because he has
previously and explicitly taught that the principal variation of all
things depends upon those points. Lastly, Allatius has here rendered
the word by no other than _proximé_, which is also the word given in
the Perugio Latin of 1646.

On the other hand, Whalley, in his note on the present chapter, says,
that “according to this Prince of Astrologers” (meaning Ptolemy),
“we are to observe the new or full Moon preceding the ingress, only,
for our judgment on the succeeding quarter, and not the lunation
succeeding: and the reason I conceive to be, because the lunation,
which immediately precedes the ingress, carries its influence to the
very position of the ingress itself, but not so that which follows the
ingress.” Wing, in his Introduction to the Ephemerides (London, 1652)
also says, that “for the knowledge of the weather, it is requisite
to observe the conjunction or opposition of the luminaries next
_preceding_ the Sun’s ingress into the first point of Aries.”

Now, if a new or full Moon happen _immediately after_ the Sun’s transit
or ingress, the previous full or new Moon must have happened _a
fortnight before_ the said transit or ingress; and, after considering
the other parts of Ptolemy’s doctrine, I do not conceive, that he
intended to teach, in this chapter, that a _previous_ lunation, when at
so great a distance before the important ingress, would have a greater
influence over the ensuing quarter of the year, than a _subsequent_
lunation taking place so closely after the said ingress.

The second part of the consideration relates to each month, and
requires a similar observation of the new or full Moon first taking
place on the Sun’s progress through each sign: and it must be
remembered, that, if a new Moon should have happened at a period
nearest to the Sun’s transit over the past tropical or equinoctial
point, the new Moon also in each succeeding sign, until the
commencement of the next quarter, are to be observed; but, if a full
Moon should have so happened, then similar observation is to be made
of each subsequent full Moon. The angles, also, must be duly attended
to, as well as the planets and stars ruling in both the places[104];
and especially the nearest phases, applications, and separations of
the planets, and their properties. The peculiar qualities of the two
places, and the winds, liable to be excited by the planets themselves
and by those parts of the signs in which they may be situated, are
likewise to be considered; and also that particular wind, which is
indicated by the direction of the Moon’s ecliptical latitude. By the
aid of these observations, and by weighing and comparing the existing
vigour of each of the several properties and qualities, the general
constitution of the atmosphere during each month may be predicted.

[104] “_Both the places._” These are the places of the new or full
Moon, and of the following angle; as before mentioned with regard to
the quarterly consideration.

The third part of this consideration appertains to significations
applying more minutely, and points out their force or weakness. In
this case, the partile configurations of the Sun and Moon, at the
intermediate quarters, as well as at the new or full Moon, are to
be attentively regarded; since there is a certain variation in the
constitution of the atmosphere, which usually commences about three
days before, and sometimes, also, about three days after the Moon has
equated her course to the Sun. The configurations effected between
the Moon, at each quarterly equation, and the planets, whether by the
trine, sextile, or other authorized distances, are also to be observed;
because the peculiar property of the change in the constitutions of
the atmosphere depends much upon such configurations, and may be
accordingly perceived by considering the nature of the influence
which the said configurated planets and the signs exercise over the
atmosphere and the winds.

The particular quality of the weather, thus produced, will be more
fully established on certain days; especially when the brighter and
more efficacious fixed stars maybe near the Sun, either matutine
or vespertine; as, when so posited, they most frequently convert
the constitution of the atmosphere to an agreement with their own
natures: and, when the Luminaries may transit any one of the angles, a
similar effect is also produced. At all such positions the particular
constitutions of the atmosphere are subject to variation, and thus
become alternately more intense or more relaxed in their respective
qualities. In this manner, by certain positions of the Moon, the flux
and reflux of the sea are caused: and, when the Luminaries may be in
angles, a change of the wind is produced, according to the direction of
the Moon’s ecliptical latitude.

Finally, in all these considerations, it must be remembered that the
more general and first constituted cause takes precedence, and that
the particular cause comes subsequently and secondarily: and, that the
operation is in the highest degree confirmed and strengthened, when the
stars, which regulate the general effects, may be also configurated
towards the production of the particular effects.




