CHAPTER IV

THE QUALITY OF EMPLOYMENT


The dominion of the employment, or profession, is claimed in two
quarters; viz. by the Sun, and by the sign on the mid-heaven.

It is, therefore, necessary to observe whether any planet may be
making its oriental appearance nearest to the Sun,[221] and whether
any be posited in the mid-heaven; especially, when also receiving the
application of the Moon. And if one and the same planet possess both
these qualifications, that is to say, make its nearest appearance to
the Sun, and be also in the mid-heaven, that one alone must be elected
to determine the present inquiry: and, likewise, though the planet
should not be thus doubly qualified, but only singly, in whichever
respect, even then that planet alone must still be elected provided
itself alone should possess such single qualification. If, however,
there should be one planet presenting its nearest appearance, and
another in the mid-heaven conciliating the Moon, both must then be
noticed; and whichever of two may have greater sway, and possess
greater rights of dominion, that one must be preferred. But where not
any planet may be found so situated, neither making its appearance as
above described, nor being in the mid-heaven, then that one, possessing
the dominion of the mid-heaven,[222] is to be considered as lord of
the employment: it is, however, only some occasional occupation which
can be thus denoted; because persons, born under such a configuration,
most commonly remain at leisure and unemployed.

[221] See the 4th Chapter of the 8th Book of the Almagest inserted in
the Appendix.

[222] The Greek says merely “that one having the dominion,” without
specifying the place of dominion: the Latin printed at Perugio, is,
however, “_dominum accipe medii cœli_,” which is certainly the sense
required by the tenor of the previous instructions. Whalley also has
similarly rendered it.

What has now been said, relates to the election of the lord of the
employment or profession; but the species of the employment will be
distinguished by means of the respective properties of the three
planets, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, and of the signs in which they may
be posited.

Mercury, for instance, produces writers, superintendents of business,
accountants, teachers in the sciences, merchants and bankers: also,
soothsayers, astrologers, and attendants on sacrifices, and, in
short, all who live by the exercise of literature, and by furnishing
explanation or interpretation; as well as by stipend and salary, or
allowance. If Saturn bear testimony jointly with Mercury, persons then
born will become managers of the affairs of others, or interpreters of
dreams, or will be engaged in temples for the purpose of divination,
and for the sake of their fanaticism. But, if Jupiter join testimony,
they will be painters, orators, or pleaders in argument, and occupied
with eminent personages.

Should Venus have dominion of the employment, she will cause persons to
be engaged in the various perfumes of flowers, in unguents and wines,
and also in colours, dyes, and in spices: thus she will produce vendors
of unguents, garland-makers,[223] wine-merchants, dealers in medical
drugs, weavers, dealers in spices, painters, dyers, and vendors of
apparel. If Saturn add his testimony to hers, he will cause persons
to be employed in matters belonging to amusement and decoration; and
will also produce jugglers, sorcerers and charlatans, and all such as
practise similarly. But, if Jupiter join testimony with Venus, persons
will become prize-wrestlers, and garland-wearers,[224] and will be
advanced in honour through female interest.

[223] Among the ancients, a garland was an indispensable decoration
at all public ceremonies, whether civil or religious, and at private
banquets. The making of garlands was, therefore, a considerable
employment.

[224] It would seem, from “garland-wearers” being placed here in
connection with “prize-wrestlers” (αθληται), that the author intended
to point out persons competent to obtain the victors’ wreath in
public exhibitions. But it appears that the word σεφανηφορος,
_garland-wearer_, also signifies a person who was annually chosen by
the priests to superintend religious ceremonies, an office similar
to that of high priest. According to Athenæus, the Stephanephorus of
Tarsos was invested with a purple tunic, edged or striped with white,
and wore the laurel chaplet, which Plato, in the treatise _de Legibus_,
describes as being constantly worn by these officers, although the
other priests wore it only during the performance of the ceremonies.

Mars, ruling the employment, and being configurated with the Sun, will
produce persons who operate by means of fire; for instance, cooks,
as well as those who work in copper, brass, and other metals, by
melting, burning, and casting: if Mars be separated from the Sun, he
will make shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists, stonemasons, carpenters,
and subordinate labourers. If Saturn bear testimony, in addition
to Mars, persons will become mariners, workers in wells, vaults or
mines, painters, keepers of beasts or cattle, cooks or butchers,
and attendants on baths or on exhibitions. And, if Jupiter join
testimony, they will be soldiers, or mechanics, collectors of revenue,
inn-keepers, toll-gatherers, or attendants on sacrifices.

Further, should it happen that two arbiters of employment may be found
together, and provided they should be Mercury and Venus, they will then
produce musicians, melodists, and persons engaged in music, poetry,
and songs: they will also produce (especially if changed in their
places)[225], mimics, actors, dealers in slaves, makers of musical
instruments, choristers and musical performers, dancers, weavers,
modellers in wax, and painters. And if Saturn join testimony with
Mercury and Venus, the preparation and sale of female ornaments will
be added to the aforesaid occupations. But, if Jupiter give testimony,
the persons will become administrators of justice, guardians of public
affairs, instructors of youth, and magistrates of the people.

Should Mercury and Mars together be lords of the employment, persons
will become statuaries, armour-makers, sculptors,[226] modellers of
animals, wrestlers, surgeons, spies or informers, adulterers, busy in
crime, and forgers. And, if Saturn also bear testimony in addition
to Mercury and Mars, he will produce assassins, highwaymen, thieves,
robbers lurking in ambush, marauders on cattle, and swindlers. But, if
Jupiter afford testimony, he will engage persons in honourable warfare,
and in industry; making them cautious and diligent in business, curious
in foreign matters, and deriving profit from their pursuits.

[225] Meaning probably “if in mutual reception,” which position has
been before explained.

[226] Or makers of hieroglyphics—ιερογλυφοι.

When Venus and Mars exercise the dominion together, persons will become
dyers, dealers in unguents and perfumes, workers in tin, lead, gold,
and silver, mock combatants or dancers in armour, dealers in medical
drugs, agriculturists, and physicians, healing by means of medicine.
And if Saturn add testimony to Venus and Mars, he will produce persons
attendant on animals consecrated to religion; also grave-diggers and
undertakers, mourners and musicians at funerals, and fanatics occupied
in religious ceremonies, lamentations, and blood. But, if Jupiter
add testimony, the persons will become regulators of sacrifices,
augurs, holders of sacred offices, governors placed over women, and
interpreters; and they will derive support from such occupations.

The properties of the signs, in which the lords of the employment
may be posited, are also influential in varying the employment. For
example, the signs of human shape promote all scientific pursuits, and
such as are of utility to mankind; the quadrupedal signs contribute
to produce employment among metals, in business and trade, in
house-building, and in the work of smiths and mechanics: the tropical
and equinoctial signs tend to give employment in translation or
interpretation, in matters of exchange, in mensuration and agriculture,
and in religious duties: the terrestrial and watery signs tend to
employment in water, and in connection with water, as well in regard to
the nurture of plants, as to ship-building; they likewise contribute to
employment in funerals, in embalming and preserving, and also in salt.

Moreover, should the Moon herself actually occupy the place regulating
the employment,[227] and, after her conjunction, continue in course
with Mercury, being at the same time in Taurus, Capricorn, or Cancer,
she will then produce soothsayers, attendants on sacrifices, and
diviners by the basin.[228] If she be in Sagittarius or Pisces,
she will make necromancers, and evokers of dæmons: if in Virgo or
Scorpio, magicians, astrologers, and oracular persons, possessing
prescience: and, if in Libra, Aries, or Leo, she will produce fanatics,
interpreters of dreams, and makers of false vows and adjurations.

From the foregoing rules, the various forms of employment are to
be inferred; and its magnitude or importance will be manifested by
the existing power of the ruling planets. For instance, if the said
planets be oriental, or in angles, they will give the person eminence
and authority in his employment; but, if occidental or cadent, they
will render him subordinate. And should the benefics be in elevation,
the employment will be important, lucrative, secure, honourable, and
agreeable; but, on the other hand, if the malefics be in elevation
above the lords of the employment, it will then be mean, disreputable,
unprofitable, and insecure: thus, Saturn brings an adverse influence
in coldness or tardiness, and in the composition or mixture of
colours[229]; and Mars produces opposition by audacity and publicity
in enterprise: and both planets are alike hostile to proficiency and
prosperity.

The general period, at which any increase or diminution of the
employment may take place, must, again in this case also, be determined
by the disposition of the stars, which operate the effect towards the
oriental and occidental angles.

[227] That is to say, the mid-heaven; as stated in the 4th Chapter of
the 3rd Book, and in the commencement of the present Chapter.

[228] This mode of divination, as practised by the Greeks, is mentioned
by Potter. It is likewise described by a learned Doctor of Medicine,
Geo. Pictorius Vigillanus (in his Treatise “de Speciebus Magiæ
Ceremonialis,” printed at Strasburgh, 1531), as being used “when the
fraudulent vanity of a dæmon renders things more like each other than
eggs are to eggs.” And, according to this writer, it is practised by
exorcising water, and pouring it into a basin, wherein the vain and
refractory dæmon is immersed: the said dæmon will sometimes remain at
the bottom, and sometimes raise himself to the surface, sending forth a
slender hissing; out of which the desired responses are to be formed.

[229] Κρασεσι των χρωματων.—These words have been rendered literally,
but they seem to contain some figurative meaning, rather than a literal
one. Perhaps the preferable sense of them is, “_by a mixture of
views_,” or “_from various pursuits being blended together_.”




