CHAPTER VIII

TRAVELLING


The circumstances indicative of travel are to be considered by means of
the situation held by both the luminaries, in respect to the angles,
and especially, by means of that held by the Moon. For, should she be
descending, or cadent from the angles, she will cause journeys and
changes of residence: Mars, also, if descending, or cadent from the
zenith, will sometimes do the same, provided he may occupy a situation
in quartile, or in opposition to the luminaries. And, if the part
of Fortune, also, should happen to be placed in signs which produce
travelling, the course and practice of the whole life will be engaged
in foreign lands. And further, provided the benefics superintend the
aforesaid places, or ascend in succession to them, the engagements
abroad will be honourable and lucrative, and the return home speedy
and unobstructed: but if, on the contrary, the malefics superintend or
ascend in succession to those places, the journey outward will then
lead to peril and misfortune, and the return will be replete with
difficulty. But it is, at the same time, necessary in all cases to
consider the contemperament also, and to observe such of the existing
configurations as are more predominant.

It most usually happens, that, if the luminaries be posited in the
cadent houses of the oriental quadrants, the travel will take place in
the eastern or southern quarters of the world; and that, if placed in
western situations, or in an occidental quadrant, travel will be then
prosecuted in the northern or western parts. And, should the signs,
which operate travel, be themselves single in form, or should the
planets, having dominion of them, be singly posited, the journeys will
then take place after long intervals, and occasionally only: but, if
the said signs be bicorporeal, or double in form or figure, travel will
be constantly repeated and continued.

Thus, when Jupiter and Venus may be in dominion over the luminaries,
and over the places producing travel, they will render the journeys
agreeable, as well as free from danger: for the traveller will be
joyfully forwarded on his way by the magistrates of the country, and
by the concurrent assistance of friendly persons; the state of the
atmosphere will also be favourable, and he will meet with abundance of
accommodation. And, provided Mercury also be present with the planets
above specified, utility, profit, presents and honours will likewise be
derived from the journey.

Saturn and Mars, if controlling the luminaries, and, especially, if
placed distant from each other,[259] will produce great dangers, and
at the same time render the journey fruitless and unavailing. Should
they be in watery signs, the dangers will arise by shipwreck, or among
deserts and wilderness[260]; if in fixed signs, by precipices, and
adverse blasts of wind; in tropical and equinoctial signs, by want
of food and other necessaries, and by some unwholesome state of the
atmosphere; in signs of human form, by robbery, treachery, and various
depredations; and, if in terrestrial signs, by the attack of wild
beasts, or from earthquakes. And, should Mercury also lend concurrence,
the traveller will incur further danger from accusations made against
him, as well as from reptiles and venomous stings or bites.

The question, whether the events will be advantageous or injurious in
quality, must, however, be further considered by observation (made in
the forms already detailed), of the peculiar properties of the places,
in which the lords of employment, of wealth, of the body, or of rank,
may be posited. And the periods, at which travelling will take place,
are to be considered by the occasional ingress of the five planets.[261]

[259] The probable meaning is, “if not acting in concert”: but the
Latin of Perugio says, “_si sint oppositi secundum longitudinem_.”

[260] There seems a misprint here in the original: δυσωδιων, “foul
vapours,” instead of δυσοδων, “wildernesses.”

[261] On the places indicative of travelling.




CHAPTER IX

THE KIND OF DEATH


It now remains to treat of the kind and species of death. It is,
however, first to be determined, by the rules already delivered
regarding the duration of life,[262] whether death will ensue from an
oriental or occidental position of the predominating influence. And, if
death ensue from some oriental position, or meeting of rays, the place
of such meeting must be observed, and by means of that place the kind
of death is to be distinguished; if from the descension, or setting,
of the significator, or prorogator, the place of descension[263]
must be considered: because death is to be expected conformable in
character to the influences, whatever they may be, which preside over
the said places; or, if not any influences should directly preside, it
will then be conformable to the influences, of whatever kind, which
may be brought first in succession to the places in question: the
configuration of the stars, the property of the aforesaid anæretic
places, and the nature of the signs and of the terms,[264] are, also,
all of them co-operative.

[262] _Vide_ the 14th Chapter of the 3rd Book; on the number of the
modes of prorogation.

[263] That is to say, the sign and degree on the occidental horizon.

[264] See a subsequent note, p. 135, which gives an instance of the
mode in which Placidus applied the power of the terms, in an anæretic
direction.

Thus, for example, if the dominion of death be vested in Saturn, he
will produce death by means of lingering diseases; cough, rheumatism,
flux, ague, disorder of the spleen, dropsy, colic, and complaints in
the womb; and, in short, by all such diseases as proceed from the
superabundance of cold.

Jupiter effects death by quinsey, inflammation of the lungs, apoplexy,
spasm, pains in the head, morbid performance of the heart, and by all
diseases arising from the superabundance of air, and from immoderate
and impure respiration.

Mars causes death by constant fevers, semitertians, sudden and
spontaneous wounds, diseases of the kidneys, expectoration of blood,
and hæmorrhages of various kinds; by miscarriage, or abortion, and by
childbirth, by erysipelas, and, in short, by such diseases as proceed
from abundant and immediate heat.

Venus produces death by disorders of the stomach, and of the liver, by
scurvy and dysentry: also by consumption or wasting away,[265] and by
fistula and poison, and by all diseases incident on the superabundance
or poverty of moisture, and its corruption.

Lastly, Mercury causes death to proceed from fury, madness, melancholy,
epilepsy, falling fits, coughs, and obstructions, and by such diseases
as arise from superabundant or disproportionate dryness.

When the lords of death may fully possess their own peculiar and
natural properties, and when neither of the malefics may be in
elevation above them, death will ensue in the modes above detailed,
and in the ordinary course of nature. But a violent and remarkable
death will occur when both the malefics, either in conjunction, or in
quartile or opposition to each other, may be lords of the anæretic
places; or if both, or only one of the two, should attack either both
the luminaries, or even only the Sun or the Moon. In such a case, the
evil character of the death will proceed from the concurrence of the
malefic influence, and its magnitude or remarkable nature from the
additional testimony of the luminaries: its quality, also, will be
known by means of the rest of the planets and stars in configuration,
and by the signs which contain the malefic influence.[266]

[265] Δια σηψεων. Perhaps more properly, putridity or rottenness. The
Perugio Latin translation renders it by “cancer.”

[266] Placidus, in treating of the nativity of Lewis, Cardinal Zachia,
uses these words: “This example also teaches us what the sentiments
of Ptolemy were concerning a violent death; when, in a peremptory
place, both the enemies meet together, it is to be understood, that
in the nativity the violence is sometimes first pre-ordained from the
unfortunate position of the Apheta; at other times quite the contrary.
But, because the direct direction happened to be in the terms of
Mercury, the sickness was attended with a delirium and lethargy, so
that you may perceive this to have been the true cause of the native’s
death.” (Cooper’s Translation, pp. 198, 199.)

Hence, if it happen that Saturn be in fixed signs, and in quartile
or opposition to the Sun, and contrary in condition, he will produce
death by suffocation, occasioned either by multitudes of people, or
by hanging or strangulation: so, likewise, should he be occidental,
and the Moon be succedent to him, he will operate the same effects. If
he be posited in places or signs of bestial form, the native will be
destroyed by wild beasts: and, if Jupiter also offer testimony, being
at the same time badly afflicted, the death will then occur in public,
and by day; for example, by being exposed to combats with wild beasts.
If Saturn be posited in opposition to either of the luminaries in the
ascendant,[267] he will cause death in prison: if he be configurated
with Mercury, and especially if near the constellation of the Serpent
in the sphere, and in terrestrial signs of the zodiac, he will produce
death by venomous wounds or bites, and by reptiles and wild beasts.
And, should Venus also attach herself to Saturn and Mercury thus
combined, death will then ensue by poison or female treachery. If
Saturn be in Virgo or Pisces, or watery signs, and configurated with
the Moon, he will operate death by means of water, by drowning and
suffocation; and, if found near Argo, by shipwreck. Should he be in
tropical or quadrupedal signs, and the Sun be either in conjunction
with him, or in opposition; or if, instead of the Sun, Mars should
so present himself, death will be caused by the fall of houses or
buildings; and, if posited in the mid-heaven, death will happen by
falls from heights or precipices. These are the various effects of
Saturn, when configurated as described.

[267] Ειδε ανθωροσκοπησει προσοιον δηποτε των φωτων: which Allatius has
translated, “if he should be in the ascendant opposed to either of the
luminaries” (_si in horoscopo alteri luminum opponatur_); but the Latin
copy of Basle, 1541, as well as that of Perugio, 1646, give the passage
as now rendered. And it appears in a subsequent place, p. 201 (where
the word ανθωροσκοπων occurs), that it can only be properly translated
“_in opposition to the ascendant_.”

Mars, if in signs of human form, and posited in quartile or in
opposition to the Sun or Moon, and contrary in condition, will operate
death by slaughter, either in civil or foreign war, or by suicide:
if Venus add her testimony, death will be inflicted by women, or by
assassins in the employment of women: and, should Mercury also be
configurated with them, death will happen from robbers, thieves, or
highwaymen. If Mars be in mutilated or imperfect signs, or near the
Gorgon[268] of Perseus, he will produce death by decapitation, or
by mutilation of limb. If found in Scorpio or Taurus, he will cause
death by surgical amputation, burning or searing, or also by spasms
or convulsions. Should he be found in the mid-heaven, either above or
below the earth, death will be inflicted by crucifixion or impalement,
and especially if he be in the vicinity of Cepheus or Andromeda. If
descending, or in opposition to the ascendant,[269] he will produce
death by fire: and, if in quadrupedal signs, by falls and fractures.
Should Jupiter, however, bear testimony to Mars, and be at the same
time afflicted, death will ensue from the wrath of princes and kings,
and from judicial condemnation.

If it happen that the malefics be in concurrence with each other in
the first instance, and afterwards in mutual opposition, in any of
the aforesaid situations, the evil character of the death will be yet
further augmented; but its species or quality, and its dominion, will
depend upon that one which may be in occupation of the anæretic place.
And, if both the malefics claim prerogative in the anæretic places, the
bodies of persons who thus die will be cast abroad without interment,
and will be devoured by beasts and birds: these circumstances will
especially ensue, when the malefics may be found in signs similar in
form to beasts and birds; and provided not any one of the benefics
should offer testimony to the place below the earth,[270] nor to the
anæretic places.

[268] Caput Medusæ.

[269] Ανθωροσκοπων. _Vide_ note ³ in p. 135.

[270] That is to say, the lower heaven, or imum-cœli. Whalley has
translated it, “_above_ the earth,” instead of “_below_”; mistaking νπο
for νπερ.

Lastly, death will occur in foreign lands, when it may happen that
the planets controlling the anæretic places may be posited in cadent
houses; especially if the Moon be present in the said places also, or
if she be found in quartile or in opposition.[271]

[271] On this chapter Whalley makes the following annotations:
“One direction, how malevolent soever, rarely kills; and, in most
nativities, there is required a train of malevolent directions to
concur to death: where several malevolent directions concur so
together, without the aid of intervenings of the benevolents, they fail
not to destroy life.”

“In such trains of directions, the author here distinguisheth between
the killing planet and the causer of the quality of death; for one
planet doth not give both. The foremost of the malevolent train is
the killing place, and shows the time of death; but the following
directions, though benevolent, show the quality. If the train fall
altogether, and none follow, for the quality observe those which
precede, though at a distance and benevolent also; for, though the
benevolent contribute to the preservation of life, yet they frequently
specify the disease which is the cause of death. And with these, our
author tells us, concur the configurating stars, the quality of the
stars and signs, and the terms in which the lords happen. In violent
deaths, the genethliacal positions of the lights are to be observed,
and how the malefics affect them, and (_how they_) are also concerned
by directions in the quality or death.” See also Chap. XIV, Book II.




