CHAPTER XXVI

FACES, CHARIOTS, AND OTHER SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES OF THE PLANETS


The familiarities existing between the planets and the signs are such
as have been already particularised.

There are also, however, further peculiarities ascribed to the planets.
Each is said to be in its proper face, when the aspect it holds to the
Sun, or Moon, is similar to that which its own house bears to their
houses: for example, Venus is in her proper face when making a sextile
aspect to either luminary, provided she be occidental to the Sun, but
oriental to the Moon, agreeably to the primary arrangement of her
houses.[60]

[60] _Vide_ Chapter xx. It of course follows that Saturn is in his
proper face when he is five signs, or in quintile, after the Sun
or before the Moon; that Jupiter is so when in trine; Mars when in
quartile; Venus when in sextile; and Mercury when only one sign (or in
modern phrase, in semi-sextile), after the Sun or before the Moon.

Each planet is also said to be in its proper chariot, or throne, or
otherwise triumphantly situated, when it holds familiarity with the
place which it actually occupies by two, or more, of the prescribed
modes of connection: for when it is so circumstanced, its influence and
energy are specially augmented by the familiarity it thus holds with
the sign which encompasses it, and which is similar in influence and
co-operates with it.

Lastly, each planet (although it may possess no familiarity with
the sign encompassing it) is said to rejoice, when any connection
subsists between itself and other stars of the same condition; as,
notwithstanding the distance between them, a certain sympathy and
communication of influence is derived from their mutual resemblance.
In the same manner, again, when a planet occupies a place adverse and
dissimilar in condition to itself, much of its influence is dissipated
and lost; in consequence of the interposition and admixture of the
other different influence, arising out of the dissimilar temperament of
the sign by which it is encompassed.




CHAPTER XXVII

APPLICATION, SEPARATION, AND OTHER FACULTIES


In all cases when the distances between planets or luminaries are
but trifling,[61] the planet which precedes is said to apply to that
which follows; and that which follows to be separating from that
which precedes.[62] The same rule obtains both in respect to bodily
conjunction and to any other of the aspects before described; except
that, in the application and separation of the bodily conjunction, it
is also essential to observe the actual latitudes of the bodies, in
order to receive and consider only such a transit as may be made in the
same parts of the zodiac.[63] But in the application and separation of
aspects merely, the same attention is not requisite, since all the rays
are uniformly converged into one focus, that is to say, into the angle
of the earth,[64] and meet there alike from every quarter.

[61] This has been understood to mean, when the planets or luminaries
are within each other’s orbs; Saturn’s orb being 10 degrees, Jupiter’s
12, Mars’s 7 degrees 30 minutes, the Sun’s 17 degrees, Venus’s 8,
Mercury’s 7 degrees 30 minutes, and the Moon’s 12 degrees 30 minutes.

[62] Astrologers generally agree, that the inferior planets always
apply to the superior, but the superior never to the inferior, except
when the inferior be retrograde. In the present instance it seems most
probable that the author means the planet which is more occidental, by
“the planet which precedes.” He often uses “precedent” as equivalent
to “occidental” in regard to the daily revolution of the heavens: and
thus a planet in the first degree of Aries would precede, and be more
occidental than one in the sixth degree of Aries, to which latter it
would, by the regular planetary motion, be applying.

[63] On this, Whalley says that “the less the difference of latitude of
the planets in conjunction, the more powerful will be the influence:
for if two planets in conjunction have each considerable latitude of
different denomination, the influence of such conjunction will be much
lessened.”

[64] Τουτ εσι επι το κεντρον της γης. The precise meaning of the
word κεντρον is “centre,” rather than “angle”; but Ptolemy uses it
throughout this work, in speaking of the four angles of heaven, and I
conceive he uses it here to signify an angle at, or on, the earth. The
following definition of an aspect, by Kepler, strengthens my opinion:
“An aspect is an angle formed on the earth, by the luminous rays of two
planets; efficacious in stimulating sublunary nature.”

It appears, therefore, by the whole of what has been already delivered,
that the effective influence of the stars must be considered as arising
not only from their own peculiar natures and properties, but also
from the quality of the surrounding signs, and from configuration
with the Sun and the angles; all which has been pointed out. The
influence of each planet, however, is strengthened chiefly when it
may be oriental, swift and direct in its proper course and motion—for
it has then its greatest power: but, on the other hand, it loses
strength when occidental and slow in motion or retrograde; as it then
acts with smaller effect.[65] Its influence also receives accession
or diminution, from its position with regard to the horizon; as, if
it be situated in the mid-heaven, or succedent to the mid-heaven,
it is especially strong; likewise, if it be on the actual horizon,
or succedent to the horizon, it is also powerful—particularly if in
the eastern quarter. Should it, however, be below the earth, and
configurated with the ascendant, either from the lower heaven, or
from any other part below the earth, its influence then becomes more
languid; but if, when below the earth, it hold no such configuration,
it is entirely deprived of efficacy.[66]

[65] Placidus (Cooper’s translation) says that “the three superiors
are supposed to be stronger, if they are found to be matutine, or
eastern, from the Sun; the three inferiors, vespertine, or western;
for then they have a greater degree of light, in which consists their
virtual influence, and then they are called oriental; but occidental if
otherwise. Every one knows how largely, yet to no purpose, authors have
treated of the orientality of the planets.”

Moxon’s Mathematical Dictionary has the following words on the same
subject: “Now the three superior planets are strongest, being oriental
and matutine; but the three inferior when they are occidental and
vespertine. The reason is, because the first in the first case, but
the last in the second, do then descend to the lowest part of their
orbit, are increased in light, and approaching nearer the earth; and so
on the contrary, the inferiors matutine, the superiors vespertine are
weakened.”

[66] In a note on the 6th Chapter of this Book, Whalley says that,
“according to Ptolemy, such as are between the ascendant and mid-heaven
obtain the first place of strength, and are said to be in their
oriental orientality: but, between the western horizon and the lower
heaven, in their occidental orientality, which is the second place
of strength: between the lower heaven and the ascendant, in their
oriental occidentality, the first degree of weakness; and between the
mid-heaven and western horizon, in their occidental occidentality, the
weakest place of all.” This is all very pretty jargon, but certainly
NOT “according to Ptolemy,” who distinctly says, on the contrary, that
if a planet “is on the actual horizon, or succedent to the horizon, it
is also _powerful, and particularly_ if in the eastern quarter.” The
last member of this sentence, as well as the conclusion of this 27th
Chapter, shows that Ptolemy did not consider a situation between the
mid-heaven and western horizon to be “the weakest place of all.”




BOOK THE SECOND




