CHAPTER IV

THE INFLUENCES OF THE PLANETARY ORBS


The Sun[29] is found to produce heat and moderate dryness. His
magnitude, and the changes which he so evidently makes in the seasons,
render his power more plainly perceptible than that of the other
heavenly bodies; since his approach to the zenith of any part of the
earth creates a greater degree of heat in that part and proportionately
disposes its inhabitants after his own nature.

[29] It will be recollected that the Ptolemaic hypothesis considers the
Sun as a planetary orb, in consequence of his apparent progress through
the zodiac.

The Moon principally generates moisture; her proximity to the earth
renders her highly capable of exciting damp vapours, and of thus
operating sensibly upon animal bodies by relaxation and putrefaction.
She has, however, also a moderate share in the production of heat, in
consequence of the illumination she receives from the Sun.

Saturn produces cold and dryness, for he is most remote both from the
Sun’s heat and from the earth’s vapours. But he is more effective
in the production of cold than of dryness. And he and the rest of
the planets derive their energy from the positions which they hold
with regard to the Sun and Moon; and they are all seen to alter the
constitution of the Ambient in various ways.

Mars chiefly causes dryness, and is also strongly heating, by means
of his own fiery nature, which is indicated by his colour, and in
consequence of his vicinity to the Sun; the sphere of which is
immediately below him.

Jupiter revolves in an intermediate sphere between the extreme cold of
Saturn and the burning heat of Mars, and has consequently a temperate
influence: he therefore at once promotes both warmth and moisture. But,
owing to the spheres of Mars and the Sun, which lie beneath him, his
warmth is predominant: and hence he produces fertilizing breezes.

To Venus also the same temperate quality belongs, although it exists
conversely; since the heat she produces by her vicinity to the Sun is
not so great as the moisture which she generates by the magnitude of
her light, and by appropriating to herself the moist vapours of the
earth, in the same manner that the Moon does.

Mercury sometimes produces dryness, and at other times moisture, and
each with equal vigour. His faculty of absorbing moisture and creating
dryness proceeds from his situation with regard to the Sun, from which
he is at no time far distant in longitude; and, on the other hand, he
produces moisture, because he borders upon the Moon’s sphere, which is
nearest to the earth; and, being thus excited by the velocity of his
motion with the Sun, he consequently operates rapid changes tending to
produce alternately either quality.




CHAPTER V

BENEFICS AND MALEFICS


Of the four temperaments or qualities above mentioned, two are
nutritive and prolific, viz. heat and moisture; by these all matter
coalesces and is nourished: the other two are noxious and destructive,
viz. dryness and cold; by these all matter is decayed and dissipated.

Therefore, two of the planets, on account of their temperate quality,
and because heat and moisture are predominant in them, are considered
by the ancients as benefic, or causers of good: these are Jupiter and
Venus. And the Moon also is so considered for the same reasons.

But Saturn and Mars are esteemed of a contrary nature, and malefic, or
causers of evil: the first from his excess of cold, the other from his
excess of dryness.

The Sun and Mercury are deemed of common influence, and productive
either of good or evil in unison with whatever planets they may be
connected with.




CHAPTER VI

MASCULINE AND FEMININE


There are two primary sexes, male and female; and the female sex
partakes chiefly of moisture. The Moon and Venus are therefore said to
be feminine, since their qualities are principally moist.

The Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are called masculine. Mercury is
common to both genders, because at certain times he produces dryness,
and at others moisture, and performs each in an equal ratio.

The stars, however, are also said to be masculine and feminine, by
their positions with regard to the Sun. While they are matutine and
preceding the Sun, they are masculine; when vespertine and following
the Sun, they become feminine.[30]

And they are further regulated in this respect by their positions
with regard to the horizon. From the ascendant to the mid-heaven, or
from the angle of the west to the lower heaven, they are considered
to be masculine, being then oriental: and in the other two quadrants,
feminine, being then occidental.

[30] “Astronomers call the planets matutine, when, being oriental from
the Sun, they are above the earth when he rises; and vespertine, when
they set after him.” Moxon’s Mathematical Dictionary.




