CHAPTER III

THE DEGREE ASCENDING


There frequently arises some uncertainty as to the precise time of
birth, and some apprehensions lest it should not be accurately noted.
In most cases, the actual minute of the hour, at which the birth
happens, can only be ascertained by making a scientific observation,
at the time, with an horoscopical astrolabe[112]; for all other
instruments, employed in ascertaining the hour, are almost fallacious,
although used by many persons with much care and attention. The
clepsydra,[113] for instance, is subject to error, because the flow
of the water will, from various causes, proceed irregularly: and the
sundial is often incorrectly placed, and its gnomon often distorted
from the true meridian line. To obviate the difficulty arising from the
inaccuracy of these instruments, it seems highly necessary to present
some method by which the actually ascending degree of the zodiac may be
easily ascertained, in a natural and consistent manner.

And in order to attain this essential point, it is necessary first to
set down the ordinary degree which, by the Doctrine of Ascensions,[114]
is found near the ascendant at the presumed hour. After this has
been done, the new or full Moon, whichever it may be, that may take
place next before the time of parturition, must be observed: and, if
a new Moon, it will be necessary to mark exactly the degree of the
conjunction of the two luminaries; but, if a full Moon, the degree of
luminary only which may be above the earth during the parturition.
After this, it must be observed what planets have dominion over the
said degree: and their dominion depends always on the five following
prerogatives, viz. on triplicity, house, exaltation, terms, and phase
or configuration[115]; that is to say, a planet, eligible to dominion,
must be connected with the degree in question either by one, or more,
or all of these prerogatives.

[112] It is, perhaps, needless to remark that modern improvements in
science have superseded the use of this and other ancient instruments
here mentioned.

[113] Although the “clepsydra,” or water-clock, was commonly used among
the ancients for various purposes, it appears, from Martian (a Latin
writer, who lived about A. D. 490), that there was also a clepsydra in
special use as an astrological engine.

[114] “_The Doctrine of Ascensions_,” in allusion to the method of
calculating the actual position of the ecliptic.

[115] “_Phase or configuration._” Or, holding some authorized aspect to
the degree in question.

If, therefore, there may be found any one planet properly qualified in
all or most of these prerogatives, the exact degree, which it occupies
in that sign in which it may be posited during the parturition, is to
be remarked; and it is then to be inferred that a degree of the same
numerical denomination was actually ascending, at the precise time of
birth, in that sign which appears, by the Doctrine of Ascensions, to be
nearest to the ascendant.[116]

But when two planets, or more, may be equally qualified in the manner
prescribed, it must be seen which of them may transit, during the
parturition, a degree nearest in number to the ordinary degree shown
by the Doctrine of Ascensions to be then ascending; and that said
degree, nearest in number, is to be considered as pointing out the
numerical denomination of the degree actually ascending. And when the
degrees of two planets, or more, may closely and equally approximate in
numerical denomination to the ordinary degree found by the Doctrine of
Ascensions, the degree of that planet which possesses further claims,
by connection with the angles and by its own condition, is to regulate
the number of the actually ascending degree.

It must however be observed, that if the actual distance of the degree,
in which the ruling planet may be posited, from the ordinary degree
ascending, be found to exceed its distance from the ordinary degree
of the mid-heaven; the numerical denomination, found in the way above
mentioned, is then to be considered as applicable to the actual degree
in culmination; and the other angles are to be arranged in conformity
therewith.[117]

[116] Or, on the ascendant.

[117] The precepts delivered in this Chapter have obtained the name
of Ptolemy’s Animodar: the term is probably Arabic, if it be not a
corruption of the Latin words _animum_, or _animam_, _dare_, “giving
animation or life”; yet this meaning seems scarcely close enough.




CHAPTER IV

DISTRIBUTION OF THE DOCTRINE OF NATIVITIES


After due attention to the preceding instructions, the doctrine of
genethliacal prognostication should be separately and distinctly
considered, for the sake of order and perspicuity, in its first, second
and successive divisions or heads of inquiry. It will thus be found to
present a mode of investigation, at once practicable, competent and
agreeable to nature.

One division is applicable only to certain circumstances established
previously to the birth; as, for instance, to those which concern the
parents; another to circumstances, which may be established both before
and after the birth; as those respecting brothers and sisters; another
to circumstances actually occurring at the very time of birth, and
immediately consequent thereupon: and this head of inquiry embraces
various points, and is by no means simple: and the last division
relates to events liable to take place after the birth, at various
periods, earlier or later; and it involves a still more diversified
theory.

Thus, the questions to be solved, in regard to the actual circumstances
of the birth itself, are, whether the production will be male or
female; twins, or even more; whether it will be monstrous; and whether
it will be reared.

The questions of the periods subsequent to the birth relate first to
the duration of life (which is distinct from the question of rearing),
then to the shape and figure of the body, to the bodily affections, and
to injuries or defects in the members. After these, further inquiry is
instituted as to the quality of the mind, and the mental affections;
then, as to fortune, in regard to rank and honours as well as wealth.
In succession to these, the character of the employment or profession
is sought out; then, the questions relative to marriage and offspring,
and to consentaneous friendship, are to be considered; then, that
concerning travel; and, lastly, that concerning the kind of death which
awaits the native. The question of death, although depending, in fact,
upon the same influence as the question of the duration of life, seems
yet to find its proper situation in being placed last in the series.

On each of the foregoing points of inquiry, the doctrine and precepts
to be followed shall be thoroughly and succinctly detailed; but all
idle conceits, promulgated by many persons without any foundation
capable of sustaining the test of reason, shall be utterly avoided,
in deference to the only true agency, which is derived from primal
Nature herself. It is only upon clearly effective influences that
this treatise is established: and all matters, which are open to an
authorized mode of inquiry by means of the theory of the stars, and
their positions and aspects with regard to appropriate places, shall
be fully discussed here; but the divination by lots and numbers,
unregulated by any systematic causation, must remain unnoticed.

The brief remarks, immediately following, are applicable to all cases,
generally, and are now at once stated, to avoid the repetition of them
under each particular division or head of inquiry.

Firstly, notice must be taken of that place in the zodiac which
corresponds, according to the scheme of the nativity with the
particular division of inquiry; for example, the place of the
mid-heaven is adapted to questions comprised under the head of
employment or profession; and the Sun’s place to those relative to the
concerns of the father.

Secondly, after the proper place has thus been duly ascertained,
the planets holding right of dominion there, by any of the five
prerogatives hereinbefore mentioned, are to be observed; and, if any
one planet be found to be lord by all these prerogatives, that planet
must be admitted as the ruler of the event liable to happen under that
particular head of inquiry. If, however, two or three planets hold
dominion, that one among them, which may have most claims to the place
in question, must be selected as the ruler.

Thirdly, the natures of the ruling planet and of the signs, in which
itself and the place which it thus controls may severally be situated,
are to be considered as indicating the quality of the event.

Fourthly, the proportionate vigour and strength, or weakness, with
which the dominion is exercised, as exhibited either by the actual
cosmical position of the ruling planet, or by its position in the
scheme of the nativity, will point out to what extent and with what
force the event will operate. And a planet is found to be cosmically
powerful when in one of its own places,[118] or when oriental, or
swift in course; and it is strong in the scheme of the nativity,
when transiting an angle or succedent house; especially those of the
ascendant, or of the mid-heaven. But it is cosmically weaker, when
not in one of its own places; or when occidental, or retarded in its
course; and in respect to the scheme of the nativity, it is weak when
cadent from the angles.

Lastly; the general time, about which the event will take place, is to
be inferred from the ruling planet’s matutine or vespertine position,
in regard to the Sun and the ascendant, and from the circumstance of
its being situated in an angle, or a succedent house. As, if it be
matutine, or in an angle, its influence operates earlier and more
promptly; but, if vespertine or in a succedent house, later and more
tardily. And, in reference to this point, the quadrant which precedes
the Sun, and that which precedes the ascendant, together with the
quadrants opposite to these, are oriental and matutine; and the other
quadrants, following the former, are occidental and vespertine.

[118] In House, Triplicity, Exaltation, Term or Face.




