CHAPTER VIII

TWINS


With respect to the probability of the birth of twins, or a greater
number at once, the same places must be observed, as those mentioned in
the preceding chapter; that is to say, the places of both luminaries
and the ascendant.

When two, or all three, of the said places may be situated in
bicorporeal signs, births of this kind will occur, in consequence
of the combination which then arises; especially, provided all
the planets, which control those places, should also be similarly
circumstanced: or although only some of them be posited in bicorporeal
signs, while the rest may be placed by two or more together. Because
even more than twins will be born, in a case wherein all the ruling
places may be in bicorporeal signs, most of the planets being, at the
same time, posited in the same way, and configurated with them. The
number of children, however, to be produced at the birth, is to be
inferred from the planet which exercises the right of determining the
number[132]: and the sex or sexes are to be predicted by means of the
planets in configuration with the Sun, Moon, and ascendant.

[132] The planet here alluded to, seems to be that which may be
connected with most of the ruling places.

And, should the position of the heavens be arranged so that the angle
of the mid-heaven, and not that of the ascendant, may be connected with
the luminaries, there will, in that case, be produced, almost always,
twins; and sometimes even more.

To speak, however, more particularly, three males will be born, as in
the nativity of the Anactores,[133] when Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars may
be configurated with the places before appointed, in bicorporeal signs;
and three females, as in the nativity of the Graces, when Venus and the
Moon, with Mercury femininely constituted, may be configurated in like
manner. When Saturn, Jupiter, and Venus may be configurated, two males
and one female will be born; as in the nativity of the Dioscuri[134];
and, when Venus, the Moon, and Mars may be so configurated, two females
and one male; as in the nativity of Ceres, Core, and Liber.[135]

In cases of this kind, however, it most usually happens that the
conception has not been complete, and that the children are born with
some remarkable imperfections or deformities. And, in some instances,
owing to a certain concurrence of events, these numerous productions
are quite extraordinary and amazing.

[133] I have looked in many other books for this word “_Anactores_”
(plural of ανακτωρ), as designating three particular individuals born
at the same birth; for which signification it is here used by Ptolemy;
but my search has been in vain. Cicero has, however, written a passage,
in which a word, very nearly resembling it, occurs, and which would
seem to relate to the very persons alluded to by Ptolemy: viz. “The
godship of the Dioscuri was established in various modes among the
Greeks, and applied to various persons. One set consisted of three
persons, who were styled at Athens the _Anactes_, and were the sons of
Jupiter, the most ancient king, and Proserpine; their several names
were Tritopatreus, Eubuleus and Dionysius.” _De Nat. Deor._, lib. 3,
cap. 21.

[134] This is the second set of the Dioscuri, as stated by Cicero: they
were the children of the third, or Cretan Jupiter (the son of Saturn)
and Leda; their names were Castor, Pollux, and Helena. Helena, however,
is not mentioned by Cicero.

[135] Core is a name of Proserpine; Liber, of Bacchus. And, although
the mention here made of Ceres, Proserpine and Bacchus, as being the
offspring of one and the same birth, does not accord with the usual
notion of the genealogy of these divinities, it seems that Ptolemy did
not so represent them without some reason. For, in cap. 24, lib. 2, _De
Nat. Deor._, Cicero speaks of Liber as having been deified conjointly
with Ceres and Libera (another name of Proserpine); and adds, that “it
may be understood, from the rites and mysteries of the worship, how the
deification took place.” It appears also, by Davies’s notes on Cicero,
that Livy and Tacitus both speak of the copartnership in divinity
exercised by Liber, Libera and Ceres. There is not, however, any
occasion at present to dive deeper into the question of the generation
of these deities; for our author has advertised to them only to point
out that so many males or females will be produced at one birth, under
certain configurations of the stars.




CHAPTER IX

MONSTROUS OR DEFECTIVE BIRTHS


The same places, as those pointed out in the two chapters last
preceding, are again to be considered, in inquiring into the
probability of a monstrous or defective birth. For it will be found
that, at a birth of this description, the luminaries are either cadent
from the ascendant, or else not in any manner configurated with it;
while, at the same time, the angles[136] are occupied by the malefics.

It therefore becomes necessary, when such a position of the heavens may
occur at the time of birth, to observe forthwith the preceding new or
full Moon[137] and its ruler; as well as the rulers of the luminaries
at the said time of birth. For, if all the places, in which the rulers
of the luminaries, and in which the Moon herself and Mercury may be
situated, at the birth, or, if most of those places should be totally
inconjunct and unconnected with the places of the said preceding new
or full Moon and its ruler, the birth will then be monstrous. And if
it should be further found, in addition to this absence of connection,
that the luminaries may be also posited in quadrupedal or bestial
signs, and the two malefics in angles, the birth will in that case not
be human. And should the luminaries, when so circumstanced, be not at
all supported by any benefic planet, but only by malefics, the creature
born will be wholly indocile, wild, and of evil nature: if, however,
they should receive support from Jupiter or Venus, the offspring
will then be like that of dogs or cats, or other creatures held in
religious veneration and used in worship[138]: but, if Mercury support
the luminaries, it will resemble that of fowls, oxen, or swine, or, of
other animals adapted to the service of mankind.

[136] Whalley says here, “chiefly the ascendant and mid-heaven.”

[137] Whichever might have been nearer in time.

[138] It is perhaps superfluous to mention that the two kinds of
animals here named (as well as many others) were venerated by the
Ægyptians.

When the luminaries may be in signs of human shape, while other
circumstances in the scheme of the nativity may exist as before
described, the creature born will then be human, or will partake of
human nature, although it will still be defective in some peculiar
quality. And, in order to ascertain the nature of that defect, the
shape and form of the signs found on the angles occupied by the
malefics, as well as of those wherein the luminaries are situated,
must be taken into consideration: and, if in this instance also,
no benefic planet should lend support to any one of the prescribed
places, the offspring produced will be utterly void of reason, and
indeed indefinable.[139] If, however, it should happen, that Jupiter or
Venus give support, the defect will be veiled by a specious outward
appearance, similar to that of hermaphrodites, and of those persons
called Harpocratiaci,[140] or others of like imperfections. And should
Mercury also give support, in addition to that of Jupiter or Venus, the
offspring will then become an interpreter of oracles and divinations;
but, if Mercury support alone, it will be deaf and dumb,[141] although
clever and ingenious in its intellect.

[139] The Greek says “enigmatical.”

[140] One Latin translation has rendered this word “stammerers”; and,
as Harpocrates was the god of silence, Ptolemy has probably used the
epithet to signify defect of speech.

[141] “Dumb.” The Greek is οδοντων εςερημενον, “_deprived of teeth_,”
and Allatius has so translated it: but other translations render these
words by _dumb_, which, considering the nature of Mercury, seems their
preferable signification.




