CHAPTER XII

THE PROROGATORY PLACES


Firstly, those places, only, are to be deemed prorogatory, to which the
future assumption of the dominion of prorogation exclusively belongs.
These several places are the sign on the angle of the ascendant,
from the fifth degree above the horizon, to the twenty-fifth degree
below it; the thirty degrees in dexter sextile thereto, constituting
the eleventh house, called the Good Dæmon; also the thirty degrees
in dexter quartile, forming the mid-heaven above the earth; those in
dexter trine making the ninth house, called God; and lastly, those in
opposition, belonging to the angle of the west.

Secondly, among these places, the degrees which constitute the
mid-heaven are entitled to preference, as being of a more potent and
paramount influence: the degrees in the ascendant are next in virtue;
then the degrees in the eleventh house succedent to the mid-heaven;
then those in the angle of the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth
house, which precedes the mid-heaven.

No degrees under the earth are, in any manner, eligible to the dominion
now in question; except such only as enter into light actually above
the succedent, or, in other words, with the ascendant. And any sign,
although it may be above the earth, is still incompetent to partake in
this dominion, if it be inconjunct with the ascendant: hence the sign
which precedes the ascendant, and constitutes the twelfth house (called
that of the Evil Dæmon), is incompetent; and not only for the above
reason, but also because it is cadent, and because the beams cast by
the stars posited therein, towards the earth, are impaired by the thick
and dark exhalations arising from the earth’s vapours, which produce an
unnatural colour and magnitude in the appearance of stars so posited,
confusing, and in some measure annihilating, their beams.

Thus far with regard to the places of prorogation.




CHAPTER XIII

THE NUMBER OF PROROGATORS, AND ALSO THE PART OF FORTUNE


After due attention has been given to the instructions in the preceding
chapter, the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, and the part of Fortune, are
to be considered as the four principally liable to be elected to the
office of prorogator; and their positions, together with those of such
planets as rule in the places of their positions, are to be observed.

The part of Fortune is ascertained by computing the number of degrees
between the Sun and the Moon; and it is placed at an equal number of
degrees distant from the ascendant, in the order of the signs. It is
in all cases, both by night and day, to be so computed and set down,
that the Moon may hold with it the same relation as that which the Sun
may hold with the ascendant; and it thus becomes, as it were, a lunar
horoscope or ascendant.[144]

[144] The Latin translation, printed at Perugio in 1646, has here the
following passage in addition: “But it must be seen which luminary may
follow the other in the succession of the signs; for if the Moon should
so follow the Sun, the part of Fortune is also to be numbered from the
horoscope or ascendant, _according_ to the succession of the signs. But
if the Moon precede the Sun, the part of Fortune must be numbered from
the ascendant, _contrary_ to the succession of the signs.”

There is a long dissertation on the part of Fortune, in Cooper’s
Placidus, from pp. 308 to 318; and, among the directions there given
for computing its situation, the following seem the most accurate and
simple: viz. “In the diurnal geniture, the Sun’s true distance from
the east is to be added to the Moon’s right ascension, and in the
nocturnal, subtracted; for the number thence arising will be the place
and right ascension of the part of Fortune: and it always has the same
declination with the Moon, both in number and name, wherever it is
found. Again, let the Sun’s oblique ascension, taken in the ascendant,
be subtracted always from the oblique ascendant of the ascendant, as
well in the day as in the night, and the remaining difference be added
to the Moon’s right ascension; the sum will be the right ascension
of the part of Fortune, which will have the Moon’s declination.” It
is shown also by this dissertation, that the situation of the part
of Fortune must be necessarily confined to the lunar parallels;
that it can but rarely be in the ecliptic; and that its latitude is
ever varying. Cooper also adds, from Cardan’s Commentaries on the
Tetrabiblos, that “if the Moon is going from the conjunction to the
opposition of the Sun, then the Moon follows the Sun, and the part
of Fortune is always under the Earth, from the ascendant; but if the
Moon has passed the opposition, she goes before the Sun, and the part
of Fortune is before the ascendant, and always above the earth.” This
remark of Cardan’s is, in effect, exactly equivalent to what is stated
in the additional passage inserted in the Perugio Latin translation,
and given above.

In the Primum Mobile of Placidus (Cooper’s translation, p. 45), the
following remark and example are given: “The part of Fortune is placed
according to the Moon’s distance from the Sun; and you must observe
what rays the Moon has to the Sun, for the latter ought to have the
same, and with the same excess or deficiency, as the part of Fortune to
the horoscope. As the Moon is to the Sun, so is the part of Fortune to
the horoscope; and as the Sun is to the horoscope, so is the Moon to
the part of Fortune. So, in the nativity of Charles V, the Moon applies
to the ultimate sextile of the Sun, but with a deficiency of 7° 45′:
I subtract the 7° 45′ from 5° 34′ of Scorpio, the ultimate sextile to
the horoscope, and the part of Fortune is placed in 28° 9′ of Libra.”
N.B.—In this nativity, according to Placidus, the Sun is in the second
house, in 14° 30′ of Pisces: the Moon in the ascendant, in 6° 45′ of
Capricorn; the ascendant is 5° 34′ of Capricorn; and the part Fortune
is in the ninth house, in 28° 9′ of Libra.

Among the candidates for prorogation, as before-mentioned, by day
the Sun is to be preferred, provided he be situated in a prorogatory
place; and, if not, the Moon; but if the Moon, also, should not be so
situated, then that planet is to be elected which may have most claims
to dominion, in reference to the Sun, the antecedent new Moon, and
the ascendant; that is to say, when such planet may be found to have
dominion over any one of the places where these are situated, by at
least three prorogatives, if not more; the whole number being five. If,
however, no planet should be found so circumstanced, the Ascendant is
then to be taken.

By night, the Moon is to be elected as prorogator, provided, in like
manner, she should be in some prorogatory place; and if she be not, the
Sun: if he also be not in any prorogatory place, then that planet which
may have most rights of dominion in reference to the Moon,[145] and
the antecedent full Moon and the part of Fortune. But, if there be no
planet claiming dominion in the mode prescribed, the Ascendant must be
taken, in case a new Moon had last preceded the birth; but, if a full
Moon, the part of Fortune.

If the two luminaries, and also some ruling planet of appropriate
condition, should be each posited in a prorogatory place, then,
provided one luminary may be found to occupy some place more important
and influential than the others, that luminary must be chosen;
but should the ruling planet occupy the stronger place, and have
prorogatives of dominion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries,
the planet must then be preferred to either of them.[146]

[145] According to her position in the scheme of the nativity.

[146] Placidus, in remarking on the nativity of John di Colonna, after
stating his opinion that it is an error to suppose that a malign
influence to the horoscope, when the horoscope has _not_ the primary
signification of life is anæretic, says, that “the order and method
which Ptolemy lays down for the election of a prorogator are quite
absurd, unless life be at the disposal of a sole prime significator
only.” He proves by other arguments also, and by instances of the
fact, that “_one only_ signifies life, elected according to Ptolemy’s
method.” (Cooper’s translation, p. 184.)




