CHAPTER VI

CHILDREN


The next point to be investigated is that concerning children: and, to
accomplish this, observation must be made of the planets posited in,
or configurated with the place on the zenith,[247] or its succedent
house, which latter is called the place of the good dæmon. And should
it happen that not any planets may be present in the said places,
nor configurated with them, it will then be necessary to take into
consideration such as may be in opposition thereto.

[247] The angle of the mid-heaven.

Now the Moon, Jupiter, and Venus are esteemed as givers of offspring;
but the Sun, Mars, and Saturn are considered as denying children
altogether, or as allowing but few: while Mercury, being in quality
common to both parties, lends co-operation to that with which he may be
configurated, and gives offspring, when oriental, but withholds, when
occidental.

To speak briefly, if the planets, which grant progeny, be so posited as
described,[248] and placed singly, the gift of progeny will be single
only[249]; but should they be in bicorporeal or in feminine signs,
they will grant double offsprings[250]: so likewise if they should be
in prolific or seminal signs, such as Pisces, Cancer, and Scorpio,
they will grant twins, or even more. And provided they should also be
masculinely constituted, as well by configuration with the Sun, as by
being in masculine signs, they will grant male children; but otherwise,
if femininely constituted, female.

But, although the said planets, even if beneath the malefics in
elevation, or, even if found in barren places, or in signs such as
those of Leo and Virgo, will still grant children; yet such children,
thus indicated, will neither be healthy, nor continue in life. Should
it happen, however, that the Sun and the malefics may be in entire
possession of the places above mentioned, viz. that on the zenith,
or the succedent house allotted to the good dæmon; and provided they
be, at the same time, in masculine or barren signs, and the benefics
be not in elevation above them, a total privation of offspring is
thereby indicated; but, should they be in feminine or prolific signs,
or supported by the testimony of the benefics, children will then be
granted; yet they will be liable to disease, and short-lived.

If, however, planets of each condition should be configurated with, and
have prerogative in prolific signs, there will then ensue a loss of
either all the children, or only few, or else the major part of them;
in the same proportion as that in which the planets, bearing testimony
to either condition, may preponderate on one side rather than the
other; by excelling in number, or in influence, in consequence of being
posited more orientally, more genuinely in angles, higher in elevation,
or successively ascending.

When the lords of the aforesaid signs[251] may be such as are givers of
offspring, and be either oriental, or in places proper to themselves,
the children thus granted will become eminent and illustrious: but,
if occidental, or in places not proper to themselves, the children
will then become undistinguished and abject. Should the said lords
also be in concord with the part of fortune, and with the ascendant,
they will render the children amiable, and cause them to be beloved by
their parents, and to inherit their parents’ substance: but, if found
inconjunct, and not in concord with the said parts, the children will
then become odious and mischievous to their parents, and will forfeit
the inheritance of their substance.

[248] The meaning, apparent from the commencement of the chapter, is
this: “Should such planets be in the mid-heaven or its succedent house,
or configurated with either.”

[249] Μοναδικην, single, or one at a birth.

[250] Διδυμογωνιαν, double, or two at a birth.

[251] That on the mid-heaven, and that on the eleventh house.

Further, should the planets which grant progeny be appropriately
configurated with each other, they will promote brotherly love, and
mutual regard and affection among the children; but, if inconjunct,
or in opposition, they will excite in them mutual hatred, deceit, and
treachery.

The general investigation regarding children is to be conducted
in the foregoing method: but, in order to enquire into particular
circumstances consequent on the above, it will be necessary to assume,
as an ascendant, the position of each planet which gives offspring, and
to observe the separate schemes; drawing inferences therefrom as in the
case of a nativity.




CHAPTER VII

FRIENDS AND ENEMIES


With respect to friendship and enmity, it may be observed that great
and lasting familiarities, or disagreements, are respectively called
sympathies and enmities; while the smaller, such as arise occasionally,
and subsist for a short time only, are denominated casual intimacies
and strifes: the whole are to be contemplated according to the
following rules.

Indications of great and lasting friendships, or enmities, may be
perceived by observation of the ruling places, exhibited in the
respective nativities of both the persons, between whom the friendship
or enmity may subsist. It is consequently essential to observe the
places of the Sun, the Moon, the ascendant, and the part of fortune;
for, should all these in both nativities be in the same signs, or
should either all or most of them be counterchanged in position in
each nativity, and especially should the two ascendants be within the
distance of seventeen degrees from each other,[252] they will create
fixed and indissoluble friendship. On the other hand, should they be
in signs inconjunct, or in opposition, they will produce great and
lasting enmity. If, however, they be not constituted in either of the
modes above mentioned, but merely configurated in signs,[253] they
will then produce minor friendship; provided such configuration exist
by trine or sextile; but, if by quartile, they will excite minor
enmity, so as to take effect at certain particular times, in which
the friendship remains, as it were, inactive and subdued, while the
malefics transit the configuration: and, in a similar manner, enmity
also will be softened and abated, when the benefics may enter upon the
configuration.[254]

[252] Or, regard each other within the distance of seventeen degrees.

[253] That is to say; if the places of the Sun, &c., in one nativity be
configurated with such parts of the zodiac as are occupied by the Sun,
&c., in the other nativity.

[254] Of any of the four places above described.

The friendship and enmity, which men bear towards each other, may be
classed under three general heads. One kind is suggested by spontaneous
wilfulness; another, by the idea of profit; and another, by pain and
pleasure mutually excited.

And, therefore, should either all or most of the aforesaid places
be in familiarity with each other, friendship of all the three
kinds will be established: so, also, should the places be entirely
without familiarity, similar enmity will be established. If, however,
familiarity, or absence of familiarity (as the case may be), exist
only as regards the places of the luminaries, friendship or enmity
will then be established by spontaneous will; and friendship thus
produced is the best and most secure; while, on the other hand, enmity
so arising is, in like manner, the worst and most dangerous. The
friendship, or enmity, consequent on the familiarity or non-familiarity
of the respective parts of Fortune, will be established on the idea of
profit; and that, consequent on a similar disposition of the respective
ascendants, will arise from pain or pleasure mutually excited between
the parties.

It will, however, be necessary to pay still further attention to the
places in question, in order to observe whether any and what planets
may be in elevation above them, or in aspect to them; because, among
all the said places, that particular one, to which any planet in
elevation, or in succession, may be adjacent, whether in the same
sign, or in the next, will possess the more powerful influence over
friendship or enmity: and whichever place may have its aspecting
planets more powerfully benefic, will operate in a greater degree[255]
to advantage in friendship, and to the relaxation of enmity. The
foregoing instructions are applicable to such friendships or enmities
as are great and lasting.

[255] Than the rest of the places.

But, in the case of others, which subsist only occasionally, and which
have been defined as casual intimacies and strifes, it is essential
to make observation of the motions of the planets, as exhibited by
each nativity; that is to say, the times are to be calculated, on the
completion of which the motions of the planets of one nativity will
cause them to enter on certain places of the other nativity; for it is
at such periods that certain particular friendships and enmities occur,
continuing for a short time, until the said ingress of the planets
shall have passed over.

For instance, Saturn and Jupiter, when making ingress upon each other’s
places, produce friendship by certain agreements, or engagements,
relating either to agriculture or to inheritance: Saturn and Mars
create contention and treachery spontaneously entertained: Saturn and
Venus, friendship between kindred; liable, however, soon to grow cool:
Saturn and Mercury, friendship on account of business, or profit, or
some secret art or mystery.

Jupiter and Mars create friendship in the direction of affairs, and
by means of dignities; Jupiter and Venus also create friendship by
means of female persons, or attendants on religion, or on oracles:
Jupiter and Mercury, friendship by means of eloquence and science, and
philosophical inclinations.

Mars and Venus cause friendship in the course of amours, adultery, and
fornication: Mars and Mercury excite hatred and strife by offences
committed in business and trade, or by sorcery.

And Venus and Mercury produce communion by means of the arts and
sciences, by a mutual interest in literature, or by female persons.

It is in this manner that the planets operate in producing friendship
or enmity. And their comparative intensity or relaxation of vigour is
to be distinguished by the situation of the places, which they occupy,
with regard to the four principal and ruling places[256]: for, should
they be posited in angles, at the places of the respective parts of
Fortune, or at those of the luminaries, they will render the casual
intimacies or strifes more eminent and remarkable; but, if they be
remote from these places, their effects will not be highly conspicuous.
The comparative degree of injury or advantage, liable to be received,
is to be discerned by means of the good or evil properties of such
planets as may be thus in aspect to the aforesaid places.

With respect to servants,[257] the sign of the evil dæmon[258] is
considered as the place to which the disposition ruling over them must
be referred; and it is to be observed what planets are in aspect to
that place, both at the actual time of nativity, and at that of any
ingresses made upon it, or oppositions to it; and also, especially,
whether the lords of the said sign may be configurated in familiarity
with the ruling places of the nativity, or not in familiarity.

[256] Those of the Sun, Moon, Ascendant, and part of Fortune, as before
mentioned.

[257] “—and the attachment, or disagreement, subsisting between them
and their masters”;—so Allatius, and the Latin translation printed at
Perugio.

[258] The twelfth house.




