CHAPTER VI

BROTHERS AND SISTERS


Under this head of inquiry, a general and cursory investigation, only,
can be performed; and an attempt to dive into minute particulars would
be fruitless, and would prove to be merely a vain search after things
not open to discovery.[128]

The place, whence inferences are drawn respecting brothers and sisters,
is to be considered as being applicable only to children of the same
mother, and it is consequently, agreeably to nature, presumed to be the
same as the maternal place; viz. the sign occupying the mid-heaven; or,
by day, that which contains Venus, and, by night, the Moon. This sign
and its succedent are considered as indicative of the mother and her
children, and the same place is therefore properly allotted to brothers
and sisters.

[128] In spite of this declaration of the author, it seems, by
Whalley’s note on this chapter, that Cardan maintained that the
particular circumstances, liable to affect the brothers and sisters,
might be inferred by adopting, as an ascendant, the degree of the
planet holding chief dominion over the place of brethren, and erecting
a scheme thereby; in a mode similar to that allowed by Ptolemy in the
case of the parents.

Hence, provided this place be configurated with the benefics, there
will be several brothers and sisters: the number of them depending upon
the number and positions of such benefic stars, whether in bicorporeal
signs, or in signs of single form.

If, however, the malefics should be in elevation over this place, or
be hostilely situated in opposition thereto, the brothers and sisters
will then be few in number; and this fewness especially follows when
the malefics may surround the Sun. Should the hostile configuration
be presented from the other angles,[129] and, particularly, if from
the ascendant, Saturn will then represent the elder born; and Mars,
by inflicting death, will diminish the total number of brothers and
sisters.[130]

Again, should the stars, which promise brethren, be favourably
circumstanced as to their cosmical position, the brethren will be
eminent and illustrious; but humble and obscure, if the cosmical
position be of an adverse nature. If, also, the malefic stars should be
in elevation over those which give brethren, the life of the brethren
will then be only of short duration.

Stars, constituted masculinely, represent brothers; those femininely,
sisters. The more oriental stars likewise represent the elder born; and
those which are more occidental, the younger.

Moreover, should the stars, which give brethren, be harmoniously
configurated with that one which has dominion of the sign allotted to
brethren, the brethren will be mutually friendly and affectionate; and,
if an harmonious configuration be also extended, by the same planets,
to the part of fortune, the brethren will live together in communion.
But, if the stars, which give brethren, should, on the contrary, be
in situations unconnected with each other, or be in opposition, the
brethren will then live at variance, mutually practising enmity and
fraud.

[129] That is to say, from the angles in quartile (and therefore
hostile also) to the mid-heaven.

[130] The text does not show whether it be necessary that Saturn and
Mars should _both_ be in the ascendant, in order to produce the effect
described; nor whether the same effect would not follow, if one of them
should be in the ascendant, and the other in the occidental angle, or
even in some other position.




CHAPTER VII

MALE OR FEMALE


After the indications which regard brothers and sisters have been
investigated by the foregoing rules, consonant with nature and reason,
the actual native, or the person to whom the scheme of nativity is
specially appropriated, demands attention; and the first and most
obvious inquiry is whether the said native will be male or female.

The consideration of this question rests not on a single basis, nor
can it be pursued in one sole direction only: it depends, on the
contrary, upon the several situations of the two luminaries and the
ascendant, and upon such planets as possess any prerogatives in the
places of those situations; and all these circumstances should be
specially observed at the time of conception, and, in a general manner
also, at that of birth.

Observation of the said three places, and of the mode in which the
planets ruling them may be constituted, is wholly indispensable:
it must be seen whether all, or most of them, may be constituted
masculinely or femininely; and prediction must, of course, be regulated
in conformity with their disposition, so observed; as tending to
produce a male or female birth.

The masculine or feminine nature of the stars is to be distinguished
in the manner already pointed out in the commencement of this
treatise.[131] For instance, by the nature of the signs in which they
are situated, by their relative position to each other, and also
by their position towards the earth; as when in the east, they are
masculinely disposed, and, when in the west, femininely. Their relative
position to the Sun also affords guidance in distinguishing them;
since, if they should be matutine, they are considered to signify the
male gender; and if vespertine, the female. Thus, from the sex chiefly
prevalent, as observed by these rules, that of the native may be
rationally inferred.

[131] _Vide_ Chapter VI, Book I.




