CHAPTER X

CHILDREN NOT REARED


The question which now remains to be considered, in order to complete
the investigation of circumstances taking place simultaneously with the
nativity, or immediately consequent thereon, is, whether the child,
then born, will or will not be reared.

This inquiry is to be handled distinctly from that regarding the
duration of life, although there is an apparent connection between
them. The questions themselves are, indeed, similar; for it is much
the same thing to inquire whether the child will be nurtured, or
how long it will live; and the only distinction, between these two
questions, arises from the different modes in which they are treated.
For instance, the inquiry into the duration of life is to be pursued
only in cases wherein there is allotted to the native some space of
time, not less in duration than a solar period; that is to say, a year.
Therefore, since time is also measured by smaller portions, such as
months, days, and hours, and since the question, whether the native
will or will not be reared, belongs to cases wherein some exuberance
of evil influence threatens speedy destruction, and where life is not
likely to endure throughout a whole year, the inquiry into the duration
of life must consequently involve a more multifarious consideration,
than that which relates to rearing; which may be at once disposed of,
in a more general and summary manner.

Thus, if either of the two luminaries be in an angle, and one of the
malefics be either in conjunction with that luminary, or else distant
in longitude from each luminary, in an exactly equal space; so as to
form the point of junction of two equal sides of a triangle, of which
sides the two luminaries form the extremities, while, at the same
time, no benefic star may partake in the configuration, and while the
rulers of the luminaries may be also posited in places belonging to,
or controlled by, the malefics; the child, then born, will not be
susceptible of nurture, but will immediately perish.

Should the configuration, made between the malefic planet and the
luminaries, not exist precisely in the mode just mentioned; that
is to say, should the said planet not be equally distant from both
luminaries, so as to form the point of junction of two equal sides of a
triangle; yet should it then happen that the rays of two malefics may
nearly approach the places of the two luminaries, casting an injurious
influence either on both, or only one of them, and if both the said
malefics be together succedent, or in opposition, to the luminaries,
or if one of them be succedent, and the other in opposition, or even
if only one may particularly afflict one of the luminaries, then, in
any such case, no duration of life will be allotted to the child: for
the supremacy of the power of the malefics extinguishes the influence
favourable to human nature, and tending to prolong existence.

Mars is exceedingly pernicious when succedent to the Sun, and Saturn
when succedent to the Moon. But a converse effect takes place when
either of these planets may be in opposition to the Sun or Moon, or in
elevation above them; for the Sun will then be afflicted by Saturn, and
the Moon by Mars; and especially so, provided the said planets should
have local prerogatives in the signs containing the luminaries, or
in the sign on the ascendant. And, should a double opposition exist,
by the circumstance of the luminaries being placed in two opposite
angles, and by the two malefics being each so posited as to be equally
distant from each luminary, the child will be born almost, if not
quite, dead. Nevertheless, if the luminaries should be separating from,
or be otherwise configurated with benefic planets, whose rays may be
projected to parts preceding the said luminaries, the child will then
live as many days, or hours, as there are degrees, numbered between the
prorogator[142] and the nearest malefic.

[142] A prorogator is either a luminary, planet, or a certain degree
of the zodiac, which determines the duration of life, or the time of
the accomplishment of any event: it is hereafter fully treated of in
the 13th Chapter of this Book; which shows that, in the instance now
mentioned, it would be a luminary, either in the ascendant, or in the
mid-heaven.

If malefics should cast their rays to parts preceding the luminaries,
and benefics to parts following them, the child will be abandoned at
its birth; but will afterwards meet with adoption, and will live. Yet,
if the malefics should be in elevation above those benefics which
are thus configurated, the child, so adopted, will lead a life of
misery and servitude: if, on the contrary, the benefics should be in
elevation, then whoever may adopt the deserted child will supply the
place of its parents. And, provided a benefic planet should either
ascend with, or near in succession to the Moon, or be applying to her,
and one of the malefics be occidental, the child’s own parents will, in
that case, take it again under their protection.

Rules similar to the foregoing are to be observed, when more than
one child is born; for, if any one of those planets, which may be
configurated towards the production of two, or even more children,
should be under the west, the children will be born half dead, or
deformed, and imperfect in body. And, if the planet so situated should
also be beneath the malefics, the children will not be susceptible of
nurture, or their life will be of the shortest span.




CHAPTER XI

THE DURATION OF LIFE


Of all events whatsoever, which take place after birth, the most
essential is the continuance of life: and as it is, of course, useless
to consider, in cases wherein the life of a child does not extend to
the period of one year, what other events contingent on its birth might
otherwise have subsequently happened, the inquiry into the duration of
life consequently takes precedence of all other questions, as to the
events subsequent to the birth.

The discussion of this inquiry is by no means simple, nor easy of
execution; it is conducted in a diversified process, by means of the
governance of the ruling places. And the method now about to be laid
down seems, of all others, the most consonant with reason, and with
nature: because the influence of the prorogatory places, as well as
of the rulers of those places, and the disposal of the anæretic[143]
places or stars, perform the whole operation of regulating the duration
of life. Each of these influences is to be distinguished in the mode
pointed out in the chapters immediately ensuing.

[143] The epithet _anæretic_ is a term of art, adopted from the Greek,
signifying fatal, or destructive.




