CHAPTER XX

HOUSES OF THE PLANETS


Those stars which are denominated planetary orbs have particular
familiarity with certain places in the zodiac, by means of parts
designated as their houses, and also by their triplicities,
exaltations, terms, and so forth.

The nature of their familiarity by houses is as follows:

Cancer and Leo are the most northerly of all the twelve signs; they
approach nearer than the other signs to the zenith of this part of
the earth, and thereby cause warmth and heat: they are consequently
appropriated as houses for the two principal and greater luminaries;
Leo for the Sun, as being masculine; and Cancer for the Moon, as being
feminine. It has hence resulted, that the semicircle from Leo to
Capricorn has been ordained solar, and the semicircle from Aquarius
to Cancer, lunar; in order that each planet might occupy one sign in
each semicircle, and thus have one of its houses configurated with the
Sun and the other with the Moon, conformably to the motions of its own
sphere, and the peculiar properties of its nature.

Saturn, therefore, since he is cold and inimical to heat, moving also
in a superior orbit most remote from the luminaries, occupies the signs
opposite to Cancer and Leo: these are Aquarius and Capricorn; and they
are assigned to him in consideration of their cold and wintry nature;
and because the configuration by opposition does not co-operate towards
the production of good.[48]

[48] Saturn being also malefic in his nature.

Jupiter has a favourable temperament, and is situated beneath
the sphere of Saturn; he therefore occupies the next two signs,
Sagittarius and Pisces. These signs are airy and fruitful, in
consequence of their trinal distance from the houses of the luminaries,
which distance harmonises with the operation of good.

Mars is dry in nature, and beneath the sphere of Jupiter: he takes
the next two signs, of a nature similar to his own, viz. Aries and
Scorpio, whose relative distances from the houses of the luminaries are
injurious and discordant.

Venus, possessing a favourable temperament, and placed beneath the
sphere of Mars, takes the next two signs, Taurus and Libra. These are
of a fruitful nature, and preserve harmony by the sextile distance; and
this planet is never more than two signs distant from the Sun.

Mercury never has greater distance from the Sun than the space of one
sign, and is beneath all the other planets: hence he is placed nearest
to both luminaries, and the remaining two signs, Gemini and Virgo, are
allotted to him.[49]

[49] The planets, having two houses, are said to be more powerful in
one by day and in the other by night: thus,

    Saturn’s  day house is Aquarius,   his night house Capricorn
    Jupiter’s              Sagittarius                 Pisces
    Mars’s                 Aries                       Scorpio
    Venus’s                Taurus                      Libra
    Mercury’s              Gemini                      Virgo

The above is from Whalley; but the same disposition is to be found in
all modern astrological writers.




CHAPTER XXI

THE TRIPLICITIES


The familiarity existing by triplicity arises in the following mode:

The triplicity preserves accordance with an equilateral triangle, and
the whole zodiacal orbit is defined by three circles, viz. that of the
equinox, and those of the two tropics; the twelve signs are, therefore,
distributed among four equilateral triangles.

The first triangle, or triplicity, is formed by three masculine signs,
Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, having the Sun, Jupiter, and Mars as lords
by house. Mars, however, being contrary in condition to the solar
influence, this triplicity receives, as its lords, only Jupiter and
the Sun. By day, therefore, the Sun claims the principal co-regency of
it, and Jupiter by night. Aries is on the equinoctial circle, Leo on
the summer, and Sagittarius on the winter circle. This triplicity is
principally northern, owing to the concurrent dominion of Jupiter, who
is fruitful and airy, and expressly connected with winds proceeding
from the north; it is, however, also north-west, in consequence of
being, in some degree, combined with the west by means of the house of
Mars, who introduces western breezes and the feminine qualities of that
quarter, in consequence of his lunar condition.[50]

The second triplicity, formed by Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, is
allotted to the dominion of the Moon and Venus, since it consists of
feminine signs. The Moon rules it by night, and Venus by day. Taurus
is on the summer circle, Virgo on the equinoctial, and Capricorn
on the winter. This triplicity is southern, in consequence of the
dominion of Venus, whose warm and moist influence produces south
winds: it, however, additionally receives a mixture of the east, by
means of Saturn; for, as Capricorn is the house of that planet, and
an eastern sign, Saturn becomes effective of winds from that quarter,
and furnishes this triplicity with a mixture of the east, with which
quarter he is further connected by means of his solar condition.[51]

The third triplicity is composed of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius,
masculine signs. It holds connection with Saturn and Mercury by
containing their houses, and is therefore attributed to them, and not
to Mars, to which planet it bears no relation. Saturn rules it by day,
owing to his condition,[52] and Mercury by night. Gemini is on the
summer circle, Libra on the equinoctial, and Aquarius on the winter.
This triplicity is principally eastern, by the influence of Saturn; but
it becomes north-east by receiving also a mixture of the north from the
condition of Jupiter, with which planet Saturn has, in this respect, a
diurnal familiarity.[53]

The fourth triplicity, formed by Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, is left
to the remaining planet, Mars, who has right in it by means of his
house, Scorpio. But, as the signs which compose this triplicity are
feminine, the Moon by night and Venus by day, through their feminine
condition, govern it, together with Mars. Cancer is on the summer
circle, Scorpio on the winter, and Pisces on the equinoctial. This
triplicity is western, in consequence of the government of the Moon and
Mars; but it is also blended with the south by the joint dominion of
Venus, and therefore becomes south-west.

[50] The “lunar condition” here spoken of refers to the position of
Aries (Mars’s house) in the lunar semicircle.

[51] Capricorn being in the solar semicircle.

[52] The reason for making Saturn diurnal lord of this triplicity may
be found in Chap. vii.

[53] This familiarity seems to arise from the sextile aspect between
Aquarius, the diurnal house of Saturn, and Sagittarius, the diurnal
house of Jupiter.




