CHAPTER XIII

THE INFLUENCE OF THE FOUR ANGLES


The angles are the four cardinal points of the horizon, whence
are derived the general names of the winds. With respect to their
qualities, it is to be observed that the eastern point, or angle of
the ascendant, is chiefly dry in its nature; because, on the Sun’s
arrival therein, the damps occasioned by the night begin to be dried
up: and all winds blowing from that quarter, under the common name of
east winds, are arid and free from moisture.

The southern point, or angle of the mid-heaven, is the most hot;
because the Sun’s meridan position, which produces greater warmth and
heat, declines (in this part of the earth) towards the south. The
winds, therefore, which blow from that quarter, and are commonly called
south winds, are hot and rarefying.

The western point, or occidental angle, is moist; because, when the
Sun is there, the moisture, which had been overpowered during the day,
recommences its operation: and the winds proceeding from thence, and
commonly called west winds, are light and damp.

The northern point, or angle of the lower heaven, is the most cold; for
the Sun’s meridian position in this part of the earth is far removed
from it in declination: and all winds thence proceeding, under the
common name of north winds, are cold and frosty.

It will, of course, be seen that a thorough acquaintance with the
foregoing matters is essential in order to acquire the faculty of
distinguishing temperaments in every shape and variation: since it is
sufficiently obvious that the effective influence of the stars must be
greatly diversified by the constitutions of the seasons, as well as
those of the ages of life, and of the angles; and also that the stars
have a much stronger influence on any constitution, when there may not
be in it any tendency contrary to their own, as the whole influence is
then entire and unalloyed. For example, stars effecting heat operate
more vigorously in constitutions of heat; and those effecting moisture
in constitutions of moisture. On the other hand, should a tendency,
contrary to their own, exist in any constitution, the stars accordingly
become less efficacious; in consequence of being attempered and mixed
with that contrary tendency: and this happens, for instance, when
stars effecting heat are attempered by constitutions of cold, or stars
producing moisture by constitutions of dryness. The influence of every
star is thus modified by the proportionate admixture presented by
constitutions of a nature different from its own.

In succession to the previous instructions, the following description
of the natural and peculiar properties of the signs of the zodiac is
annexed: the general temperaments of the signs are analogous to those
of the seasons, which are respectively established under each sign,
but they have, also, certain peculiar energies, arising from their
familiarity with the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, which shall be
hereafter specified;—and the simple and unmixed influences existing in
the signs, as considered only in themselves and with regard to each
other, will be first stated.




CHAPTER XIV

TROPICAL, EQUINOCTIAL, FIXED, AND BICORPOREAL SIGNS


Among the twelve signs, some are termed tropical, others equinoctial,
others fixed, and others bicorporeal.

The tropical signs are two: viz. the first thirty degrees after the
summer solstice, which compose the sign of Cancer; and the first thirty
degrees after the winter solstice, composing the sign of Capricorn.
These are called _tropical_, because the Sun, after he has arrived at
their first points, seems to _turn_, and to change his course towards a
contrary latitude;[43] causing summer by the _turn_ he makes in Cancer,
and winter by that which he makes in Capricorn.

There are also two equinoctial signs: Aries, the first after the vernal
equinox; and Libra, the first after the autumnal equinox: they are so
called, because the Sun, when in the first point of either, makes the
day and night equal.

Of the remaining eight signs, four are fixed, and four bicorporeal.
Those signs, which severally follow immediately after the two tropical
and the two equinoctial signs, are termed fixed, because, during the
Sun’s presence in them, the cold, heat, moisture or dryness, of the
season, which commenced on his arrival in the preceding tropical or
equinoctial sign, is then more firmly established: not, however,
that the temperament of the season has in itself actually increased
in vigour, but, having continued for some time in operation, it then
renders all things more strongly affected by its influence.

The bicorporeal signs severally follow the fixed signs; and, being thus
intermediately placed between the fixed and the tropical signs, they
participate in the constitutional properties of both, from their first
to their last degrees.

[43] In other words, the Sun then begins to diminish his declination,
which, at the first points of the said signs, is at its greatest amount.




