CHAPTER I

GENERAL DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT


The great and leading points, requiring to be attended to as a
necessary means of introduction to the consideration of particular
predictions, having been succinctly defined, the further parts of
the subject, comprehending everything which may tend to facilitate
prediction, and render it complete, shall now be duly proceeded in;
and, at the same time, care shall be taken to confine the whole
doctrine within the limits of natural reason.

The foreknowledge to be acquired by means of Astrology is to be
regarded in two great and principal divisions. The first, which may
be properly called General, or Universal, concerns entire nations,
countries, or cities; and the second, denominated Particular, or
Genethliacal, relates to men individually.

In considering these respective divisions, it seems proper to give
priority to that which has the more general application and influence:
because, in the first place, general events are produced by causes
greater and more compulsatory than the causes of particular events;
secondly, because natures of more extended potency must invariably
control those which are more limited in action; and, thirdly, because
particular events, or individual affections, are comprehended in those
of general influence.[67] It is therefore especially necessary, in
desiring to investigate particular events, to treat first of those
which are general.

[67] _Vide_ Chap. iii, Book I, pp. 13-14.

Again, general events are subdivided according to their operation
upon entire countries, and upon certain cities or districts: one
sub-division being regarded as affecting entire countries, and the
other certain cities or districts only. They are also separately
considered according to the causes by which they are produced; war,
pestilence, famine, earthquakes, inundations, and other similar
visitations being dependent on such greater and more important causes,
as arise only after considerable periods; while slighter causes,
arising more frequently, have reference only to the revolution of the
seasons; their greater or less variation in cold and heat; the severity
or mildness of the weather; the occasional abundance or scarcity of
provisions; and other like occurrences.

Hence the consideration of those events which concern whole countries,
and are dependent on the greater causes (since it has a more extended
scope than the other, which attaches only to certain cities, or
districts, and is subject to slighter causes) takes precedence. And,
for its due investigation, two essential points are to be attended to:
the first is, the appropriate familiarity of the zodiacal signs and the
fixed stars with the several regions which may be concerned; and the
second comprises the indications occasionally arising in those parts of
the heavens where such familiarity is found: for instance, the eclipses
of the Sun and Moon, and such transits as may be made by the planets,
when matutine, and in their respective stations.

The nature of the sympathy between these things must, however, be
explained first; and a brief description will therefore be given of
the chief peculiarities observable in whole nations; in regard to
their manners and customs, as well as to their bodily formation and
temperament; considered agreeably to their familiarity with those stars
and signs whence the natural cause of their peculiarities duly proceeds.




CHAPTER II

PECULIARITIES OBSERVABLE THROUGHOUT EVERY ENTIRE CLIMATE


The peculiarities of all nations are distinguished according to entire
parallels and entire angles, and by their situation with regard to the
Sun and the Ecliptic.

The climate which we inhabit is situated in one of the Northern
Quadrants: but other nations, which lie under more southern parallels,
that is to say, in the space between the equinoctial line and the
summer tropic, have the Sun in their zenith, and are continually
scorched by it. They are consequently black in complexion, and
have thick and curled hair. They are, moreover, ugly in person, of
contracted stature, hot in disposition, and fierce in manners, in
consequence of the incessant heats to which they are exposed; and they
are called by the common name of Æthiopians. But the human race does
not alone afford evidence of the violent heat in these regions; it is
shown also by all other animals and by the state of the surrounding
atmosphere.

The natives of those countries which lie under the more remote northern
parallels (that is to say, under the Arctic circle and beyond it[68])
have their zenith far distant from the zodiac and the Sun’s heat.
Their constitutions, therefore, abound in cold, and are also highly
imbued with moisture, which is in itself a most nutritive quality,
and, in these latitudes, is not exhausted by heat: hence they are fair
in complexion, with straight hair, of large bodies and full stature.
They are cold in disposition, and wild in manners, owing to the
constant cold. The state of the surrounding atmosphere and of animals
and plants, corresponds with that of men; who (as natives of these
countries) are designated by the general name of Scythians.

[68] “Under the Bears,” in the Greek.

The nations situated between the summer tropic and the Arctic circle,
having the meridian Sun neither in their zenith nor yet far remote from
it, enjoy a well-temperated atmosphere. This favourable temperature,
however, still undergoes variation, and changes alternatively from heat
to cold; but the variation is never vast nor violent. The people who
enjoy this kindly atmosphere are consequently of proportionate stature
and complexion, and of good natural disposition: they live not in a
state of dispersion, but dwell together in societies, and are civilised
in their habits. Among the nations comprehended in this division, those
verging towards the south are more industrious and ingenious than the
others, and more adapted to the sciences: and these qualifications are
engendered in them by the vicinity of the zodiac to their zenith, and
by the familiarity thus subsisting between them and the planets moving
in the zodiac, which familiarly gives activity and an intellectual
impulse to their minds. Again, the natives of those countries which lie
towards the east excel in courage, acting boldly and openly under all
circumstances; for in all their characteristics they are principally
conformed to the Sun’s nature, which is oriental, diurnal, masculine
and dexter—(and it is plainly apparent that the dexter parts of all
animals are much stronger than others)—hence results the greater
courage of the inhabitants of the East. And as the Moon, on her first
appearance after conjunction, is always seen in the west, the western
parts are therefore lunar, and consequently feminine and sinister;
whence it follows that the inhabitants of the west are milder, more
effeminate and reserved.

Thus, in all countries, certain respective peculiarities exist in
regard to manners, customs and laws; and in each it is found that
some portion of the inhabitants differs partially and individually
from the usual habits and condition of their race. These variations
arise similarly to the variations perceptible in the condition of the
atmosphere; as, in all countries, the general state of whose atmosphere
may be either hot, or cold, or temperate, certain districts are found
to possess a particular temperature of their own, and to be more or
less hot, or cold, by being more or less elevated than the general face
of the country. So, likewise, certain people become navigators owing
to their proximity to the sea, while others are equestrian, because
their country is a plain; and others, again, become domiciliated by the
fertility of their soil.

And thus, in each particular climate, certain peculiar qualities are to
be found, arising from the natural familiarity which it holds with the
stars and the twelve signs. And although these qualities do not pervade
it, in such a manner as to be necessarily exhibited by every individual
native, yet they are so far generally distributed as to be of much
utility in investigating particular events; and it is highly important
to take at least a brief notice of them.




