CHAPTER VII

DIURNAL AND NOCTURNAL


The day and the night are the visible divisions of time. The day, in
its heat and its aptitude for action, is masculine:—the night, in its
moisture and its appropriation to rest, feminine.

Hence, again, the Moon and Venus are esteemed to be nocturnal; the
Sun and Jupiter, diurnal; and Mercury, common; since in his matutine
position he is diurnal, but nocturnal when vespertine.

Of the other two planets, Saturn and Mars, which are noxious, one is
considered to be diurnal, and the other nocturnal. Neither of them,
however, is allotted to that division of time with which its nature
accords (as heat accords with heat), but each is disposed of on a
contrary principle: and for this reason, that, although the benefit is
increased when a favourable temperament receives an addition of its
own nature, yet, the evil arising from a pernicious influence is much
mitigated when dissimilar qualities are mingled with that influence.
Hence the coldness of Saturn is allotted to the day, to counterbalance
its heat; and the dryness of Mars to the night, to counterbalance
its moisture. Thus each of these planets, being moderated by this
combination, is placed in a condition calculated to produce a
favourable temperament.[31]

[31] Whalley here appends the following note: “To this chapter may be
properly added, that a planet is said to be diurnal, when, in a diurnal
nativity, above the earth; and, in a nocturnal nativity, under the
earth: but nocturnal, when, in a nocturnal nativity, above the earth;
or, in a diurnal nativity, under the earth.”




CHAPTER VIII

THE INFLUENCE OF POSITION WITH REGARD TO THE SUN


The respective powers of the Moon and of the three superior planets are
either augmented or diminished by their several positions with regard
to the Sun.

The Moon, during her increase, from her first emerging to her first
quarter, produces chiefly moisture; on continuing her increase from her
first quarter to her full state of illumination, she causes heat; from
her full state to her third quarter she causes dryness; and from her
third quarter to her occultation she causes cold.

The planets, when matutine, and from their first emerging until they
arrive at their first station, are chiefly productive of moisture;
from their first station until they rise at night, of heat; from their
rising at night until their second station, of dryness; and from their
second station until their occultation, they produce cold.[32]

But it is also sufficiently plain that they must likewise cause, by
their intermixture with each other, many varieties of quality in the
Ambient: because, although their individual and peculiar influence may
for the most part prevail, it will still be more or less varied by the
power of the other heavenly bodies configurated with them.

[32] Although all the positions mentioned in this paragraph are not
applicable to Venus and Mercury, which can never rise at night, that
is to say, at sunset, and although the author in the beginning of the
chapter speaks only of the Moon and the three superior planets, there
yet seems no reason why the orbits of Venus and Mercury should not be
similarly divided by their inferior and superior conjunctions, and
their greatest elongations.

The following is from Whalley: “The first station, in this chapter
mentioned, is when a planet begins to be retrograde; and the second
station when, from retrogradation, a planet becomes direct. They” (the
planets) “begin to rise at night when in opposition to the Sun.”




CHAPTER IX

THE INFLUENCE OF THE FIXED STARS


Next in succession, it is necessary to detail the natures and
properties of the fixed stars; all of which have their respective
influences, analogous to the influences of the planets: and those
stars which form the constellations of the zodiac require to be first
described.

_Aries._ The stars in the head of Aries possess an influence similar
in its effects to that of Mars and Saturn: those in the mouth act
similarly to Mercury, and in some degree to Saturn; those in the hinder
foot, to Mars; those in the tail, to Venus.

_Taurus._ Those stars in Taurus, which are in the abscission of the
sign, resemble in their temperament the influence of Venus, and in some
degree that of Saturn: those in the Pleiades are like the Moon and
Mars. Of the stars in the head, that one of the Hyades which is bright
and ruddy, and called Facula,[33] has the same temperament as Mars: the
others resemble Saturn, and, partly, Mercury; and those at the top of
the horns are like Mars.

_Gemini._ The stars in the feet of Gemini have an influence similar to
that of Mercury, and moderately to that of Venus.

The bright stars in the thighs are like Saturn: of the two bright stars
on the heads, the one, which precedes and is called Apollo,[34] is like
Mercury; the other which follows, called Hercules,[35] is like Mars.

_Cancer._ The two stars in the eyes of Cancer are of the same influence
as Mercury, and are also moderately like Mars. Those in the claws are
like Saturn and Mercury. The nebulous mass in the breast, called the
Præsepe, has the same efficacy as Mars and the Moon. The two placed
on either side of the nebulous mass, and called the Asini, have an
influence similar to that of Mars and the Sun.

_Leo._ Of the stars in Leo, two in the head are like Saturn and partly
like Mars. The three in the neck are like Saturn, and in some degree
like Mercury. The bright one in the heart, called Regulus,[36] agrees
with Mars and Jupiter. Those in the loins, and the bright one in the
tail, are like Saturn and Venus: those in the thighs resemble Venus,
and, in some degree, Mercury.

_Virgo._ The stars in the head of Virgo, and that at the top of the
southern wing, operate like Mercury and somewhat like Mars: the other
bright stars in the same wing, and those about the girdle, resemble
Mercury in their influence, and also Venus moderately. The bright one
in the northern wing, called Vindemiator, is of the same influence as
Saturn and Mercury: that called Spica Virginis is like Venus and partly
Mars: those at the points of the feet and at the bottom of the garments
are like Mercury, and also Mars, moderately.

_Libra._[37] Those stars at the points of the claws of Scorpio operate
like Jupiter and Mercury: those in the middle of the claws, like
Saturn, and in some degree like Mars.

[33] The little Torch; now known by the name of Aldebaran.

[34] Castor.

[35] Pollux.

[36] Cor Leonis.

[37] Called by the ancients χηλαι, Chelæ, or the _claws_ of Scorpio;
which sign they made to consist of 60 degrees, omitting Libra. Thus
Virgil in the first Georgic, line 33, &c.

    Quo locus Erigonen inter, Chelasque sequentes
    Panditur: ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens
    Scorpius, et cœli justâ plus parte reliquit.

Ovid, likewise, takes the following notice of Scorpio:—

    Porrigit in spatium signorum membra duorum.
                                       _Met._ 2, l. 198.


_Scorpio._ The bright stars in the front of the body of Scorpio have an
effect similar to that produced by the influence of Mars, and partly to
that produced by Saturn: the three in the body itself, the middle one
of which, called Antares,[38] is ruddy and more luminous, are similar
to Mars and moderately to Jupiter: those in the joints of the tail are
like Saturn and partly like Venus: those in the sting, like Mercury and
Mars. The nebula is like Mars and the Moon.

_Sagittarius._ The stars at the point of the arrow in Sagittarius have
influence similar to that of Mars and the Moon: those on the bow, and
at the grasp of the hand, act like Jupiter and Mars: the nebula in
the face is like the Sun and Mars: those in the waist and in the back
resemble Jupiter, and also Mercury moderately: those in the feet,
Jupiter and Saturn: the four-sided figure in the tail is similar to
Venus, and in some degree to Saturn.

_Capricorn._ The stars in the horns of Capricorn have efficacy similar
to that of Venus, and partly to that of Mars. The stars in the mouth
are like Saturn, and partly like Venus: those in the feet and in the
belly act in the same manner as Mars and Mercury: those in the tail are
like Saturn and Jupiter.

_Aquarius._ The stars in the shoulders of Aquarius operate like Saturn
and Mercury; those in the left hand and in the face do the same: those
in the thighs have an influence more consonant with that of Mercury,
and in a less degree with that of Saturn: those in the stream of water
have power similar to that of Saturn, and, moderately, to that of
Jupiter.

_Pisces._ Those stars in Pisces, which are in the head of the southern
fish, have the same influence as Mercury, and, in some degree, as
Saturn: those in the body are like Jupiter and Mercury: those in the
tail and in the southern line are like Saturn, and, moderately, like
Mercury. In the northern fish, those on its body and back-bone resemble
Jupiter, and also Venus in some degree: those in the northern line are
like Saturn and Jupiter; and the bright star in the knot acts like
Mars, and moderately like Mercury.[39]

[38] Adams’s Treatise on the Globes calls this star “Kalb al Akrab,
or the Scorpion’s heart,” and adds, that “the word Antares (if it is
not a corruption) has no signification.” But it should be observed
that Ptolemy states that this star partakes of the nature of Mars: it
seems therefore not improbable that Antares may be a regular Greek
word, compounded of αντι _pro_ and αρης _Mars_, and signifying _Mars’s
deputy_, or _lieutenant_, or _one acting for Mars_.

[39] Salmon, in his “Horæ Mathematicæ, or Soul of Astrology” (printed
by Dawks, 1679) divides each sign of the zodiac into six faces of five
degrees each, “because that in every sign there are various stars of
differing natures”; and he gives a particular description to each
face, depending on its ascension or culmination. This seems an attempt
to adapt Ptolemy’s signification of the several stars, composing the
different signs, to some general rule or mode of judgment: but it does
not merit the implicit assent of astrologers. It is understood that
Salmon was not the inventor of this division of the signs into faces,
but that it came originally from the Arabian schools.




