CHAPTER XVI

The two men who had walked up together arm in arm from Downing Street,
stood for several moments in Pall Mall before separating. The pressman
who was passing yearned for the sunlight in his camera. One of the
greatest financiers of the city in close confabulation with Mr. Gordon
Jones, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was an interesting, almost an
historical sight.

“It is a source of the greatest satisfaction to me, Sir Alfred,” the
Minister was saying earnestly, “to find such royal and whole-hearted
support in the city. I am afraid,” he went on, with a little twinkle
in his eyes, “that there are times when I have scarcely been popular in
financial circles.”

“We have hated you like poison,” the other assured him, with emphasis.

“The capitalists must always hate the man who tries to make wealth pay
its just share in the support of the Empire,” Mr. Gordon Jones remarked.
“The more one has, the less one likes to part with it. However, those
days have passed. You bankers have made my task easier at every turn.
You have met me in every possible way. To you personally, Sir Alfred, I
feel that some day I shall have to express my thanks--my thanks and the
thanks of the nation--in a more tangible form.”

“You are very kind,” the banker acknowledged. “Times like this change
everything. We remember only that we are Englishmen.”

The Minister hailed a passing taxi and disappeared. The banker
strolled slowly along Pall Mall and passed through the portals of an
august-looking club. The hall-porter relieved him of his coat and
hat with great deference. As he was crossing the hall, after having
exchanged greetings with several friends, he came face to face with
Surgeon-Major Thomson. The latter paused.

“I am afraid you don’t remember me, Sir Alfred,” he said, “but I have
been hoping for an opportunity of thanking you personally for the six
ambulance cars you have endowed. I am Surgeon-Major Thomson, chief
inspector of Field Hospitals.”

Sir Alfred held out his hand affably.

“I remember you perfectly, Major,” he declared. “I am very glad that my
gift is acceptable. Anything one can do to lessen the suffering of those
who are fighting our battle, is almost a charge upon our means.”

“It is very fortunate for us that you feel like that,” the other
replied. “Thank you once more, sir.”

The two men separated. Sir Alfred turned to the hall-porter.

“I am expecting my nephew in to dine,” he said,--“Captain Granet. Bring
him into the smoking-room, will you, directly he arrives.”

“Certainly, sir!”

Sir Alfred passed on across the marble hall. Thomson, whose hand had
been upon his hat, replaced it upon the peg. He looked after the great
banker and stood for a moment deep in thought. Then he addressed the
hall-porter.

“By-the-bye, Charles,” he inquired, “if you ask a non-member to dinner,
you have to dine in the strangers’ room, I suppose?”

“Certainly, sir,” the man replied. “It is just at the back of the
general dining-room.”

“I suppose an ordinary member couldn’t dine in there alone?”

“It is not customary, sir.”

Surgeon-Major Thomson made his way to the telephone booth. When he
emerged, he interviewed the head-waiter.

“Keep a small table for me in the strangers’ room,” he ordered. “I shall
require dinner for two.”

“At what time, sir?”

Major Thomson seemed for a moment deaf. He was looking through the open
door of the smoking-room to where Sir Alfred was deep in the pages of a
review.

“Are there many people dining there to-night?” he asked.

“Sir Alfred has a guest at eight o’clock, sir,” the man replied.
“There are several others, I think, but they have not ordered tables
specially.”

“At a quarter past eight, if you please. I shall be in the
billiard-room, Charles,” he added, turning to the hall-porter.

Sir Alfred wearied soon of the pages of his review and leaned back in
his chair, his hands folded in front of him, gazing through the window
at the opposite side of the way. A good many people, passing backwards
and forwards, glanced at him curiously. For thirty years his had been
something like a household name in the city. He had been responsible, he
and the great firm of which he was the head, for international finance
conducted on the soundest principles, finance which scorned speculation,
finance which rolled before it the great snowball of automatically
accumulated wealth. His father had been given the baronetcy which he
now enjoyed, and which, as he knew very well, might at any moment be
transferred into a peerage. He was a short, rather thick-set man,
with firm jaws and keen blue eyes, carefully dressed in somewhat
old-fashioned style, with horn-rimmed eyeglass hung about his neck with
a black ribbon. His hair was a little close-cropped and stubbly. No
one could have called him handsome, no one could have found him
undistinguished. Even without the knowledge of his millions, people who
glanced at him recognised the atmosphere of power.

“Wonder what old Anselman’s thinking about,” one man asked another in an
opposite corner.

“Money bags,” was the prompt reply. “The man thinks money, he dreams
money, he lives money. He lives like a prince but he has no pleasures.
From ten in the morning till two, he sites in his office in Lombard
Street, and the pulse of the city beats differently in his absence.”

“I wonder!” the other murmured.

Other people had wondered, too. Still the keen blue eyes looked across
through the misty atmosphere at the grey building opposite. Men and
women passed before him in a constant, unseen procession. No one came
and spoke to him, no one interfered with his meditations. The two men
who had been discussing him passed out of the room presently one of them
glanced backwards in his direction.

“After all, I suppose,” he observed, as he passed down the hall, “there
is something great about wealth or else one wouldn’t believe that old
Anselman there was thinking of his money-bags. Why, here’s Granet. Good
fellow! I’d no idea you’d joined this august company of old fogies.”

Granet smiled as he shook hands.

“I haven’t,” he explained. “You have to be a millionaire, don’t you,
and a great political bug, before they’d let you in? No place for poor
soldiers! I have to be content with the Rag.”

“Poor devil!” his friend remarked sympathetically,--“best cooking, best
wines in London. These Service men look after themselves all right. What
are you doing here, anyhow, Granet?”

“I’m dining with my uncle,” Granet replied, quickly.

“Sir Alfred’s in there, waiting for you,” his friend told him,
indicating the door,--“he has been sitting at the window watching for
you, in fact. So long!”

The two men passed out and Granet was ushered into the smoking-room.
Sir Alfred came back from his reverie and was greeted by his nephew
cordially. The two men sat by the window for a few moments in silence.

“An aperitif?” Sir Alfred suggested. “Capital!”

They drank mixed vermouth. Sir Alfred picked up an evening paper from
his side.

“Any news?” he asked.

“Nothing fresh,” Granet replied. “The whole worlds excited about
this submarine affair. Looks as though we’d got the measure of those
Johnnies, doesn’t it?”

“It does indeed,” Sir Alfred agreed. “Two submarines, one after the
other, two of the latest class, too, destroyed within a few miles and
without a word of explanation. No wonder every one’s excited about it!”

“They’re fearfully bucked at the Admiralty, I believe,” Granet remarked.
“Of course, they’ll pretend that they had this new dodge or whatever it
may be, up their sleeves all the time.”

Sir Alfred nodded.

“Well,” he said, “come in to dinner, young fellow. You shall entertain
me with tales of your adventures whilst you compare our cuisine here
with your own commissariat.”

They passed on into the strangers’ dining-room, a small but cheerful
apartment opening out of the general dining-room. The head-waiter
ushered them unctuously to a small table set in the far corner of the
room.

“I have obeyed your wishes, Sir Alfred,” he announced, as they seated
themselves. “No one else will be dining anywhere near you.”

Sir Alfred nodded.

“Knowing how modest you soldiers are in talking of your exploits,”
 he remarked to Granet, “I have pleaded for seclusion. Here, in the
intervals of our being served with dinner, you can spin me yarns of the
Front. The whole thing fascinates me. I want to hear the story of your
escape.”

They seated themselves, and Sir Alfred studied the menu for a moment
through his eyeglass. After the service of the soup they were alone. He
leaned a little across the table.

“Ronnie,” he said, “I thought it was better to ask you here than to have
you down at the city.”

Granet nodded.

“This seems all right,” he admitted, glancing around. “Well, one part of
the great work is finished. I have lived for eleven days not quite sure
when I wasn’t going to be stood up with my back to the light at the
Tower. Now it’s over.”

“You’ve seen Pailleton?”

“Seen him, impressed him, given him the document. He has his plans all
made.”

“Good! Very good!”

Sir Alfred ate soup for several moments as though it were the best soup
on earth and nothing else was worth consideration. Then he laid down his
spoon.

“Magnificent!” he said. “Now listen--these submarines. There was a Taube
close at hand and I can tell you something which the Admiralty here are
keeping dark, with their tongues in their cheeks. Both those submarines
were sunk under water.”

“I guessed it,” Granet replied coolly. “I not only guessed it but I came
very near the key of the whole thing.”

A waiter appeared with the next course, followed by the wine steward,
carrying champagne. Sir Alfred nodded approvingly.

“Just four minutes in the ice,” he instructed, “not longer. What you
tell me about the champagne country is, I must confess, a relief,”
 he added, turning to Granet. “It may not affect us quite so much, but
personally I believe that the whole world is happier and better when
champagne is cheap. It is the bottled gaiety of the nation. A nation
of ginger ale drinkers would be doomed before they reached the second
generation. 1900 Pommery, this, Ronnie, and I drink your health. If I
may be allowed one moment’s sentiment,” he added, raising his glass,
“let me say that I drink your health from the bottom of my hear, with
all the admiration which a man of my age feels for you younger fellows
who are fighting for us and our country.”

They drank the toast in silence. In a moment or two they were alone
again.

“Go on, Ronnie,” his uncle said. “I am interested.”

“I met Conyers the other day,” Granet proceeded, “the man who commands
the _Scorpion._ I managed to get an invitation down to Portsmouth to
have lunch with him on his ship. I went down with his sister and the
young lady he is engaged to marry. On deck there was a structure of some
sort covered up. I tried to make inquires about it but they headed
me off pretty quick. There was even a sentry standing on guard before
it--wouldn’t let me even feel the shape of it. However, I hadn’t given
up hope when there came a wireless--no guests to be allowed on board.
Conyers had to pack us all off back to the hotel, without stopping even
for lunch. From the hotel I got a telescope and I saw a pinnace with
half-a-dozen workmen, and a pilot who was evidently an engineer, land on
board. They seemed to be completing the adjustments of some new piece of
mechanism. Then they steamed away out of sight of the land.”

“A busy life, yours, Ronnie,” Sir Alfred remarked, after a moments
pause. “What about it now? I’ve had two urgent messages from Berlin this
morning.”

“It’s pretty difficult,” Granet acknowledged. “The _Scorpion’s_ out in
the Channel or the North Sea. No getting at her. And I don’t believe
there’s another destroyer yet fitted with this apparatus, whatever it
may be.”

“They must be making them somewhere, though,” Sir Alfred remarked.

His nephew nodded.

“To think,” he muttered, “that we’ve two hundred men spread out at
Tyneside, Woolwich and Portsmouth, and not one of them got on to this! A
nation of spies, indeed! They’re mugs, uncle.”

“Not altogether that,” the banker replied. “We have some reports,
although they don’t go far enough. I can put you on to the track of the
thing. The apparatus you saw is something in the nature of an inverted
telescope, with various extraordinary lenses treated by a new process.
You can see forty feet down under the surface of the water for a
distance of a mile, and we believe that attached to the same apparatus
is an instrument which brings any moving object within the range of what
they call a deep-water gun.”

“Did that come from reports?” Granet asked eagerly.

“It did,” Sir Alfred said. “Further than that, the main part of the
instrument is being made under the supervision of Sir Meyville Worth, in
a large workshop erected on his estate in a village near Brancaster in
Norfolk.”

“I take it back,” Granet remarked.

“The plans of the instrument should be worth a hundred thousand pounds,”
 Sir Alfred continued calmly. “If that is impossible, the destruction of
the little plant would be the next consideration.”

“Do I come in here?” Granet inquired.

“You do, Ronnie,” his uncle replied. “The name of the village where Sir
Meyville Worth lives is Market Burnham, which, as I think I told you,
is within a few miles of Brancaster. Geoffrey, at my instigation, has
arranged a harmless little golf party to go to Brancaster the day after
to-morrow. You will accompany them. In the meantime, Miss Worth, Sir
Meyville Worth’s only daughter, is staying in London until Wednesday.
She is lunching with your aunt at the Ritz to-morrow. I have made some
other arrangements in connection with your visit to Norfolk, which will
keep for the present. I see that some strangers have entered the room.
Tell me exactly how you came by the wound in your foot?”

Granet turned a little around. There was a queer change in his face as
he looked back at his uncle.

“Do you know the man at that corner table?” he asked.

Sir Alfred glanced across the room.

“Very slightly. I spoke to him an hour ago. He thanked me for some
ambulances. He is the chief inspector of hospitals, I think--Major
Thomson, his name is.”

“Did you happen to say that I was dining with you?”

Sir Alfred reflected for a moment.

“I believe that I did mention it,” he admitted. “Why?”

Granet struggled for a moment with an idea and rejected it. He drained
his glass and leaned across the table.

“He’s a dull enough person really,” he remarked, a little under his
breath, “but I seem to be always running up against him. Once or twice
he’s given me rather a start.”

Sir Alfred smiled. He called the wine steward and pointed to his
nephew’s glass.

“The best thing in the world,” he observed drily, as he watched the wine
being poured out, “for presentiments.”



