VIII

SOME ASPECTS OF INTOXICATION

There are various drugs that, through acute or chronic poisoning from
their use, cause mental disturbance,--alcohol, chloral, cannabis
indica, somnal, sulphonal, paraldehyde, ether, chloroform, antipyrin,
phenacetin, trional, chloralamid, iodoform, atropine, hyoscyamus,
salicylic acid, quinine, lead, arsenic, mercury, opium and morphine,
the bromides, cocaine, and others. Of these intoxicants alcohol always
has been most commonly used by western nations, but the moral aspects
of alcoholism have not been shown with sufficient insistence. There
are many sots in human society much less reprehensible than to the
unskilled observer they appear to be; others are more blameworthy.

Morality, as far as the agent is concerned, apart from the nature and
circumstances of the deed, supposes, first, voluntary acts, or acts
that proceed from the will with a knowledge of the end toward which
the acts tend; and, secondly, free acts, or acts that under given
conditions may or may not be willed. If by unavoidable chance one
stumbles against a man standing at the edge of a wharf, knocks him
into the water, and drowns him, the act has no element of morality in
it, because it is not voluntary and free. If a mind is diseased, and,
impelled by a mad notion of persecution, it brings about a like
killing, there is no question of morality, because the agent is not
free, and when fully analysed his action is not voluntary.

An act is more or less voluntary and free, and therefore more or less
moral, as the agent is affected by ignorance, passionate desire, fear,
or disease. Ignorance, fear, and disease may be such as to remove all
quality of morality from an act. {106} Certain diseases or
pathological conditions, especially of the nervous system, can take
out of an act the elements of voluntariness and freedom that are
necessary to make the act moral or immoral, provided, however, these
pathological conditions are not brought on through the fault of the
subject in which they exist. If a man voluntarily becomes drunk with
alcohol, or some other drug, he is, of course, accountable for the
evil he may unconsciously do while under the influence of that drug,
and if he begets an idiot or a criminal imbecile in his drunkenness,
he must atone somewhere for the blinded soul of his child. Here,
again, there are certain extenuating circumstances, because very few
drunkards are fully conscious of the extent of the evil in alcoholism.

Apart from the other requirements that go to make an act moral, the
agent must be sane; that the act be immoral, he must be sane or
insane, either temporarily or permanently, through his own fault; that
it be devoid of morality an act must be a mere _actus hominis_, or it
must be the act of a person blamelessly insane. If a man knows that an
alcoholic is liable to beget a criminal imbecile solely because of the
alcoholism,--and most men are aware of that fact,--this father or
grandfather is more or less accountable for every larceny, rape, and
murder done by the imbecile. The law, therefore, should put the
imbecile into safe keeping, then seek out the father and hang him.

Insanity is a common condition, but it has not been satisfactorily
defined. It supposes an appreciable unsoundness of the will, memory,
and understanding, or of one or two of these faculties, but no
alienist has given a short differentiation of that unsoundness. Where
shall we draw the line between the weak but responsible will and the
insane will? What degree of opacity between intellect and the world
separates the ignorant man from the lunatic? The extremes of sanity
and insanity are readily recognisable, but the intermediate degrees
are not clear. There is no test to apply to all cases; each must be
diagnosed from its peculiar symptoms, but the will of an insane man is
always weak. It can not deny or defer the gratification of a desire,
nor can it keep up an effort. Even in its lightest forms insanity is
selfish and {107} impolite, because it lacks the force of will
necessary to take trouble. It foregoes great future benefit for slight
present gratification. The insane man is idle, or busy only in work
that he likes, in pleasurable activity. A marked quality of sanity is
the capacity for sustained work, and the man that shirks work merely
because he does not like it is gratifying himself dangerously.

These defects are found commonly in sane persons, but the lunatic can
not rise from them, and he adds to the defects of will a warped
intellect. He can not adjust himself to his surroundings, and the
fault is in himself, not in the circumstances. His intellect may be
brilliant, but it sooner or later shows a taint. The insane man is not
a free, rational agent.

Alcoholism readily passes over into unmistakable insanity, and it
almost always is the cause of nervous degeneration in the children
born within its influence. This, is a phase of the evil not
sufficiently insisted upon by those that plead for total abstinence.

Chronic poisoning by alcohol induces hardening and calcification in
the walls of the arteries, degeneration of the nerve cells and
dendrites, wasting or overgrowth of the heart muscle, and fatty
degeneration of the liver and kidneys. The nerve centres that control
the circulation of the blood are paralysed by it, and, as a sequence,
the arteries and capillaries are diminished in calibre. This state in
turn obstructs the flow of the blood, and the body is not nourished,
nor are the waste and poisonous results of metabolism carried off as
they should be. Alcohol prevents the haemoglobin of the blood from
doing its office, which is to supply oxygen and remove carbon dioxid.
It absorbs the necessary water from the tissues, and thus it acts as a
corroding poison. It is also a functional toxin, because it depresses
the activity of organs by injuring the innervation. The poison affects
the brain, and as the cerebral gray matter, especially its pyramidal
cells, are the physical instruments of thought, will, and memory, or
the means of communication between the soul and the outer world, the
exercise of these spiritual functions is checked or inhibited by it.

A tendency to excess in the use of alcohol commonly {108} manifests
itself before the thirtieth year, and in some cases it may be removed
at the alcoholic climacteric, which is from the fortieth to the
sixty-fifth year. Those that become drunkards are usually of a
neuropathic constitution, through inheritance or abuse. Severe
diseases, like influenza, syphilis, typhoid; injuries to the head,
sunstroke, shock, worry; the disturbance that may accompany puberty,
pregnancy, lactation, and so on,--cause a nervous depression which is
soothed by alcohol, and thus a habit is fixed. The reckless
prescription of alcohol by some physicians is another cause of the
habit, and the use of proprietary medicines is a still more prolific
source of drunkenness and the consequent misfortune.

Cider, beer, ale, and porter contain from 4 to 6 per centum of real
alcohol; light wines, red and white, and natural sherry, 10 to 12 per
centum; strong sherry and port, 16 to 18 per centum; brandy, 39 to 47
per centum by weight, or 46 to 55 per centum by volume; and whiskey,
44 to 50 per centum by weight, or 50 to 58 per centum by volume. The
effect of these liquors on the body is due primarily to alcohol, and
secondarily to ethereal derivatives of alcohol. Some owe a part of
their effect to non-volatile substances,--beer from which all alcohol
has been boiled can still affect the body in a marked degree.

The chemist of the Massachusetts State Board of Health (Document No.
34) gives the percentage of alcohol in the common proprietary
medicines, and these percentages will be found in the article on
_Social Medicine_.

The weakest of these compounds are twice as strong in alcohol as beer,
and they treacherously bring about the habit of drunkenness in
disposed persons who may be very desirous to avoid such a calamity.

Some men and women are quickly destroyed by alcohol; others resist it
more or less successfully for a lifetime, as far as mere existence is
concerned. Alcoholism is one of the commonest causes of insanity, but
it is often an effect of insanity. It may be an early symptom of
paresis, or a part of the maniacal stage of circular insanity. In
poisoning by alcohol the higher nerve centres are first affected and
the {109} lowest last. The sense of human dignity and of morality, the
exercise of the intellect, are more or less inhibited before the
motive muscles are affected.

The usual effect of alcoholic poisoning is boisterous exaltation of
mind, but there is a depressed type of drunkenness which weeps. Some
patients at once are subjected by hallucinations and delusions, others
are so depressed that they have a suicidal tendency, others may have a
maniacal frenzy that is destructive or homicidal. In these neuropathic
conditions muscular co-ordination is commonly well preserved--the
patient is "drunk in the head and sober in the legs."

In alcoholism the mental changes are gradual and progressive. The
intellect is blunted, the judgment becomes foolish, the moral sense is
dulled. The drunkard is always a liar. Delusions not infrequently
occur, and it is one of the common symptoms of alcoholic insanity to
suspect a wife or husband of conjugal infidelity. If a man that is a
drunkard accuses his wife of infidelity, the chances are fifty to one
that she is innocent and that he is in the first stages of insanity.
This symptom is characteristic also of cocaine intoxication.

Another mental disturbance of acute alcoholism is _delirium tremens_,
which is inexactly called _mania a potu_ by some writers. _Delirium
tremens_ is not a form of mania, but an acute hallucinatory confusion,
in which the consciousness is much more impaired than it is in a
mania. _Mania a potu_ is a real mania, and it is transient commonly,
although it may leave permanent mental weakness with delusions.

In chronic alcoholism a paranoid condition may occur, and this often
is incurable. This psychosis may come on suddenly or gradually. In
true paranoia the delusions are systematised, but in this alcoholic
pseudoparanoia the enfeebled intellect can not build up coherently
even a delusion. The alcoholic hallucinations are visual and auditory,
and we find delusions of persecution, especially of a sexual nature.
The patient hears all kinds of insulting remarks made by "voices."
These voices often come from his own belly. His enemies send poisonous
or foul odours into his room at night, and the groundless suspicions
of his wife's infidelity take most outrageous forms of expression. He
will swear {110} he has _seen_ her misdeeds. Often the baseless
suspicions of his wife begin before any other noticeable impairment of
intellect, and are not recognised as delusions. The first step a
priest should take in investigating accusations of conjugal infidelity
is to find out whether the accuser is a tippler or not.

The delusions of persecution lead to attacks on the supposed enemies
which often are homicidal. Occasionally alcoholic insanity takes on a
paretic form, or it may be epileptic. Ten per centum of alcoholics are
epileptic. When the children of alcoholics are epileptic, the
convulsions begin in these children about four years earlier than in
children that are epileptics from other causes. If epilepsy is latent,
alcoholism will start it into action.

Alcoholism sometimes produces a condition of waking trance followed by
amnesia (lack of memory). In such a state the drunkard may transfer
property, carry out complicated professional actions, commit crime,
take long journeys, travel for days, and so act that no one notices
his disordered mental condition. Then suddenly he awakens and he has
no recollection whatever of what has happened during this trance. He
appears to be conscious, but to have no memory of his consciousness.
There is another alcoholic amnesia, found especially in those that
drink much during the morning hours, where there is instantaneous
forgetfulness. If you ask one of these men to shut a door, for
example, he will forget between his chair and the door what he started
to do. This condition is difficult to cure even after the use of
alcohol has been relinquished.

Dipsomania is a form of impulsive degenerative insanity, and it is
probably epileptic in origin. After a few days of insomnia and loss of
appetite for food, there is an irresistible impulse to drink alcoholic
liquor and to indulge in other excess. The patient drinks until all
means of getting alcohol are exhausted. He will take crude alcohol,
bay rum, cologne, the alcohol that is about pathologic specimens in a
hospital museum. The attack lasts from one to two weeks, and is
followed by depression and a feeling of remorse. The onsets are
irregular in occurrence, and between them the patient may {111} be
temperate or have even an extreme distaste for alcohol. This form of
disease is not infrequent among professional men and clergymen, and it
is impossible to find out just how far the patient is responsible for
his condition. If bishops would investigate the alcoholic tendencies
of the _families_ of candidates for seminaries, and reject all that
have this taint, there would be much less scandal. It is a serious
error of judgment to ordain a seminarian that has even once been under
the influence of alcohol, and those seminarians that cover up the
tippling of a companion, because he is a good fellow, are guilty of
far-reaching crime. The fact is worth investigation whether or not a
liquor dealer who never drinks alcohol, but who lives for years in the
presence of volatilised alcohol, has much of the alcoholic degeneracy
and a tendency to beget neurotic children. Certainly the fumes of wood
alcohol have killed workmen that went down only once into a vat
containing these fumes, and other alcohols in the form of vapour
should have deleterious effects. Fere produced monsters in chickens by
exposing eggs to the vapour of alcohol.

In judging a drunkard, it must be remembered that in many forms of
alcoholism, after the condition is well established, the patient has
little more freedom of will than a brute has. If he is accountable for
the habit, he is blamable for the crime that follows. If he is not
accountable, and it is often very difficult to prove that he is, he is
to be treated as a blamelessly insane man. In proper surroundings, and
with skilful direction, a child born with a tendency, or more exactly
a temptation, to dipsomania or other alcoholic neurosis can be saved,
but commonly the circumstances of such a child's life are the worst
imaginable. These children must never take alcohol, even as a
medicine, and they must not be pushed in school to nervous exhaustion.
A tendency to unchastity can "run in families," like a disposition
toward alcoholism, but the disgrace in yielding to this vicious bias
keeps many such unfortunates clean. It is to be regretted that public
opinion can not give the same aid in alcoholic predisposition.

A confirmed alcoholic should be prevented, if possible, from marriage,
because his sins will be visited upon his posterity. {112} The first
children of an alcoholic may be mentally sound, the younger children
are more or less mentally weak, the youngest are not uncommonly
imbeciles, or idiots, or under shock they grow insane. Fortunately
many of the children of alcoholics die at an early age, and the family
of a drunkard very seldom lasts beyond four generations. In the first
generation moral depravity and alcoholic excess are found; in the
second, chronic drunkenness and mania; in the third, melancholia,
hypochondria, impulsive and homicidal ideas; in the fourth, idiocy,
imbecility, and extinction of the family. The lower the social caste
of the drunkard, the greater the liability of meeting these blights.

Priests should take a deep interest in societies established for the
promotion of temperance, and the only temperance for most persons is
total abstinence. No man knows what latent tendency to alcoholism he
may have, especially in America, where great grandfathers are unknown
and the climate and life are trying on the nervous system. The
adulterated liquors sold everywhere at present make the danger greater
than it ever was. Whatever may be the truth as regards heredity, there
is no doubt concerning the strong influence of environment; therefore
get into the temperance societies the children of alcoholic parents,
of parents that are shiftless, hysterical, irritable. If a man has a
violent temper or if he is unchaste, get him and his children into the
society to check the downward drift. A bad temper is a neurotic taint,
and it commonly is a first step toward alcoholism. Do not forget to
warn the people against patent medicines that contain alcohol.

If you go over the list of the families in a parish, it is startling
to find how few there are without one or more "black sheep." The human
black sheep, in a good environment, is always physically imperfect,
and never so black as the gossips paint him. He may be a powerful
football player, but there is something wrong with his gray matter. He
is morally deaf, he was born so, and he is to be excused if he can not
always hear the still, small voice. This may sound like lax doctrine,
but it is true, nevertheless.

We must recognise that moral weakness is very often, {113} partly at
least, a physical defect, and there is no such state as "moral
insanity" where the intellect is normal. Now, I do not wish to be
quoted as holding that all moral depravity has a physical basis; most
of it is the unalloyed stuff; the Lombroso criminal is not a
scientific fact; but there is a moral condition very frequently met
with which is largely physical in origin. Given so many grains of
cocaine or morphine or so many ounces of alcohol, and you can make a
liar of a man once on the way toward sanctity. Given an attack of
hysteria in a holy nun, and she at once becomes a liar, an altogether
blameless liar, but no influence that does not remove the physical
cause will cure the lying.

The morally weak do not at present obtain enough religious
instruction. Their religion is more a matter of inheritance and habit
than of positive energy. It is "in the bones," sometimes in the fists,
rather than in the soul. They prefer the Sunday newspaper to the
Sunday sermon. The remedy here seems to be in making the Sunday school
solidly interesting and its teaching impressive.

Alcoholism in the parents, especially drunkenness at the moment of
conception, is one of the chief causes of idiocy in children. Fere, as
was said before, by injecting a few drops of alcohol beneath the shell
of hens' eggs, or by exposing the eggs to the vapour of alcohol, could
produce monsters almost invariably. In 1000 cases of idiocy at the
Bicetre, Bourneville found a history of alcoholism in 620, or 62 per
centum: in the fathers of 471, in the mothers of 84, in both parents
of 65; and in one-half of the remaining 38 per centum no history was
obtainable--probably most of these also had the alcoholic taint. The
administration of alcohol to infants, of gin and whiskey, of essences
of peppermint and anise, to relieve colic or induce sleep, and the
dosing with opiates like paregoric, are also well-established causes
of idiocy.

The idiot is practically dead, except for the trouble he gives in
caring for him; but another unfortunate, the imbecile, most commonly
the offspring of alcoholics, is often capable of great mischief. The
higher grades of imbeciles, those nearest the normal, are almost
invariably criminals. Not all criminals, of course, are imbeciles, but
a vast number of petty and brutal {114} criminals are imbeciles. We
keep these unfortunates most of their lives in jail, while we fine
their drunken fathers, the cause of the imbecility, "five dollars and
costs."

Imbecility has grades,--from marked lack of intellectual power, a
stage little beyond idiocy, up to the presence of a mind capable of
fair education,--but in all cases there is real defect, either of
intellect or of will. Sometimes, where the will is so weak that the
patient becomes a criminal in spite of all training, the intellect is
practically normal to the superficial observer.

The grades of imbecility can not be clearly marked off from one
another, but, roughly speaking, there are three. The lowest grade of
imbeciles understands simple commands, and has a slight manual
dexterity. They express themselves by signs and in monosyllables. They
can not concentrate attention upon anything, nor can they be taught to
read or write. Careful training can advance them so far that they may
do rough, menial work, and they are industrious when directed by a
present superior. They are inclined to masturbation. If they are not
teased, they are quiet; if annoyed, they may become dangerous.

Imbeciles of the middle grade can converse in a narrow vocabulary, and
they commonly stammer. They may be taught to read monosyllables; they
can not do even the simplest sum in addition, yet they show a certain
shrewdness. They are irritable and quarrelsome, inclined to lying and
stealing, and they have no sense of shame. They will not do any
regular work, but change from one occupation to another. They may have
sexual instincts and cause trouble on that account. They are slow to
understand, their memories are defective, and they are always very
vain. Their belly and what they shall wear are the chief things in
their lives. They are less criminal than the highest grade of
imbeciles.

The third class, the high-grade imbecile, is the most important,
because he is commonly a criminal. His intellect is below the average,
and his will is very flabby. He learns little at school, and what he
does learn is acquired slowly. He reads and writes badly and he may be
able to add simple {115} columns of numbers, but he can not multiply
or divide. Sometimes such an imbecile has a remarkable facility in
getting a speaking knowledge of two or three languages, and he may
learn a trade. There is a high-grade imbecile that is cunning and
shrewd, but he has no will, and he is a criminal. As imbeciles
approach the normal in intellect they recede from it in abnormality of
will.

Autopsies on imbeciles show an infantile development of the forebrain.
Imprisonment does no good in these cases. They are not taught anything
in prison, not even a trade, because the labour organisations and the
protected industries will not permit prison labour. They should be
confined so that they will not pervert youth and propagate their kind.
It is impossible to say how far a given imbecile is morally
accountable for what he does, but the accountability is not full in
the best cases. A neurasthenic, however, is not to be mistaken for an
imbecile. A neurasthenic person may have a tender conscience, an
imbecile has no conscience. In imbecility the fault is in the will,
rather than in the intellect, in the middle and highest grades. Many
women, especially, that are hopeless fools intellectually have strong
wills, but an imbecile never has a strong will except in the sense
that stubbornness is strength. Stubbornness is perverted strength.

_Morphine and Cocaine Intoxication_,--Morphine, an alkaloid of opium,
is used very extensively as an intoxicant. Since 1890 the importation
of opium into the United States has increased fourfold, although
physicians are now using less opium than they formerly did.

The insomnia, worry, moral distress, which bring on the alcoholic
habit in some persons, lead to morphinism in others. Some physicians,
by carelessly prescribing morphine for neuralgia, migraine,
dysmenorrhoea, or any pain, make their patients slaves of this drug.

The degenerative effects of morphine are not so great nor so rapid as
those of alcohol. It does not shorten life so much as alcohol does,
nor are the children of a person addicted to the use of the drug so
liable to idiocy and imbecility. The mind is enfeebled--slowly in some
cases, rapidly in others. The patient will resort to almost any means
to obtain the {116} drug, if he is deprived of it. Authorities hold
that he will lie without reason, merely for the perverse pleasure in
deceiving, that he is uncertain and treacherous, with a dull
conscience and morbid impulses. There are exceptions to this in cases
where the drug is easily obtained by the patients. Opium and morphine
diminish the sexual appetite in males, even to impotence. The bodily
changes are slow but profound.

When a user of morphine has been deprived of the drug for from ten to
fifteen hours, he becomes so weak he can not stand; he gets diarrhoea
with cramps; he sweats, trembles, and collapses. Later, mental
disturbance comes on. He grows delirious, sees insects and small
animals, as the delirium tremens patient does, and his suffering is
very great. It is extremely difficult, and commonly impossible, to
cure the morphine disease after it has been firmly established, and a
deliberate acceptance of the habit is evidently a grave vice. Where a
patient has become addicted to the use of the drug, through the fault
of a physician, or through ignorance, the treatment from the social
point of view of such a patient is commonly cruel.

Cocaine intoxication is much worse than morphinism. It is a new
excess, which was unknown before 1886. Many users of morphine can
carry on business, but the cocaine _habitue_ can not do so. He is
always extremely busy doing nothing. He writes long letters which are
never finished. He changes from work to work, and even his
conversation wanders. His bodily weight decreases rapidly, even
one-third of his whole weight may be lost within a few weeks. The skin
hangs in folds and is of a dirty yellow colour, the facial appearance
is that of extreme distress, and the muscles are feeble. Fainting,
irregular cardiac action, sweating, and insomnia are other symptoms.

Insanity is an occasional sequence, with hallucinations, especially of
hearing. Such a patient hears roaring noises and voices; his secret
thoughts are shouted out, he thinks, to crowds; loud screams, shrieks
of murder, and similar noises appall him. Again, he sees swarms of
flies, ants, roaches, which cover him and crawl into his mouth,
nostrils, {117} and ears. He feels bugs crawling under his skin, and
he has a multitude of similar interesting experiences.

Such patients grow homicidal. Like alcoholics, they are jealous and
suspicious of their wives, but, unlike the alcoholic, the cocaine user
is commonly reticent; he is not willing to talk of his troubles.

The prognosis is always bad, even in the best cases. This drug can be
withdrawn from a patient more rapidly than is possible in chronic
poisoning from morphine, but a relapse is to be expected.

In dipsomania, morphinomania, and other drug habits, and in the cases
of vicious and degenerate children, many encouragingly good results
have been reported from the use of hypnotism. Forel, Voisin, Ladame,
Tatzel, Hirt, Nielson, de Jong, Liebeault, Bernheim, van Eeden, van
Renterghem, Hamilton Osgood, Wetterstrand, Schrenck-Notzing,
Kraft-Ebbing, Francis Cruise, Lloyd Tuckey, Kingsbury, Woods, and
others have undoubtedly cured dipsomania by hypnosis.

Wetterstrand alone cured 37 of 51 cases of morphinism by hypnosis. One
of these patients had been using morphine for fourteen years and
morphine with cocaine for an additional four years. All his cases
except one were treated at home--they were not obliged to go to a
hospital or sanitarium.

As to vicious children: Liebeault in 1887 recorded 77 cases, 45 of
whom were boys and 32 girls. By hypnosis 56 of these were cured, 9
improved, 12 were not affected.

As to the so-called dangers of hypnotism in the hands of skilled
physicians, there are none. Forel said: "Liebeault, Bernheim,
Wetterstrand, van Eeden, de Jong, I myself, and the other followers of
the Nancy school, declare absolutely that, although we have seen many
thousands of hypnotised persons, we have never observed a single case
of mental or physical harm caused by hypnosis." Travelling mountebanks
that hypnotise in public can do harm, and they should be prevented
from so doing. On the continent of Europe only physicians are
permitted to use hypnosis.

For a bibliography of hypnosis as a curative agent, see _Allbutt's
System of Medicine_, vol. viii. p. 428 (The Macmillan Co.).

{118}

In Genicot's _Theologiae Moralis Institutiones_, vol. i. p. 162
(Louvain, 1902), is the following passage: "Videtur licitum ebrietatem
inducere ad morbum depellendum, si quando practicum est, ex gr. ad
typhum depellendum, vel ad coercendam vim veneni quod e serpentis
morsu haustum sit (Sabetti. N. 149). Similiter, per se licebit sensus
sopire ope ebrietatis ad magnos dolores levandos: nullum enim
discrimen morale videtur inter hoc medium et alia, ex gr.
chloroformium, quae adhiberi solent."

That is, Father Genicot permitted alcoholic intoxication to cure
typhus or typhoid (typhoid is called typhus abdominalis in Europe) and
snake bite, or to quiet great pain, as chloroform is used, in his
opinion. This doctrine would be correct morally if from a medical
point of view alcoholic intoxication cured typhus, typhoid, or snake
bite, but it does not. Alcoholic liquors are necessary in some stages
or forms of typhus and typhoid, and they must be administered
skilfully; but to induce alcoholic intoxication in any pathological
condition is always to add a grave poison to the disease already at
work. The very name of the condition is _intoxication_, poisoning. You
can end a toothache by removing a man's jaw, but the practice is not
to be encouraged.

In America, when a person is bitten by a rattlesnake or copperhead,
the first aid to the injured is commonly a pint of whiskey. You might
better rub milk on the patient's bootheels, because the milk is
harmless, but the pint of whiskey is anything but harmless; and one is
as good as the other as far as curing the snake bite is concerned.
Whiskey is popularly supposed to be a good medicine in all the ills of
humanity. It is a good medicine in certain cases and a very bad
medicine in others. A snake bite is a startling evil, and while far
from a physician the early settlers gave the patient the only medicine
they had, whiskey, and if a little is good a great deal is better. As
the "bite" of the North American snakes is frequently not fatal, some
early victims grew well in spite of the snake venom and the added
whiskey poisoning; therefore a pint of whiskey cured them, _post hoc
ergo propter hoc_. Thus the "cure" became fixed in the popular
ignorance, and some moral theologians, without investigating the {119}
matter, fixed it deeper. The venom of the East Indian cobra and of
other tropical and subtropical snakes would not be affected in the
slightest degree by all the whiskey in Kentucky. The only hope in such
cases, is in Calmette's antitoxin, administered within an hour or two
after the poisoning.

Snake venom paralyses the muscles of respiration, and the patient
ceases to breathe. A little whiskey may do good--whiskey pushed to
intoxication is very injurious. Artificial respiration, if needed, as
in a case of attempted resuscitation after partial drowning, with
skilful stimulation by a physician, and the use of an antitoxin, are
the main parts of the treatment in snake poisoning; but to pour a pint
of whiskey into the victim is cruel ignorance. Patients often come
into dispensaries showing bitten wounds which are stuffed with hair
from the dog that did the biting; whiskey causes a man to see snakes,
therefore use "hair from the dog that bit you." This may be good
homoeopathy, but it is not medicine.

The making a man drunk with alcohol "to remove great pain" is a
treatment not used by reputable physicians: there are many correct
medical methods of removing pain, but a big draught of whiskey is not
one of them. Even in a case where a physician can not be found, it is
usually questionable whether the effect of alcoholic intoxication
would not be worse than the irritation of the pain; and if it were
not, where is the line to be drawn? Some male and female old ladies
can work up "great pain" from a colic. The bigger and stronger a man
is, especially if he has never been ill before, the greater his
"agony" when he is having a tooth filled.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{120}

