XIII

THE MOMENT OF DEATH

It not infrequently happens that a priest reaches a patient who has
just died. Conditional absolution, baptism, or other spiritual
ministration might have been offered if there were signs of life, but
the heart and lungs are still, "the patient is dead," and the priest
leaves the place without doing anything. Yet the patient may not
really be dead.

Our knowledge of the precise time the soul leaves the body is very
imperfect. There is, we are aware, a close connection between the
vital functions of the body, taken together or singly, and cellular
activity. If the cells are not destroyed, a vital function sometimes
may be restored after its cessation, but if the cells are destroyed up
to a certain extent, the vital function is not recoverable. For
example, if the various bodily cells of a patient dead from diphtheria
are examined microscopically, it will be found that the diphtheria
toxin has disintegrated the nuclei of these cells. What number of
cells proportionate to the whole in, say, the heart should be
destroyed before the vitality of that organ is lost, is not clearly
known. Where the cells are intact, or nearly so, mere absence of
respiration, or of even the heart movement, are not absolute proof of
death. Numerous cases are found in medical records of persons that had
been lying under water for many minutes, up to even an hour, but who
were restored to life by patient and skilful efforts; and of late
remarkable restorations after what was practically death, under
anaesthesia and otherwise, have been reported. The technique consists
chiefly in rhythmical compression of the heart, commonly after
surgical exposure of that organ, with artificial respiration, and, in
Crile's method, peripheral resistance is {165} employed to raise the
blood pressure. Ludwig in 1842, experimented in cardiac massage, and
Professor Schiff at Florence was the first to apply the method to
human subjects. Kemp and Gardner, in the _New York Medical Journal_,
May 7, 1904, described various methods used in attempting
resuscitation.

Professor W. W. Keen of Philadelphia has collected the records of the
chief cases of resuscitation after apparent death (see _The
Therapeutic Gazette_, April, 1904), and some of these are the
following: Dr. Christian Igelstrud of Tromsoe, Norway, in 1901, was
operating upon a woman, 43 years of age, for cancer. During the
operation, which was a coeliotomy, she collapsed and her heart ceased
beating. After the usual means for resuscitation had been
ineffectively tried, her heart was laid bare. Igelstrud took hold of
the heart with his hand and made rhythmic pressure upon it. In about
one minute the heart began to pulsate. The patient was discharged from
the hospital five weeks afterward.

Tuffier (_Bull, et mem. soc. de chir._, 1898, p. 937) in 1898 had a
patient whose heart stopped after an operation for appendicitis. The
surgeon had left the operating room, but he returned, laid bare the
heart, pressed it rhythmically, and after two minutes it began to move
again. The patient breathed regularly, his eyes opened, the dilated
pupils contracted, and he turned his head. After the opening over the
heart had been closed, however, he died.

Prus (_Wiener klin. Woch._, no. 21, 1900, p. 486) by the same method
started contractions of the heart after 15 minutes in a man that had
hanged himself. The effort at resuscitation was made two hours after
the suicide had been discovered, but the recovery did not go beyond
imperfect movements of the heart, which gradually ceased.

Maag (_Centralbl. f. Chir._, 1901, p. 20) reports the case of a man
who under chloroform anaesthesia ceased breathing and whose heart
stopped. After 10 minutes the patient was pulseless, without
respiration, cyanotic, and cold. The heart was exposed and compressed
rhythmically; it was restored to action, and he began to breathe. He
remained alive for 12 hours, seemingly asleep; then he died.

{166}

Starling and Lane (_Lancet_, Nov. 22, 1902, p. 1397) were operating
upon a man 65 years of age. The heart and respiration ceased. Lane put
his hand into the abdominal incision and squeezed the heart through
the diaphragm. After twelve minutes of artificial respiration the
lungs and heart began to act. The patient afterward was discharged
from the hospital cured.

Sick (_Centralblatt f. Chirurgie_, Sept. 5, 1903, p. 981) reports a
very remarkable case. A boy of 15 years of age died upon the operating
table. _Three quarters of an hour_ after the heart had ceased to beat
it was laid bare. The flaps did not bleed, the pericardium was
bloodless, the heart was motionless, relaxed, and cold. After a
quarter of an hour, during which the heart was compressed, and
artificial respiration was kept up, that is, one hour after what any
physician would call death, the heart was beating and respiration was
restored. Two hours later the boy became conscious and complained of
great thirst and dyspnoea. He remained in this condition for
twenty-seven hours, and during that time his speech was indistinct but
intelligible. He then died.

Dr. George W. Crile, of Cleveland, Ohio, reports the case of a woman
whose heart movement and respiration had ceased for six minutes. She
was restored completely, even without exposing the heart. Dr. Crile
uses an inflated rubber suit on the patient to raise the blood
pressure by peripheral resistance--he does not expose the heart. He
had another case, a man 38 years of age, who "died during operation,
was resuscitated, and died again two hours later."

Two Hungarian labourers, whose skulls had been crushed in the same
accident, were brought into Dr. Crile's clinic in a dying condition.
The heart of one of these men ceased beating as he was brought into
the operating room. After nine minutes the surgeons began to work upon
him to resuscitate him. They succeeded, but he lived for only 28
minutes.

They then examined the other man and found him dead. Just 45 minutes
after this second patient had been brought into the operating room the
effort to resuscitate him began. As he had not been observed while the
physicians had been engaged with the first man, they do not know when
his heart {167} had ceased to beat, but he certainly was dead in the
opinion of skilled observers. They resuscitated him so well that he
moved his head away from the operator who was relieving the depression
of the skull, but he died again in 34 minutes.

These cases are not what is commonly called conditions of suspended
animation. All the patients would have been pronounced dead by any
physician, and if they had been left untouched, they surely never
would have been revived.

There have been about thirty attempts made by surgeons to restore
patients who were dead in the full acceptance of the term as used at
present. Four of these attempts resulted in complete success, others
in a partial recovery, and many were without positive result. The
number of complete and partial resuscitations, however, are enough to
justify a priest in giving conditional absolution or baptism within an
hour, or even two hours, after a patient has to all appearance died,
especially in accident cases. We do not know when the soul enters the
body, and there is the same doubt as to the moment when the soul
leaves the body. In these latter cases we should give the patient the
benefit of the doubt.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{168}

