XXV

CRIMINOLOGY AND THE HABITUAL CRIMINAL

In recent years no little attention has been devoted to the subject of
criminology, and a supposed science of the criminal has been evolved.
It has been the claim of a very well known Italian school of mental
diseases, whose leader is Professor Lombroso of Turin, that there is a
criminal type in humanity, that is, that there is a generic human
organisation not difficult of differentiation, at least as a class,
the members of which almost necessarily develop criminal proclivities.
Even when criminality has not actually occurred, this is thought to be
but an accident, and criminal acts may be looked for at any time from
these individuals. Lombroso's claims in this matter have met with
decided opposition in every country of Europe and also here in
America. This opposition has come especially from serious students of
abnormal types who have devoted much time to the study of criminals
and other supposedly degenerate individuals. Magnan, the very well and
widely known French authority on insane peculiarities, especially the
so-called criminal monomaniacs, and whose opportunities for careful
investigation of such cases in the Asile St. Anne in Paris have been
very extensive, utterly rejects the idea of a special physical
conformation as characteristic of the criminal.

He is not the only one of the distinguished authorities in mental
diseases who is in opposition to Lombroso in this matter. Dr. Emile
Laurent, the eminent criminologist of Paris, has shown that the same
anomalies which are supposed to characterise criminals are to be found
among those who have never committed any criminal act, and that these
supposed signs of degeneracy are not sufficient to indicate even {272}
that there are criminal tendencies. Manouvrier, the distinguished
anthropological authority of the University of Paris, does not
hesitate to advance the opinion that he can not find any distinctive
difference between criminals and normal men in the extensive studies
of the comparative anatomy of the two classes. He admits, however,
that environment sometimes leads to the formation of habits which
modify the anatomy in certain ways, and that of course traces of hard
work, as well as of poor living, can be found in the anatomical
conformation of many habitual criminals.

Dr. von Holder, a distinguished German authority on the subject, says
that it is impossible to draw any conclusion from cranial asymmetries
as to psychical characteristics, and that physical signs of
degeneration indicate nothing further than the possible presence of a
tendency to psychic degeneration. Dr. Wines, quoted by Draehms in his
book on _The Criminal, a Scientific Study_, says that in a strictly
scientific sense, the existence of an anthropological criminal type
has not been proved, and it is doubtful whether it ever can be proved.
Dr. Arthur McDonald, the well known American specialist in criminology
and degeneracy, some of whose work in connection with the National
Bureau of Education at Washington has attracted widespread attention,
says, in his _Abnormal Man:_ "The study of the criminal can also be
the study of a normal man, for most criminals are so by occasion or
accident, and differ in no essential respect from other men. Most
human beings who are abnormal or defective in any way are much more
like than unlike normal individuals."

How much the subject of criminology has been overdone because of the
morbid popularity of the idea that many persons are, as it were,
forced by their natures into the commission of crime, can best be
appreciated from some recent publications with regard to left-handed
individuals. A number of supposed observers, much more anxious,
evidently, to make out a case for a pet preconceived theory, than to
make observations that would add to the present store of truth, have
rushed into print. As a result, left-handed persons have been said to
be criminals much more commonly than {273} those who habitually use
their right hand, and have also been said to be defective in other
ways. They were spoken of as weaklings, degenerates, and the like.
Statistics even were quoted to show a much larger proportion of
criminals than might be expected, according to the normal percentage,
between right-handed and left-handed people, among those who use their
left hand by preference. As a matter of fact, left-handed people are
far from being the weaklings or degenerates they are thus proclaimed;
but on the contrary are often magnificent athletes and excellent
specimens of normal development. Left-handedness is due to
right-brainedness and this is an accident dependent on a diversion of
blood supply in an increased amount to this side of the brain in early
embryonic life. This question of the criminal and the left-handed
individual and their mutual relations is only a good example, then, of
how far over zealous advocates of a theory have been led astray in
their attempts to bolster it up.

Draehms, whose opinion on the supposed born criminal is worth while
quoting, as it is founded on his personal experiences and observations
while a resident chaplain of the state prison at San Quentin,
California, says:

"Crime is not, as Lombroso and his coadjutors would have us believe,
wholly either a disease or a neurosis in the sense of a direct,
absolute, physiological, pathognomonic entity, though doubtless not
infrequently closely associated with physical, anatomical, and nerve
degeneration, as above conceded. To presuppose absolute and necessary
brain lesion or diseased nerve action, or anomalous, physiognomonical,
or anatomical diathesis, as the inevitable precursor of any form of
mental and moral deflection, is an assumption wholly unwarranted and
is nowhere substantiated by facts, though its advocates have sought to
lay their foundations deep and wide in the materialistic hypothesis.
Most criminals present unusually sound physiological conditions, and
there is among them no unusual death rate, considering their habits
and mode of life, as we shall hereafter see. Hence their moral
instability can not be associated with physiological instability in
the absolute sense. The physical defect must be either reversionary or
incidental, rather than absolute."

{274}

The impetus in the study of criminals, which came as a result of the
revolutionary teaching of the Italian school, has not been without a
good effect. Criminals all over the world have been studied more
closely and more sympathetically, in order to test the new ideas,
until now it is possible to draw definite conclusions with regard to
certain features of the problem. After a time, Lombroso came to admit
that the so-called criminal type occurred in somewhat less than half
the criminal cases. Criminal anthropologists, however, have shown that
the physical conformation called by the name criminal, is really only
the result of a defective or degenerative physical constitution. It is
easy to understand that persons born with a defective nervous system,
or with serious degenerative lesions in other parts of the body, which
prevent the proper nutrition and functional development of the nervous
system, would perform many more materially criminal acts than the rest
of the population. The idiot and certain forms of the degenerative
insane show this. Any defective development of the nervous system,
moreover, may lead to instability of moral character, because the free
action of the soul may be hampered by the physical environment with
which it is associated.

Certain of the physical peculiarities most frequently seen in
criminals have an influence of this kind and merit discussion. A
knowledge of them will furnish clergymen with reasons for a larger
charity to those unfortunates, and a greater tolerance for their
relapses, without allowing sentiment to play too important a role in
dealing with them. There are all grades of defective human beings,
from the idiot up to those little less than normal. Anatomical
peculiarities prevent the proper functions of the nervous system, as
it is not hard to understand. The will is hampered in its action by
the defect of the instrument through which it must work.

In persons properly to be considered as degenerates usually the head
is small, though this may not be very noticeable because of
over-development of the jaws. A heavy lower jaw particularly, because
of the principle of bone-development that size depends on functional
action and reaction, may lead to over-thickness of the skull at the
point of articulation. The {275} jaw articulates with the base of the
skull, and as a consequence the cranial capacity of these individuals
is distinctly less than normal. Besides this, there is commonly some
abnormality in the shape of the head, or the cranium is distinctly
asymmetrical. It has been noted that criminals have a large orbital
capacity, that is to say, the bony framework surrounding the eye is so
large as to encroach much more than usual upon the space left within
the cranium for nervous tissue. The bones of the skull are likely to
be thicker and heavier than usual, thus also limiting the cranial
capacity. The superciliary ridges often project and give the beetling
brow that is sometimes so remarkable. The jaws are heavy, and
especially the lower jaw is apt to be large and prognathic, that is,
projecting. This may extend even to the existence of a so-called
lemurian appendix of the jaw. The zygomatic process is apt to be
prominent, in keeping with the heaviness of the upper jaw. The nose is
usually somewhat flattened, and may be crooked. This peculiar
development of the nose puts most of the internal parts of that
important organ within the skull itself. This further encroaches upon
the cranial capacity. The ears are asymmetrical, often unevenly placed
at the sides of the head, sometimes adherent at the lobule, sometimes
very prominent. The displacement of the soft tissues is due to the
existence of asymmetry of the skull. As may be seen, all of the
characteristics of the criminal type, pointed out by Lombroso, may
practically be summed up in the one expression, there is diminished
amount of intracranial space.

With regard to many cranial deformities, and especially various
thickenings of the cranial bones, it must not be forgotten that they
are not the expression of physical heredity, but are often
pathologically acquired. Certain diseases of children are accountable
for many of them. Various disorders of nutrition in the early years of
life express themselves in bony deformities, and the skull is not
spared. Rickets, for instance, is well recognised as a cause of such
deformities. Owing to a wrong etymology of this word, by which it is
supposed to be derived from the Greek word [Greek text], meaning the
spine, rickets is sometimes scientifically {276} called rachitis. The
connection, then, between the cranial deformity and some underlying
nervous disturbance might be assumed. It does not exist, however.
Rickets is an English word, the derivation of which is unknown, but
probably it is _wricken_, twisted, deformed, and its use has crept in
because the disease was first described in England, and is indeed
often spoken of on the continent of Europe as an English disease. Not
that it is any more frequent in England, however, but was there first
recognised as a distinct pathological entity. As the result of this
affection the children, usually of poor parents, suffer from
gastro-intestinal disorders of various kinds, and develop symptoms of
malnutrition, affecting especially bone tissue. The ends of the long
bones at the wrists and at the ankles, where the effects of the
disease can be noticed particularly, become more thickened and nodular
than usual. The ends of the ribs, where the bones join the cartilages,
also become nodular, so that a series of beads can be seen down each
of the child's sides, a condition described as the rickety rosary. In
a similar way the bones of the skull become thickened, especially at
the edges of the fontanels, that is, the openings in the child's head
before complete ossification of the skull has taken place. As a
consequence of this thickening these openings do not close as they
should, and the head becomes markedly deformed in some cases.

Indeed, as has been shown by experts in children's diseases, many of
the peculiarities that have been pointed out by over enthusiastic
craniologists as indicating criminal degeneration, are really the
results of the rickety process on the skull. Needless to say, however,
this does not change the character of the individual, nor is there any
good reason why such deformities should have any special connection
with criminality. It happens that many of the criminal classes suffer
from malnutrition in their early childhood, and as a consequence there
is a faulty bony development of the skull. It is observations of this
kind, particularly, that have served to discredit craniology as an
independent science.

With regard to habitual criminals, the question of criminality must be
discussed from the standpoint, not of those who theorise, but of those
who know from actual {277} observation most about the criminal
classes. In an article in _The Nineteenth Century and After_ for
December, 1901, Sir Robert Anderson discusses how to put an end to
professional crime. Sir Robert has been Chairman of the Criminal
Investigation Committee of the English Parliament for many years. His
opinion, then, is worth weighing well and is very strikingly different
from those of the criminologists who would find a very large
proportion of criminals among mankind. He says:

"I am not turning phrases about this matter, or dealing in rhetorical
fireworks. I am speaking seriously and deliberately, and I appeal to
all who have any confidence in my judgment and knowledge of the
subject, to accept my assurance that if not 70,000 but 70 known
criminals were put out of the way, the whole organisation of crime
against property in England would be dislocated, and we should, not
ten years hence but immediately, enjoy an amount of immunity from
crimes of this kind that it might to-day seem Utopian to expect. The
criminal statistics cult blinds its votaries. It is the crime
committed by professional criminals that keeps the community in a
state of siege. The professional criminals are few and I may add they
are well known to the police. The theory that these men commit crimes
under the overpowering pressure of habit, or of impulse, is altogether
mistaken. They pursue a career of crime because, as Sir Alfred Wills
expresses it, they calculate and accept its risks. And just in
proportion as you increase the risks you will diminish the number of
those who will face them. True it is that the army of crime includes a
certain number of wretched creatures who have not sufficient moral
stamina to resist the criminal impulse. I believe there are fewer of
this class in England than abroad, but I know that these are not the
sort of criminals whose crimes perplex the police. The high-class
criminal is a different type of person altogether."

Sir Robert gives an extract from one of the morning papers of the day
on which he wrote these lines, in order to show how different is the
status of every ordinary habitual criminal from that which the
enthusiastic criminologist supposes it to be:

{278}

"Hewson Patchett, 48, was sentenced yesterday for obtaining seven
pounds and a gold watch by false pretenses. He urged it was his first
offence, but a London detective informed the court that there were
about two hundred cases against him for housebreaking."

Sir Robert adds: "If Patchett is a cool-headed, deliberate criminal,
the whole proceeding is a farce. And if he be one of those miserable,
weak creatures who can not abstain from crime, the sentence is
barbarous."

Such experiences as Sir Robert hints at as occurring frequently in
England, are certainly by no means uncommon in this country. Within
the past year in at least four cases in New York City, in which a
burglar, besides committing robbery, wounded or killed some one,
either in the commission of the crime itself or in endeavouring to
avoid arrest afterwards, there were more than two convictions
registered against the criminal in his previous life. There can be no
doubt that criminality becomes for some men a sort of mania, and that
society must protect itself against their actions quite as it does
against those of the insane by confining them under surveillance. It
seems very clear that while a man may, under stress of circumstances
or because of some specially tempting opportunity, be induced to
commit burglary or some other crime by violence in order to obtain
money, this will not happen a second time, except in the case of
certain individuals whose moral tone is so perverted that reformation
is practically hopeless. If a second conviction for burglary,
therefore, is secured, a longer sentence than is now the custom should
be inflicted, and the individual should not be allowed to go from
under the surveillance of the authorities until he has demonstrated,
for at least five years, his willingness and capacity to earn an
honest living.

This may seem a drastic method. It may also appear to some that there
would be consequent upon this system of regulating criminals a very
undesirable increase of our present rather extensive system for the
care of criminals. Here is where Sir Robert Anderson's experience is
of value. The confirmed criminals are not near so many in number as is
usually supposed, or as is even claimed by certain heedless {279}
statistical experts in criminology. There is no doubt, however, that
these men succeed in drawing others around them and in organising most
of the crimes of violence that are committed. There is a certain
glamour about the successful burglar that allures the young man and
starts him in the downward path of criminal tendencies from which he
may not be able later easily to withdraw.

If those who are most deeply interested in the reform of the criminal
classes would unite in an effort to secure legislation to the effect
that the habitual criminal should receive, not a definite sentence but
an indeterminate sentence; that is to say, that on his second
conviction for burglary, he should be sent to jail until such a time
as, in the opinion of officers of the institution where he has been
confined, he shows signs of a disposition to become a worthy member of
society, and that then he should be allowed to be at liberty only
under such circumstances as would permit of reports with regard to his
conduct for a time equal at least to the years spent in prison, then
there would be much less need of the theoretical considerations with
regard to the heredity of criminal traits, and the supposed all
powerful influence of environment in fostering criminal tendencies.
There is in this matter a very worthy field for the development of
philanthropic qualities, and the student of the abnormal man will find
many opportunities for the exercise of a large-hearted charity, rather
than the facile condemnation which places all violations of law under
the head of criminality.

Those who have made special studies with regard to criminals have, as
a rule, come to the conclusion that our modern method of treating
those convicted of crime is eminently irrational. It is a rare thing
to pick up a newspaper without finding that a crime by violence has
been committed by some one who has previously been in state's prison
for a similar crime. Most of the burglars have a police record.
Pickpockets and others continue to pursue their avocations,
notwithstanding a series of convictions. It is clear that a sentence
of a year or two, or even more each time that a crime is committed,
does not act as a deterrent. Such people are differently constituted
from those who are influenced by {280} public conviction of crime and
restraint of liberty. There is something radically wrong with their
moral sense. It would seem that the proper way to treat them is after
the same fashion as the method used with those who are mentally
impaired.

After a man has shown, by a second conviction of a crime by violence,
that he is one of those whose moral sense can not be restored by
punishment to a realisation of his action, then an indeterminate
sentence, somewhat as in the case of the mentally unstable, who are
allowed to leave the asylum but are kept under observation, is the
only proper method.

Men like Sir Robert Anderson are sure that this procedure could be
adopted with regard to quite a liberal number of leading criminals
whose influence induces others to crime. There would be much less need
for all machinery of the criminal law than at the present time, and
the community would be better protected. This is certainly true as
regards the large cities, where crimes against property are almost
without exception committed by those who have been previously
convicted for such crimes, or who at least have been in intimate
association with such convicted criminals.

This view of the criminal, as one against whom society must protect
itself just as it does against the insane, is comparatively modern. It
must be borne in mind, however, that insane asylums are by no means an
old institution, and that the present restraint of very large numbers
of the insane is something unknown before in history. It seems not
unlikely that if this newer aspect of criminology could be made
popular great benefit would follow, not only to the peace of the
community and the freedom of its members from fear as to such crimes,
but also a number of the weaker individuals, who are now influenced
and led astray by clever criminals, would be saved from commission of
crime and the necessity of punishment, with the degradation and
lifelong stigma that this involves.

This is an aspect of criminology with which the Christian clergyman
can be in sympathy, and that does not smack of the utter materialism
which was at the foundation of much of the discussion of the so-called
criminal type. The {281} recognition of moral perversion as a form of
insanity requiring treatment and then constant observation for many
years, just as in the case of mental disequilibration would be a
distinct advance over our present crude methods of dealing with
criminals.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{282}

