XXVII

SUICIDES

It is a very difficult problem at times to explain just how a suicide
is due to mental alienation in a person whose intellectual powers
appeared previously unimpaired, yet in most of the cases a knowledge
of all the circumstances and of the individual himself would lead
inevitably to this more charitable view. Most suicides are persons
that have been recognised as paranoiacs and likely to do queer things
for a long time beforehand. Indeed, some of the melancholic qualities
on which the unfortunate impulse to self-murder depends are likely to
have exhibited themselves in former generations. Not long since it was
argued that the regular occurrence of a certain number of suicides
every year--varying in various places, always on the increase, but
evidently showing a definite relationship to certain local conditions
--demonstrate that the human will is not free, since from a set of
statistics one can foretell about how many cases of suicide would take
place in a given city during the next year. As a matter of fact,
suicides are not in possession of free will as a rule, but are the
victims of circumstances and are unable to resist external influences.

The most important feature of suicide in recent years is the constant
increase in the number, the increase affecting disproportionately
young adults. This increase in the number of suicides is no illusion;
it is not due to more careful statistics. It is true that in recent
years, that is to say during the last quarter of a century
particularly, the unsparing investigation by the authorities of all
cases of suspicious death, and their report by sensational newspapers,
has added somewhat to the apparent number of suicides. {307} Families
were accustomed to announce accidental death and have their story
unquestioned, in a certain number of cases, where now there is no hope
of concealment because of the unfortunate publicity that has crept
into life. This increase, however, would account for only a small
additional number of suicides, while the actual figures have more than
trebled in the last thirty years.

This increase has come especially in the large cities. According to
the report of the New York Board of Health, there were 1,308 suicides
in New York City during the decade from 1870 to 1880. During the
decade from 1890 to 1900 there were 3,944 suicides. This increase is
much more than the corresponding increase in population. During the
first decade mentioned there were 124 suicides per million of
population. During the last decade this had risen to 196 suicides per
million. The increase is nearly 60 per centum. The increase is
variously distributed over the different ages. While every five years
from twenty upwards shows a percentage of increase in the number of
suicides committed, somewhat less than the percentage of increase for
all ages, the five years between fifteen and twenty shows an increase
of 106 per centum. In a word the deaths of adolescents from suicide
have more than doubled in the last thirty years.

Towards the end of the last decade of the nineteenth century there was
for a time a cessation of the continuous increase. This occurred
during the years 1898 and 1899. Apparently it was due to the fact that
the occupation of the country with other interests, the war and its
problems, and the fact that an era of prosperity made material
conditions better, and thus gave less occasion for depression of
spirits. During the years since 1900, however, the increase has not
only reasserted itself, but has more than made up for the period
during which suicides were less frequent. The increase during the last
four years is more than was noted during the six years from 1891 to
1897.

The same increase has been noted in European cities. The higher the
scale of civilisation in a city, or at least the greater the material
progress and the more strenuous the life, {308} the higher the death
rate. In Dresden, for instance, the rate is 51 suicides per 100,000
every year. In Paris it is 42, in Berlin it is 36; while in Lisbon and
Madrid it is lowest, being only respectively two and three per 100,000
per year. While suicides are more common among men than women in all
countries, this is not true for certain ages. Between the ages of
fifteen and twenty-five the suicides of women are more numerous than
those of men. The suicides of women are increasing faster than those
of men. Fifty years ago the proportion was five to one. Twenty years
ago it had fallen from three to one. Now it is less than two and a
half to one. The saddest feature of the suicide situation is the
increasing number of the children who commit suicide.

Almost needless to say, children's suicides are without any serious
motives and are usually due to an attack of pique because of a slight
from a playmate, a reprimand at home, a rebuke from a teacher, envy of
the success of a companion, disappointment over a passing love affair,
sometimes a peculiar attachment in the case of weak and morbid
individuals, the manifestations of which are resented by its object,
or are forbidden by parents and guardians. These unfortunate accidents
have become so common now that special care must be taken with regard
to children of neurotic heredity. When in previous generations there
have been the manifestations of lack of mental equilibrium, then
children's mutterings with regard to possible recourse to suicide
should be the signal for the exercise of close surveillance. As far as
possible such children should be kept from the strenuous competition
at school in modern life.

As has been well pointed out there is no doubt that the power of
suggestion and example has much to do with the increase of suicide.
Dymond, an authority in the matter, says, "The power of the example of
the suicide is much greater than has been thought. Every act of
suicide tacitly conveys the sanction of one more judgment in its
favour. Frequency of repetition diminishes the sensation of abhorrence
and makes succeeding sufferers, even of less degree, resort to it with
less reluctance."

{309}

Our modern newspapers, by supplying all the details of every suicide
that occurs, especially if it presents any criminally interesting
features or morbidly sentimental accessories, familiarise the mind,
particularly of the impressionable young, with the idea of suicide.
When troubles come lack of experience in life makes the youthful mind
forecast a future of hopeless suffering. Love episodes are responsible
for most of the suicides in the young, while sickness and physical
ills are the causes in the old. In a certain number of cases, however,
domestic quarrels, and especially the infliction of punishment on the
young at an age when they are beginning to feel their independence and
their right to be delivered from what they are prone to consider
restriction, are apt to be followed in the morbidly unstable by
thoughts of suicide.

The important practical question is the prevention of the fulfilment
of the morbid impulse during these impressionable years. Many a young
person has been saved from suicide at this time to realise the
enormity of the act and to live without any further temptation to its
commission for a long lifetime. As a rule the motive for the act is so
trivial and often so insensate that it is not difficult to make
patients (because patients they truly are) see the folly of their
irrational impulse.

In order to forestall the putting into action of their impulse it is
important that those who are close to the patient should have some
realisation of the possibility of its occurrence. There are usually
some signs beforehand of the possibility of the crime. Many of these
early suicides have distinct tendencies to and stigmata of hebephrenic
melancholia. The best known symptoms of this condition are those
described by Dr. Peterson, the present president of State Commission
of Lunacy of New York in his book on mental diseases. The symptoms
noted are extraordinarily rapid and paradoxical changes of
disposition. Depressed ideas intrude themselves in the midst of
boisterous gaiety, and untimely jocularity in the deepest depression,
or at solemn moments. Then there is the paradoxical facial expression,
the so-called paramimia, that is, a look of joy and pleasure when
really mental depression is present, or a look of depression when
joyful sentiments {310} are being expressed. The existence of such
rather noticeable peculiarities may lead to the suspicion of mental
disequilibration in young people.

The most important warning may well be the occurrence of suicide in
any other member of the family for several generations before. The
tendency of suicide to repeat itself in families is now well known and
recognised. During the year 1901 in New York City, in one case other
members of the immediate family had committed suicide in six
instances. The subject has taken on additional interest because of the
suicide of a well-known gambler who was the fourth of his family in
two generations to take his own life. In another case, reported within
the last five years, the suicide was the last of a family of nine
children, every one of whom had committed suicide. There is the record
in the German army of four generations of a noble family, the eldest
son of which committed suicide during the 5 years from 50 to 55.

In these cases the tendency to suicide is not directly inherited, but
there is a mental weakness that makes the individual incapable of
withstanding the sufferings life may entail. In the later members of
the family there is also a suggestibility that the frequent
contemplation of the idea of suicide finally leads to the putting off
of the natural abhorrence at the thought of its commission. In such
families, therefore, it is particularly important to warn medical
attendants and members of the family of the possibilities of
unfortunate acts so as to prevent if possible the execution of any
impulse to self-murder.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{311}

