X

HYPNOTISM, SUGGESTION, AND CRIME


In recent years a quasi-unconscious state, induced by suggestion and
called the hypnotic trance, has come to occupy a very important place
in the popular mind. Hypnotism, as the general consideration of this
state is known, has attracted not a little attention, as well from
physicians as from those interested in psychology. The hypnotic
(Greek, [Greek text], sleep) trance is a condition in which voluntary
brain activity is almost completely in abeyance, though the mind is
able passively to receive many impressions from the external world.
There are very curious limitations in the effect of the hypnotic state
upon the various senses. While visual sensations, and, as a rule also,
impressions from the tactile sense, lose their significance, or are
translated according to the will of the person active in producing the
hypnotic state, or of some person present making suggestions, auditory
sensations are quite normally perceived. The patient has all the
appearance of being asleep, though motions, and even locomotion, are
often possible, and are performed as if the patient were walking in
sleep.

The hypnotic state is a partial sleep, then, of the motor side of the
nervous system and of portions of the sensory nervous system. Certain
of the higher intellectual powers, however, are entirely awake, and
capable of being impressed through the hearing, and thus hypnotic
suggestion has a place. For a time, under the influence of Charcot and
his disciples, there was a very generally accepted opinion that the
hypnotic trance was a pathological condition, somewhat allied to the
cataleptic phase of major hysteria. It is well known that persons
suffering from severe attacks of hysteria {130} may, while apparently
unconscious, yet receive suggestions through the hearing. On the other
hand, the production of cataleptic and other strained attitudes, in
the maintenance of which fatigue seems to play no part, is possible by
means of hypnotic suggestion in susceptible individuals.

Further investigation, however, seems to have shown that the hypnotic
state is rather to be considered as a quasi-physiological condition,
somewhat related to sleep, all the mystery of which is not as yet
understood. This is not surprising when we realise that such a normal
and absolutely physiological condition as healthy sleep is yet without
a satisfactory explanation on the part of physiologists. Hypnotism is
recognised now as having a certain limited power for good, though the
benefit derived from it is apt to be temporary, and the operator loses
his power after a time,--not so much failing to produce the hypnotic
condition, as failing to have his suggestions favourably accepted by
the subject While the Nancy school of hypnotism insisted that most
people were susceptible to the hypnotic trance, it is now generally
considered that something less than 40 per centum of ordinary
individuals can be brought under its influence.

Much has been said of the dangers of hypnotism. There seems no doubt
that very nervous persons are likely to be hurt by repeated recourse
to the hypnotic condition. After a time they are likely to live most
of their lives in a half-dreamy condition, in which initiative and
spontaneous activity becomes more difficult than before. Where persons
have been hypnotised by means of the flash of a bright object, or by
some other special means, it sometimes happens that accidentally some
similar object may send them into hypnotic trance. After a time, too,
auto-hypnotism becomes possible, and much of the individual's waking
time is occupied with efforts to keep himself from going into the
hypnotic trance. These are, however, very extreme cases, likely to
occur only in those who are not of strong mentality in the beginning.
Unfortunately these are the individuals who are most likely to be made
the subjects of repeated and prolonged hypnotic experimentation on the
part of unscrupulous charlatans.

For the great majority of those that are susceptible to the {131}
hypnotic condition, there is very little danger. We now have on record
the experiences of men who have seriously devoted many years to the
study of hypnotic phenomena. There is entire agreement among these men
that the possible dangers of hypnotism have been exaggerated. Indeed,
it may be as well to say at once that most of what has been written
with regard to the dangers of hypnotism has come from those who have
least practical experience with the condition. Dr. Milne Bramwell,
who, for a quarter of a century, has had a very extensive experience
with hypnotism in its many phases, in his recent book on hypnotism,
deliberately speaks of the "so-called dangers" of hypnotism. He has
never seen any evil effects, though he has been practising hypnotism
very freely on all kinds of patients for over twenty years.

It is on the experience of such serious, disinterested observers that
we must rely for our ultimate conclusions as to hypnotism, rather than
on the claims of pseudo-experts who like to magnify their own powers,
or on popular magazine articles, or still less the Sunday newspapers,
the writers for which are mainly interested in producing a sensation.
It seems probable that in the next few years hypnotism will occupy a
less prominent place in popular interest than it has in the recent
past. Interest in hypnotism runs in cycles, reaching a maximum about
once a generation, and we are on the downward swing of the last wave
of popular attention to this subject.

A subject that has attracted much attention, whenever hypnotism has
been under discussion, has been the possibility of crime being
committed under the influence of hypnotic suggestion. The best
authorities in hypnotism seem to be agreed that subjects can not be
brought by hypnotic influence to perform actions that are directly
contrary to their own feeling of right and wrong. The supposed
exceptions to this rule are rather newspaper sensations than real
compelled crimes. There is no doubt, however, that a tendency to the
performance of certain wrong actions, so that the normal
disinclination to their performance becomes much less than before, may
be cultivated by a series of hypnotic as well as by waking
suggestions. Where the individual influenced is {132} already
characterised by weakness of will in certain directions, the added
weight of the motives furnished by hypnotic suggestion may prove
sufficient to turn the scale of responsibility. It is probably because
of such influence that a recent case in France has attracted
world-wide attention.

In general, however, it may be said that normal individuals can not be
brought to the commission of crime by hypnotic suggestion, and the
plea of irresponsibility, for this reason, is not worthy of
consideration. There are phases of this important problem, however,
which require further careful study. Undoubtedly some of the so-called
inherited tendencies to the commission of crime are really instances
of the influence of auto-suggestion that has kept the possibility of
some criminal act constantly before the mind. Some of the cases of
hereditary dipsomania are almost surely of this character. Persons
whose parents have been the subject of inebriety lose something of
their own will power to keep away from intoxicating drink by the
reflection that it is hopeless for them to struggle against an
inherited tendency.

A series of cases have been reported in which suicide has occurred in
successive generations in the same family at about the same time of
life. There seems no doubt that suggestion must have great influence
in such cases. In one well-authenticated report, mentioned in the
chapter on suicides, the members of the family were officers in the
German army, and the eldest son, the family representative, committed
suicide within the same five years of life, in four successive
generations. The last member of the family had refused to marry,
because of this doom hanging over the house, and had often referred to
the possibility of suicide in his own case. In his early years he
seemed to have the idea that he might escape the family fate, but
after middle life he settled down irretrievably to the persuasion that
he would inevitably go like the others.

Here, in America, a rather striking example of this has recently been
the subject of sensational newspaper reports. A notorious gambler,
whose career had seen many ups and downs, finally found himself in a
condition where, strange as it may seem, legal restriction made it
impossible for him to {133} continue his usually lucrative profession.
Three members of his immediate family, two brothers and his mother,
had committed suicide. To friends he had sometimes spoken of this sad
history of family self-murder, but always with a calm rationality
which seemed to indicate that he hoped to avoid any such fate. When
well on in years, however, with his means of livelihood taken from
him, he, too, took the family path out of difficulties and shot
himself at the door of the man who had been most instrumental in
taking away from him his occupation. It seems not unlikely, from the
circumstances of the case, that a double crime, homicide, as well as
suicide would have been reported, only for the fortuitous circumstance
that the other man was not in at a time when usually he was to be
found at his office.

In such cases as these it seems reasonably clear that long-continued
familiarity with a given idea produces an auto-suggestion which
finally overcomes the natural abhorrence even of suicide. Something
can be done for such unfortunates by suggestion in the opposite
direction, and by taking care that as far as possible they are not
allowed to brood over the fate they consider impending. At times of
stress and emotional strain, relatives and friends must be
particularly careful in their watch over them. It is never advisable
that they should take up such professions as those of broker or
politician, or speculator, since the emotional states connected with
such occupations are likely to prove too much for their mental
equilibrium.

Practically all physicians that have given any attention to the
subject are convinced that not a few of the suicides, which are now so
alarmingly on the increase in this country, are due to the frequent
reading in newspapers of the accounts of suicides. As we have said
elsewhere, brooding over the details of these is very likely to lessen
the natural abhorrence of self-murder in persons that are predisposed,
by melancholic dispositions, to such an act. The publication of cases
of suicide can do no possible good, while it undoubtedly does, in this
way, work incalculable harm. This is especially true with regard to
suicides among young people, that is, individuals under twenty-five
years of age. The saddest feature of recent {134} statistics with
regard to suicide is that this crime has become proportionately much
more frequent among young men and young girls, and even children, than
it was two or three decades ago. It has been noted, too, in many cases
that a previous suicide in the family seems to have familiarised the
young mind with the idea of self-destruction and thus suggested its
commission.

On the other hand, among young people especially, it has been noted
that there is frequently an imitative element in suicides. Three or
four suicides, practically with the same details, will occur, within a
few days of each other. Suicides at all ages are especially likely to
occur in groups, and are often cited to exemplify the truth of the old
axiom that evils never come singly. It is especially among young
people, however, that this relationship to previous suicides can be
traced, and there is no doubt that it is the unfortunate publicity
given to suicide, with the consequent suggestive influence, which
constitutes the most important factor in these cases. All the
influence that clergymen can exert, then, must be wielded to suppress
this, as well as the many other evils which flow from sensational
journalism.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{135}

