The Project Gutenberg eBook of Essays In Pastoral Medicine
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Essays In Pastoral Medicine

Author: Austin O'Malley
        James J. Walsh


        
Release date: March 3, 2012 [eBook #39036]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/39036

Credits: Produced by Don Kostuch






Produced by Don Kostuch




[Transcriber's notes]
  This is derived from the Internet Archive:
   http://www.archive.org/details/essaysinpastora00walsgoog

  Page numbers in this book are indicated by numbers enclosed in curly
  braces, e.g. {99}. They have been located where page breaks occurred
  in the original book.

  Obvious spelling errors have been corrected but "inventive" and
  inconsistent spelling is left unchanged.

[End Transcriber's notes]


{iii}


ESSAYS IN PASTORAL MEDICINE


BY


AUSTIN OMALLEY, M.D., Ph.D., LL.D,

PATHOLOGIST AND OPHTHALMOLOGIST
TO SAINT AGNES'S HOSPITAL
PHILADELPHIA

and

JAMES J. WALSH, M.D., Ph.D., LL.D.

ADJUNCT PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE AT THE NEW YORK POLYCLINIC SCHOOL
FOR GRADUATES IN MEDICINE; PROFESSOR OF NERVOUS
DISEASES AND OF THE HISTORY OF MEDICINE
FORDHAM UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK



LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

91 AND 93 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK

LONDON AND BOMBAY

1906

{iv}

_Copyright, 1906_

By Longmans, Green, and Co.

_All rights reserved._



THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U. S. A.






{v}

PREFACE

The term Pastoral Medicine is somewhat difficult to define because it
comprises unrelated material ranging from disinfection to foeticide.
It presents that part of medicine which is of import to a pastor in
his cure, and those divisions of ethics and moral theology which
concern a physician in his practice. It sets forth facts and
principles whereby the physician himself or his pastor may direct the
operator's conscience whenever medicine takes on a moral quality, and
it also explains to the pastor, who must often minister to a mind
diseased, certain medical truths which will soften harsh judgments,
and other facts, which may be indifferent morally but which assist him
in the proper conduct of his work, especially as an educator. Pastoral
medicine is not to be confused with the code of rules commonly called
medical ethics.

The material of pastoral medicine requires constantly renewed
discussion, because medicine in general is progressive enough
frequently to devise better methods of diagnosis and treatment, and
thus the postulates of the moral questions involved are changed. This
discussion, however, is not easily made. The facts upon which the
ethical part of pastoral medicine rests are furnished by the physician
for the consideration and judgment of the moralist--the physician
educated after modern methods knows little or nothing of ethics and
can not himself make accurate moral decisions. The moralist, on the
other hand, is commonly a poor counsellor to the physician, because
long training in medicine is needed before the physical data of the
moral decisions is comprehended. The physician, therefore, is at a
loss to determine what he may or may not do in {vi} cases that involve
the greatest moral responsibility, and the priest is a hesitating
guide because the moral theologies do not convincingly present the
doctrine in these cases.

Now and then such subjects have been proposed for discussion to a
group of physicians and moralists, but usually no practical conclusion
has been reached because one side did not understand the other. In
1898 there was a series of articles on ectopic gestation in the
_American Ecclesiastical Review_, in which moralists like Lehmkuhl,
Sabetti, Aertnys, and Holaind, and some of the leading gynaecologists
of America considered the questions but arrived at no decision. The
physicians did not understand certain questions, other questions were
on obsolete medical practice, essential questions were omitted, and
from the data the moralists came to opposed conclusions.

We find also in moral theologies deductions drawn from false medical
sources. Reasons are given, for example, to justify the use of a large
quantity of alcoholic liquor at a dose in cases of great pain, typhoid
fever, snake-poisoning, and other diseases, in the supposition that
such doses will benefit or cure the patient, whereas the physician
that would follow that treatment would be guilty of malpractice. There
was recently in America a discussion on the relation of oeophorectomy
to the _impedimentum impotentiae_. One side held that a lack of
ovaries constitutes impotence; the other side, that it does not. The
discussion was useful because it incidentally gathered the full
doctrine of the moralists on this subject, but from the medical point
of view there is no connection whatever between these conditions.

A small number of books on pastoral medicine have been written by
clergymen that were not physicians, and a few German books by
physicians that were also moralists. Those by the physicians draw
conclusions from antiquated medical practice, or they are mere popular
treatises on hygiene; those by the clergymen have some value on the
ethical side, but they are incomplete because the authors had not the
necessary medical knowledge. The essays offered in this book by no
{vii} means cover the entire field of pastoral medicine, but as far as
they go we have endeavoured to offer the medical doctrine of the
present day on the questions considered, and that as completely as is
necessary to draw the moral inferences.

Since, then, so many of the questions of pastoral medicine are not
defined, physicians are likely to follow the doctrine of the standard
medical books, which without exception advise them to take the life of
a dangerous foetus almost as unconcernedly as they might prescribe an
active drug, or in any case to put utility before justice. There is,
therefore, an urgent necessity that competent men fix that shifting
part of ethics and moral theology called pastoral medicine, and these
essays are presented as a temporary bridge to serve in crossing a
corner of the bog until better engineers lay down a permanent
causeway.

Some may think that the authors are inclined toward an exaggerated
charity in suggesting the measure of responsibility for many human
actions, but the physician that is brought much in contact with those
suffering from mental defects of various kinds soon learns how easily
complete responsibility becomes marred. Responsibility is dependent
entirely upon free will; and while the great principle of free will
remains solid in truth, no two men are free in exactly the same
manner. Physical conditions have not a little to do with modifications
of freedom of the will. To point out this fact to the clergyman and
the physician has been our intention, for a proper appreciation of it
will widen the bounds of charity and save many that are more sinned
against than sinning from the injury of grievous misjudgment. It is
better to run the risk of exculpating a few individuals whose
responsibility is not entirely clear when the application of the same
principles lifts many others above the rash judgment of those that can
be of most help to them.

{viii}

{ix}

CONTENTS

_The Authorship of the respective Essays is indicated by the signature
at the end of each Essay_.

Chapter               Page

I. Ectopic Gestation 1

II. Pelvic Tumours in Pregnancy 40

III. Abortion, Miscarriage, and Premature Labour   48

IV. The Caesarean Section and Craniotomy   55

V. Maternal Impressions 60

VI. Human Terata and the Sacraments 69

VII. Social Medicine 88

VIII. Some Aspects of Intoxication 105

IX. Heredity, Physical Disease, and Moral Weakness 120

X. Hypnotism, Suggestion, and Crime 129

XI. Unexpected Death 135

XII. Unexpected Death in Special Diseases   150

XIII. The Moment of Death 164

XIV. The Priest in Infectious Diseases 168

XV. Infectious Diseases in Schools 187

XVI. School Hygiene 202

XVII. Mental Diseases and Spiritual Direction   211

XVIII. Neurasthenia 230

XIX. Hysteria 235

XX. Menstrual Diseases 240

XXI. Chronic Disease and Responsibility 245

{x}

XXII. Epilepsy and Responsibility 251

XXIII. Psychic Epilepsy and Secondary Personality  259

XXIV. Impulse and Responsibility 266

XXV. Criminology and the Habitual Criminal  271

XXVI. Paranoia, a Study in Cranks 282

XXVII. Suicides 306

XXVIII. Venereal Diseases and Marriage 311

XXIX. Social Diseases 317

XXX. De Impedimento Matrimonii Dirimente Impotentia 326

APPENDIX. Bloody Sweat 347

INDEX 357

{1}

ESSAYS IN PASTORAL MEDICINE


I

ECTOPIC GESTATION


Ectopic gestation is gestation in the uterine adnexa, the peritoneal
cavity, or the horn of an abnormal or rudimentary uterus. It is
opposed to natural uterine gestation, and, since it includes pregnancy
in an abnormal uterus, it is a more comprehensive term than
extrauterine pregnancy.

In this article the morality involved in the surgical treatment of
ectopic gestation is considered; and to have the data requisite for
judgment it is necessary to describe in outline the anatomy of the
uterine adnexa and the growth of the foetus; to explain the varieties,
effects, diagnosis, and treatment of ectopic gestation; to present the
cases of this condition, or rather this disease, as they occur in
medical practice; to set forth some of the moral principles or laws
that govern medical practice, especially where there is question of
life and death; and finally to apply these principles to the cases
offered for investigation.

The uterus is in the pelvic cavity, between the bladder and the rectum
and above the vagina, into which it opens. It is a hollow,
pear-shaped, muscular organ, somewhat flattened, and about three
inches long, two inches broad, and one inch thick. The base or fundus
is upward, and the neck is downward. Passing out horizontally from the
corners or horns of the uterus, which are at its base, are the two
Fallopian Tubes, one on either side. These are about five inches in
length and somewhat convoluted. They are true tubes, opening into the
uterus, and they are about one-sixteenth of an inch in diameter along
the greater part of their extent The ends farthest {2} from the uterus
are fringed and funnel-shaped; and this funnel-end, called the
Infundibulum or the Fimbriated Extremity, opens into the abdominal or
peritoneal cavity. Near the Fimbriated Extremity of each tube is an
Ovary,--an oval body about one and a half inches long by
three-quarters of an inch in width.


  [Illustration]
  The Uterus and its Adnexa

  _F U_, Fundus or Base of the Uterus. _F T, P T_, Fallopian Tubes. On
  the left of the reader the Fimbriated Extremity of the tube is
  lifted up to show it. _O, O_, Ovaries. _B L, B L_, Broad Ligament.
  _R_, Rectum. _B_, Bladder.


For convenience in description, each tube is divided into four parts:
(1) the Uterine Portion, which is that part included in the wall of
the uterus itself; it extends from the outer end of the horn into the
upper angle of the uterine cavity, and its lumen is so small it will
admit only a very fine probe; (2) the Isthmus, or the narrow part of
the tube which lies nearest the uterus; it gradually opens into the
wider part called (3) the Ampulla; (4) the Infundibulum, or the
funnel-shaped end of the Ampulla. This part is fimbriated, as has been
said, and one of the fimbriae--the Fimbria Ovarica--which is longer
than the others, forms a shallow gutter which extends to the ovary.

{3}

The uterus, tubes, and ovaries lie in a septum which reaches across
the pelvis from hip to hip. This septum is called the Broad Ligament.
If a man's soft felt hat, of the kind called a "Fedora" hat, is held
crown downward with one hand at the front and the other at the back of
the rim, it will represent the pelvic cavity, and the fold along the
crown of the hat coming up into this cavity is very like the Broad
Ligament. As the crown is held downward, the uterus would be in the
middle, its fundus upward, and, of course, altogether outside the hat,
but in the crown fold. The tubes and ovaries would also be outside the
hat and in the crown fold, and the fimbriated extremities would open
by holes into the hat's interior.

The ovum breaks through the surface of the ovary, passes, probably on
a capillary layer of fluid, into the fimbriated extremity of the tube,
and then is moved along slowly through the tube into the uterus.
Ovulation and menstruation occur about the same time, but often one
antedates the other a few days. In exceptional cases they may occur
independently.

If the ovum produced is not fecundated, it gradually shrivels up, and
passes off through the uterus and the vagina. Fecundation of the ovum
rarely occurs in the uterus, but ordinarily in the Fallopian tube,
according to the general opinion of physiologists. After fecundation
the ovum is pushed on into the uterus in from five to seven days,
where it fastens to the wall and develops. Hyrtl (_Kollmann's Lehrbuch
der Entwickelungsgeschichte des Menschen_, Jena, 1898) speaks of a
case in which the ovum appeared to reach the uterus in three days. If
the fecundated ovum is blocked or held in the Fallopian tube, the
embryo grows where the ovum stops, and we have a case of Ectopic
Gestation.

The average time of normal human gestation is ten lunar months or
forty weeks. At the moment the pronucleus of the spermatozoon fuses
with the pronucleus of the ovum in the Fallopian tube and makes the
segmentation nucleus, in my opinion, the soul of the child enters, and
personality exists as absolutely as it does in a child after birth. It
is as much a murder, as such, to unjustly destroy this microscopic
fecundated ovum as it is to kill the child after birth. This is the
opinion of every embryologist I have consulted on the {4} subject,
with the exception of one who said he did not know when the soul
enters.

Technically the product of conception is called the Ovum for the first
two weeks of pregnancy; during the third and fourth weeks it is called
the Embryo, and after the fifth week the Foetus. During the fourth
week the embryo begins to draw nourishment from the maternal blood
through its umbilical vessels, but before that time it obtains
nourishment by osmosis.

The foetus at the end of the eighth week is about one inch in length;
at the end of the fourth lunar month it is from four to six inches
long, and its sex may be distinguished. At the end of twenty-four
weeks, if the normal foetus is born it will attempt to breathe and to
move its limbs, but it dies in a short time. At the end of
twenty-eight weeks of gestation if it is born it moves its limbs
freely and cries weakly. It is nearly fifteen inches in length and
weighs about three pounds. Such an infant might be deemed viable, but
its chances for life are extremely precarious, even in most expert
hands and with the help of an incubator. At the end of thirty-two
weeks of gestation a foetus if born may be raised with skilful care,
but the chances are not promising. It is viable. At the end of forty
weeks the child is at term.

In 1876 Parry collected 500 cases of extrauterine pregnancy from
medical literature, but when Tait in 1883 first operated on a case of
ruptured tubal pregnancy attention was called to the subject. It was
better understood as coeliotomies (opening the abdomen) became common,
and in 1892 Schrenck collected 610 cases that had been reported during
the preceding five years. Kuestner alone has operated on 105 cases in
five years.

There has been much discussion among physicians as to the causes that
arrest the fertilized ovum in the tube, but whatever these causes may
be they do not affect the moral questions which come up in this
article. There may be mechanical obstruction from peritoneal
adhesions, or abnormal conditions resulting from inflammatory diseases
of the tubes, ovaries, and the pelvic peritoneum, but no general cause
that will explain all cases can be ascribed.

{5}

Tait denied the possibility of Ovarian Pregnancy, or a pregnancy where
the ovum fastened to the ovary itself and developed there, but five
fully established cases of this kind have been reported. Dr. J.
Whitridge Williams, professor of Obstetrics at the Johns Hopkins
University, in his textbook on Obstetrics (New York, 1903), collects
twenty-five cases of ovarian pregnancy, where five cases are certain
diagnoses, thirteen highly probable, and seven fairly probable. In
these twenty-five cases ten foetuses reached full term, but four of
the five certain cases ruptured at early periods.

It was formerly thought that primary abdominal pregnancy is quite
common; that is, that the ovum is implanted on some organ within the
abdomen itself, apart from the uterine adnexa. This is now looked upon
as very doubtful, and such cases are probably secondary; that is,
secondary to a pre-existing tubal pregnancy which has ruptured without
great maternal hemorrhage and let the foetus grow within the
peritoneal cavity.

The common form of extrauterine pregnancy is the Tubal Pregnancy. The
ovum may be stopped in any one of the three parts of the tube, and we
find Interstitial, Isthmic, or Ampullar Pregnancy. From these primary
types, by rupture, secondary forms sometimes arise,--Tubo-abdominal,
Tubo-ovarian, and Broad-ligament Pregnancy.

The interstitial form, that is, where the ovum is arrested in that
part of the tube which passes through the wall of the uterus itself,
is the rarest of the tubal pregnancies. Rosenthal (_Ein Fall
intranturaler Schwangerschaft. Centralbl. f. Gyn._ 1297-1305) found it
in only three per centum of 1324 cases of tubal pregnancy. Some deem
the Isthmic variety the commonest. Dr. Howard Kelly (_Operative
Gynaecology_) says he never met a case of Interstitial or Ovarian
pregnancy in his practice. The interstitial form is especially liable
to rupture with suddenly fatal hemorrhage.

About one-fourth of the cases of tubal pregnancy end within the first
twelve weeks by rupture of the Fallopian tube. If the embryo is
implanted in the interstitial end of the tube, the rupture (into the
uterus, or into the abdominal cavity, or into the broad ligament)
takes place later,--about the fourth month, or even considerably after
that time. The reason for {6} the delay here is that the uterus grows
with the foetus. If the foetus breaks into the uterus (a very rare
occurrence), it is either expelled through the vagina almost
immediately or it goes on like a normal pregnancy.

Tait was of the opinion that every case of tubal pregnancy results in
a rupture of the tube not later than the twelfth week, but this
opinion is no longer held. Very rarely a tubal pregnancy goes on
without rupture to full term, as in the cases reported by Williams,
Saxtorph, Spiegelberg, Chiari, and a few others.

Three-fourths, about seventy-eight per centum, of the cases of tubal
pregnancy result in what is technically called "tubal abortion"
instead of rupture. In tubal abortion the connection between the
embryo and the tube-wall is broken by effusion of blood. If the
separation is complete the effused blood pushes the embryo out through
the fimbriated end of the tube into the abdominal cavity, and then the
hemorrhage of the mother commonly ceases. Such an extrusion of the
foetus is called a complete tubal abortion. If the connection between
the foetus and the tube-wall is only partly severed, the ovum remains
in the tube, and the maternal hemorrhage goes on. This is called
incomplete tubal abortion.

In incomplete tubal abortion the maternal blood may slowly trickle
from the fimbriated extremity of the tube into the abdominal cavity,
become encapsulated, and thus form an haematocele. If the fimbriated
extremity of the tube is blocked, the blood accumulates in the tube
and makes an haematosalpynx.

In complete tubal abortion the foetus dies; in incomplete tubal
abortion the viability might depend on the injury done the placenta,
but in almost every case of even incomplete tubal abortion the foetus
dies as a result of its separation from the tubal wall, or from
compression after the bleeding.

In cases of rupture of the tube in extrauterine pregnancy, if the
foetus with its attachments is expelled from the tube into the
peritoneal cavity or into the broad ligament, the embryo dies.

If the foetus or embryo itself alone is expelled into the abdominal
cavity and the placenta remains attached to the wall of the tube and
communicates with the foetus by the umbilical cord which runs through
the tear in the tube, the foetus may {7} possibly live, provided the
mother does not die from hemorrhage. If the foetus goes on growing in
this case, we have an abdominal pregnancy. One such case is reported
by Both where a fully developed foetus was found in the abdominal
cavity even lacking all its membranes, which had been left in the
tube, but a foetus will not live apart from its membranes within the
maternal body.

When an embryo or foetus ruptures the tube and goes into the broad
ligament, it may live or die according to the injury done its
attachments to the tubal wall, but it ordinarily dies. Sometimes such
a broad-ligament pregnancy ruptures again into the abdominal cavity.
Because the bleeding is more likely to be confined within the folds of
the broad ligament, the immediate danger of maternal death from
hemorrhage is less in this than in other forms of rupture.

Concerning tubo-abdominal pregnancy the only remark to be made is
that, owing to adhesions, it is often surgically difficult to remove
such a growth.

If the foetus is expelled after rupture into the peritoneal cavity it
dies, and if the hemorrhage does not kill the mother the dead foetus
if small is absorbed; if large it becomes mummified, or it hardens
into a lithopoedion, or it turns into a yellowish greasy mass called
adipocere, or it putrefies. A lithopoedion may be carried for years.
There are more than thirty cases reported which were carried from
twenty to thirty years in the abdomen, and one case where a
lithopoedion was carried for fifty years.

If the foetus putrefies it causes fatal septicaemia in the mother, or
a perforating abscess, unless it is successfully removed.

There are various abnormalities of the uterus, and in these pregnancy
resembles in effect extrauterine pregnancy. An abnormal uterus may be
unicornis, didelphys, pseudodidelphys, bicornis duplex, bicornis
septus, bicornis subseptus, bicornis unicollis, or bicornis unicollis
with a rudimentary horn. The impregnated ovum may fasten in the
rudimentary horn and be blocked there; then the usual result is
rupture within the first four months, with fatal hemorrhage unless the
bleeding is immediately checked by coeliotomy and ligation.

{8}

As to diagnosis in Ectopic Gestation, Williams (_op. cit._), one of
the authorities at present on the subject, says: "A positive diagnosis
is occasionally made before rupture, but in the vast majority of cases
the condition escapes recognition until symptoms of collapse point to
the probability of rupture or abortion. In advanced cases careful
examination will usually disclose the real condition of affairs, and
when full term has been passed the history is so characteristic that
mistakes should hardly occur."

In the _American Ecclesiastical Review_ for January, 1898 (vol. ix.,
n. i), Father Rene I. Holaind, S. J., published the answers of many
physicians to six questions concerning extrauterine pregnancy. Among
these physicians were Thomas Addis Emmet, Barton Cooke Hirst, Howard
A. Kelly, W. T. Lusk, T. Galliard Thomas, Mordecai Price and his
brother Joseph Price, William Goodell, and Lawson Tait,--all eminent
authorities on this subject. The second question submitted was:
"During pregnancy, at what time and by what means can a differential
diagnosis be made between _intra_ and _extra-uterine_ pregnancy, and
between abnormal gestation and pelvic or other tumour?"

In answer to this question Dr. Emmet said: "There can be no absolute
certainty as to the existence of pregnancy in any case until the
pulsation of the foetal heart can be detected. [After the eighteenth
or twentieth week of gestation.] . . . A diagnosis is difficult in all
cases of abnormal pregnancy, but an expert can, within a reasonable
degree of certainty, arrive at a knowledge of the existing conditions
between the second and third month."

Dr. Hirst said: "In almost all cases of advanced gestation the
differential diagnosis can be made. In early cases it is not always
possible unless conditions be favourable."

Dr. Howard A. Kelly said: "The differential diagnosis between intra
and extrauterine pregnancy can usually be made from the sixth week up
to the end of pregnancy. It is more easily made from the tenth to the
twelfth week on." Writing in the _American Text Book of Obstetrics_
(Philadelphia, 1896), he says: "In the atypical cases, on the
contrary, a positive diagnosis is often difficult or even impossible.
. . . {9} The diagnosis of ectopic gestation after the death of the
foetus is largely dependent upon the clinical history; if this be
deficient, the diagnosis is frequently impossible."

Dr. Lusk said: ".... The frequent discovery of the dead ovum in a tube
when there has been no suspicion of pregnancy shows the difficulty of
a diagnosis." In his text-book (_The Science and Art of Midwifery_,
New York, 1890) is this remark: "Sometimes the diagnosis can only be
decided by the introduction of the sound or a finger into the uterus,
the physician assuming the risk of premature labour, should he find
his supposition of extrauterine pregnancy an error." This means that
sometimes the diagnosis is impossible without running the risk of
causing abortion of a normal uterine pregnancy.

Dr. Thomas said, "After the second month the diagnosis is perfectly
possible." This was also the opinion of Dr. Mordecai Price; and Dr.
Joseph Price holds that the diagnosis can be made "after the third
month, by exclusion." Dr. John F. Roderer, quoting Lawson Tait, says
that "the diagnosis between intra and extrauterine pregnancy can not
be made with certainty before rupture, nor can it be determined
exactly whether an enlargement of the tube is either an ectopic
pregnancy or some form of tumour."

Dr. Goodell's opinion was, "A differential diagnosis can rarely be
made positively at any stage of extrauterine pregnancy."

The diagnosis, then, is difficult; and for the ordinary practitioner,
the average physician, who does perhaps ninety-five per centum of the
medical work of the world, the diagnosis is often impossible. There is
no greater expert than Dr. Thomas Addis Emmet, and he says the
diagnosis is difficult. Others hold that the diagnosis can be clearly
made, and they speak truly as regards themselves, but ordinary skill
finds the diagnosis almost impossible in many cases. Mordecai Price
(_The Pennsylvania Medical Journal_, vol. viii. p. 223) in one year
saw four cases which he and other physicians diagnosed as ectopic
pregnancies with rupture of the tube. When the abdomen had been
opened, uterine pregnancy was discovered with a ruptured tube in each
case, and all the women died.

{10}

The first positive diagnosis of unruptured tubal pregnancy was made by
Veit in 1883, and the first one made in America was by Janvrin in
1886, eight years before Father Holaind's article was written. Before
1883, only eleven years in advance of the same article, when Lawson
Tait performed the first coeliotomy for the purpose of checking
hemorrhage from a ruptured tubal gestation, extrauterine pregnancy was
as mysterious as the old "inflammation of the bowels," which turned
out afterward to be appendicitis. Hence common skill in the difficult
diagnosis of ectopic gestation can not be looked for.

The doctrine given in all the leading medical works at present
concerning the treatment of extrauterine pregnancy is this:

  1. As soon as an extrauterine pregnancy is discovered remove the
  foetus through an opening made in the mother's abdominal wall. Do
  not use electricity or the injection of poisons into the foetal sac,
  or the incandescent knife. Emmet and a few others approved of the
  use of electricity at times, but this is against the teaching of the
  great majority of writers at present. The reason for removing the
  foetus at once is that it is apt at any moment to cause rupture and
  fatal hemorrhage before surgical aid can be effective.

  2. In a case of rupture with free hemorrhage and collapse the only
  operation advised is an immediate coeliotomy to stop the bleeding by
  ligatures. The rupture should not be approached through the vaginal
  wall according to the common doctrine, but through the abdominal
  wall.

  3. If there is a rupture in which the bleeding is confined and there
  is no collapse, do not operate at once unless the haematocele
  increases steadily or shows signs of suppuration. Sometimes
  evacuation of the haematocele through the vaginal wall is possible.

  4. In the later months of an extrauterine pregnancy, whether the
  case is intraligamentous or abdominal, perform coeliotomy as soon as
  the diagnosis has been made, and remove the foetus, because there is
  always danger of sudden and fatal hemorrhage before the surgeon can
  reach the source of the bleeding. What is to be done in a case where
  the surgeon is certain before operating that the foetus is {11}
  dead, has interest only for the physician, and it involves no moral
  question.

Operating for extrauterine pregnancy maybe a simple coeliotomy, if any
coeliotomy is really simple, but it commonly is the most dangerous
operation for the mother that the gynaecologist is called upon to
perform.

The discussion of the moral questions that arise in cases of ectopic
gestation which began in volume ix. of the _American Ecclesiastical
Review_ was very valuable, but as the moralists had not full data to
work on their decision as a whole is not satisfactory. The original
cases presented are in part obsolete in the medical practice of
to-day, and important physical conditions were not disclosed in some
of the other parts of the cases. Father Holaind tentatively agreed
with Father Lehmkuhl in one decision, Fathers Eschbach and Sabetti
directly attacked Father Lehmkuhl's reasons, and Father Aertnys
indirectly opposed Father Sabetti's chief argument. These men are all
eminent authorities, but as each, except Father Holaind, was
dissatisfied with the arguments advanced by the others, and as their
data were incomplete, we can not rest the case on their decision.

In Father Holaind's fifth question, if I understand it correctly, he
seemed to think it possible to baptize a foetus through the opening in
the mother's abdominal wall while it lies in the abdominal cavity
before surgical removal. He mentions antiseptic precautions in the
baptism, which would have no meaning if the foetus were out of the
abdomen.

Baptism would not be possible in that case: the priest could not get
at the foetus, he ordinarily could not even see it, and certainly no
surgeon would permit the attempt. There would be no time for the
attempt in a rupture case, even if the foetus could be seen; and there
would be no advantage gained by baptizing the foetus in the abdominal
cavity where the conditions gave time to do so. If it is alive it will
live long enough for baptism after removal from the abdomen, provided,
of course, it is baptized immediately in the operating room. That it
does not breathe is no proof of immediate death. It is not unusual for
a full-term child not to breathe for even an hour or longer after
birth.

{12}

If Father Holaind had not in view baptism within the abdominal cavity,
the question has this meaning: What is the most effective method after
the foetus has been removed from the abdomen to open its enveloping
membranes so as to give it a chance for a life lasting long enough to
allow baptism?

The best method is to slit the membranes with a scalpel or scissors as
quickly as possible. The envelopes, cord, and placenta are essential
parts of the foetus itself, and they grow from itself, not from the
mother. They take the place of the lungs and the alimentary tract,
which do not come into action until after normal birth. It would be
worth discussing whether a baptism on the intact foetal envelopes is
valid, were it not that we may not apply probabilism in such a case.
The remaining matter brought out in Father Holaind's questions will be
considered in the course of this article.

Before presenting the cases of ectopic gestation that occur in medical
practice, the fundamental ethical principles that are to be applied in
judging the morality of the surgeon's interference should be given.

The morality of any action is determined, (1) by the object of the
action; (2) by the circumstances that accompany the action; (3) by the
end the agent had in view.

  1. The term _object_ has various meanings, but here it means the deed
  performed in the action, the thing which the will chooses. That deed
  by its very nature may be good, or it may be bad, or it may be
  indifferent morally. In themselves to help the afflicted is a good
  action, to blaspheme is a bad action, to walk is an indifferent
  action. Some bad actions are absolutely bad, they never can become
  good or indifferent (blasphemy or adultery, for example); others, as
  stealing, are evil because of a lack of right in the agent: these
  may become good by acquiring the missing right. Others are evil
  because of the danger necessarily connected with their
  performance,--the danger of sin connected with them, or the
  unnecessary peril to life. An action to have the moral quality must
  be voluntary, deliberate; and mere repugnance in doing an act does
  not in itself make the act involuntary.

  2. Circumstances sometimes, though not always, can add a {13} new
  element of good or evil to an action. The circumstances of an action
  are the agent, the object, the place in which the action is done,
  the means used, the end in view, the method observed in using the
  means, the time in which the deed is done. If a judge in his
  official position tells a sheriff to hang a criminal, and a private
  citizen gives the same command, the actions are very different
  morally because of the circumstances of the agent giving the
  command. The object--it changes the morality of the deed if a man
  steals a cent or a thousand dollars. The place--what might be merely
  a filthy action in a house might be a sacrilege in a church. The
  means--to support a family by labour or by thievery. The end in
  view--to give alms in obedience to divine command or to give them
  to buy votes. The method observed in using means--kindly, say, or
  cruelly. The time--to do manual labour on Sunday or on Monday. Some
  circumstances aggravate the evil in a deed, some extenuate it.
  Others may so colour a deed that they specify the deed, make the
  action some special virtue or vice. The circumstance that a murderer
  is the son of the man he kills specifies the deed as parricide.

The end also determines the morality of an action (see St Thomas,
_Sum. Theol_. I. 2., q. xviii., a. 4 and 7). Since the end is the
first thing in the intention of the agent, he passes from the object
wished for in the end to choosing the means for obtaining it. Without
the end the means can not exist as such. There are occasions when an
end is only a circumstance: for example, if it is a concomitant end.
When an end is a, _finis extrinsecus operantis_, when it is in keeping
with right reason or discordant thereto, it may become a determinant
of morality.

In every voluntary, or human, act there is an interior and an exterior
act of the will, and each of these acts has its own object. The end is
the proper object of the interior act of the will; the exterior object
acted upon is the object of the exterior act of the will; and as this
exterior act specifies the morality, so does the interior
object--which is the end--specify it, and even more importantly than
the exterior object does.

The will uses the body as an instrument on the external {14} object,
and the action of the body is connected with morality only through the
will. We judge the morality of a blow, not by the physical stroke, but
from the intention of the striker. The exterior object of the will is,
in a way, the matter of the morality, and the interior object of the
will, or the end, is the form. Aristotle (_Ethics_, lib. v., cap. 2)
says: "He that steals that he may commit adultery, is, absolutely
speaking, more an adulterer than a thief." The thievery is a means to
the principal end, and it is this principal end that chiefly specifies
or informs the action.

The means used to obtain an end are very important in a consideration
of the morality of an act. There are four classes of means,--the good,
the bad, the indifferent, and the excusable.

Good means may be absolutely good, but commonly they are liable to
become vitiated by circumstances,--almsgiving is an example. Some
means are bad always and inexcusable,--lying, for example. The
excusable means are those which are bad, but justifiable through
circumstances. To save a man's life by cutting off his leg is an
excusable means.

The existence of excusable means whereby some good actions are
effected does not establish the assertion that the end justifies the
means. The end sometimes may incriminate or sanctify indifferent
means, but it does not in itself justify all means. The means, like
other circumstances, are accidents of an action, but they are in an
action just as much as colour is in a man. Colour is not of a man's
essence, but you can not have a man without colour.

The effect of an action, the result or product of an effective cause
or agency, may in itself be an end or an object or a circumstance, and
it has influence in the determination of morality. Sometimes an act
has two effects, one good and the other bad; and that such an action
be lawful it is necessary (1) that the action itself be good or
indifferent; (2) that the good effect be intended and the evil effect
be not intended (chosen) but only reluctantly permitted; (3) that the
evil effect be not a means to secure the good effect; (4) that there
be present a motive sufficiently grave to excuse or counterbalance the
bad effect. {15} St. Thomas (_Sum. Theol_. 2. 2. q. 64, a. 7) Speaking
of killing a man in self-defence, says: "Nihil prohibet unius actus
esse duos effectus, quorum alter solum sit in intentione, alius vero
sit praeter intentionem. Morales autem actus recipiunt speciem
secundum id quod intenditur, non autem ab eo quod est praeter
intentionem, cum sit per accidens."

That an act, therefore, be morally good, or justifiable, (a) the whole
train of the tendency of the will must be good; that is, (1) the
object, (2) the end, (3) and the circumstances must be good; or (b)
the intention should be good, and the remaining elements in the train
of will-tendency are to be indifferent. That an act be morally bad it
is enough that the object, the end, or the circumstances be
inexcusably bad.

There may be honest doubt as to the existence of evil in the
circumstances or the end, and here enters the matter of probability;
but apart from this, some general rules of morality that govern all
cases may be formulated:

  1. An intention or end which is gravely evil always makes the entire
  action evil and unjustifiable.

  2. An intention or end which is slightly evil, if it is the entire
  end of an action, makes the whole action evil but not gravely
  evil--makes it, say, a venial sin and not a mortal sin.

  3. If an intention or end which is venially evil accompanies
  secondarily a good intention or end, and is rather a motive than the
  real effective agent in attracting the will, this venial evil does
  not vitiate the whole goodness or righteousness of the main action.
  Compare the remarks made above in discussing an action that has a
  double effect, partly good and partly bad.

  4. Circumstances that are gravely evil practically vitiate the
  entire action, but circumstances which are venially evil do not
  always vitiate the entire action.

Much might be said here concerning conscience as a judge of the
morality in an act, but this discussion is not necessary for our
present purpose. Like other men, physicians often confuse conscience
with inclination, or at best with unfounded opinion. When conscience
is to be a rule of action it must {16} have at the least moral
certitude; or, what is different but practically the same thing, the
opinion of conscience must be at the least genuinely probable. The
term "probable" is used here in a technical sense, and it will be so
used throughout the remainder of this article.

The doctrine of Probabilism is connected with the promulgation of law.
A law, according to St. Thomas (_op. cit._ I. 2., q. 90, a. 4) is:
"Ordinatio rationis ad bonum commune ab eo qui curam habet
communitatis promulgata." Sometimes it is not evident whether or not a
law binds in a particular case, and in such a condition, that is, in
which there is question solely of the existence, interpretation, or
application of a law, we may follow a probable opinion which assures
us the act is licit, although the opinion which says the act is
illicit may be just as probable or even more probable. This is the
fundamental proposition of Probabilism, which is the doctrine
especially of St. Alphonsus Liguori, but it was held centuries before
his time. As the church has never condemned this doctrine, but rather
tacitly approved of it, Catholics may safely follow it, and those that
are not Catholics will find it very reasonable.

A law which is doubtful after honest and capable investigation has not
been sufficiently promulgated, and therefore it can not impose a
certain obligation because it lacks an essential element of a law.
When we have used such moral diligence of inquiry as the gravity of a
matter calls for, but still the applicability of the law is doubtful
in the action in view, the law does not bind; and what a law does not
forbid it leaves open.

Probabilism is not permissible when there is question of the worth of
an action as compared with another, or of issues like the physical
consequences of an act. If a physician knows a remedy for a disease
that is certainly efficacious and another that is probably
efficacious, he may not choose the probable cure, at the least in a
grave illness. Probabilism has to do with the existence,
interpretation, or applicability of a law, as I said, not with the
differentiation of actions.

The term probable means provable, not guessed at, or jumped at without
reason. There must be sound reason {17} adduced to constitute
probability. The doubt must be founded on a positive opinion against
the existence, interpretation, or application of the law. It must be
more than mere negative doubt, more than ignorance, more than vague
suspicion, especially must it be more than a sentimental impression.
There is a mental condition, which easily passes over into disease,
wherein a man habitually can not make up his mind. This flabbiness has
nothing to do with Probabilism. The opinion against a law to
constitute Probabilism must be solid. It must rest upon an intrinsic
reason from the nature of the case, or an extrinsic reason from
authority,--always supposing the authority cited is really an
authority. Many men sitting upon the supreme bench in the Court of
Science and called authorities by friends and newspapers, are only
fools in good company.

The probability must also be comparative. What seems to be a very good
reason when standing alone may be very weak when compared with a
reason on the other side. When we have weighed the arguments on both
sides, and we still have good reason left for standing by our opinion,
our opinion is probable. The probability is, moreover, to be
practical. It must have considered all the circumstances of the case.

The principles presented here have been arranged, as we said, with a
view toward application in judging the morality of actions that may
occur in cases of ectopic gestation, and we shall apply the doctrine
of probabilism in the question, does the commandment "Thou shalt not
kill" bind in certain cases of ectopic pregnancy? It is also necessary
to add the principles underlying our duty to preserve human life.

  1. It is never lawful directly or indirectly to kill an innocent
  man. "Insontem et justum non occides" (Exod. xxiii. 7). An
  _innocent_ man is one that has not by any human act done harm to
  another man or to society commensurate with the loss of his life.
  _Directly_ means to kill either as an end, say, for revenge, or as a
  means toward an end.

  A man is a person, an intelligent being, therefore free, and
  autocentric; he belongs to no one except to God, who made {18} him;
  he is by that very fact distinguished from brutes or things which
  may belong to another. Now, if you kill a man, you destroy his human
  nature by separating his soul and body, you subordinate and
  sacrifice him wholly to yourself, make him entirely yours, which is
  unjust. Even the state has no right to kill an innocent man. A
  foetus in the womb, only a few hours old, is as much a human being
  as a man fifty years of age, and this natural law holds for the
  foetus as for the man.

  2. It is, however, lawful _indirectly_ to kill a man provided this
  man is an unjust aggressor. Cardinal de Lugo (_De Just. et Jure_,
  10, 149) and others hold you may even _directly_ kill an unjust
  aggressor. _Indirectly_ here means incidentally. An effect happens
  indirectly when it is neither intended as an end nor a means, but
  happens as a circumstance unavoidably attached to the end or means
  intended.

We may not, however, kill an innocent man even indirectly, because no
end is proportionate to the sacrifice of an innocent man's life, but
the case of an unjust aggressor differs from that of an innocent man.
By an unjust aggressor is meant some one that outside the due course
of law threatens your life or the equivalent of your life, or the life
of some one you should or may protect. You may stop such an aggressor,
and if you happen to kill him while trying to stop him, there is no
moral wrong involved. This aggressor may be formally or only
materially unjust: he may be a normal man with a formal intention to
kill you or your ward, or a murderous lunatic that tries to kill you
or your ward, but he must be _unjust_ either formally or materially.

It is natural for every being to maintain itself in existence, to
resist destruction. This is a primary law of nature. As Father Holaind
well said (_Amer. Eccl. Rev._, January, 1894): "The ethical foundation
of self-defence is this: Justice requires a sort of moral equation,
and if a right prevails it must be superior to the right which it
holds in abeyance. At the outset both the aggressor and his intended
victim have equal rights to life, but the fact of the former using his
own life for the destruction of a fellow man places him in a condition
of juridic inferiority with regard to the latter. If we may be {19}
allowed so to express it, the moral power of the aggressor is equal to
his inborn right to life, less the unrighteous use which he makes of
it, whilst the moral power of the intended victim remains in its
integrity and has consequently a higher juridic value. When the person
assailed cannot defend himself, his right _can_ and sometimes _must_
be exercised by those who are bound in justice or charity to protect
the innocent. At the dawn of human life the physician or surgeon
stands as the natural protector both of the mother and of the child;
he is beholden to both.

"The right of self-defence is not annulled by the fact that the
aggressor is irresponsible. The absence of knowledge saves him from
moral guilt, but it does not alter the character of the act,
considered objectively and in itself; it is yet an unjust aggression,
and in the conflict, the life assailed has yet a superior juridic
value. The right of killing in self-defence is not based on the ill
will of the aggressor but on the illegitimate character of the
aggression. Now, an aggressor is _at least materially unjust_ whenever
he perpetrates an act destructive of the right of another."

Mark the words "right of another," at the end of the quotation. In a
case of pregnancy at term in a woman with a contracted pelvis the
foetus would be a contributing instrument of death to the mother,
supposing there were no artificial means of delivering her, but such a
child is not an aggressor even materially unjust. The child itself is
normal, it has a natural right to be where it is, it did not put
itself where it is; the mother's contracting uterus crushing the child
against her narrow pelvic arch is the direct agency that kills the
woman, and the child is only an inert instrument used by the
contracting uterus. In such a case the mother might be considered an
aggressor materially unjust against the life of the child rather than
that the child is the aggressor.

Lehmkuhl (_Compendium Theologiae Moralis_, 1891, p. 238) says:
"Medicus graviter peccat ... si media abortus procurat: nisi quando ad
salvandam matrem ex probabili opinione liceat." On page 188 he says:
"Ex consulto abortum inducere, etiam liceri videtur in praesenti vitae
{20} maternae discrimine, quod per solam foetus immaturi ejectionem
avert! possit . . . Idque videtur applicari posse ad matrem quae tarn
arcta est ut tempus praematuri partus exspectare non possit."

By _foetus immaturus_ here he means an unviable foetus, as is evident
from the context. If this probabilism of Father Lehmkuhl's stands (but
it does not), a decision in most of the cases that occur in ectopic
gestation would be easily made, but even he himself would not take
responsibility in the matter, and that before the decision of the Holy
Office which defined abortion. Since this decision, made July 24,
1895, Lehmkuhl has entirely withdrawn his opinion.

On May 4, 1898, the Holy Office published the following decree, which
was approved by the Pope:

  BEATISSIME PATER,--Episcopus Sinaloen. ad pedes S. V. provolutus,
  humiliter petit resolutionem insequentium dubiorum:

  I. Eritne licita partus acceleratio quoties ex mulieris arctitudine
  impossibilis evaderet foetus egressio suo naturali tempore?

  II. Et si mulieris arctitudo talis sit, ut neque partus prematurus
  possibilis censeatur, licebitne abortum provocare aut caesariam suo
  tempore perficere operationem?

  III. Estne licita laparotomia quando agitur de pregnatione
  extra-uterina, seu de ectopicis conceptibus?

  Feria iv, die 4 Mali, 1898.

  In Congregatione habita, etc . . . EE. ac RR. Patres rescribendum
  censuerunt:

  Ad I. Partus accelerationem per se illicitam non esse, duromodo
  perficiatur justis de causis et eo tempore ac modis, quibus ex
  ordinariis contingentibus matris et foetus vitae consulatur.

  Ad II. Quoad primam partem, _negative_, juxta decretum, Feria iv.,
  24 Julii, 1895, de abortus illiceitate.--Ad secundam vero quod
  spectat: nihil obstare quominus mulier de qua agitur caesareae
  operationi suo tempore subjiciatur.

  Ad III. Necessitate cogente, licitam esse laparotomiam ad
  extra-hendos e sinu matris ectopicos conceptos, dummodo et foetus et
  matris vitae, quantum fieri potest, serio et opportune provideatur.

  In sequenti Feria vi., die 6 ejusdem mensis et anni . . . SSmus
  responsiones EE. ac RR. Patrum approbavit.

{21}

The third question proposed by the bishop is:

"Is laparotomy licit when performed for extrauterine pregnancy or
ectopic gestation?"

The approved answer of the Holy Office to this question is:

"In a case of necessity, laparotomy for the purpose of removing an
ectopic foetus (_conceptus_) from the abdomen of the mother is licit,
provided the lives of both the foetus and the mother, as far as is
possible, are carefully and fitly guarded."

The expression, "dummodo et foetus et matris vitae, quantum fieri
potest, serio et opportune provideatur," is capable of various
translations and interpretations.

The words might have this meaning: "In a case of necessity you may do
laparotomy and remove an ectopic gestation, provided you do not kill
either the mother or the foetus." If that is the interpretation, the
decree means that we may never remove an unviable ectopic foetus when
we know that the foetus is alive, because removal will kill it.

The sentence can also be translated in this sense: "In a case of
necessity, you may do laparotomy and remove an ectopic foetus from the
mother, provided you take full care to save mother and child if that
is possible."

If that is the signification, it is evidently very different from the
first interpretation. It would mean: do the laparotomy, remove the
foetus, and if you possibly can save both mother and foetus do so, but
if you can not, take the best means you can to save one or the other.

If the decree refers only to cases in which the foetus is viable, it
would appear to be unnecessary--we need no decree of the Holy Office
to let us do a laparotomy to remove a viable foetus. If it does not
refer to a viable foetus, it refers to an unviable foetus, but to
remove an unviable foetus is to either kill it or to hasten its death.

Genicot (_Institutiones Theologiae Moralis_, Louvain, 1902, vol. i. p.
358) has this interpretation of the decree:

"In conceptione extra-uterina licebit sane recurrere ad laparotomiam
similemve operationem, quando aliqua etiam tenuissima spes affulget
salvandi infantem, simul ac mater fere certo liberabitur. . . . Ubi
vero nulla spes hujusmodi {22} affulget, neque in hoc casu licebit
abortum directe inducere, etiamsi foetus certo moriturus sit antequam
in lucem edatur, et baptismum recipere nequeat. Etenim S. Inqu., dum
provocat ad responsum 19 August, 1888, satis indicat abortus
inductionem a se haberi tamquam operationem directe occisivam foetus
ideoque semper illicitam."

There is no question of an _abortion_ in a laparotomy for extrauterine
gestation; abortion is altogether a different operation in method and
nature. Secondly, the other decree of the Holy Office to which he
refers speaks of a direct killing of the foetus, but there is no
direct killing of the foetus in the operation for ectopic gestation,
nor is the indirect hastening of the foetus's death a means to an end.
The decree on abortion is so clear it leaves no room for doubt.

Cardinal Monaco, in the _Epistola ad Archiepiscopum Camarcensem_,
August 19, 1889, says the Holy Office decreed that "In scholis
catholicis tuto doceri non posse licitam esse operationem chirurgicam
quam _craniotomiam_ appellant, sicut declaratum fuit die 28 Maii,
1884, et quamcumque chirurgicam operationem directe occisivam foetus
vel matris gestantis."

Note the words "_directe_ occisivam." Craniotomy is a direct killing,
and a direct killing used as a means to an end; moreover it is an
altogether unnecessary killing. Artificial abortion in the case of an
unviable foetus is also a direct killing as a means to save the
mother's life, but the removal of an unviable ectopic foetus is
neither a direct killing, nor is it a means toward any end.

Since the meaning of the decree concerning laparotomy in extrauterine
pregnancy is by no means clear, we may discuss the question until the
law has been fully promulgated, ready to conform to the real meaning
of the decree whenever it is explained. In that spirit we may now
consider the cases that occur in ectopic gestation.

Case I. A surgeon is called in to treat a woman and he finds her in a
state of collapse. He makes a diagnosis of tubal pregnancy, which has
gone on to rupture with hemorrhage, and the bleeding will evidently be
fatal to the mother unless it is checked. Practically the only chance
of saving the {23} mother's life is coeliotomy and the ligation of her
open arteries. Dr. Howard Kelly (_Operative Gynaecology_, vol. ii. p.
437) says: "When the hemorrhage is sudden and excessive the patient
falls in collapse; but, in spite of these alarming symptoms, she may
survive a succession of similar attacks and the foetus and sac may
continue to develop." This exception complicates the case slightly. If
the surgeon were absolutely certain that the only possible chance to
save the woman's life is coeliotomy and haemostasis, the case would be
somewhat different from one in which there is some chance of escape by
spontaneous haemostasis. That chance, however, is so slight, and so
far beyond any means we have for forecasting, that it is mere luck,
and it is to be neglected. The surgeon may safely consider the patient
in the gravest actual danger.

(a) Before he opens the abdomen he can not tell whether the foetus is
alive or not; but the stronger probability is that it is not, and the
certainty is that it has no chance at all to remain alive more than a
few minutes or hours, unless the surgeon is willing to trust to sheer
luck in the expectation that he may happen to have one of Dr. Kelly's
exceptions before him.

(b) The operation to save the mother is this: as quickly as possible
he makes a vertical slit from four to six inches long through the
woman's belly-wall. Then commonly the free blood begins to run out, or
it may even spurt out some feet into the air. The surgeon can see
nothing for the blood and the presence of the entrails. If the blood
is not freshly welling up he bails it out with his hands or a ladle;
if it is spurting he at once thrusts in his hand, feels for the foetal
sac, lifts it up, and puts on clamps near the uterus on one side and
near the pelvic brim on the other. This stops the hemorrhage, and he
can then work more leisurely, but unfortunately this also stops the
flow of blood to the foetus. He can not first examine the foetus and
then stop the hemorrhage. He can not back out even if he finds a live
foetus without letting the mother die on the table.

(c) If the placenta is already loose from the Fallopian tube the child
is dead or it will die in a few seconds or minutes. If it was not
loose the lifting out may tear it loose, and this {24} tearing loose
will hasten the death of the foetus a few minutes (but give a chance
for baptising it).

(d) If the lifting out does not tear loose the supposedly fixed
placenta, the foetus either will die anyhow if the mother dies, or it
will die if the mother lives, because to save her the surgeon must put
ligatures just where the flow of blood will be shut off from the
foetus. Commonly there is no time to even look for the foetus until
after the maternal arteries have been closed.

(e) The same conditions could exist in the rupture of a pregnancy in a
rudimentary uterine horn as in a rupture in tubal gestation.

What is the surgeon to do in a case like this? Fathers Holaind (_Amer.
Eccl. Rev._, January, 1894, in a note on p. 39), Lehmkuhl and Sabetti
say: do coeliotomy, ligate the mother's arteries, remove and baptise
the foetus.

The analysis of the case is this: (i) The _action_ is the stopping of
a fatal hemorrhage in a woman, and possibly, though not certainly, an
indirect incidental hastening of a foetus's inevitable death.

(2) The _object of the action_ is the haemostasis, which is good, and
the possible indirect hastening of the foetus's death, which is evil,
but, as we shall see, excusable evil.

(3) The _end of the action_ is to save the mother's life--a good end.

(4) The _circumstances are_: (a) that possibly, through mere luck, the
woman's condition is not necessarily hopeless: a few women have
escaped in this seemingly imminent peril--but that chance of escape is
not soundly probable; the stronger probability by far is on the side
of a fatal issue; therefore the chance for escape may be neglected,
and the woman's case may be regarded as hopeless if operation is
foregone.

(b) The quickest possible work on the surgeon's part is necessary, and
there is no time or chance to examine the foetus's condition before
tying the maternal arteries. Before he opens the mother's abdomen he
can tell nothing whatever of the foetus's condition, but the
probability is all in favour of the fact that the foetus is already
dead or moribund.

(c) The _means_ are coeliotomy, and the ligation of the {25} uterine
and ovarian arteries to stop the mother's bleeding. This ligation, in
the contingency that the foetus is still attached to the Fallopian
tube, will also shut off the blood from the foetus, yet the uncertain
shutting off of the foetal blood-supply is not intended by the surgeon
as a means toward his end in any degree direct or indirect, but it is
an evil circumstance associated with the action which may hasten the
foetal death--even here the hastening is uncertain.

(5) The _action has two effects_,--one, the saving of the mother, is
directly intended and evidently good; the other, the possible indirect
hastening of the foetus's death, may or may not be evil. The moral
centre of the whole case is this possible hastening of the foetus's
death. If that possible hastening is licit the whole action is licit;
if it is not permissible it will vitiate the entire action.

Suppose that there is no doubt that the ligation of the maternal
arteries in this case really hastens the foetus's death some minutes:
it would still be an indirect volition. Father Lehmkuhl also calls it
indirect and licit. Father Sabetti denied that it is indirect, but he
held that it is licit for another reason. Sabetti said (_Aner. Eccl.
Rev_., August, 1894): "It is evidently false to say that a means which
is _directly_ adopted for obtaining an end is only _indirectly_
contained in the intention of the agent who so adopts it." That is
true, but the minor proposition in a syllogism drawn from that
statement is to be emphatically denied. The cutting off of the foetal
blood is a fact associated with the means, not a means direct or
indirect toward the end, which is to save the mother--the means to
save the mother is the stopping of her bleeding.

This is not hair-splitting in the opprobrious sense of that term. The
bases of all sins are absolutely abstract principles, and because
abstract principles can not be pinched or weighed, they have often
little meaning for the opposition in an argument. There is only the
width of a hair between Heaven and Hell at many places along the
frontier, and there is only the difference between a direct or an
indirect volition separating murder and a good deed. The best ethics
frequently consists in delicate hair-splitting; and despite the
protests of sentimentalists, one of the most valuable benefits of
Moral Science is {26} to show us how to handle moral poisons for good
purposes, as a physician uses the material poisons, opium and aconite.

If the foetus in this case of rupture in ectopic gestation were a
materially unjust aggressor on the mother's life, the indirect
hastening of its death would be justifiable according to all
moralists, and the direct hastening would be licit according to
Cardinal de Lugo, who was, in the opinion of St. Alphonsus, "post D.
Thomam inter alios theologos facile princeps"
(_Th. Mor._, lib. 4. n. 552).

Sabetti held that the foetus is a materially unjust aggressor. His
reason for this opinion is that the extrauterine foetus is not in a
position in which it has a right to be. If it were in the uterus, its
natural position, it would have a right to its position. Ectopic
gestation is a disease, not a physiological condition.

Father Aertnys (_Amer. Eccl,_ Rev., July, 1893) denies that the foetus
is an aggressor materially unjust. He says: "Nequaquam enim mortem
intentat matri, sed actione, quam non ipse sed corpus matris producit,
conatur ad lucem pervenire, et iste conatus non nisi ex naturali
concursu rerum fit matri causa mortis. Infans ergo non est _aggressor_
et multo minus est _aggressor injustus_. Hinc nego paritatem cum
homine mente capto, qui delirans alteri mortem intentat; hic enim agit
motus a sua voluntate, licet absque culpa, et ponit actiones in se
injustas, utpote ad necandum directe intentas."

In the same periodical (January, 1894) while repeating this statement
he says: "Sive in utero existat sive alibi reconditus sit [sc.
foetus], nequaquam mortem intentat matri, siquidem non ipse actione
propria conatur egredi, sed corpus matris infantem expellit et haec
expulsio a matre emanans fit matri causa mortis."

What Father Aertnys says in these two passages is true of an
intrauterine foetus, but it is altogether erroneous when applied to an
extrauterine foetus, of which alone there is question here. In
extrauterine pregnancy the uterus or any other part of the maternal
body does not "try to expel" the foetus; the uterus has nothing at all
to do with the case--the very name of the condition is _extra_-uterine
pregnancy. If an ectopic gestation {27} goes on to term (a very rare
happening), there will be false labour and uterine contractions, and
these cease after a time without effect one way or the other; but in
all cases of rupture and the like the uterus is outside the question
and the mother is passive. There is no attempt by the mother in
extrauterine pregnancy at expulsion either before rupture or at any
other time unless the dead foetus putrefies, and the maternal tissues
"try to expel" it as a foreign body by breaking down into an abscess.
The foetus simply grows, and its bulk bursts the tube. If it were in
the uterus, the uterus would enlarge synchronously with the foetus and
there would be no rupture, but the tube will not give beyond a certain
point, therefore it bursts.

In normal uterine pregnancy at term the uterus and other maternal
muscles are the active factors in expelling the foetus--the foetus is
passive. In ectopic gestation the foetus is active, the mother is
passive, and there is no attempt at expulsion from either side. In
this case the foetus in the tube through the action of its own vital
principle draws nourishment from the mother and grows gradually larger
till it bursts the tube (it may even move its arms and legs if
advanced), and this rupture tears open arteries wherethrough the
mother bleeds, commonly to death. This is evidently material
aggression.

Father Aertnys says the foetus differs from the murderous lunatic in
this, that the madman is moved by his will, although blamelessly, in
doing unjust actions directly intended as homicidal. The fact that the
lunatic uses his will has no weight whatever in permitting me to
defend my life against him, it is an accidental thing outside the
question; but Father Aertnys in mentioning the madman's will means
solely, if I understand him, that the madman is really an active
aggressor. The foetus, however, is also an active aggressor without
using its will. I might fall from a height toward a man and certainly
endanger his life while I was not using my will at all, not conscious
of the man's presence under me, or even while I was using all the
power of my will against the result. In any of these cases I should be
a materially unjust aggressor; and if in trying to prevent my body
from killing him the man killed me, he would be blameless.

{28}

Now, in the first place, the tubal foetus is an aggressor; and since,
secondly, its position is unnatural, monstrous, a disease, a thing not
intended by nature, it has no right to its position, and it is
therefore a materially unjust aggressor. Since it is an aggressor on
the very life of the mother in a place where it should not be, the
surgeon therefore may at the least stop the fatal bleeding it causes.
If the foetus dies as an unwished for, though permitted, consequence
of this haemostasis, the surgeon may lament this result, but he is
blameless.

The foetus was blocked in its unnatural position through a defect in
the mother, nevertheless it remains a materially unjust aggressor. If
I by an accidental blow had made a man insane, and later this lunatic
tried to kill me, I, or my legitimate protector, might lawfully kill
the lunatic in defence of my life. This is an exact parallel to the
case of the mother and the extrauterine foetus.

The extrauterine foetus is not like a foetus in a craniotomy case.
Where there might be question of craniotomy the foetus is not an
unjust aggressor even materially, as has been said: first, because it
is not an aggressor in any manner, it is altogether passive; secondly,
it has a perfectly natural right to be where it is. In ectopic
gestation with fatal rupture the foetus is, first, an active
aggressor; secondly, it has no right to be where it is. In craniotomy
the foetus is killed as a direct means toward the end that its head
may be reduced and extracted and the mother saved; in extrauterine
gestation with fatal rupture the foetus is incidentally killed as a
consequence of the haemostasis, and not as a means in any sense of the
term. In craniotomy the child is wantonly killed since there are other
means of saving the mother; in extrauterine pregnancy with fatal
rupture the hastening of the death of the child is unfortunately
associated with the only possible means we have to save the mother.

In Case I., therefore, we have an action that has an object partly
good and partly, very probably, not evil; the end intended is good;
the circumstances are justifiable or indifferent; consequently in Case
I. the surgeon may do coeliotomy, tie the uterine and ovarian
arteries, and if the foetus {29} happens to be alive he may
reluctantly and indirectly permit the hastening of its death after
attempting to baptise it.

Case II. The conditions presented in Case I. are the ordinary and most
common that the surgeon meets with in treating ectopic gestation, but
other conditions may be found.

Suppose the surgeon, before operation, diagnoses a case of ectopic
gestation, but that he can not tell whether or not the foetus is
alive. The probability leans toward the side that the foetus is alive,
because there is no indubitable history, as physicians say, of
maternal symptoms that indicate rupture.

Medical authorities tell him to do coeliotomy at once, ligate the
uterine and ovarian arteries, and remove the foetus. Would he
certainly or probably be justified in following out this medical
doctrine?

The mother is in actual, _very probable_ danger of death, but not in
actual, _certain_ danger of death. She may possibly escape if
operation is deferred; she has a negligible chance of escape if no
operation is performed after the death of the foetus; coeliotomy and
ligation of the uterine and ovarian arteries give her by far the
surest chance of escape, so sure an opportunity for escape when
performed early that it can scarcely be called a mere chance.

If operation is deferred the chances for rupture are about 22 per
centum, say, one and a half in five chances, and all ruptures are not
necessarily fatal. The chances of the mother's death, however, are
much higher than that, because death can come in ectopic pregnancy
from causes other than rupture. From 63.1 to 68.8 per centum (say,
66.3 per centum) of ectopic gestations treated by the expectant method
result in death to the mother--just two-thirds of the women die. A.
Martin in a series of 265 cases of ectopic gestation where the
expectant treatment was employed found a maternal mortality of 63.1
per centum; Parry in 500 similar cases found a mortality of 67.2 per
centum; and Schauta in 241 cases a mortality of 68.8 per centum.

In the 87 years between 1809 and 1896, 77 cases of coeliotomy for the
delivery of _viable_ ectopic foetuses were reported {30} in all
medical literature with a maternal mortality of about 58.3 per centum.
Between 1809 and 1888 there were 37 coeliotomies with a maternal
mortality of 86.5 per centum. Between 1889 and 1896 there were 40 such
operations, with a maternal mortality reduced to 32.5 per centum by
modern surgical methods.

The results as regards the children were almost the same in the two
series, and perhaps a little better in the latter series. In the first
series the 37 children were alive at delivery: the length of time in
which three of these children lived is not given; three more were
alive but they did not breathe; the others lived from a few seconds to
days, weeks, months or years. One was well at six months, another at
one year, another at seven and a half years, another in its fourteenth
year, another in its fifteenth year. In the second series the results
as regards the children were, as has been said, almost the same. The
40 cases that were reported from 1889 to 1896 are the standard for
this phase of ectopic gestation, because they come under the diagnosis
and treatment of the present day. They represent closely all such
cases that occurred in the entire world between 1889 and 1896, because
physicians report these operations to medical societies, and active
physicians are almost without exception members of such
societies--outside the civilised world these operations do not take
place. In the seven years there were annually less than six cases of
coeliotomy for ectopic gestation at term in the world, therefore
operations at term may be neglected in discussing Case II., and the
argument may be confined to the ordinary cases of expectant treatment.
Schrenck in 1892 collected 610 cases of ectopic gestation which had
been reported between 1887 and 1892; during the same time there were
23 cases (less than 4 per centum) of operations for the delivery of
viable foetuses.

If the physician that has made the diagnosis in this Case II. leaves
the patient, she may have a fatal hemorrhage at any moment. Dr. Howard
Kelly reports (_Operative Gynaecology_, vol. ii. p. 438) a fatal
hemorrhage in two days from rupture where the foetus was only as large
as a Lima bean. The hemorrhage may be so suddenly fatal that the woman
drops {31} to the floor unconscious just as if she had been shot. Dr.
Harris (_International Cyclop. of Surgery_, vol. vi. p. 784) tells of
a case where three of the best obstetricians in Philadelphia met in
consultation daily for 16 days expectantly watching development, but
the woman died from hemorrhage in thirty minutes before any of these
physicians could be called to her aid. Death may be brought about by
anaemia after repeated hemorrhages. Some hemorrhages can be mistaken
for colic by the physician, and this error will defer until too late
the treatment for hemorrhage.

If the woman is living in a hospital where there is a resident surgeon
with instruments ready, she has a better chance than if she is in her
own house. Even if she has a surgeon within call the outcome of the
case for her will depend largely on his skill, his presence of mind,
the preparedness of his instruments, the general condition of the
patient, and many other circumstances.

The instruments, ligatures, gauzes, solutions, dressing, etc., for
coeliotomy are multitudinous, and all must be sterile, or the woman
will be killed by septicaemia even if the hemorrhage is stopped. It is
almost impossible to keep a set of instruments and the other things
used in a coeliotomy always sterile and ready for instant use.

The skin surface of the patient's abdomen must be sterilised, or pus
infection will get into the peritoneum through the wound. In all
ordinary coeliotomies this surface is carefully sterilised by a long
process the night before the operation, a protective dressing is put
on, and the sterilisation is repeated the next day just before the
operation. This is so important that its voluntary omission is
malpractice. In the hurried operation for tubal rupture there would be
no time for sterilisation of the abdominal skin surface, and probably
no time to sterilise the instruments and other things used, especially
the surgeon's hands.

The surgeon to do any coeliotomy needs assistant physicians--one to
anaesthetise the patient, and at the least one other to work with him
in the operation. He should have three or four physicians and one or
two nurses. He can not do a coeliotomy alone. Hence the patient in a
ruptured {32} extrauterine pregnancy must have at the very least two
physicians within call.

The woman, then, in Case II. before operation has one chance in three
of life if no operation is done until the child is viable, and if she
remains alive till the child is viable (when she must be operated
upon) her chances for life will be no better, judging from modern
statistics.

At any moment, therefore, she is in actual peril of death by two
chances in three, and probably more if all special circumstances are
considered. The foetus is a materially unjust aggressor in this case
before rupture or other similar mishap, as it was in Case I., but not
to the same extent. In Case II. it is a materially unjust aggressor as
two is to three; in Case I. it is a materially unjust aggressor as
three is to three.

If a lunatic is just about to fire three cartridges at me, I may know
the chances are only two in three, or even only one in three, that he
will hit me fatally, nevertheless I may licitly kill him to stop the
firing and save my life. The mother in Case II. is in exactly similar
danger of life.

The objection that the danger to my life from the action of the
lunatic exists _hic et nunc_ and that the danger to the mother's life
does not threaten _hic et nunc_, is not of any weight. She is in
actual danger _hic et nunc_, even while the surgeon is in the room
examining her. Moreover, the matter of time here is accidental. If you
give a man a poison that may kill him in ten hours, or one that may
kill him in ten days, the action is essentially the same.

I am of the opinion that if this second case were proposed to moral
theologians many of them would decide that the surgeon should explain
the case fully to the patient or her family, and if immediate
operation were insisted upon he should withdraw from the case.
Nevertheless, as far as I can see, he has sound probabilism on the
side that operation is justifiable.

But, it may be objected, in Case I. the surgeon ligated the uterine
and ovarian arteries to stop an actual hemorrhage, and he permitted
the death of the foetus; in Case II. there is no hemorrhage yet, there
may possibly be none at all. I answer {33} that in Case II. if he
operates he ties the two arteries to forestall an imminent hemorrhage
which might begin within the next hour if it were not securely shut
off, and to forestall sepsis by leisurely and proper precautions, and
exactly as in the first case he permits the death of the foetus, he
indirectly kills an unjust aggressor. If the lunatic is aiming at me I
do not have to wait until he begins firing to licitly shoot at him.
The sooner I shoot, _servato moderamine inculpatae tutelae_, the more
prudent my action.

To put it in another form--in Case II. the surgeon is standing before
a dam (the stretched Fallopian tube) that is threatening to break at
any moment and cause death to a woman below it, because there is a
lunatic (the foetus) behind it tearing away the masonry. If the
surgeon shunts off the water just above the dam (the ligation of the
arteries), he will suddenly let the lunatic who is tearing away the
masonry fall down to the rocks at the bottom of the dam and be killed.
May he let the lunatic fall? Certainly he may. But perhaps the lunatic
will not succeed in tearing away the masonry. He is well provided with
tools to do so; the chances are even two in three that he will
succeed. Is he or the woman to be given the benefit of the doubt? The
woman, by all means; she has a doubt worth in juridic value at the
least twice as much as that which the lunatic has.

In any case of ectopic gestation the foetus has a very faint chance
indeed of even living long enough for baptism if the expectant
treatment is employed. We have seen that between November 1809 and
November 1896 there were reported 77 cases of operation for the
delivery of viable foetuses. Eleven of these children survived, 67
died within a few months, and many of these died just after delivery.
Still, probably all might have been baptised. Judging, however, from
the geographical distribution of the cases (see Kelly's _Operative
Gynaecology_, vol. ii. p. 458) and the names of the operators, only
about 14 of these children received baptism.

Now, since Schrenck found 610 ectopic gestations reported in five
years, this indicates that the average number of cases of ectopic
gestation which occur in the civilised world is at the least 122 a
year, for many more (twice as many, at the lowest {34} estimate) are
not diagnosed or not reported when diagnosed. In the 80 years, then,
between 1809 and 1896 there were at the least 9760 cases of ectopic
gestation in the civilised world; in the uncivilised countries there
were certainly as many more with not a child saved, or even brought
out of the pelvic cavity. To be sure, by rejecting perhaps a third of
the cases through bad diagnoses and neglect of reports, there were
20,000 cases; and in all these hardly 20 children baptised--one in a
thousand.

Modern surgical methods and improved diagnosis will do little to
better the condition, from the nature of the disease. Between 1893 and
1896 there were 21 cases of operation for the delivery of viable
foetuses reported, and this list is approximately correct, because the
surgeons that operate on such material are men that as a rule report
their work even when it is to their discredit. In these 21 cases, 6
mothers, 28 per centum died, 72 per centum recovered. Even if modern
surgery should save all the mothers who had escaped until the foetus
was viable, and should bring all the children to baptism, there would
not be more than about 7 such cases in the world annually. Increased
skill in diagnosis would raise the number of children brought to
baptism, but it would more than proportionately raise the whole number
of ectopic gestations discovered. If 10 foetuses were brought from the
pelvic cavity alive in the 130 cases of ectopic gestation of the year,
the chances for an extrauterine foetus to only reach baptism at a
viable age (not to live after baptism) are only 7 in 100 at a most
liberal estimate. Statistics are unreliable, of course, but I am
giving odds of two to one. The foetus has a much better chance for
baptism if the coeliotomy is done as early in the pregnancy as
possible, but it has a negligible chance of life in any case. Since
the creation of man there have been less than 15 extrauterine children
saved, and of these 15 four were less than a year old when reported,
and three under five years of age: the oldest was fifteen years of
age, and all were weaklings.

The practical rule, then, is that the ectopic foetus will die anyhow,
and operation only _indirectly_ (mark the word) accelerates the
inevitable death of a materially unjust aggressor, {35} while it gives
the mother the best chance for her life, which is in very grave peril.

Case III. The surgeon before operation diagnoses with the help of
consultors extrauterine pregnancy, but he or they can not tell whether
the foetus is alive or not. What should he do?

In my opinion he may operate with much more solid probability than
that which exists in Case II. If the argument is more for the death of
the foetus than for its life, this, of course, strengthens the
permissibility of the operation.

(1) The danger to the mother is exactly the same,_caeteris paribus_,
as in Case II.; (2) the foetus is only probably alive. An actual
danger to life is opposed to the probable life of a materially unjust
aggressor; therefore the surgeon may probably operate at once.
Probable here is used in the technical sense of the term.

Case IV. The following case is given because a similar one was
proposed in the articles in the _American Ecclesiastical Review_, but
it is not a practical case.

The surgeon, after consultation, does not know whether the growth in a
woman's pelvis is a malignant tumour or a sac containing an
extrauterine foetus. If the growth is a malignant tumour, the woman is
in actual and certain danger of life, her death is a mere matter of
time if a malignant tumour is not removed, and the sooner the tumour
is removed the better. If operation is deferred, metastases of the
tumour will have occurred, and operation will be too late. The
indication when we find a malignant tumour is, if it is not already
too late to operate, to take it out at once.

If the surgeon thinks that the growth may possibly be a foetus, and he
puts off the operation until a time when certain signs of pregnancy
should be present to establish a diagnosis of gestation, or their lack
to establish a diagnosis of tumour, it would almost surely be too late
to operate in the event the growth turned out to be a malignant
tumour.

As has been said, the case is not practical, because malignant tumours
of the tube are so very rare that they are not to be looked for,--only
one or two have been observed. {36} Malignant tumours about the tube
should be diagnosed. Supposing, however, the case to stand, it offers
in favour of operation a probabilism stronger than that in any case
except Case I., because the mother's danger is graver, and the
argument concerning the foetus is the same as that in Case III.

Case V. Suppose a doubtful case like Case III. or Case IV., but after
the surgeon has opened the abdomen he finds a foetus evidently alive.
This is an improbable but a possible case. Case V. then becomes like
Case II. with the addition of another grave danger to the lives of
both the mother and the foetus, which is the coeliotomy already
performed. The suggestion that the surgeon can leave the woman, back
out of the case, is absurd. If he closes the abdomen, the coeliotomy
may cause tubal abortion, the wound might have to be opened again in a
few hours or a few days, and the mother would be left in much greater
peril than she was in Case II. For the reasons already given, he
should go on with the operation.

Case VI. Suppose a case like Case V. in every particular except that
when the surgeon finds the foetus he can not tell whether it is alive
or not. He should,_ a fortiori_, finish the operation.

Case VII. A case of ectopic gestation is diagnosed, the conditions are
explained to the woman, and she refuses to be operated upon. Is she
justified? The probability is one to two that she will escape death if
she waits, and much less than one to two if she finally refuses
operation. The moralists would tell her she may refuse operation.

Case VIII. Let us suppose a case where a Fallopian tube either has its
lumen so narrowed by a gonorrhoeal inflammation that although the
spermatozoa may pass through and fecundate the ovum this fecundated
ovum can not get out to the uterus; or, secondly, that the gonorrhoeal
infection has completely shut the tube, yet migratory fecundation has
occurred through the route of the other tube and the passage along the
fundus of the uterus to the ovary of the infected side. In either case
an ectopic gestation begins.

The first case is improbable from a medical point of view, {37} and
the second is barely possible. Gonorrhoeal infection of the tubes is
common enough, but when it occurs it usually shuts the tube up
permanently. In chronic salpingitis at times the ovarian end of the
tube is not wholly closed at once, and since the body of the ovary is
very rarely affected by gonorrhoea, there is a possibility worth
considering of a tubal pregnancy through migration to occur.

In such a condition the woman might have been infected with
gonorrhoea, first, before her marriage through fornication or
accident; second, after her marriage through adultery or accident;
third, after the marriage by her husband.

If she had been infected through fornication or adultery, she is
accountable for the foreseen consequences of her sin, and she has put
an impediment for which she is responsible before the embryo. Suppose
the physician knows these facts. Then the excuse for indirectly
hastening the death of the foetus does not, at first sight, seem to
exist, because the foetus is apparently not a materially unjust
aggressor. It could easily happen that a surgeon's refusal to operate
in a case like this would cause the death of the mother and foetus.
Should he let both perish? Is he to let the mother die for the sake of
staving off for a half-hour the certain death of a useless embryo the
size of a pigeon's egg? It is not a useless embryo the size of a
pigeon's egg, but a human being, the most important thing on earth,
and a human being shut off from life and baptism as a direct
consequence of that woman's brutal sensuality. But the woman may be
the mother of other helpless children. What is to be done? Let us
recur to the example of the homicidal maniac.

If I accidently by a blow make a man insane and that insane man
afterward tries to kill me, I or my protector may permit his death to
save my life. If I maliciously make a man insane and he afterward
tries to kill me, may I or my protector kill him in my defence? Some
may say that I may not because I have lost all juridic superiority
over the madman as a consequence of my sin against him. That position,
however, does not seem to be correct.

If it is correct, parity makes the assertion true that the foetus in
the case supposed above may not be indirectly {38} killed to save the
mother. If it is not true, the foetus may be indirectly destroyed.
Does my sin against the insane man give him a right to kill me? By no
means. Nothing but defence of life or its equivalent gives any private
individual the right to kill another. The man might kill me before
this aggression of mine, in defence of his sanity, but after the fact
such a killing would be mere revenge, or an _actus hominis_, not a
right.

The woman, we suppose, has maliciously put the foetus in its position
of material aggressor, but has the foetus the right to kill her? No;
the foetus is an individual not acting in self-defence, it is merely
growing. Has the woman or the surgeon, her protector, the right to
permit the death of the foetus to defend the woman's life? I think
they have, because the foetus here also is, from its unnatural
position, a materially unjust aggressor.

But, you say, this is a vicious circle. You justify the permitted
death of the foetus in Case I. because it is a materially unjust
aggressor, and it is a materially unjust aggressor because it is in an
unnatural position where it has no right to be; but in the present
case the mother put it in the unnatural position, and it therefore has
a right to be where it is. No: the consequence does not follow. The
fact that the mother put the foetus in its unnatural position does not
give the foetus a _right_ to be in that position, although it
constitutes a ground for her punishment by proper authority. You
object again, if this woman has a right to permit the death of the
foetus to save her own life, how may she be punished for that death?
She will not be punished for the actual coeliotomy which indirectly
caused the death of the foetus, but she will be punished for the sin
of putting that child in a position in which it had to be killed. This
seems to be a distinction without a difference. As far as the mother
is concerned, _transeat _; but it is a real distinction as far as the
surgeon is concerned.

If the woman's condition is a result of accidental infection before or
after marriage, the case goes into the class of those discussed above,
and operation is justifiable.

If her infection comes after her marriage adulterously, her {39} sin
is the greater, but the operation is justifiable for the reasons which
were given in the case of culpable infection before marriage.

If she had been infected by her husband, the operation is
justifiable--the father is accountable for the foetus's death.

Fortunately the entire case is so nearly hypothetical that it is
little more than mere words.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{40}

