VI

HUMAN TERATA AND THE SACRAMENTS

Teratology ([Greek text], a monster) is a part of biology that treats
of deviation from a normal development in man and the lower animals.
The name was adopted in 1822 by the elder Saint-Hilaire, who then
attempted to separate the results of modern exact methods of research
from the myths and loose descriptions of monsters found in the
writings of old authors. Cicero (_De Divinatione_) derives the term
monster from the proper preternatural signification looked for in the
occurrence of these abnormal beings: "Monstra, ostenta, portenta,
prodigia appellantur, quoniam monstrant, ostendunt, portendunt et
predicunt."

At the end of the seventeenth century Malpighi and Grew discovered
that plant tissue is entirely made up of microscopic spaces enclosing
fluid; they called these spaces _cells_. Different investigators found
that animal tissue is also composed of cells; and between 1835 and
1839 Schwann and Schleiden formulated the law that every metazoic
organism is made of cells, and starts from a cell.

In 1672 de Graaf discovered the mammalian ovum, in 1675 Ludwig Ham
found spermatozoa, in 1827 von Baer recognised the human ovum, but not
until 1875 was the important fact established that fertilisation is
effected by the fusion of the male and female pronuclei. This was
demonstrated by Oscar Hertwig from observation of the ova of
starfishes.

Mammalian ova, owing to an almost complete lack of yolk, are all
small. The egg of a whale is about the size of a fern-seed, but the
yolked eggs of birds are large--that of the great auk was 7.5 inches
long. In man the ovum is from 0.18 to 0.2 mm. in diameter, scarcely
visible to the {70} naked eye, and the spermatozoon is extremely
minute. The human spermatozoon is only fifty-four thousandths of a
millimetre in length, and from forty-one to fifty-three thousandths of
a millimetre are taken up by its flagellum. The essential part is from
four to six thousandths of a millimetre in length (Dr. L. N. Boston,
_Journ, of Applied Microscopy_, vol. iv. p. 1360). A line of 18 human
spermatozoa would reach only across the head of an ordinary pin. These
spermatozoa have the power of locomotion in alkaline fluid. Henle
found they can travel one centimetre in three minutes.

  The human ovum and spermatozoon are single cells, and the principal
  parts of a typical cell are the cytoplasm (called also the
  protoplasm), and, within this, the nucleus and centrosome. The
  centrosome is efficient in the process of cell-division. A few cells
  have also an outer envelope or membrane, and this part is well
  developed in the ovum.

  The nucleus is the centre of activity in a cell. In the resting
  state it is surrounded by a membrane, and within the membrane is an
  intra-nuclear network made up of chromatin and linin--the chromatin
  is an important element. The meshes of this network are probably
  filled with fluid.

  During the stages preparatory to the mitotic, or indirect, division
  of a cell into two cells (one of the methods of reproduction) the
  chromatin segregates in typical cases into two groups of loops, and
  each group has equal portions of the chromatin. When the chromatin
  is in this shape, a loop is called a chromosome.

  The chromosomes are very important. They occur in constant definite
  numbers in the somatic cells of the various species of many animals
  and plants, and it is probable that each species of plant and animal
  has its own characteristic number of chromosomes. Wilson (_The Cell
  in Development and Inheritance,_ New York, 1890) gives a list of 72
  species in which the number has been determined. Man has probably 16
  chromosomes in the somatic cell, and the mature male and female germ
  cells in man contribute eight chromosomes each to the nucleus of the
  impregnated ovum.

The chromosomes transmit the physical bases of heredity from one
generation to the next, and the heritages from the two parents are
equal except in cases of prepotency. Every cell {71} in the human body
is derived from the father and the mother equally. The fact that the
woman carries a child for months in her womb means only that she
employs a peculiar method of feeding and protecting it. After its
birth she feeds it from her breasts, before birth through its
umbilical vessels, but she originally gives only the eight chromosomes
as the father does, and the child's vital principle builds up the body
from this foundation. The popular notion that the foetus in the womb
is formed through some process of literal abstraction from the
maternal tissues is no more true than that the infant is so built up
while it is suckling; both processes are merely different methods of
feeding.

All the chromosomes from the fathers of at least 200 men could fit
simultaneously on the head of one pin, yet virtually, not merely
potentially, half the bodily substance of that multitude, and all the
physical characteristics derived from the 200 fathers, are indubitably
contained in those chromosomes and nowhere else, unless by a special
creation they are infused with the new soul, which seems to be an
altogether unreasonable alternative. This statement concerning the
minuteness of the chromosomes is not speculation--they can readily be
seen and measured with the aid of the microscope.

A human being, then, obtains eight microscopic chromosomes from his
father and eight from his mother, positively nothing more except food;
yet he develops into a man with a body made up of countless millions
of cells which expand into more than 200 bones in the skeleton and
over 200 muscles,--into the fascias, ligaments, tendons, the great and
small glands, the lymph and blood systems, the respiratory and
alimentary tracts, the skin and its appendages, and a nervous system,
which alone furnishes material for years of study if we would learn
its anatomy fully. Not only all this, but the man commonly closely
resembles his father or his mother, or some other ancestor, in
personal appearance, in certain physical tendencies, in graces or
blemishes; and furthermore, he shows inherited racial characteristics.

If a father is prepotent, he may have a greater effect in producing
the formed child than the mother has, and _vice versa,_ as when a son
closely resembles his father or his mother. {72} Prepotency, moreover,
may extend down through generations and centuries. In the streets of
Palermo to-day typical Normans may be seen, despite the intermarriages
of centuries, who are the descendants of those male Normans that went
down to Sicily with Tancred. There are Romans there, too, and
Saracens. When the Belgae--a race of tall, red-bearded men, with
elliptical skulls--went from the continent of Europe to Ireland,
probably six centuries before our era, they conquered the aborigines,
a gentle, brune race of lower stature. These Belgae became the
ancestors of the chieftain class, and their physical type persists
until to-day; so does that of the Pictish aborigines. Daniel O'Connell
had a typical Belgic body. Other big, blond Irishmen are Norse or
Danish in remote origin.

  How is the extremely complex human body with its various physical
  characteristics built up from the nucleus of a fecundated cell, the
  ovum? The endeavour to answer this question has brought out most
  ingenious speculation from nearly all the great biologists of modern
  times. The question is the foundation of the theories of heredity,
  and it is also fundamental in the theories of evolution.

  The human ovum is a flattened spherical cell, made up of a very
  delicate cell-wall, called the vitelline membrane; outside this is a
  comparatively thick membrane, the zona pellucida, which is properly
  not a part of the cell. Within the vitelline membrane is a granular
  cytoplasm, the vitellus (yolk), and in this lies the nucleus, which
  in the old text-books was called the germinal vesicle. This nucleus
  contains a nucleolus.

  The human spermatozoon consists of a flattened head which has a thin
  protoplasmic cap extending down two-thirds of its length. In the
  head is the nucleus with the chromatin. Beyond the head is the neck,
  which contains the anterior and posterior centrosomes. Behind the
  neck is the tail, or flagellum, in three parts,--the middle piece,
  the principal part, and the end piece. From the neck to the end of
  the tail centrally runs a bundle of fibrils, the axial filament. In
  the middle piece these fibrils are wrapped within a single spiral
  filament which winds from the neck down to the annulus at the
  beginning of the principal part, and lies in a clear fluid. Without
  the spiral filament, along the middle piece, is the mitochondria, a
  finely granular protoplasmic layer. The principal part of the tail
  consists of the axial {73} filament enclosed in an involucrum, and
  the end piece is made up of this filament without the involucrum.

  The head and neck of the spermatozoon, which contain the nucleus and
  centrosomes, are the essential parts, and the middle piece and the
  remainder of the tail appear to be used solely for locomotion and
  penetration. When the head penetrates the ovum, the tail is detached
  and rejected.

  Our knowledge of the initial stages in the development of a human
  embryo is derived indirectly from the observation of other mammals.
  There are nine early human embryos reported, and the average
  probable age of these is twelve days. Breuss' specimen was probably
  ten days old (_Wiener med. Wochenblatt,_ 1877). Peters (_Einbettung
  des mensch. Eies,_ 1899) found a smaller embryo than this. The
  Breuss ovum was 5 mm. in length; Peters' was 3 by 1.5 by 1.5 mm.,
  but the probable age was not given. There have been numerous embryos
  more than twelve days old observed, and since the process after the
  twelfth day is identical in man and the higher mammals, there is no
  doubt that the first stages are also the same.

  The segmentation that makes new cells is complicated, and the
  outcome of the division is a ball of cells. In eggs which have a
  large yolk, like those of birds, the cells form a round body resting
  on the surface of the yolk, but in mammalian ova a hollow ball of
  cells, or a _Morula,_ results, which lines the internal surface of
  the cellular envelope. The ovum absorbs moisture by osmosis and
  enlarges, and about the twelfth day after the germ-nuclei have begun
  to divide, the Morula, or hollow ball of cells, called also the
  _Blastodermic Vesicle,_ is formed.

  The next stage in development is the establishment of two primary
  germinal layers, called together the _Gastrula_, The outer layer is
  the _Ectoderm_ or the _Epiblast,_ and the inner layer is the
  _Endoderm_ or _Hypoblast_. In a Morula the smaller cells, which
  contain less yolk-material, gradually grow around the larger
  yolk-containing cells to form the Gastrula.

 Between the Ectoderm and the Endoderm a layer of cells called the
 _Mesoderm_ or _Mesoblast_ is next formed, and from these three layers
 all the parts of the embryo are built up. From the outer Ectoderm and
 the inner Endoderm those organs arise which are in the body, outer
 and inner,--as the nervous system and the outer skin from the
 Ectoderm, the inner entrails, the lungs and liver, from the Endoderm.
 From the Mesoderm come the inner skin, the bones and muscles.

  By this time the embryo is a minute longitudinal streak at the {74}
  surface of one pole of the ovum. The "Primitive Trace" is like a
  long inverted letter U, the legs of which are in apposition. The
  Primitive Trace becomes a circular flattened disc; and it grows into
  a cylindrical body by the juncture of the free margins which fold
  downward and inward and meet in the median line, and this closes in
  the pelvic, abdominal, thoracic, pharyngeal, and oral cavities. The
  legs and arms bud from this cylinder later. While the ventral
  cylinder is growing, another longitudinal cylinder is formed along
  the upper surface of the embryo, which will contain the brain and
  the spinal column. The subsequent development of the embryo and
  foetus need not be known for an understanding of the material
  considered in treating here of terata.

Human terata occur in certain rather definite, types of erroneous
development, and the classification of Hirst and Piersol (_Human
Monstrosities_, Philadelphia, 1891), which is a combination and change
of the classifications of Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire, Klebs, and Foerster,
is the most satisfactory. There are four great groups of abnormally
developed human beings: (1) Hemiteratic; (2) Heterotaxic; (3)
Hermaphroditic; (4) Monstrous.

Hemiterata are giants, dwarfs, persons showing anomalies in shape, in
colour, in closure of embryonic clefts, in absence or excess of
digits, or having other defects. This group does not come under
discussion here, but attention should be called to the fact that women
who are dwarfs are to be warned before marriage that they cannot be
delivered normally,--that the caesarean section or symphyseotomy will
be necessary, or that certain physicians will practise craniotomy in
delivering them.

The Heterotaxic group comprises persons whose left or right visceral
organs are reversed in position through abnormal embryonic
development; the liver is on the left side, the heart points to the
right, and so on.

Of the next group, the Hermaphroditic, it may be said that a true
hermaphrodite, in the full sense of the term, has not been found; but
there have been several examples of individuals who had an ovary and a
testicle, and other rudimentary sexual organs that belonged to both
male and female. Forms of apparent doubling are common, and in case of
doubt as to sex the probability leans toward the {75} masculine side.
As to marriage in such cases, questions may arise that are to be
settled by the anatomist. In dealing with double monsters it is
sometimes difficult or impossible to determine whether we have to do
with one or two individuals, and this difficulty has serious weight,
especially in the administration of baptism. It is improbable that
there is a doubling of personality in hermaphrodites. A striking
characteristic of compound terata is that the individuals are always
of the same sex; moreover, the embryonal development of reproductive
organs in general is such as almost to preclude a question of duality
of personality.

Terata, more properly so called, are divided into single, double, and
triple monsters. Single monsters may be autositic, or independent of
another embryo or foetus; or they may be omphalositic, that is,
dependent upon another embryo or foetus, which is commonly well
developed, and which supplies blood for both through the umbilical
vessels. When an omphalosite exists, the other foetus is called, in
this case also, the autosite.

The first order of autositic single monsters contains four genera with
eight species, and under these species are thirty-four varieties. They
may have imperfect limbs, no limbs, one eye in the middle of the
forehead (_cyclops_), fused lower limbs (_siren_), and so on. Some of
these monsters show a strong resemblance to lower animals, but there
is no record that is in any degree scientific of a hybrid between a
human being and a lower animal.

There are two genera of the omphalositic single monsters, with four
species. One of the twins, the autosite, is commonly a normal child;
the other, the omphalosite, may be as small as a child's fist, and be
very much deformed. Of these omphalosites the _paracephalus_ has an
imperfect head, commonly no heart, and the lungs are absent or
rudimentary. The _acephalus_ has no head, and commonly no arms; the
_asomata_ is a head more or less developed, with a sac below
containing rudiments of the trunk organs. The Acephalus is very
rare--the rarest of all monsters except the Tricephalus. There is a
fourth kind--the _foetus anideus_. This is a shapeless mass of flesh
covered with skin. There may be a {76} slight prominence with a tuft
of hair on it at one end of the mass to indicate the head. In this
monster there are more traces of bodily organs than might be expected.
These four kinds of omphalosites are either dead when born, or they
die as soon as the placental circulation is cut off. If there is any
probability of life, the physician should give them baptism before the
placental circulation is stopped.

  Nothing satisfactory is known concerning the etiology of single
  monsters. Landau, and other authorities as great as he is, reject
  the theory that maternal impressions from fright or exposure to the
  sight of hideous deformity are the cause of terata. I think the
  father is accountable for terata as often as the mother is. Barnes,
  an English physician, and others claim they find that terata are
  frequent in consanguineous marriages, but I have not been able to
  verify the assertion.

  It seems a theory may be offered to explain the single terata. In
  1888 Roux of Breslau by puncturing one blastomere of a frog's egg in
  the two-cell stage killed the punctured blastomere without affecting
  the other. The punctured blastomere remained inactive, but the other
  developed into a complete _half_ embryo.

  Crampton by separating and isolating the blastomeres in the two-cell
  stage obtained a half embryo; and Zoja by isolating blastomeres of
  the medusae, Clytia and Laodice, got _dwarfed_ larvae.

  Wilson succeeded by the separation through shaking of the
  blastomeres in the two-cell and four-cell stages in developing
  Amphioxus larvae, which were half the natural size for the two-cell
  blastomeres, and commonly half the normal size from the four-cell
  blastomeres, yet in the latter some of the larvae were of the normal
  size but imperfect From the eight-cell stage he got only _imperfect_.
  larvae. Similar results were obtained by other operators with
  various eggs.

  Driesch and Morgan by removing part of the cytoplasm from a
  fertilized egg of the ctenophore, Beroe, produced imperfect larvae
  showing certain defects which represent the parts removed.

  In these cases of injured and isolated blastomeres we have, it seems
  to me, a plausible theory for the etiology of single terata. The
  blastomeres in the human ovum may perhaps be injured in part by
  toxins from the mother, or they may be defective through disease in
  the ovum or the spermatozoon. They also may possibly be displaced
  traumatically, but this seems to be doubtful.

  There are three theories concerning the origin of omphalositic {77}
  terata. Ahlfeld (_Missbildungen des Menschen_, Leipsic, 1882) holds
  that the autosite is stronger than the omphalosite, and as a
  consequence the foetal circulation in the omphalosite is reversed,
  and development is thus checked. Dareste (_Production artificielle
  des monstruosites_, Paris, 1876), Panum (_Beitrag zur Kenntniss der
  physiol. Bedeut. der angeboren Missbildungen, Virchow's Archiv.,_
  1878), Perls (_Lehrbuch der allgem. Pathologie_) and Breus (_Wiener
  med. Jahrbuch_, 1882) maintain there is an inherent original defect
  in the omphalositic child which prevents development of the
  blood-vessels, and that Ahlfeld's theory of an indirect umbilical
  connection of the omphalosite to the placenta is not probable; if it
  were, omphalosites would be very common, because one of twins is
  nearly always stronger than the other. Hirst and Piersol (_op. cit_)
  combine these theories. This kind of monster is certainly an
  imperfectly developed human individual, and even the Foetus Anideus
  should receive at the least conditional baptism.

The next group comprises the composite monsters. Normal twins may
arise from the fertilisation of one ovum and of two distinct ova. In
506 cases examined by Ahlfeld he found that 66 twin births came from
single ova. Twins from a single ovum are always of the same sex, and
they are not easily distinguished one from the other. Triplets may
arise from one, two, or three ova. The elder Saint-Hilaire thought
that composite monsters arise from the fusion of two impregnated ova,
but this opinion is now generally rejected. Composite terata in every
instance arise from a single ovum.

  There is a divergence of opinion, however, as to the origin of a
  composite monster in the single ovum. Some authorities maintain that
  these monsters arise from the union of two originally separate
  primitive traces. This supposes primitive duality followed by fusion
  (_Verwachsungstheorie_). Other writers hold that there is originally
  one primitive trace, and that composite terata are the product of a
  more or less extensive cleavage of this single blastoderm. This
  supposes primitive unity followed by fission (_Spaltungstheorie_).
  Here, as in the case of normal development, the argument is founded
  on analogy. The earliest stage in the development of a human double
  monster observed was at the fourth week after
  fertilisation--Ahlfeld's case.

  B. Schultze (_U. anomale Duplicitaet der Axenorgane, Virchow's
  Archiv._) and Panum and Dareste (_op. cit._) hold the fusion
  theory-- {78} the fusion of two separate blastoderms in one ovum.
  Panum and Dareste have seen two separate normal blastoderms on one
  ovum. Allen Thompson in 1844 (_London and Edinburgh Monthly Journal
  of Medical Science_), Wolff, von Baer, and Reichert also observed
  two embryos in one ovum. Dareste is of the opinion that the fusion
  of two separate ova is impossible. The fission theory--the fission
  of a single blastoderm to make a composite monster--is supported by
  Wolff, J. F. Meckel, von Baer, J. Mueller, Valentine, Bischoff, and
  others, especially by Ahlfeld. Ahlfeld says that this single
  blastoderm is split by pressure.

  Gerlach also (_Die Entstehungsweise der Doppelmissbildungen, etc.,_
  Stuttgart, 1882) admits fission, but he contends that it is not so
  simple a process as Ahlfeld thinks it is. It is not a passive
  cleavage, but a result of a force in the cell-mass existing before
  differentiation. Gerlach calls fission at the anterior or head-end
  of the single blastoderm, _bifurcation_; and he has actually
  observed such bifurcation in a chick embryo of sixteen hours (_U. d.
  Entstehungsweise der vorderen Verdoppelung. Deutsche Archiv. f.
  klin, Med.,_ 1887). In this case the first change noticed was a
  broadening of the anterior end of the primitive streak; next a
  forked divergence appeared, and this became more pronounced; until
  by the twenty-sixth hour the bifurcation was half as long as the
  undivided posterior part. From each anterior end of the diverging
  branches a distinct head-process extended. Allen Thompson (_loc.
  cit._) in 1844 saw a goose-egg, which had been incubated for five
  days, in which was a double monster divided to the neck.

  Beyond this observation by Gerlach we have the fact, which seems to
  make for the fission theory, that no matter how unequally nourished
  or how variable in extent, the union between the halves of double
  monsters is always symmetric--exactly the same parts of each twin
  are joined. This seems to exclude a fortuitous growing together of
  dissimilar areas or cell-masses, for non-parasitic double terata at
  the least. Born ( _U. d. Furchung des Eies bei Doppelbildungen,
  Breslauer Aerztl. Zeitschr._, 1887), in a study of fish ova, found
  that ova which produce double monsters begin with a segmentation
  like that of the single normal ovum.

  If fission is complete homogeneous twins are the result; these twins
  are of the same sex and very similar in appearance. Incomplete
  fission, as has been said, gives rise to double or triple terata. If
  one of the teratic twin embryos is stronger than the other, the
  various combinations of enclosure and parasitism may result,
  although the origin of parasitic double terata is not convincingly
  clear. A triple {79} monster, according to the fission theory,
  arises from a double incomplete cleavage of the primitive trace. Dr.
  Ephraim Cutter has observed teratic composite spermatozoa which, he
  thinks, probably have influence in producing composite monsters.

There are three orders of the double autositic monsters: _Terata
Katadidyma,_ in which the embryonal fission was at the cerebral end;
the _Terata Anadidyma_, divided below; the _Terata Anakatadidyma_,
divided above and below, but joined at the middle of the body. There
are four genera of the Terata Katadidyma with many species. The first
genus is the _Diprosopus,_ the double-faced. The doubling varies from
the finding of two complete faces to a slight trace of duplex
formation in one head. Foerster in 500 human monsters observed 29 cases
of diprosopi.

There are six species of diprosopi: 1. _D. Diophthalmus,_ which has
only two eyes, but there is a doubling of the nose. 2. _D. Distomus_,
which has two mouths, two lower jaws, two tongues, one pharynx, and
one oesophagus. 3. _D. Triophthalmus_, which has three eyes, and the
doubling of the face is more complete. There are only two ears. 4. _D.
Tetrophthalmus_, which has four eyes and two well-separated faces. 5.
_D. Triotus_ is like the last, but it has three ears. 6. _D. Tetrotus_
has four ears, four eyes, and there is some doubling at the pharynx.
Two oesophaguses enter one stomach in this species commonly. D.
Tetrotus is rare--only one example in man is known. In all diprosopi
there is only one trunk, one pair of arms, and one pair of legs. Sir
James Paget had a photograph, made in 1856, of a living diprosopus,
the second face of which had a mouth, nose, eye, part of an ear, and a
brain (?) of its own. The two faces acted simultaneously, suckled,
sneezed, yawned together.

Are diprosopi twins? An answer to this question will be clearer after
a description of other composite terata.

The second genus of the Terata Katadidyma is the _Dicephalus_. This
genus comprises five species, which have in each case two heads, with
separate necks commonly. There are two vertebral columns, which
usually are separate down to the sacrum, and they converge at the
lower end. {80} In the interior organs doubling will be found
corresponding to the degree of separation of the trunks. In all the
species of this genus there are one umbilicus and one cord.

The first species of the Dicephalus is the _Dicephalus Dibrachius_--a
two-armed, double-headed monster. In this species most of the viscera
are single, but the right and left halves of each viscus are supplied
by the respective foetuses, and the entrail does not become
indistinguishably single until near the lower end of the ileum. There
may be two ordinary kidneys and a third smaller one, two pancreatic
glands, and two gall-bladders. Such a monster may be monauchenous or
diauchenous.

The next species is the _Dicephalus Tribrachius Dipus_--two heads,
three arms, and two legs. There is also a _Dicephalus Tribrachius
Tripus_ (three arms and three legs), _D. Tetrabrachius Dipus_ (four
arms and two legs), and _D. Tetrabrachius Tripus_ (four arms and three
legs). In all these cases there is no doubt of the presence of twins,
unless there might be some doubt as to dual personality in the
Dicephalus Dibrachius. In the Dicephalus Tetrabrachius Dipus and the
Dicephalus Tetrabrachius Tripus there is almost complete duplication
of the internal organs, and the halves of the composite body belong
evidently to individuals distinct in thought, volition, and character.
Each brain controls only its own half of the body. There are four
lungs, two hearts (sometimes in one pericardium), two stomachs, two
intestinal canals down to the colon or lower, two livers (sometimes
joined), four kidneys (or three, one of which is small), two bladders,
emptied at different times through a common urethra.

Dicephali are somewhat common. Foerster found 140 among 500 specimens
of monsters. They are rarely born alive. The best known cases of
dicephali that lived for any length of time are:

1. Peter and Paul, of Florence, born in 1316, lived thirty days.

2. The Scotch Brothers, born in 1490, lived twenty-eight years. They
were at the court of James III. Above the point of union the twins
were independent in sensation and action, but below the point all
sensation and action were {81} common. One died before the other, and
the second "succumbed to infection from putrefaction" a few days
later.

3. The Wuertemberg Sisters, born in 1498.

4. The twins, Justina and Dorothea, born in 1627, lived six weeks.

5. Boy twins at Padua, born in 1691, lived to be baptised.

6. Rita-Cristina, born at Sassari in Sardinia in 1829. They lived
eight months. These children had a common trunk below the breast, one
pelvis, and one pair of legs. Rita was feeble and quiet, Cristina
vigorous and lively. They suckled at different times; and sensation in
the heads and arms was individual, but below the junction it was
common. Rita died of bronchitis, and during Rita's final illness
Cristina was healthy; but when Rita died, Cristina, who was suckling
at the time, suddenly expired. They had two hearts in one pericardium,
the digestive tracts did not fuse until the lowest third of the ileum
was reached. The livers were fused, the vertebral columns were
distinct throughout. These twins were baptised separately.

7. Marie-Rose Drouin, born in Montreal in 1878. They lived seven
months. Marie died of cholera infantum; and Rose then died, although
she had not been directly affected by the disease. These twins were
like Rita-Cristina anatomically except that they had no legs. The
respirations and heart-pulsations differed, and one child slept while
the other child cried.

8. The Tocci boys, born in Turin in 1877. In 1882 they were strong and
healthy, and they may be living still. They resembled Rita-Cristina
anatomically in every respect. Each boy had control of the leg on his
own side, but not of the other leg, consequently they could not walk.
Their sensations above the juncture were distinct, and their thoughts
and emotions differed.

In the Paris _L'union medicale_ there is an account of a bicephalic
still-born monster, born at Alexandria in 1848, which, according to
the report, had on one side a typical negro head and on the other side
a typical Egyptian fellah head. This report is probably not authentic;
but if it is, it would be difficult to reconcile it with the fission
theory. {82} Supposing the report true, the case would have to be one
(1) of superimpregnation wherein (2) a spermatozoon from each source
penetrated the same ovum, (3) a bicephalic monster resulted, with (4)
distinct racial characteristics. All this is extremely improbable.

Superimpregnation has happened. There are cases where negresses have
given birth to twins, one of which was a negro and the other a
mulatto. Instances are cited in books on Legal Medicine like those of
Tidy and Beck. In Flint's Physiology a case is recorded in which a
mulatto woman in Kent County, Virginia, married to a negro, gave birth
to twins, in 1867, one of which was a negro much blacker than the
mother, and the other a white child, with long, light, silky hair, and
a "brilliant complexion." The white child's nose was shaped like the
mother's, but there was no other resemblance. Even supposing this to
be a case of superimpregnation, that does not fully explain the
extreme whiteness of one child and the extreme blackness of the other.

Superfoetation is also possible. Tidy (_Legal Medicine_) gives a case:
"Mary Anne Bigaud, at thirty-seven, on April 30th, 1748, gave birth to
a full-term mature boy, which survived its birth two and a half
months, and to a second mature child (girl) on September 16th, 1748,
which lived for one year." The second child was born four and a half
months after the first, and both were "nine-months" children. It was
proved after death in this case that the mother had not a double
uterus, and the report is vouched for by Professor Eisenman, and by
Leriche, surgeon-major of the Strasburg Military Hospital. Several
other cases of superfoetation are given by Bonnar (_Edin. Med.
Journ.,_ January, 1865).

The third genus of Terata Katadidyma is the _Ischiopagus_. These twins
are divided so much from above downward that the heads are at almost
opposite ends of the double body. They are joined at the coccyges and
sacra, and the spinal columns have nearly the same axis. The trunk
organs are complete and separate, except that they are commonly fused
in the pelvis. There may be two, three, or four legs, given off at
right angles to the pelvis. This kind of monster is not rare. Foerster
collected twenty cases, and nine new examples {83} were reported in
the _Index Medicus_ between 1879 and 1893. Ischiopagic twins were born
in County Roscommon, Ireland, in 1827, and baptised separately. The
Jones Twins, born in Typhon County, Indiana, in 1889, lived for about
two years; they were ischiopagi, and they had the very unusual
quality, it is said, that they differed in complexion and the colour
of eyes and hair. A case was reported in _American Medicine_,
September, 1903.

Classed with the Katadidyma is the genus _Pygopagus_, although it has
four legs. This form is very rare. The twins are joined only by the
latero-posterior aspects of the sacra and coccyges, so that the two
individuals are placed almost back to back. The trunk organs are
independent, except for some fusion near the point of juncture.
Examples of this class are the Hungarian Sisters, born at Szony in
1701, who lived to womanhood; the negresses Millie-Christine, born in
1851, and who were recently living in North Carolina; and the Blazek
Sisters of Bohemia. The negresses had common sensation in the legs,
but Millie could not localise what part of Christine's legs was
touched, and _vice versa_.

The second group of the double autositic monsters are _Terata
Anadidyma_--terata divided from below upward. The first genus is the
_Dipygus_. This has a single body above, but a double pelvis with
double lower extremities in the typical cases. There is an exact
description of a double monster of this kind in the Gaelic _Annals of
the Four Masters_ as early as the year 727 of this era. The chronicler
says in that year on Dalkey Island near Dublin, "There was a cow seen
which had one head and one body as far as her shoulders, two bodies
from her shoulders hindward, and two tails. She had eight legs, and
she was milked three times a day."

A perfect human Dipygus with two equally developed pairs of legs is
unknown. Catherine Kaufmann, who was born in 1876, and who died in
1878, had a double pelvis with double pelvic organs in part, but she
had only one pair of legs. There is a similar anomaly said to be
living in Philadelphia at present. Blanche Dumas, born in 1860, had a
double pelvis, double pelvic organs, and three legs. Mrs. B., born in
1868, {84} had four legs--the two inner ones were smaller than the
outer pair. Her spinal column was divided up to the third lumbar
vertebra. Her double pelvic organs acted independently. There are
living male examples of this form of monster.

The next genus is the _Syncephalus_, called also _Janus_ and
_Janiceps_. Its lower body is double up to the umbilicus, the trunk
single above that point; the head shows signs of doubling, and there
are four legs and four arms; the bodies grow front to front. The head
usually is large, therefore this monster is born dead.

Another genus is the _Craniopagus_--twins joined only by the skull or
scalp. There are three species, named from the place of
union--_Craniopagus Frontalis, C. Parietalis_, and _C. Occipitalis_.

A third group of double autositic monsters are the _Terata
Anakatadidyma_, which are divided above and below, but joined from the
navel to the head. There are three genera. The first, the
_Prosopothoracopagus_, is joined at the upper abdomen, the chest, and
the faces; the spinal columns are separate. The faces are imperfect,
the jaws are united; there is a broad neck with one oesophagus, and
there is one stomach and one duodenum. This is a rare form, and it can
not exist out of the uterus.

A second genus, the _Thoracopagus_, has a thorax in common, and the
inner legs may be united. It is, as a rule, still-born.

The next genus is the _Omphalopagus_, in which the twins are joined
from the navel to the bottom of the chest. This double monster has the
slightest union of all, and it is very rare. The Siamese Twins were
omphalopagi. They quarrelled; one became a drunkard and the other
remained temperate. They married two women, and Chang had ten
children, and Eng twelve. Chang died while Eng was asleep, and the
latter died two hours after he had waked and learned of his brother's
death.

There is a genus, the _Rachipagus_, the examples of which are joined
behind like the class Terata Anakatadidyma that are joined in front.

{85}

Four known attempts have been made to separate double monsters
surgically, but all failed owing to crude surgery; modern methods
might be successful in some cases.

The second order of double monsters comprises the parasitic class.
There are three genera of these terata, with five species and
seventeen varieties. The chief of these only will be mentioned. The
_Heterotypus_ is a parasitic child which hangs from the abdominal wall
of the principal subject. Varieties of this species are the
_Heteropagus_, which is a parasite with head and arms; the
_Heterodelphus_, which has no head; the _Heterodymus_, which has a
head, neck, and thorax. The _Heteralitis_ is a second species, in
which the parasite is inserted at a distance from the navel of the
autosite. The _Epicomus_ is the only example, and it consists of a
parasitic supernumerary head. The _Polypnathus_ is a parasite attached
to the jaw of the autosite. When fastened to the upper jaw, it is an
_Epignathus_; at the lower jaw it is an _Hypognathns_. Another group
is made up of terata having parasitic legs which are attached to
different parts of the autosite,--to the pelvis, the head, the
abdomen, and so on. Finally, there is the _Endocyma_, which is a
parasite enclosed within the body of an autosite.

Parasites are nourished through the blood supply of the autosite, and
the parasites usually are incapable of motion. The autosite can feel
when the parasite is touched, and in some cases the autosite can
localise the touch. In India, in 1783, a child was born which had a
supernumerary head attached to the autositic head, crown to crown; it
lived four years. The parasite's eyes were always partly open, but
they appeared to be incapable of intelligent vision. They contracted
under strong light, and when the autosite was suddenly awakened both
sets of eyes moved.

Gould and Pyle (_Anomalies and Curiosities of Medicine_) give an
account of an Italian boy, aged eight years, who had a small parasitic
head protruding from near the left third rib. Sensibility was common.
Each of the heads received baptism (one was called John and the other
Matthew), and there was question as to whether extreme unction should
be administered to the parasitic head. A similar case occurred in {86}
England in 1880 (_British Med. Journal_), and the parasitic head could
be pinched without attracting the attention of the autosite.

Teratologists now exclude Dermoid Cysts from the lists of terata. The
hair, teeth, and particles of bone found in these cysts are looked
upon as the development of abnormal ectodermic and endodermic cells,
rather than as evidence of a separate personality.

There is only one well-authenticated case of a triple monster, and
this happened in Italy in 1831. The monster had a single broad body
with three distinct heads and two necks. It was killed in delivery.

In Katadidyma (terata divided from above downward), when we have
dicephali, ischiopagi, or pygopagi, there are evidently two
individuals present. Is the Diprosopus, however, the two-faced
monster, possessed of one or two souls? The cases vary, as we said,
from examples with two distinct faces and four ears to cases that have
merely two noses. What portion of a human body is required to contain
a new soul? That is an interesting question for the psychologist and a
very practical one for the moralist, and no moralist has yet attempted
to solve it. The presence of a brain is not essential, because
acephalous monsters develop without brain, and they are born alive;
they have a vital principle which is identical with the soul.

Among the Terata Anadidyma (divided from below upward) the Syncephalus
and the Craniopagus are unquestionably two persons. Is the Dipygus
(single down to the navel, double below) one or two persons? Mrs. B.,
the example already given, was as double below the navel as any
Dicephalus is above that point. She had features so well ordered in
unity that she was a pretty woman, but that unity ceased at her waist.
Was her husband unknowingly a bigamist? I think he was. After a
consideration of the fission of terata, and the non-essential quality
of the brain, why should fission that started at the feet differ from
fission that started at the head?

In the _Rituale Romanum Pauli V._ (tit. ii. cap. i. nn. 18, 19, 20,
21), the following directions for the baptising of terata are given:

{87}

  18. In monstris vero baptizandis, si casus eveniat, magna cautio
  adhibenda est, de quo si opus fuerit, Ordinarius loci; vel alii
  periti consulantur, nisi mortis periculum immineat.

  19. Monstrum, quod humanam speciem non praeseferat, baptizari non
  debet; de quo si dubium fuerit, baptizetur sub hac conditione: _Si
  tu es homo, ego te baptizo,_ etc.

  20. lllud vero, de quo dubium est, una ne, aut plures sint personae,
  non baptizetur, donec id discernatur: discerni autem potest, si
  habeat unum vel plura capita, unum vel plura pectora; tunc enim
  totidem erunt corda et animae, hominesque distincti, et eo casu
  singuli seorsum sunt baptizandi, unicuique dicendo: _Ego te
  baptizo_, etc Si vero periculum mortis immineat, tempusque non
  suppetat, ut singuli separatim baptizentur, potent minister
  singulorum capitibus aquam infundens omnes simul baptizari, dicendo:
  _Ego vos baptizo_, in nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus sancti.
  Quam tamen formam in iis solum, et in aliis similibus mortis
  periculis, ad plures simul baptizandos, et ubi tempus non patitur,
  ut singuli separatim baptizentur, alias numquam, licet adhibere.

  21. Quando vero non est certum in monstro esse duas personas, ut
  quia duo capita et duo pectora non habet distincta; tunc debet
  primum unus absolute baptizari, et postea alter sub conditione, hoc
  modo: _Si non es baptizatus, ego te baptizo in nomine Patris, et
  Filii, et Spiritus sancti._

   AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{88}

