XII

UNEXPECTED DEATH IN SPECIAL DISEASES


Besides the general systemic conditions in which sudden death may
occur without anticipation, there are certain specific diseases of
which unexpected death is sometimes a feature. For the clergyman to
know the condition in which the sudden fatal termination is liable to
occur is to be forearmed against the possibility of death without the
Sacraments, or their enforced administration in haste, when the
recipient is in a very unsatisfactory condition of mind and body. It
has been said that if a normally healthy individual reaches the age of
twenty-five he is reasonably sure to live to a good old age, provided
he does not meet with an accident or catch typhoid fever or pneumonia.

Pneumonia is an extremely important affection as regards its
prognosis. From 15 to 20 per centum of sufferers from the disease die;
that is to say, about one in six of those attacked by the disease will
not recover. It is a little more fatal in women than in men. It is
especially serious for the very young and the old.

Healthy adults in middle life very rarely die from the disease. The
prognosis of any individual case, it has been well said, depends on
what the patient takes with him into the pneumonia. Serious affections
of important organs nearly always cause fatal complications. If the
heart is affected before the pneumonia is acquired, then the prognosis
is very unfavourable, and a fatal termination is almost inevitable. If
the kidneys are seriously diseased beforehand, death is almost the
rule. Pneumonia developing during the course of pregnancy is fatal in
more than one-half of the cases. At one time it was suggested that
premature delivery of pregnant {151} pneumonia patients might save at
least the mother's life. Experience in Germany, however, has shown
that, far from making the prognosis more favourable, the induction of
premature labour makes the outlook a little worse for the patient.
Previous affections of the lungs, emphysema, or tuberculosis, are
prone to make the prognosis of pneumonia much more unfavourable than
under ordinary circumstances.

Deteriorated conditions of the blood, anaemia, chlorosis--such as
occurs so commonly in young women--is prone to make the outlook in
pneumonia more serious. Pneumonia of the upper lobes of the lungs is
more apt to be followed by complications, and is therefore more
serious than pneumonia of the lower lobes. Secondary pneumonia--that
is, inflammation of the lungs which develops as a complication of some
other disease--is much more unfavourable than primary pneumonia which
develops in the midst of health. The amount of lung involved is of
course a serious factor in the prognosis. If the whole of one lung is
consolidated, or if considerable portions of both lungs are thus
affected, the prognosis becomes extremely unfavourable.

In persons of alcoholic habits the result of pneumonia is always to be
dreaded. The more liberal has been the consumption of alcohol, as a
rule, the less hope is there of a prompt, uncomplicated recovery.
Stimulants are of the greatest importance in pneumonia, and the less
the patient has taken of them before the development of his pulmonary
affection the more effective are they when the crisis of the disease
comes. The less the alcohol that has been taken habitually before the
development of pneumonia, the more surely will it do the work expected
of it during the course of the pneumonia. It must be borne in mind
that cases of pneumonia that occur in institutions, asylums,
hospitals, and the like, and in crowded quarters in tenement houses or
lodging houses, have a distinctly worse prognosis than those treated
in private houses, and the priest must accordingly be more on his
guard and give the Sacraments early.

In pneumonia, as in typhoid fever, so-called walking cases always have
a serious prognosis. They occur in very strong patients who resist,
not the invasion of the disease, but its {152} weakening influence,
and keep on their feet for several days, despite the presence of
symptoms that require them to be in bed. When a patient walks into a
doctor's office in the third or fourth day of a pneumonia with most of
one lung consolidated, exhaustion of the heart and of the nervous
system, under these unfavourable conditions, will usually have made
his resistive vitality very low. Such cases should be given the
Sacraments early, while in the full possession of their senses.
Conditions sometimes develop rather unexpectedly in which the
administration of the Sacraments becomes unsatisfactory, because of
the collapsed state of the patient.

This same advice holds with regard to walking cases of typhoid fever.
Where strong patients suffering from the disease have insisted on
being around on their feet for from six to ten days at the beginning
of the affection, the prognosis becomes very unfavourable.
Complications, such as hemorrhage or perforation of the intestine,
occur about the beginning of the third week, and often prove fatal.
All typhoid fever patients should receive at least the Sacraments
necessary to give a sense of security to the priest and their friends
during the course of the second week, even though they may seemingly
be in excellent condition. When typhoid fever is fatal the
complications occur suddenly, often without much warning; and if
intestinal perforation, for instance, takes place, the peritonitis
which develops makes the patient's condition very unsuitable for the
reception of the Sacraments in a proper state of mind.

Typhoid fever patients sometimes die suddenly in collapse when they
are convalescent. The toxine of the typhoid bacillus often affects the
heart, and causes what is called cloudy swelling of its muscular
fibres. This decreases very notably their functional ability. Any
sudden exertion, even sitting up in bed, may cause the heart to stop
under such circumstances. The modern custom in hospitals is not to
allow typhoid patients to sit up in convalescence until the head of
the bed has been raised gradually for several days so as to accustom
the heart to pumping blood up the hill to the brain. Priests must be
careful, then, when they call to see convalescent typhoid patients,
not to permit them to sit up {153} to greet them. The doctor's
directions in this matter should be followed very carefully.

This sudden fatal collapse may occur after any of the infectious
diseases. It is seen not infrequently after diphtheria. It occurs more
rarely after scarlet fever, and even after some of the milder
children's diseases. In rheumatism, especially where a heart
complication has occurred, this rule with regard to sudden movements
is extremely important Rheumatism is itself not a fatal disease, yet
there are certain cases in which very high temperature sets in, causes
delirium, and death ensues at times before the patient recovers
consciousness. Where rheumatic patients show a tendency to run high
temperatures, that is, 104 deg. or higher, it is well to be prepared for
this emergency.

Appendicitis is very much talked about in our day; but the fatal
affection represented by the new word is no more frequent than it was
half a century ago, or, for that matter, twenty-five centuries ago.
People died of inflammation of the bowels and peritonitis then; and as
the appendix was not known as the origin of the trouble, the fateful
name was not the spectre that it is now. Practically all abdominal
colic--and this means 90 per centum of all the acute pain which
follows gastro-intestinal disturbance in young or middle-aged
adults--is due to appendicitis. It comes on, as a rule, in the midst
of good health. It is very treacherous, and when the patient is
apparently but slightly ill, a sudden turn for the worse may assert
itself, and an intensely painful and prostrating condition develop.
Where symptoms of appendicitis are present, it is the part of safety
to have the patient receive at least the Sacraments of Penance and the
Holy Eucharist. When peritonitis develops, vomiting is the rule. Hence
the advisability of prompt administration of Holy Communion. Extreme
Unction can be given with some satisfaction, even during the disturbed
period which follows a beginning peritonitis. For the peritonitis that
sometimes results from appendicitis there is no hope of recovery
except by operation. Operation, to be successful, must follow the
perforation of the appendix not later than by a few hours.

{154}

Early pregnancy, that is, the first eight to ten weeks of gestation,
is sometimes complicated by a set of symptoms the most prominent of
which are sudden very acute pains in the lower part of the abdomen,
followed by intense prostration, and then by the symptoms of internal
bleeding,--namely, a soft pulse, pallor with cold extremities, sighing
respiration, and marked tendency to faintness. When symptoms like
these occur during the first three months of pregnancy, they signify,
almost without exception, rupture of an extrauterine gestation-sac.
Except where operation can be performed at once, these cases are
almost invariably fatal. Extrauterine pregnancy occurs with greatest
frequency in women who, having had one or more children, then have a
period of five or more years without children, followed by pregnancy.
Undoubtedly, extrauterine pregnancy, the knowledge of which is the
result of medical advance in very recent years, and appendicitis,
which is the growth of the last twelve years, were prominent factors
in the production of many inexplicable deaths in history. These were
not infrequently set down as due to poison.

Acute indigestion in elderly people is sometimes followed by sudden
death. Observations in this matter have somehow become much more
frequent of late years, and many of the so-called cases of heart
failure belong to this group. The important nerve trunk that carries
nervous fibres to the heart bears fibres to the digestive tract, the
oesophagus, the stomach, the intestines, the liver as well, and also
to the larynx and lungs. There is a certain intercommunication between
the impulses which pass along these various nerve fibres. Intense
irritation of the nerve endings in any one of these organs may be
reflected back upon the heart. Curiously enough the nerve fibres to
the heart that run in this trunk are many of them inhibitory; that is
to say, they lessen the function of the heart or cause it to stop
beating entirely. If an intense nervous irritation is set up in the
stomach, reflex nervous impulses may cause the heart to stop
completely and never resume its work.

Typical cases of this kind often occur during the first cold days of
the winter time. Elderly people come to their meals cold and chilly,
yet with appetite increased by the bracing air. They sit down at once,
take a larger meal than usual, and then develop severe gastritis
during the night. This is {155} relieved by purging and vomiting, and
the pain yields to the administration of morphine. Their condition
improves and all danger seems past, when, on sitting up suddenly the
next day, or, if left alone, getting up to get something for
themselves, they collapse and are dead before help can come to them.
Deaths like this sometimes occur in dysentery also, the reason being
the intense nervous reflex from the irritated intestinal nerve endings
which exerts its influence upon the heart nerves.

Certain diseases practically always end in sudden death and must be
taken special care of by the priest for this reason. Aneurism, for
instance, is one of these. An aneurism is a widening or dilatation at
some point of an artery. The most important aneurisms occur in the
arch of the aorta, that is, in the large curved artery which comes
directly from the heart itself and of which all the other arteries are
branches. Aneurisms develop, according to the expression of a
distinguished American physician, in the special votaries of three
heathen divinities, Vulcan, Bacchus, and Venus,--that is, in those who
have worked too hard, in those who have drunk too hard, and in those
who have devoted themselves too much to the pleasures of the flesh.
The most important factor of all is, however, the contraction of
venereal disease, especially of that form known as syphilis.

The termination of aneurism cases is usually by rupture with profuse
hemorrhage. Death takes place in a moment or two. Aneurisms often
cause intense pain, which is sometimes thought to be rheumatic in
origin. If the aneurism, in its enlargement, meets with bony
structure, it produces absorption of the bone by pressure upon it and
so finds a way even through the bone to the overlying skin. This
process is always intensely painful, and shortly after the aneurism
appears at the surface the pressure upon the skin causes it to become
thin and the aneurism may rupture externally.

Addison's Disease always ends suddenly. This is a rare affection,
described by Addison, an English physician, some fifty years ago,
which develops in individuals whose suprarenal capsules are
degenerated. The suprarenal capsules are little bodies of half-moon
shape which lie above the kidneys. {156} Their degeneration produces a
great lowering of blood pressure. The patient becomes intensely weak,
muscular movement becomes impossible, intellectual processes cause
great fatigue, and finally blood pressure becomes so low that fatal
collapse ensues from lack of blood in the brain. The external symptoms
of these cases is a pigmentation, that is, a very dark discolouration
of the skin, which develops rather early in the disease. The tongue
especially becomes a very dark brown. Areas of pigmentation also occur
where the skin is irritated,--at the wrists from the irritation of the
coat sleeves, at the edge of the hair from the irritation of the hat.
Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, in his _Autobiography of a Quack_, has described
one of these cases very strikingly. The hero of the tale is found dead
one morning by the nurse in the hospital, after he has been feeling
quite as well as usual for some time.

It must not be forgotten that patients who are burned extensively very
frequently die shortly after the accident. A burn that involves more
than one-half of the body, no matter how superficial the burning may
be, will always have a fatal termination. Deep burns in one part,
unless it is some very vital part, are not so serious as extensive
superficial burns. Patients with extensive burns frequently remain in
encouragingly good condition for several days, and then have a sudden
change for the worse. Sometimes death takes place in coma. Sometimes
it takes place as the result of a perforation of the duodenum. These
perforations of duodenal ulcers may take place as late as a week to
ten days after the burn. They are always followed by symptoms of
peritonitis and the condition of intense prostration which this brings
on. Such cases need to be prepared for the worst after the first acute
symptoms of the burn have subsided, when a certain amount of peace of
mind is restored.

Cirrhosis of the liver not infrequently causes sudden death. Cirrhosis
is an affection in which a large part of the liver substance proper
degenerates, and its place is taken by connective tissue. It is
typically a disease of people of alcoholic habit. It occurs in those
who are engaged in the sale of spirits, though the alcoholic
absorption does not take place {157} through the skin, but in a much
more direct way. It is most frequent in people who take strong spirits
on an empty stomach. Those who are much exposed to changes of
temperature are especially liable to form such habits. It is found
most frequently in the drivers of wagons and cars, in policemen, and
in sea-captains, sailors, and the like. When cirrhosis causes sudden
death, it is nearly always by hemorrhage. The hemorrhage takes place
from the oesophagus, some of the large veins of which have become
dilated until the thin walls are unable to retain the blood. The
dilatation is due to interference with the venous circulation in the
liver.

Of late years pathologists and medical men, especially those who are
interested in children's diseases, have devoted considerable time to
the study of certain cases of sudden death, which have long been very
mysterious. Infants often die while in apparent good health without
any adequate reason that can be found, even on the most careful
autopsy. Children of an older growth sometimes die suddenly as the
result of some slight shock or fright, or they die after the
administration of a few whiffs of chloroform, given to help in the
performance of some simple surgical operation, or they die at the
beginning of some infectious fever which they ought to be able to
withstand without any difficulty. A distinguished pathologist at
Vienna, Professor Paltauf, who was the coroner's physician of the city
and had a large number of these sudden deaths to investigate, found
that in most of the cases one abnormal condition was constantly
present. This consisted in an enlargement of the lymph glands all over
the body. The lymph glands in the neck were involved, also the tonsils
and lymphoid tissue at the back of the throat, the series of lymph
glands in the groin, and, finally, there was a hypertrophy of the
lymphoid tissue that occurs all along the intestinal tract. This
condition of hypertrophy of lymphoid tissue has come to be known as
the lymphatic diathesis or constitution. It is nearly always
accompanied by a distinct hypertrophy of the thymus gland. The thymus
gland is an organ which occurs in the upper part of the thorax of the
child, but which atrophies and practically disappears after the age of
two years. In these cases it is from twice to three {158} times its
normal size in the infant, and in older children it is
persistent--that is, retains its primary size, though in the ordinary
course of nature it should atrophy. This lymphatic diathesis
undoubtedly has considerable to do with the sudden deaths which occur
in these patients. What the exact connection is we do not as yet
definitely know. Unfortunately, moreover, this lymphatic constitution
gives no sure sign of its existence before the occurrence of the fatal
termination. Enlargement of the glands of the neck and of the groin,
with some enlargement of the tonsils, occurs in delicate children
without necessarily being symptoms of the lymphatic diathesis. The
enlargement or persistence of the thymus can be better recognised, and
doctors now seldom fail to notice it. Where any suspicion of such a
condition exists in children of from eight to sixteen or seventeen
years of age, proper precautions must be taken to prevent sudden fatal
termination of any even mild disease without due preparation.
Undoubtedly many of the cases of sudden death under chloroform and
ether in children and young persons are due to the existence of this
lymphatic diathesis.

Diseases, like tuberculosis and cancer, that run a long but assuredly
fatal course, usually terminate unexpectedly. The tuberculous patient
particularly will almost surely be planning for next year the day
before he dies. This condition of euphoria, that is, of sense of well
being, was recognised as associated with tuberculosis as far back as
we have any history of the disease. Hippocrates pointed out as one of
the symptoms of consumption the _spes phthisical_ or consumptive hope.
If the patient has been very much run down, death may take place from
thrombosis of some of the arteries. If the thrombosis takes place in
the brain, consciousness will be lost, and the patient will often die
without recovering it. Patients often develop tubercles in their brain
as the result of a spread of the disease beyond the lungs, and then,
as a rule, death will take place in the midst of a paralysis, which
may be accompanied by loss of consciousness that lasts for several
days or a week or more.

Cancer patients also die suddenly, or at least unexpectedly, at the
end. Very often in them, as in tuberculosis, {159} thrombosis plays an
important role in the fatal termination. In cancer of the stomach,
peritonitis from perforation of the stomach may close the scene. The
fatal termination in cancer of the uterus is often brought about by
the development of uraemic symptoms. The new growth in the pelvis
involves the ureters, prevents the free egress of urine, and so causes
the retention in the system of poisonous substances that should be
excreted. Cancer in other parts of the body often causes death by
metastatic cancers, that is, offshoots of the original cancer which
occur in other organs. Usually these are in the liver, but sometimes
they are in the brain, and sometimes in the bones that surround the
spinal cord. In the course of their growth they cause pressure
symptoms upon the nervous system, and this leads to death. If patients
become very much weakened, as is not infrequently the case, thrombosis
occurs, and portions of the clots may be shot into the pulmonary
veins, and cause death in this way.

Two affections which are quite common, one of them usually involving
no danger at all, sometimes cause sudden death. They are varicose
veins and a discharging ear. Varicose veins are the enlarged veins
which occur on the limbs of a great many elderly people. If these
people become run down in health and then exhaust themselves by
overwork, the circulation through these enlarged veins is sometimes so
impeded that clotting--thrombosis, as it is called--occurs. If a
portion of the clot becomes detached, and is carried off into the
circulation, a so-called embolus, this may cause sudden death, either
by its effect upon the heart, or more usually upon the lungs.

Middle-ear disease causes death, either by producing an abscess of the
brain, or by causing thrombosis of some of the large veins within the
skull. The dangers involved in a discharge from the ear are now well
recognised. Insurance companies refuse to take risks on the lives of
persons affected by chronic otitis media, as it is called
scientifically. Such persons may run along in perfect good health for
years without accident, but a sudden stoppage of the flow may be the
signal for the formation of the brain abscess, with almost inevitable
death.

{160}

Certain severe forms of the infectious fevers are very often fatal.
These forms are popularly known as black fevers, that is, black
measles, black scarlet fever, etc. These fulminant forms occur
especially in camps, barracks, orphan asylums, jails, and the like,
where the hygienic conditions of the patients have been very poor, and
where the resistive vitality has, as a consequence, become greatly
lowered. The black spots that occur on such patients are really due to
small hemorrhages into the skin. The hemorrhages are caused by a lack
of resistance in the blood-vessels and by a change in the constitution
of the blood that allows it to escape easily from the vessels. Where
such cases occur, patients should be fully prepared for the worst As a
rule, the mortality is from 40 to 70 per centum.

Acute pancreatitis is a uniformly fatal disease, though fortunately it
is rare. It occurs much more frequently, however, than used to be
thought. It occurs in persons over thirty who have been for some years
addicted to the use of alcohol. The symptoms of the disease are severe
pain in the upper left zone of the abdomen, that is, above and to the
left of the umbilicus. This is accompanied by nausea and vomiting.
Collapse ensues and death takes place on the second to the fourth day
of the affection. This disease may have important medico-legal
bearings. Some slight injury in the abdomen, as from a blow or a kick,
may precipitate an attack in predisposed individuals. Accusation of
murder may result. The mental attitude of the physician and the
clergyman with regard to such cases must be very conservative. No
opinion as to possible culpability should be ventured.

Cholelithiasis, that is, stone in the bile duct, may not only cause
severe pain, but may lead to rupture of the duct and a rapidly fatal
termination. Owing to the practice of wearing corsets, gall-stones
occur much more commonly in women than in men. Twenty-five per centum
of all women over 60 years of age are found to have gall-stones. While
these cases suffer from intense pain they are very seldom fatal. But
it must not be forgotten that a fatal issue can take place either from
collapse and stoppage of the heart, because of the intensity of the
pain, or from perforative peritonitis.

{161}

The perforation of a gastric ulcer may cause symptoms which rapidly
place the patient in a condition in which the administration of the
Sacraments is very unsatisfactory. Gastric ulcers occur especially in
young women, usually in those who follow some indoor occupation. Its
favourite victims are cooks, though laundresses, seamstresses, and
even clerks in stores, suffer from it much more than those engaged in
other occupations. It occurs by preference in anaemic or chlorotic
women. Sometimes, however, as in the case of cooks, the patients may
seem to be in good health. Acute pain in the stomach region, followed
by symptoms of collapse, should in such persons be a signal for the
administration of all the Sacraments. Fatal peritonitis soon brings on
a state of painful uneasiness ill adapted to the proper dispositions
for the Sacraments.

Two diseases that are fortunately very rare, but which are almost
uniformly fatal, deserve to be mentioned here. In both of them the
symptoms of the disease are manifested through the nervous system.
They are tetanus and hydrophobia. Tetanus occurs as a consequence
especially of a wound which has been contaminated by the street dirt
of a large city, or the refuse of a farm. It follows deep wounds such
as are made by a hayrake or a pitchfork; or seared wounds, such as are
made by a toy pistol. A serum for the treatment of the disease has
been discovered, but unfortunately the first symptom of tetanus is not
the first symptom of the disease, but the preliminary symptom of the
terminal stage of the disease, the affection of the nervous system.
Practically all cases of acute tetanus terminate fatally. As soon as a
patient exhibits the characteristic symptoms, the lockjaw, the stiff
neck, and the rigid muscles, all the Sacraments should be
administered. In tetanus, as a rule, consciousness is preserved until
very late in the disease. In severe cases, however, a convulsive state
of intense irritability develops in which the slightest sound or
effort brings on a series of spasmodic seizures. Patients must be
prepared, then, early in the disease, if possible.

Rabies or hydrophobia is a disease which claims a certain number of
victims every year in our large cities. {162} Its symptoms are the
occurrence of fever and disquietude, with spasmodic convulsions of the
muscles of the throat whenever an attempt is made to swallow. These
symptoms come on from three to fifteen days after the bite of a mad
dog. Unless the Pasteur treatment has been taken shortly after the
bite of the animal was inflicted, no treatment that present-day
medicine possesses is able to affect the course of the disease, and
patients nearly always die. Their preparation, then, is a matter of
necessity as soon as the first assured symptoms of the disease show
themselves.  [Footnote 4]

  [Footnote 4: One cannot help but add a word here as to the cause of
  the disease, because clergymen can by their advice do something to
  remedy the evil which lies at the root of the infliction.
  Hydrophobia is due to stray dogs. In practically every case the
  fatal bite is inflicted by some animal that no one in the
  neighbourhood claims. Bites by pet dogs are rarely fatal. If
  clergymen would use their influence to suppress the dog nuisance we
  would soon have an end of hydrophobia.]

Alcoholic subjects are very liable to unexpected death from a good
many causes. Patients suffering from delirium tremens, for instance,
may die suddenly in the midst of a paroxysm of excitement. Such a
termination is not frequent, but it has occurred often enough to make
it the custom, at asylums for inebriates, to warn friends who bring
patients of the liability of such an accident. It is not so apt to
happen during a first attack of delirium tremens as during subsequent
attacks. It is most frequent among those whose addiction to alcohol
for years has caused repeated paroxysms of delirium tremens. The cause
of the sudden death is usually heart failure. This term means nothing
in itself, but it expresses the fact that a degenerated heart finally
refuses to act. Alcoholic poison in the circulation has led to fibroid
degeneration of the muscular elements of the heart and made them
incapable of proper function, or at least has greatly hampered their
action, and the heart ceases to beat.

It must be borne in mind that chronic alcoholism makes a number of
serious organic diseases run a latent course. The patient is apt to
attribute his symptoms to the after effects of the abuse of alcohol.
Unless the doctor who is called in makes a very careful examination,
serious kidney disease or even advanced pneumonia may not be
discovered. Alcoholic subjects bear pneumonia very badly, and the
preliminary {163} symptoms of the disease are often completely
concealed by the symptoms due to the patient's alcoholism. Other
infectious diseases, as typhoid fever, tuberculosis, and even various
forms of meningitis, may run a very insidious course and give but very
slight warning of their presence. The result is that these diseases
are very frequently fatal in alcoholic subjects.

Old inebriates bear operations badly, and the mortality after any
operation in such subjects is distinctly higher than in normal
individuals. One reason for this is that considerably more ether or
chloroform is required to produce narcosis in alcoholic subjects than
in ordinary individuals. Ether and chloroform are very irritant to the
kidneys. The kidneys are prone to be affected more or less in old
alcoholic subjects. Death from oedema of the lungs or from some form
of pneumonia is not infrequent in these post-operative cases, and
gives as a rule but little warning of its approach.

It is clear, then, that alcoholic subjects must be prepared with
special care whenever disease is actually present or an operation is
to be performed. Too great care can scarcely be exercised in their
regard. What would seem overcaution will save many a heartburn to
friends and priest, for it is in alcoholic subjects especially that
some of the saddest cases of unexpected death without preparation
occur.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{164}

