II

PELVIC TUMOURS IN PREGNANCY


Tumours of the uterus and its adnexa at times, though rarely,
complicate pregnancy, and they may involve certain moral questions
that have been little discussed. The tumours that cause difficulty are
ovarian and uterine.

Cystic ovarian tumours commonly do not prevent impregnation, if there
has been an absence of inflammation. When these cysts are small they
may not disturb pregnancy or delivery; large cysts can, however,
become a source of danger. They may sink into the pelvis and block the
channel of delivery needed by the child at term; they may have their
pedicles twisted, and thus become gangrenous and septic. Big cysts of
the ovary may during the growth of the pregnant uterus press upon the
portal vein, or the diaphragm, or they may burst or cause sepsis.
Litzman, in 56 cases of ovarian tumours complicating pregnancy, had
only 10 normal deliveries; and Remy held that 23 per centum of these
cases, when left untouched, result in death to the mothers. Stratz
says the mortality is 32 per centum, and it has gone as high as 40 per
centum. Some physicians teach that any ovarian cyst found complicating
pregnancy should be removed surgically. Other authorities hold that
they should all be treated expectantly: if they threaten the life of
the mother, they should be tapped by a trocar through the belly-wall
or the vagina, and removed only after labour. This second operation is
safe, and I think it should prevail.

Such cysts have often been removed during pregnancy. Orgler reported
146 ovariotomies (removal of the ovaries) performed during gestation
with only four maternal deaths--2.7 per centum. If the operation had
not been performed {41} about 32 per centum of these women would have
died. The chance against saving the child in such an operation is the
crux. If there is no operation 17 per centum of the cases result in
abortion and the loss of the child, as Remy found from a consideration
of 321 cases. In Orgler's series of 146 ovariotomies, where he lost
only 2.7 per centum of the mothers, and saved about 30 per centum that
would have died (97 per centum in all); he lost 32 children through
abortion caused by the ovariotomies, or 22.5 per centum; whereas by
the expectant method (without tapping) only 17 per centum of the
children were lost.

Bovee of Washington, however, reported 38 cases of removal of the
ovaries during pregnancy with one maternal death and only four
abortions, or 12.6 per centum. That is considerably less than the loss
by the expectant method without tapping. As Bovee succeeded, other men
now do, but it would be far better to attempt tapping first. The
earlier in the pregnancy either tapping or removal is done the better.

Fibroid tumours of the uterus, complicating pregnancy, occur in about
0.6 per centum of pregnancies, and they usually go on without causing
trouble; but again these tumours may block the pelvic outlet, they may
dangerously press upon abdominal viscera and the diaphragm; some
writers hold they may become inflamed and degenerate with sloughing
and gangrene, and thus bring about sepsis and death to the mother and
child. That they become gangrenous must very rarely happen; the
increased blood supply should prevent gangrene, but cause an increase
in the size of the fibroma.

A group of gynaecologists maintain that when fibromata cause dangerous
symptoms in pregnancy the uterus should be taken out in part or wholly
if the tumour is so deeply involved in the uterine wall that it can
not be separated. This operation, of course, kills the foetus. At
times the child is viable, and a precedent caesarean section will save
it. Surgeons do not remove fibromata merely as a precaution, as they
sometimes do in the case of ovarian cysts. Other surgeons say it is
safe to wait. If the channel of delivery is blocked, these men wait
till term and then do caesarean {42} section; in other cases the
tumour will often be lifted up out of the way during the later stages
of gestation or labour.

In those very rare cases where it is necessary to remove the uterus
wholly or in part before the child is viable, and thereby also to kill
the foetus, the operation at first glance seems in no wise to differ
in nature from a craniotomy upon a living child. The condition,
however, is commonly worse than one in which a craniotomy is
indicated, because in the latter condition we have a viable child, and
the caesarean section to solve the difficulty, but in the former we
have a child not viable, and therefore the caesarean section would be
useless, except for the opportunity it might give for baptism of the
child. In such a case must the surgeon let the mother die lest he
hasten the death of a non-viable child?

The action reduces to this, that the surgeon by operating would permit
a hastening of the inevitable death of the foetus while saving the
mother's life, but the child is not an unjust aggressor, not even a
materially unjust aggressor. It has a right to be where it is. The
only excuse for hastening its death is to save the mother's
life,--there is no question of self-defence; but deliberately to
hasten the death of a human being a second of time, except it be done
by an individual in self-defence against an unjust aggressor, or by
the state for legitimate cause, is murder. It seems probable, however,
that there is something to be said in favour of the unavoidable
hysterectomy (removal of the womb) in a pregnancy complicated with
uterine fibromata that undoubtedly endanger life.

Such cases differ from craniotomy, or the direct killing of a foetus
(which were formally forbidden by the Holy Office on May 28, 1884, and
August 19, 1888, and always forbidden by the natural law) in several
factors: first, in craniotomy the child is _directly_ killed, although
it is not an aggressor, in the hysterectomy it is permitted to die, it
is _indirectly_ killed; secondly, in craniotomy there is a viable
child, in the hysterectomy, an unviable child; thirdly, in craniotomy
there is a killing that is a means toward the end of saving the
mother's life, in the hysterectomy there is a permitted hastening of
the foetus's death, and this is only a circumstance inseparably joined
to the act; fourthly, in craniotomy the killing is utterly {43}
uncalled for, because the caesarean section, or symphyseotomy (a
temporary dividing of the pubic joint to get more room) will do
instead, in the hysterectomy, because the child is not viable, there
is no alternate way out of the difficulty; fifthly, formal judgment
has been pronounced by the Holy Office in craniotomy, no formal
judgment has been made as regards this hysterectomy.

Suppose A and B are on a boat hoisting a weighty object to a ship; the
tackle breaks, the falling weight mortally hurts B, and wedges him
fast to the wrecked boat. The boat is about to sink and drown both
men, but if A tips off the weight, and with it unavoidably the
entangled B, A can float to safety. A will indirectly hasten the
inevitable death of B by throwing off the weight which will drag him
down. May A do so? Very probably he may.

Two swimmers, A and B, are trying to save C, who dies in the water,
and as he dies he grips A and B so tightly they can not shake the
corpse off. A is weak, and he will soon sink and drown owing to the
weight of the corpse; B also will later go down with A and C. A,
however, cuts his clothing loose from the grip of the corpse (or some
one in a boat does so who can do no more) and A is saved; but thus
immediately B is drowned, owing to the fact that the full weight of
the corpse is upon him. Is A, or the man in the boat, justified?
Probably they are. A is the mother, B the foetus, C the diseased
uterus, the man in the boat is the surgeon. The mother has herself cut
away from the uterus and the foetus's death is hastened.

Again, take an example used by Father Ricaby in his _Moral
Philosophy_, p. 205 (London, 1901). He supposes a visitor to a quarry
to be standing on a ledge of rock which a quarryman had occasion to
blast, and the quarry man saw that "unless that piece of rock where
the visitor stood were blown up instantly, a catastrophe would happen
elsewhere, which would be the death of many men, and if there were no
time to warn the visitor to clear off who could blame him if he
applied the explosive? The means of averting the catastrophe would be,
not that visitor's death, but the blowing up of the rock. The presence
or absence of the visitor, his death {44} or escape, is all one to the
end intended: it has no bearing thereon at all."

If these examples of indirect killing are allowable, why may not the
surgeon in the rare example presented here remove the uterus and
indirectly permit the hastening of the foetus's death? That hastening
of death is not an end, nor a means toward an end, but a circumstance
only reluctantly and indirectly willed. The end is to save the
mother's life, and the means is the removal of a septic or impacted
uterus.

It may be objected that an artificial abortion wherein the womb is
emptied of an unviable foetus to save the mother's life is only an
indirect hastening of this foetus's death, but there is a difference:
in abortion the removal of the foetus is the means whereby the end is
attained, in the hysterectomy the removal of the _tumour_ is the means
whereby the end is attained. This argument is advanced only
tentatively and with diffidence, that the matter may be discussed and
settled by authority.

Sometimes carcinoma (a cancer) complicates pregnancy--once in 2000
cases is above the average. A carcinoma is a malignant tumour, and the
malignancy is made much worse by the stimulus of pregnancy with its
increased blood supply. The maternal deaths from carcinoma of the
uterus during pregnancy is, according to the latest and most
favourable statistics, 30 per centum. The mortality of the children is
from 50 to 63 per centum.

Now, first, if an artificial abortion is induced while the foetus is
unviable, the foetus is lost and the mother's condition is not
materially improved.

Secondly, if curettement (a scraping away with a sharp spoonlike
instrument), cauterization, or amputation of the uterine cervix are
performed, the mother is helped very little, if at all, and consequent
abortion is frequent.

Thirdly, if caesarean section is done at term the child has a good
chance (Sanger saved 16 of 18 children thus in one series: over 88 per
centum), but this operation nearly always kills the mother when cancer
is present, unless the entire uterus can be removed, and often it can
not be removed; that {45} is, the case is inoperable and removal is
useless owing to extension of the cancer into the surrounding tissues.

Fourthly, if the mother's condition is hopeless, a caesarean section
gives the child a chance for life, but the operation will hasten the
mother's death in nearly every case.

The first and second cases here are not practical. If the surgeon can
remove the uterus at term after a caesarean section, that is the most
reasonable operation for the mother and child, and it offers no moral
difficulty.

If the mother's condition is so bad that the uterus may not be
removed, the chances are that her death will be hastened by caesarean
section, but if caesarean section is not done, from 50 to 63 per
centum is the ratio against the saving of the child. I do not think a
general rule can be given as regards the certainty of hastening the
maternal death: the reckoning is to be made to meet the particular
condition. It seems, however, probable that in every case of
inoperable carcinoma of the uterus complicating pregnancy a caesarean
section would hasten the maternal death. She will die anyhow from the
cancer, but in certain cases she may live longer if the section is not
done.

If, again, a carcinoma of the uterus is inoperable at term, the
delivery of the child may be impossible without caesarean section,
from uterine inertia, or the opposition of the dense inflamed tissues,
or the friability of these tissues. In such a case without the section
she would die, and die probably sooner than with it. The operation
would possibly slightly prolong her life, by, say, a few hours or
days, and it certainly would give the child a very good chance for its
life. She may, of course, die upon the operating table, but she would
die in childbed without the section.

The case is different from the ordinary caesarean section done because
of a narrow pelvic bony girdle. In the latter condition the chances
that the mother will live are very high if the surgeon is competent,
but in the carcinoma case she will die no matter who the surgeon may
be, and very probably, or almost certainly, her death will be hastened
by the operation in the majority of cases.

If the condition is such that the woman can not be delivered {46}
without the section, I see no difficulty against operation, because
the surgeon can not, as far as I know, say positively whether he will
hasten the maternal death or not, and in the circumstances he may take
advantage of the doubt.

If the woman with an inoperable carcinoma uteri may be delivered
_without_ section, should such a delivery be chosen although it raises
the chances of mortality as regards the child from about 12 per centum
to at the least 50 per centum? It is a matter of a very probable
hastening of the mother's death as weighed against the safety of the
child--the child has about one chance in two of life without the
section, and, say, seven chances in eight with the section. The
operation is far preferable as regards the child alone, but not
preferable as regards the mother alone. Is it then allowable?

In the hysterectomy for fibroma already considered, the mother is
saved and the child's inevitable death is certainly hastened; in the
caesarean section the child is most probably saved, and the mother's
inevitable death is most probably hastened; we might say, in some
cases, that her death is undoubtedly hastened. If in the carcinoma
case here the child had no chance whatever for delivery except by the
caesarean section, while the mother's death would be probably or
certainly hastened, she might legitimately consent to the operation or
she might legitimately refuse the operation.

The child, however, has, as we said, one chance of delivery in two
without the section, while the mother's death will very probably be
hastened. If the mother's death would certainly be hastened by the
section, her death, although it would be a circumstance and indirect,
not an end nor a means, would not have counterbalanced against it
necessarily the saving of the child's life, because the child has one
chance in two in any event. In such an hypothesis the operation seems
to be unjustifiable.

If, however, the hastening of the mother's death is only probable and
not certain, may we oppose that probability to the advantage that must
accrue to the child through the section? If the doubt that her death
will be hastened is soundly probable, the woman may consent to the
operation. She risks through charity the hastening of her own death
for a great {47} advantage to the child, but she may risk legitimately
immediate death in major surgical operations for an advantage less
than the saving of life itself. She may have her skull opened for the
removal of a depressed bone that is causing paralysis, she may have
her knee-joint opened for the wiring of a patella to prevent lameness,
but both these operations always immediately endanger life. She may go
into a burning house, jump into a river, and so on, to save her child
from possible injury.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.

{48}

