XXIX

SOCIAL DISEASES


There are certain affections not at all uncommon and as a rule
producing rather serious effects upon the social body, of which,
though their existence is well known to all, very little is said. It
is certain that what is considered the more severe of these venereal
diseases may be acquired quite innocently. Indeed, many thousands of
cases of this affection, acquired innocently, have now been reported
by medical men in this country alone. If the statistics of all the
world were gathered together, there would probably be a hundred
thousand cases of this dreadful affection, which have been acquired
without any blame on the part of the sufferer. It has become the
custom, especially in English speaking countries, to ignore the
presence of these diseases, and this has led to a multiplication of
opportunities for their spread to such a degree that now the condition
of affairs, for those who know it best, is rather alarming. It is with
the intention that a few definite ideas, given absolutely without
exaggeration and without any striving after effect, may enlist
clergymen, as well as physicians, in a crusade against these diseases,
that the present chapter is written.

It has been said over and over again at medical society meetings that
it is a very unfortunate thing that universities in these modern times
are situated in large cities. The young man just freed from the
restraints of home life, or of the seclusion of a college, is at once
without any preliminary training, exposed to all the dangers, moral
and physical, of large city life. Not only is this true, but he is
even not properly warned of the dangers that lie so close to his path.
Our prudery has gone so far that the very names of these {318}
affections are tabooed and above all must not be mentioned before the
young. As to the awful evils that such diseases may cause, as to the
lifelong suffering, even to mental degeneration and early death, that
they may involve, not even a hint is considered to be proper. The
consequence is that young men expose themselves not infrequently to
danger, absolutely unknowing the significance that such diseases have
in recent years acquired in the minds of modern physicians, and it is
usually not until a serious mistake has been made that the young man
is brought in contact with the physician who may be frank in pointing
out evils utterly unknown before.

This state of affairs has come to be considered as so irrational in
many foreign universities that now a special course of lectures is
given every year on the significance of what may be called the social
diseases. The students are told very frankly what the possibilities of
danger for them in certain excesses may be, so that at least the young
man can not say "I knew nothing about it," when the risk becomes an
actual reality of danger. At the University of Berlin the first course
of such lectures was established, and the interest aroused and the
results obtained were such as to make other universities consider the
advisability of such lectures for their students. Even here in prim
and prude America, one or two of the great universities have come to
the realisation that the physical well being of their students is
committed to their care, as well as their intellectual development,
and at least a beginning of that precious wisdom that comes from the
fear of the physical evils of sin has been acquired because of
opportunities provided by the faculty.

It is well admitted now by all that ignorance is not innocence and
that knowledge of the consequences of social diseases is likely to be
a very important factor in preventing young men from taking risks that
would otherwise be considered very slight, perhaps. As a matter of
fact, nothing can be more helpful from the ethical standpoint than
this knowledge of how closely may follow the wages of sin, which is
death. It is for this reason that clergymen would seem to owe it, as a
duty to themselves and their position in social {319} life, to acquire
a certain knowledge of these affections. A very great change has come
over the attitude of the medical profession towards the so-called
venereal diseases in recent years. A quarter of a century ago they
were considered to be not very serious after all, and indeed in some
cases to be no more serious than a cold, a mere passing incident in
life. Now it is well recognised that almost never do they leave their
victim in the state of health in which he was before, and that
unfortunately the deterioration of tissues which has taken place is
likely to be enduring. Even many years afterwards there may be serious
complications involving health or even life.

For instance, it is now very generally conceded that paresis, or what
is sometimes called general paralysis of the insane,--a progressive
mental and nervous disease, which invariably ends fatally in from
three to seven years,--is always due to one of the so-called social or
venereal diseases. How important this affection has become in modern
life can be best appreciated from the fact that in Europe nearly one
in four of those who die in the insane asylums are sufferers from
paresis. In this country the disease is not so frequent, the
proportion being less than one in five or even one in six. The disease
is becoming more and more common, however, as large city life becomes
more prominent, and as the possibility of infection with social
diseases is more widespread.

Paresis is what is sometimes called softening of the brain, and it
attacks by preference men under thirty-five. The first symptoms of it
as a rule are not alarming. A young man's disposition changes, so that
an individual heretofore rather stingy becomes extravagant, while
occasionally a prodigal becomes very saving and considers that he has
already a large sum of money to his credit. The most prominent feature
of the early stage of the disease is the occurrence of delusions of
grandeur, that is to say, the patients get the idea that they are
important personages, or that they have fallen heirs to a large sum of
money, or that they have been appointed to high salaried positions. As
a consequence of these delusions, they may make expensive presents to
their friends. Occasionally there are other changes in disposition. A
young {320} man, for instance, who has been of genial character
becomes morose and hard to live with. The opposite change to greater
liveliness of disposition is not unknown, but is more infrequent.
Sometimes there are marked excesses, high living, luxurious habits,
and the like, before the existence of disease is recognised.

The mental stigmata of the disease at the beginning are not alarming
at all. There are slight lapses of memory. A man who has hitherto been
known as an accurate mathematician, makes frequent mistakes in adding
or multiplying. The physical signs are even slighter. In using long
words, syllables are omitted from them. A favourite method of testing
the speech of a person suspected of beginning paresis is to ask for
the pronunciation of a word like Constantinople. Usually a syllable
will be elided, and the reply will be "Constanople," or something
similar. There is a slight tremulousness of the hands and usually a
rather easily marked tremor of the lips, especially when the tongue is
protruded. Often in the very earliest stage of the disease, there are
changes in the pupils. They may be unequal, or may fail entirely to
react to light.

When these signs are positive, that is, when there is a change in
disposition and then the physical stigmata that we have gone over
appear, the diagnosis of the disease is almost certain. The physician
is able to say, with considerable assurance, that the young, strong,
healthy-looking patient, who has often had to be tempted to come to
see the doctor by some specious reason, because he does not consider
himself that he has anything wrong with him, will have to be confined
in an asylum within a year, or at most, two, and will die in a state
of dementia within five years. This, of course, is an awful picture.
This is the course of the disease in nearly 20 per centum of the
inmates of our asylums. Almost without exception there is a history of
syphilis in these cases, and the medical world is now persuaded that
this is the most important factor in the production of paresis.

Another nervous disease, corresponding in some of its features to
paresis and indeed sometimes spoken of as a spinal form of paresis, is
locomotor ataxia. This affection {321} begins usually with loss of
sensation in the soles of the feet so that the patient thinks that he
is walking on carpet all the time. Before this there may have been
some disturbance of vision. The pupils may fail to react to light.
Occasionally the first symptoms are motor, that is, the man notices
that he is not able to walk as readily as before. He staggers easily.
If he tries to turn round while walking he is apt to lose his balance.
If he tries to walk in the dark, he is almost sure to have so great a
sense of insecurity that he dare not go far from the wall.
Occasionally the first sign is a sinking of the limbs on the way down
stairs. In certain very sad cases, the first and only symptom is a
failure of sight which goes on progressively, until the optic nerve is
completely destroyed and sight forever rendered impossible.

All these symptoms are traceable directly to certain changes which
have been noted in the spinal cord. These changes are due to
disturbance of the blood and lymph supply of the nervous tissue. Once
the changes have taken place, there is no hope of the patient ever
recovering the normal use of his limbs. Not infrequently he becomes
bedridden and can not walk at all because he is not able to steady
himself. He may not suffer in his general health, however, to any
serious extent, and may live on for twenty years, though usually his
resistive vitality is lowered and he is carried off by some
intercurrent disease.

At times locomotor ataxia begins with very severe pain seizures, known
as crises. These may occur in the legs or arms or in the stomach or
sometimes in other organs. Occasionally they are the first symptoms of
the disease that are noticed, and they may continue for months or even
years before other symptoms manifest themselves. This sometimes makes
it difficult to recognise the disease for what it really is. The pains
are usually most excruciating, are tearing or boring in character, and
are sometimes described by the patient as being similar to the
sensation that would be felt if a red hot iron were forced into them,
or if a knife were inserted and then twisted round. Hence the
descriptive name which has been applied to them of "lightning pains"
which describes the suddenness of their onset and the intensity of
their character. {322} Most of the ordinary anodyne or pain-killing
medicines fall to influence them, and the patient is one of the most
pitiable of objects while they last.

It is now conceded on all sides that at least 75 per centum of the
cases of tabes are directly due to syphilis. Indeed this affection and
paresis are sometimes spoken of as parasyphilitic affections.
Unfortunately the ordinary treatment for syphilitic manifestations
does not affect them in the least. So far as we know at the present
time, there is nothing that will hinder the course or prevent the
progress or alleviate the symptoms or have any curative action on
either of these dreadful diseases. They are much more common in Europe
than they are in this country, but have been seen here with quite
sufficient frequency in recent years to make physicians, at least,
realise the necessity for having young men appreciate the dangers they
invite in thoughtlessly yielding to the temptations of great city
life.

There are other affections which can be traced directly to the social
diseases. One of the most important of these consists of certain brain
tumours which may even cause death if not properly treated. These
syphilitic brain tumours frequently cause paralysis and may lead to
permanent changes in the nervous system with consequent loss of motor
power. Whenever the symptoms of brain tumour occur, careful inquiry is
made as to the previous existence of syphilis in the case, in order to
determine, if possible, if this is the morbid agent at work. If there
is a history of syphilis it is usually said to be fortunate, for brain
tumours due to syphilis may be made to disappear by the proper use of
mercury and the iodides. If the treatment of the case is delayed,
however, alterations in the nerve substance take place which can not
be improved.

This disease affects especially the blood vessels and, as a
consequence of the thickening of the coats of the arteries, blood may
be shut off from certain portions of the brain entirely. This will, of
course, produce symptoms of paralysis. Indeed, whenever paralytic
symptoms manifest themselves under forty years of age, the physician's
first thought is sure to be that there is syphilis in the case. This
is not always {323} true, for by heredity and very hard work
occasionally arteries become so degenerate that they rupture before a
patient has reached many years beyond forty, but the case is always
suspicious. In this, as in the corresponding instance of brain tumour,
treatment, if applied sufficiently early, may not only give relief of
all the symptoms, but produce a complete cure. That is, at least the
symptoms are relieved for the time, though there may be relapses.
Usually these relapses are quite amenable to treatment, but sometimes
they get beyond the control of the physician and death ensues. It is
almost the rule where there have been serious nervous symptoms once,
that recurrences of them must be feared, and they will eventually
shorten the patient's life.

Syphilitic manifestations of serious character develop, however, not
only in the nervous system, but also in certain of the important
internal organs. The liver may become so much affected as to refuse to
do its work. Solid tumours may develop in the stomach, or along the
course of the intestines, resembling cancer so much that occasionally
operations are performed for their removal. As a rule, however, these
yield quite promptly to proper antisyphilitic treatment. Whenever an
obscure intraabdominal tumour is present, accordingly, it has become
the custom among physicians and surgeons not to make an absolute
diagnosis nor to perform any serious operation until antisyphilitic
treatment has been tried. The surprises of such treatment constitute a
very interesting chapter in obscure diseases in medicine.

As we said at the beginning, it is perfectly possible to have
contracted the disease innocently, and indeed, the first
manifestations may be so mild as to fail to attract the patient's
attention. In these cases there will be no history of syphilis, yet
the test of antisyphilitic treatment will demonstrate that the disease
has been present. Not a few physicians have died from these serious
manifestations of syphilis after having contracted the disease through
a cut on the finger or the prick of an infected needle in the ordinary
course of their professional work. Some of these cases in young men
prove to be especially malignant and fail to react to treatment, so
that a fatal issue takes place within a few years.

{324}

On the other hand, in general it may be said that the disease is
eminently curable, though it may require great care on the part of the
patient and the avoidance of all excesses either of work or indulgence
for the rest of life. It has often been noted that people who live in
the midst of serious emotional strain are most likely to suffer from
manifestations of syphilis in their nervous system. Hence it is that
paresis and locomotor ataxia are comparatively quite common among
actors, brokers, and financiers. They are also quite common among sea
captains and military men who are exposed to severe hardships and have
to assume weighty responsibilities. In such men the previous attack of
syphilis has so weakened the nervous system that it degenerates under
the strain placed upon it by the subsequent responsibilities. These
diseases are very uncommon among clergymen and are less common in
Ireland than in any other country in the world, which would serve to
confirm the opinion that the venereal disease is a prominent factor in
their causation.

We would not have the idea be assumed that syphilis is an incurable
disease and is bound to be followed in all cases by the awful
manifestations that we have described. There are many thousands of
cases of syphilis that never have any of these serious manifestations
at all. It is evident that some cases are completely cured and that no
deleterious influence remains. On the other hand, it must not be
forgotten that the presence of this disease in the tissues of either
parent during the first five years of its course are almost sure to
affect offspring born at this time. The children may suffer from the
skin lesions of syphilis in their early life, may suffer from serious
eye diseases a little later, and then eventually succumb to nervous
and mental diseases resembling paresis and locomotor ataxia in early
adult life. In fact it is this transmission of the disease that
constitutes one of its saddest pictures, and the sins of the parents
are indeed visited on the children.

Besides this severer type of social disease, there is what has been
called sometimes a milder form. It consists only of a discharge with
some fever, which is considered to last not more than a few weeks. As
a matter of fact, however, the disease may continue to exist, though
the symptoms become latent {325} and the patient may infect others
when he least suspects it. This form of disease gives rise to many sad
complications in family life. Practically all the severe eye diseases
of newly born children, the ophthalmia from which so many eyes are
lost, is due to this disease. Special medical care is now taken of
these cases, and the serious consequences are not so often seen as
used to be the case. Within a score of years, however, about one-half
of the inmates of blind asylums owed their loss of sight to this
disease. At the present time there still remains a very notable
proportion of persons blind from early childhood whose infirmity must
be attributed to the sad consequences of the social disease.

Most of the sterility in families is due to the same cause. There is
an unfortunate impression that usually the woman is responsible in
these cases, and not a little sympathy is wasted on the man, because
of the absence of children in the family. Almost invariably, however,
the real cause of the family misfortune is to be traced to an
infectious disease in the man contracted perhaps many years before, of
whose presence he may be more or less unconscious, the symptoms have
become so slight, but this has proved sufficient to infect the wife
and bring about serious changes that preclude all possibility of the
procreation of children.

These statements may seem exaggerated. On the contrary, they are
rather understatements of actualities. No one who knows the real state
of the case will fail to realise this. Physicians themselves have only
come properly to appreciate the true state of affairs in the last
twenty years. We need a coordination of all the forces that make for
social amelioration in modern life to correct present false
impressions.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{326}

