V

MATERNAL IMPRESSIONS


There is a wide-spread persuasion that a child, while carried in the
womb of its mother, may be marked as the result of incidents that
produce violent impressions upon her nervous system. This is so old a
conviction in the human race and would seem to be substantiated by so
much evidence that it is extremely difficult to convince people that
there is no scientific basis for it. As a matter of fact, however,
there is something mysterious about the way in which certain things
that happen to the mother seem to affect the child _in utero_. As the
result of the common belief in the truth of maternal impressions,
mothers sometimes are prone to blame themselves for not having been
sufficiently circumspect during the time of their pregnancy, and
accordingly they may seek advice and consolation in the matter from
clergymen. Women sometimes become very much depressed as a consequence
of an unfortunate event of this kind, and as the simple truth is the
best possible source of consolation, it would seem that a special
chapter should be given to the subject in a work of this kind.

The evidence for the truth of the theory of maternal impression is
almost entirely due to peculiar coincidences. James I. of England, the
son of Mary Queen of Scots, could never stand, according to Sir Walter
Scott, the sight of a drawn sword with equanimity, and it is said even
that he nearly fainted at his coronation because of an unexpected
glimpse of some naked blades in the hands of courtiers. This
peculiarity was attributed to the fact that his mother, while carrying
him _in utero,_ had witnessed the violent death of her secretary, the
unfortunate David Rizzio. There have been, however, any {61} number of
men who paled at the sight of a drawn sword before and since James I.,
with regard to whom no such circumstantial story could be told to
account for it. There have been any number of women that have
witnessed bloody murders under circumstances quite as heartrending as
those surrounding Mary Queen of Scots and her secretary, and yet their
offspring, though at the time _in utero_, have not been disturbed at
the sight of drawn swords, nor of blood or any other circumstance
connected with the deep impression that must have been produced on
their mothers.

There is, of course, a striking instance related in the Old Testament,
which seems to make it very clear that a belief in maternal
impressions existed from the very earliest times among the Israelites.
The story of Jacob is well known: "Jacob took him rods of green poplar
and of the hazel and chestnut tree and pilled white streaks in them
and made the white appear which was in the rods, and he set the rods
which he had pilled before the flocks in the watering troughs when the
flocks came to drink, and the flocks conceived before the rods and
brought forth cattle, ring-streaked, speckled and spotted." In this
case it seems evident that Jacob was not looking for a miracle, but
was expecting that a law of nature would be fulfilled in the matter,
the influence of the unusual sight upon the animal mothers proving
sufficient to have a definite effect upon their unborn offspring. The
most ardent advocates of the power of maternal impressions would
scarcely concede the existence of as much influence as this of the
mother's mind over the child unborn, otherwise there would surely be a
very absurd collection of anomalous births in the race.

On the other hand, it is generally conceded that the mother's habitual
temper of mind and the thoughts with which she occupies herself may
influence her unborn offspring to a most marked degree. The story is
told of a child-murderer who delighted in fiendish deeds of cruelty
and had murdered many people in cold blood, that his mother, the wife
of a butcher, had delighted in watching the operation of slaughtering
during the course of her pregnancy. There are any number of women,
however, who have, by the necessities {62} of their occupation, had to
witness the shedding of animal blood under such circumstances and yet
without any special effect being noticeable in their offspring. It has
been said that the opposite is also true, and that if a woman occupies
herself with high and lofty thoughts, with noble deeds and unselfish
devotion to others and if she occupies her mind and senses with the
great works of art, a correspondingly beneficial effect will be noted
upon the character of the foetus. These are, however, abstruse
speculations leading to conclusions not founded upon actual
observation, but upon theorising over the supposed fitness of things.

Coincidence plays such a large part in the matter of supposed maternal
impressions that it is impossible to decide how much there is of fact
and of consequence in the many stories that are told. Most women are a
little afraid, as the time of their labour approaches, lest something
or other--usually of an indefinite nature--that has happened during
their pregnancy, may cause the marking of their child. When they find
that the child is perfectly normal, they breathe a sigh of relief and
forget all about it. If any anomaly is noted, however, then they are
sure to connect it with some incident during pregnancy, and
imagination is apt to lend details that confirm the supposed
connection. On the other hand, there are not a few cases in which such
anomalies have occurred, and good, sensible mothers have been unable
to recall anything that might possibly serve to account for the
peculiarity noticed in the child, though corresponding peculiarities
in other children were supposed to be readily traceable to maternal
impression. Even where there has been no foreboding of evil results,
something or other that has occurred during the pregnancy will often
be magnified enough by memory to account for the supposed maternal
impression.

Doctors are very familiar with this tendency to make up stories to
account for various deformities. It used to be considered that
hip-joint disease and Pott's disease were the result of injuries in
early life. They are now known to be due to tuberculous processes not
necessarily and indeed only very seldom connected with injuries of any
kind. Mothers are {63} nearly always able to account in some way,
however, for the beginnings of the disease in some accident that has
happened. Young children are apt to have so many falls that some one
of them is picked out as the probable cause of the disease that
subsequently manifests itself in the joints. It is just this state of
affairs that occurs with regard to supposed maternal impression. Some
incident that would be otherwise unthought of is magnified into an
accident that caused a serious nervous shock, and consequently led to
the marking of the child.

In general it may be said for the clergyman's direction, that if women
have, as is sometimes the case, a morbid sense of their guiltiness
with regard to some maternal impression that has set a mark upon their
child, such a state of feeling may very well be rendered less poignant
by a frank statement of the present attitude of mind of most
physicians with regard to the possible effects of maternal
impressions. Scepticism is much more the rule than it used to be, and
as time goes on fewer and fewer of the cases that used to be
considered so inexplicable in the direct relationship that seemed to
exist between maternal impression and deformity in the child are
reported. Fifty years ago nearly all the authorities on this subject
were agreed in considering that maternal impressions did play some
part, though they could not explain just how, in the production of
certain deformities. Now we venture to say that most of the thinking
physicians who have occupied themselves with this subject would
scarcely hesitate to say that they were utterly incredulous of any
such effects being produced. The lack of any direct nervous or blood
connection between mother and child is the basis for such disbelief,
and is of itself the best argument against the old tradition.

With regard to mental defects, as a rule, not so much is said as for
bodily defects. Bodily deformities are noted at once after birth, and
then the mother recalls some incident of the pregnancy to account for
them. Mental defects are, however, noticed much later, and are not so
likely to be considered as connected with incidents of the puerperal
period. There is no doubt that if the mother has had to pass through a
series of emotional strains, or has suffered from severe {64} shocks,
children are likely to be born with diminished mental capacity. This
is, however, not difficult to understand, since such incidents produce
disturbances of the nervous system of the mother, and consequently
also of her nutrition, and this is prone to be reflected in the
child's condition, especially in that most delicate part of the
child's organism, the brain. Hence it is that children born during the
siege of Paris, or shortly after, were defective to such a marked
degree that they were spoken of as "children of the siege," and this
was considered to be quite sufficient explanation of nervous
peculiarities later in life.

Baron Larrey, the distinguished French surgeon, made a report with
regard to the children born after the siege of Landau in 1793. Of 92
children, 16 died at birth, 33 died within ten months, 8 showed marked
signs of mental defects, most of them to the extent of idiocy, and two
were born with several broken bones. In this case, however, it is well
known that besides the shock of the danger consequent to the siege and
the fear and distress of the women with regard to their husbands and
relatives, there were added many privations and physical sufferings.
The nutrition of the mothers was seriously disturbed by these, and it
might well be expected that the children should suffer severely. The
statistics of such events are not available in general, and when an
effort is made to establish a cause for idiocy under other
circumstances, none is usually found. Out of nearly five hundred cases
of idiots whose histories were carefully traced in Scotland, in only
six was there any question of maternal impressions having been the
cause of the condition.

Of course there are many very wonderful coincidences that seem to
confirm the idea that impressions made upon the mother's mind are
sometimes communicated to the child in her womb. That they are not
more than coincidences, however, is rather easy to demonstrate in most
cases, since, as a matter of fact, at the time when the incident
occurred which is supposed to have caused the deformity in the foetus,
the stage of development of the intrauterine child has passed long
beyond the period when formative defects could occur. For instance, it
sometimes happens that the child-bearing woman {65} sees an accident
especially to the father of the child involving the loss of a limb.
If, by chance the child should be born with a missing member, as
sometimes happens, then there would seem almost to be no doubt of a
direct connection between the accident witnessed, the effect produced
upon the mother's mind, and the consequent deformity.

We know now that the formation of the limbs of the foetus is complete
by the end of the third month. At this time the woman is scarcely more
than conscious of the fact that she is pregnant, and it is not during
this early period, as a rule, but during a much later period, that
maternal impressions are supposed to have their influence. It is only
such maternal impressions as occur very early in pregnancy, before the
tenth week as a rule, that could possibly have any effect in the
production of such deformities. It is by no means infrequent, however,
to have children born lacking one or both limbs. Sometimes nothing but
the stumps of limbs remain. In such cases it is now well known that
intrauterine amputation has taken place. Some of the membranes that
surround the child, especially the amnion, become separated into bands
which surround tightly the growing members of the foetus and by
shutting off the blood supply through constant pressure, lead to the
dropping off of all that portion of the member lying below the band.

Not infrequently it happens that when a child is born thus deformed,
the mother, by carefully searching her memory, can find some dreadful
story that she has read, some accident that she has seen or heard of,
and that has produced a seriously depressing effect upon her at the
time, to which she now attributes the deformity that has occurred.
Until the unfortunate appearance of her child was reported to her, she
had no idea of any possible connection between the story and the
bodily state of her intrauterine child. In not a few cases, however,
the most faithful searching of the memory fails to show anything which
could, by any possible connection, be made accountable for the
deformity; and these cases, we may say at once, are in a majority.

Not a little of a popular notion with regard to the influence of
maternal impression is due to the repetition of certain {66} village
gossip which by no means loses its point or effectiveness passing from
mouth to mouth. On the other hand, maternal impressions have been
exploited by novelists, who have found that the morbid curiosity of
women particularly with regard to this subject may make their stories
more widely read. Lucas Malet, who, in spite of the apparently
masculine pseudonym, is really the late Rev. Charles Kingsley's
daughter, has recently called renewed attention to this subject by her
novel "Sir Richard Calmady." In this the hero is born with both his
lower limbs missing from just below the knees. The author has been
careful, however, with regard to the details of the supposed maternal
impression to which this deformity is attributed. A young married
woman in the early part of her first pregnancy has her husband, whom
she loves very dearly, brought back to her with both his limbs taken
off by a shocking accident which resulted fatally. It is not
impossible, some physicians might think, to consider that so severe a
shock could produce a very deleterious effect upon the foetus. That
the result should so exactly copy the scene which was brought under
the eyes of the young mother is, however, beyond credence.
Occasionally such stories, supposedly on medical authority, find their
way into the newspapers, usually from distant parts of the country.
Certain parts of Texas particularly seem to be a fruitful source of
such stories for newspaper correspondents when there is a dearth of
other news. Farmers in thinly settled parts of the country lose a foot
in a reaping machine or a hand in the hay-cutting machine when there
is no one near to help them but their wives, with the result that the
shock to their wives proves the occasion of a similar deformity in an
as yet unborn child. Careful investigation of such cases, however, has
invariably shown that either they were completely false or that the
details showed that whatever had happened was at most a coincidence
and never a direct causative factor in the subsequent deformity.

The greatest difficulty in the mind of the medical man, with regard to
the possibility of maternal impression being communicated in any way
to the foetus, is, as we have said, his knowledge of the anatomy of
mother and foetus. While it is {67} generally supposed that the mother
is very intimately connected with her child _in utero,_ the actual
connection is by no means so direct as might be expected from the
popular impression. It is usually considered that the mother's blood
flows in the child's veins; but this is absolutely false. The child's
blood is formed independently of the mother's blood quite as is that
of the chick in the egg. At all times the blood of the child remains
quite different in constitution to that of its mother. It contains
many more red cells than does her blood and differs in other very
easily recognisable ways. Mother and child are connected by means of
an organ known as the placenta, which is attached very closely to the
uterine wall and from which through the cord the blood of the foetus
circulates. This placenta constitutes the so-called afterbirth. The
mother's blood flows in one portion of it, that of the child in
another, and they always remain distinct and separate from each other.
The gases necessary for the child's life diffuse through the membrane
which separates the two different bloods, and the salts and soluble
proteids necessary for the child's nutrition, as well as the water
necessary for its vital processes, all pass through this membrane, but
at no time is there any direct blood connection between mother and
child. Indeed, for a large part of the formative period of the foetus
life, that is, during the first two months of its existence, the ovum
is not very closely attached to the uterus at all, but grows by means
of the vital power which it has within itself.

Nor is there any direct nervous connection between mother and child;
indeed, there are no nerves at all in the placenta, and none in the
cord through which all communications between mother and child must
pass. It seems impossible to explain, then, how maternal impressions
can so effectively pass from mother to child; and indeed, the whole
subject, when looked at in this way, is apt to be considered
legendary, and the facts adduced in support of the theory of maternal
impressions are practically sure to be thought mere coincidences. A
little knowledge here might seem to justify many things that more
complete knowledge fails to be able to find any reasons for.

{68}

There is no doubt, however, that the mother's environment during
pregnancy is in general very important for the perfect development of
the intrauterine child. Many more deformed births are reported after
times of stress and trial, as, for example, after the sieges of great
cities, notably the siege of Paris in 1871, and such scenes of
desolation as occurred during the thirty years' war in Germany. These
are, however, not direct, but indirect effects of maternal
impressions. The development of the human being _in utero_ is an
extremely complicated process. Any disturbance of it, however slight,
is sure to be followed by serious consequences. Disturbances of
nutrition, such as are consequent upon the deprivation that has to be
endured in times of war or during sieges, is of itself sufficient
seriously to disturb even the uterine life of the child. In these
cases, however, there will be no traceable connection between the form
of the maternal impression and the type of deformity that occurs. This
is, however, the essence of the old theory of the direct effect of
maternal impressions, and consequently that theory must fall to the
ground.

From all that has been said, however, it becomes very clear that as
far as possible women should be shielded from the effect of various
nervous shocks during their pregnancy, and that they owe it to
themselves and their offspring to be careful with regard to any morbid
manifestations of feeling that they may detect in themselves.

JAMES J. WALSH.

{69}

