XXIV

IMPULSE AND RESPONSIBILITY

Not unlike that condition which develops as the result of so-called
psychic epilepsy, in which patients perform apparently voluntary acts,
while the mind is really clouded by an epileptic attack, are those
states in which, as the result of a more or less blind impulse, acts
are performed for which the responsibility of the individual is at
least dubious. Modern experts in nervous and mental diseases have
sometimes spoken of these states as obsessions. This term is adopted
from the older writers on mysticism who used it to designate states of
mind in which an individual was under the influence of some spirit,
though his intellectual and volitional state was not as completely
under the subjection of this spirit as in the condition of possession.

It seems clear to the modern student of these obscure conditions that
the old mystics and the modern alienists practically talk about the
same state of affairs when using this term. As the result of
obsession, mystical writers would have conceded that responsibility is
not quite complete, though it is not entirely done away with. The
modern alienist is just as sure of the diminution of responsibility,
though he considers it due to the fact that for some physical reason
the will is not able to act or prevent action as it is under normal
conditions. The will is sometimes spoken of by certain of these modern
psychologists as mainly an inhibitory faculty, that is, a faculty
which prevents certain reflex acts from taking place, though
permitting one set of reflexes to have its way. Under the influence of
an obsession or, as the French call it, _une idee obsedante_, this
inhibition is not {267} exercised and as a result an action is
accomplished which the agent may very shortly afterwards regret
exceedingly.

There is no doubt that impulsions or impulsive ideas may push an
individual into the performance of an action which his reason
condemns. Uncontrollable anger is a well recognised example of this.
Impulses of other kinds may exercise just as tyrannic a sway, though
it is harder to recognise the elements that make up the mental
condition in other cases. Of course it may well be said that man must
control his impulses. It is, however, just such impulses as can not be
controlled that lessen responsibility and sometimes seem entirely to
destroy it. It would, without doubt, be very easy to advance the
uncontrollable impulse as an excuse for many criminal actions. In
fact, the discussion of responsibility and its limitation by impulse
would seem to be open to so many abuses as to make it advisable, in
the present indefinite state of our knowledge, to put the subject
aside entirely. The argument, however, from the abuse of the thing,
does not hold, and an effort must be made to get at the truth
concerning certain mental conditions which modify responsibility.

It is generally conceded that no two men are free in quite the same
way with regard to the actions which they may or may not perform.
Allurements that are almost compelling for some individuals, for
others have no influence at all. Some men are so under the influence
of anger that irritation may easily lead them to the commission of
acts for which they will be subsequently supremely sorry. This may
even be the case to such an extent as to endanger their lives, yet
they are not able to control themselves. Many men suffering from
degeneration of the arteries of the heart have been warned, like John
Hunter more than a century ago, of the extreme danger of a fit of
anger, yet, like John Hunter, have succumbed to bursts of anger,
notwithstanding the warning, because someone irritated them beyond
their rather limited powers of endurance.

It is extremely difficult ever to come to any proper appreciation of
the responsibility of a given individual from a {268} single act.
Preceding acts, however, may very well give evidence of the state of
mind and the tendencies to disequilibrium which may make an apparently
normal individual irresponsible under trying circumstances. The only
way to render this clear is to illustrate such conditions by a
concrete case.

Not many years ago one of the large cities of this country was
shocked, for one twenty-four hours at least, by the news that a
business man had shot his partners and himself, while at a
consultation in which the affairs of the partnership were being
settled up, after legal dissolution had taken place. The man in
question had paid some debts of the firm with his own personal checks,
and without taking proper legal recognisance for the moneys paid. When
the partnership had been dissolved his partners insisted that instead
of obtaining credit for these payments he should, on the contrary, pay
his share of these debts once more as a partner. The state of the
evidence was such that his lawyers told him it would be useless to
take the case before the court at all; there was nothing to do but pay
the unjust demands. He went to the meeting of his partners with a
certified check for the amount of their claims in his pocket. As he
took out his pocket-book to pass it over to them he seems to have
realised very poignantly the fact that he was paying money that he
knew he did not owe, and that his partners knew he did not owe, and
that they were evidently taking advantage of a legal quibble in order
to cheat him. Evidently it was an extremely trying situation. It was
too much for his mental balance and he took a revolver from his
pocket, shot both his partners dead, and then shot himself.

Taken by itself it is extremely difficult to say anything about the
responsibility of a man who commits an act like this. In ordinary life
he was known as a clever business man; to his friends he was known to
be rather irascible and impatient, but a fairly good fellow. He was
known to have what is called an awful temper; he had, however, never
committed any violent act before. It is possible, of course, that a
man should give way to a fit of anger for the beginning of which he is
responsible, and then do violence {269} much greater than he would
justify himself for in calmer moments.

There was another occurrence in the man's life that seemed to throw
informing light on his mental condition. When he first came to live in
the large city in which he died he began paying attention to a young
woman, and the young woman was informed by a friend that he probably
had a wife living. The young woman investigated this by putting the
question directly to him. He denied it at once, wanted to know the
name of her informant, and finally laughed the whole matter out of her
mind. Within a week after his marriage to her, while on their wedding
tour, he was arrested, charged with bigamy at the instance of his
first wife, and it became evident at once that the charge was well
substantiated.

Here is a man, then, who twice at least in life, when put in the
presence of trying conditions, goes on to do the irretrievable, though
the act is eminently irrational.

With regard to the murder and suicide it is said that he had talked to
friends of shooting the scoundrels who were cheating him, but had been
persuaded of the utter foolishness of any such idea. He had apparently
given it up entirely. Notwithstanding this, he went to the last
conference with his former partners with a loaded revolver, as well as
the certified check for the amount of their claim. In the case of his
bigamous marriage, notwithstanding the warning that his second
fiancee's questions must have been, he followed out his preconceived
idea of marrying her, though he must have realised in saner moments
that discovery of his double dealing was inevitable. In a word, he was
a man who, becoming dominated by an idea, an obsession it may be
called, to do something, could not get away from the sphere of its
influence even though it might be made very clear to him it was
eminently irrational to follow out the idea.

There are many such individuals, and only the knowledge of their
previous career enables us to desume the responsibility for their acts
under trying conditions. That they are not responsible in the ordinary
sense in which the logical, timorous mortal is who is at once repelled
from such modes {270} of action seems very clear. Their lack of
responsibility is manifest, at least to a degree that makes it easy
for charity to find excuses for their crimes because of fatal flaws of
character, the result of physical defects and faulty training, which
make themselves felt especially at the moments that try men's souls.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{271}

