XXVIII

VENEREAL DISEASES AND MARRIAGE


Syphilis is a disease that is contagious, inoculable, and
transmissible by heredity. It may be acquired innocently, and it is so
acquired in about 4 per centum of cases according to good authority,
but the other 96 per centum is venereal. The disease attacks any part
of the body within and without from the soles of the feet to the hair
and finger-nails. The first evidence, where the case is not
hereditary, is a hardened sore called a chancre; next the lymphatic
glands swell, and many forms of skin-eruption occur; then follows a
chronic inflammation of the cellulo-vascular tissues and the bones,
and small tumours, called gummata, may develop in almost any part of
the body. The disease may vary from a light attack to malignancy.
There are periods in the course of the disease.

1. The period of primary incubation, or the time from infection to the
appearance of the chancre. This is commonly three weeks.

2. The primary stage: the chancre forms and the neighbouring glands
are affected. This stage lasts from three to ten days.

3. The secondary incubation, or the time between the appearance of the
chancre and the development of what are called the secondary
symptoms,--usually about six months.

4. The secondary stage. Here occur fever, anaemia, neuralgic pains,
and the eruptions on the skin and the mucous membranes. This period
lasts from twelve to eighteen months in the majority of cases.

5. The intermediate period. During this time there may be no symptom,
or slighter recurrence of the secondary {312} symptoms. This period
lasts from two to four years. It may end in recovery of health or be
followed by tertiary symptoms.

6. The tertiary stage. In this period gummata form, or there may be
diffuse infiltration of various parts of the body, chronic
inflammation and ulceration of the bones, skin and other tissues,
nervous diseases, and so on. The tertiary stage commonly begins from
three to four years after the primary infection.

The three chief divisions, which are apt to blend one into the other,
are the primary, secondary, and tertiary periods.

The affections of the secondary stage are often severe. There may be
fever associated with weakness, headache, general malaise and pain,
and this may be marked or rather light. In this stage iritis is liable
to occur, and if it is not properly diagnosed and treated it will
result in blindness.

The lesions of the tertiary stage may cause great destruction of
tissues and very grave consequences. Cerebral syphilis, if unchecked,
will inevitably cause paralysis or paresis. There may be loss of
speech, epilepsy, coma, paralyses, apoplectic hemiplegia, and so on.
The pain is harassing and often it amounts to great anguish. Whatever
part of the brain substance is destroyed will not be restored.

In syphilitic affections of the spinal cord, if the inflammation is
acute death ensues in a few days or weeks. _Tabes dorsalis_, or
locomotor ataxia, is caused in about 93 per centum of cases of this
disease by syphilis, and it is an incurable and dreadful malady.

If there is neuritis from the virus it becomes intense and causes
muscular contractions, paresis, and paralysis. The optic, auditory,
and olfactory nerves may be attacked and destroyed. The nose also may
be destroyed and it commonly caves in. The bones of the face are
frequently attacked in the tertiary stage and they rot away. The tibia
is diseased more frequently than the other long bones.

The heart is rarely injured, but when it is, the prognosis usually is
bad. In a large number of cases death is sudden and unexpected. If the
arteries are involved the prognosis again is bad, because the symptoms
here do not show until {313} too late for effective treatment When the
liver is the seat of gummata these may be cured in the early stage,
but in the later stage the prognosis is unfavourable. Some forms of
renal syphilis are remediable, but others are not, especially the
interstitial kind.

Syphilis is transmitted to a child congenitally, not as a tendency or
predisposition, but as an active contagion. It may come from the
father, the mother, from both parents, or by direct infection.

The transmission from the father is the most frequent. The spermatozoa
carry the infection to the maternal ovum. Down to the end of the
secondary stage, and half through the intermediate period between the
secondary and tertiary stages of syphilis, a father or mother may
beget a child that will be infected with hereditary syphilis, a
shivering, blasted, rotten little wretch for whom a quick death is the
greatest imaginable blessing, and it usually gets this blessing. In
the acute stage of a virulent syphilis the disease is most likely to
be transmitted; but sometimes, though rarely, a father that has been
free from all symptoms of syphilis for many years may beget a child
that is born with a virulent hereditary form of the disease.

Infection by the mother is more certain and more harmful than that
from the father, because the intrauterine life of the child is
poisoned throughout its course. Two-thirds of the cases of hereditary
syphilis die either by abortion, or if they live to term they die
shortly after delivery. If the mother is infected during the first
eight months of pregnancy the child will nearly always be syphilitic,
but if she is infected after the eighth month the child may escape.

If at the moment of conception both parents have the disease the child
will almost certainly take it, and this infection will cause its
death. In a series observed by Fournier, 28 per centum of the cases
caused by paternal infections died and 37 per centum showed the luetic
taint; in the cases caused by maternal infection 60 per centum died,
and 84 per centum had syphilitic lesions; in the mixed heredity, that
is when both the father and mother were luetic, 68.5 per centum died
and 92 per centum were born syphilitic. When a child {314} is first
infected at delivery the case is not technically classed as hereditary
syphilis.

During the first year after the father or mother has taken syphilis
the probability of infecting the child is the greatest. In the third
year the liability of infecting the child is lessened, but present. In
a series of 562 cases of hereditary syphilis observed by Fournier, 60
children, over 10 per centum, were infected more than six years after
the primary parental infection. Carefully observed cases have been
exceptionally found where infection of the child has occurred in the
fifteenth and even the twentieth year after the original parental
lesion. Fournier reports the case of one woman that had nineteen
consecutive stillbirths from syphilis.

Mild parental syphilis may transmit hereditarily the most malignant
type of the disease, and very virulent parental infection may result
in a comparatively mild infection of the child, if any infection by
syphilis may be called mild. That the parent shows no symptoms from an
old infection is no proof that he or she is cured, or that the child
may not be infected.

With proper treatment of the mother the infantile mortality in
hereditary syphilis is reduced from 59 per centum to 3 per centum, and
the children that are born living are not unfrequently free from
syphilis. When a woman is infected at the conception of her child
miscarriage takes place before the child is viable, from the first to
the sixth month; later other miscarriages occur; later still, living
but syphilitic children are born, of whom one-fourth die within the
first six months; finally she may have children that are not infected.

If a syphilitic man has been properly treated he may, after four
years, beget healthy children, and he commonly does, but he may be the
father of syphilitic children. Syphilitic women properly treated may,
after about six years from infection, bring forth healthy children,
and they commonly do, but not always.

There is a wide diversity of opinion among the best authorities
concerning the curability of syphilis. Gowers (_Syphilis and the
Nervous System_. 1892) says: "There is no evidence that the disease
ever is or ever has been cured, the {315} word 'disease' being here
used to designate that which causes the various manifestations of the
malady." He means there is no absolute proof that a person who has
once been infected is ever so fully cured that he may marry without
danger of transmitting the disease.

Fournier requires, as the minimum time, four years of methodical
treatment before he deems the patient safe, but even this arbitrary
fixing of the number of years is not warranted by experience. Many
physicians hold that in the tertiary stage the disease is not
transmissible, but that statement is not true. Commonly it is,
sometimes it is not. After all symptoms have disappeared the disease
has been transmitted.

In short, a person that wittingly marries any one who has had syphilis
at any time is a fool; and if one of the contracting parties has had
syphilis within the four years preceding the marriage the marriage is
criminal, even if the syphilis has been carefully and skilfully
treated by a physician.

Gonorrhoea is always a dangerous disease. In the male, beside the
acute lesions, it can cause chronic or fatal inflammations along the
various parts of the genito-urinary tract or in different organs of
the body. When the disease becomes chronic it lasts indefinitely. It
may then cause cystitis, or so affect the kidneys as to bring about
very grave results; it may get into the circulation and induce
gonorrhoeal rheumatism of the joints, especially of the knee joint,
and result in a partly or completely stiffened joint. The heart may be
affected and endocarditis ensue; there may be meningitis or
inflammation of the cerebral membranes; the eye may be infected, and
unless it is skilfully treated blindness will follow. Strictures of
the male urethra from chronic gonorrhoeal inflammation often require
major surgical operations for relief.

The disease in women has most of these complications, and other grave
peculiar phases. All prostitutes have acute or chronic gonorrhoea, and
12 per centum, probably more, of reputable women are infected; and the
suffering caused is very great. The gonococcus remains virulent for
two or three years at the least in a man's chronic gleet, and if he
marries he infects his wife. Should her womb be infected {316} she is
seldom completely cured. If the Fallopian tubes are involved, and this
happens frequently, they suppurate, and often they must be removed by
coeliotomy. The woman suffers for a long time when the tubes are
attacked by the disease, and she becomes sterile ordinarily.

When a child is born to a woman that has gonorrhoea its eyes are
infected at delivery, and if it is not very skilfully treated it will
surely lose its sight. Because of this danger, in maternity hospitals
the eyes of all babies are treated at delivery as a precaution, and
many physicians observe the same precaution in private practice.

When, therefore, a man has chronic gonorrhoea he should not marry
until about four years after the last infection, and he should be
carefully treated in the meantime. There is a popular opinion that
gonorrhoea is a trifling disease, but the contrary is the truth: it is
a grave disease, especially in women; and the person that carelessly
infects another is certainly guilty of crime for which a long term in
jail would be a light punishment.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{317}

