XXIII

PSYCHIC EPILEPSY AND SECONDARY PERSONALITY


One of the most interesting phases of epilepsy is the type of the
disease in which, without any significant motor symptoms, psychical
manifestations prevail very markedly. A special manifestation in this
affection is the occurrence of a more or less complete assertion of
what is called a secondary personality. Apparently the individual
becomes so divided in the use of the mental faculties that there are
two states of consciousness. In one of these the patient knows and
remembers all the ordinary acts of life, the other carries the record
of only such actions as are done in a peculiarly morbid psychic or
epileptic condition. It is rather easy to understand that this strange
state of affairs may readily give rise to even serious complications
as regards the individual's relations to others, and may make the
problem of responsibility for apparently criminal acts that have been
performed very difficult of solution. Undoubtedly, however, this set
of phenomena constitutes a form of mental alienation that must be
reckoned with in many more cases than might be thought possible. The
difficulties that may have to be encountered in the proper
appreciation of the actions of such individuals is best illustrated by
some cases.

At a recent meeting of the New York State Medical Association a case
was reported that shows how extremely difficult it may be to judge of
responsibility under these pathological circumstances. The patient, a
young man of about twenty-two, was the son of parents themselves of
marked nervous heredity, signs of which appeared in other members of
his generation. While in attendance at a public academy he had been
quite severely maltreated during the {260} course of an initiation
into a secret society of the students--the more or less familiar
processes known as hazing being employed. As a result of this he had
suffered from an attack of unconsciousness that lasted for several
hours. No other symptoms, however, or sequelae, appeared for nearly a
year. Then, while boarding with his sister, he became morose and
difficult to get along with. He quarrelled with his sister several
times and generally their relations were rather strained. He came home
one evening very late to supper, and because things were not to suit
him on the table, he grew violently angry. He went upstairs to his
room in this morose state and, procuring a revolver, after a short
time came down and shot at his sister.

Fortunately he missed her. He at once left the house but was followed
by his brother-in-law, and, after he began to run away, by others
whose attention had been attracted by the shot. He left the country
road and ran across the fields. He was found at the foot of a rather
high stone wall in a state of unconsciousness. From this
unconsciousness he did not recover until the next morning. In the
meantime he had been brought home and put to bed. The next morning he
claimed that he had absolutely no remembrance of anything that
happened after he became angry at the table because of his supper. The
family made no further difficulty about the matter, and, as nothing
serious had resulted, the boy went home to live with his father on a
farm and seemed to grow much more equable in temper.

One day, when very tired and out of sorts because things had not been
going as he wanted them to, he was asked to clear a potato patch of
potato bugs by spreading Paris green over it. Some hours later he was
found in the field suffering from severe pains in the stomach and with
evident signs of having swallowed some of the poison. A doctor was
called, an emetic was given and he purged, and after a time he
recovered from the symptoms of poisoning. He claimed that he had no
recollection of what he had done, nor did he know how he came to take
the poison. After this he begged the family to watch over him
carefully and not to let him be alone at times when they recognised
that he was somewhat {261} morose in temper. He was not melancholic in
the sense that he wanted to commit suicide, but something seemed to
come over him in spells, and while in a state of mind of which he had
no recollection afterwards, he performed actions that seemed voluntary
and yet were not.

He did not have very good health on the farm, and so he was advised to
try the effect of life at sea. A position as assistant steward was
obtained for him on a coastwise vessel. In this position he gained
rapidly in weight and seemed to have excellent health. All tendencies
to moroseness of disposition disappeared. After a time he was promoted
to a stewardship and later became the purser of a rather important
vessel. He has given excellent satisfaction and feels in every way
that he is in a much more balanced condition than ever before.

He still insists that he remembers nothing of how the two almost fatal
incidents in his life came about. All his family are convinced that it
was not a responsible state of mind that led him to attempt either of
the crimes. It seems not improbable that this is one of those
fortunately rare cases in which an attack of psychic epilepsy
sometimes obliterates for a moment the individuality of a patient. At
times these attacks last much longer, and the change to a secondary
personality may represent a rather long interval. A number of cases of
what are called ambulatory epilepsy have been brought to the attention
of the general public of late years because of certain interesting
features of the cases that have been exploited in the daily press.

Patients suffering from this form of nervous disease may wander from
their homes, and while performing automatically a number of actions,
such as buying tickets, travelling on cars and railroad trains, or
even arranging the details of their journey for a long distance, may
yet be in a state of mind that is not their ordinary consciousness.
Men may leave home under the circumstances and find themselves after
months in a strange town where they have established themselves in
some quite different occupation from that to which they were formerly
accustomed, or for which their early training fitted them. There seems
to be an absolute division between the {262} states of consciousness
that rule the individual during the intervals of ordinary and
extraordinary personality. There are, of course, many reasons for
thinking that at times such a change of personality might be feigned;
but many of the cases have been followed with too much care to allow
this thought to serve as an explanation for all of them.

A case which serves to bring home very clearly the possibility of such
a state of mind giving rise to serious complications is the following:
The patient was a young man in attendance at the medical school of a
university in a foreign city. He had been very careless in money
matters, and had aroused family suspicion that even the money sent him
for tuition was being used extravagantly. A friend of the family came
to see him unexpectedly in order to assure himself how the boy was
actually getting along. The boy's accounts were in a very disordered
condition; he had not bought the books for which he pretended to want
money; he had not paid his tuition. He realised that all this would
come out as soon as the university authorities were consulted. Very
naturally he was in an extremely perturbed state of mind.

While on the way to the university with this friend they passed a
corner pharmacy, and the young man asked to be allowed to step in for
a moment for a remedy for headache. The friend waited on the sidewalk
for him, and when, after some minutes, the young man did not come out
he went in to inquire for him, and found that after purchasing a
headache powder the young man had gone out by a side door. For three
days nothing was heard from him. Then a telegram announced that he was
in a hospital in a distant city and that he had been picked up on the
street unconscious. When he came to in the hospital he had no idea
where he was, and, according to his own story, no recollection of how
he got to the distant city.

It might be very easy to think, under such circumstances, that this
was all pretence. A number of these cases of ambulatory epilepsy have
been under the observation of distinguished neurologists, however, and
there seems no good reason to doubt that some of them, at least, were
entirely without any fictitious element. In any given case the {263}
possibility of the occurrence of an attack of what is really the
assumption of a secondary personality must be judged from the
circumstances, from the previous history of the individual, from the
family traits, and from certain stigmata as narrowing of the field of
vision and the like, which go to show the existence of a highly
neurotic constitution. In this case the family history showed marked
neurotic tendencies on both sides, and a brother had displayed a
tendency to regularly spaced attacks of alcoholism about every six
weeks, and finally became absolutely uncontrollable. There seemed good
reason to think that the case was a real example of ambulatory
epilepsy, and that the lapse of memory claimed by the patient really
existed.

In these cases it is usual for the so-called secondary personality to
assert itself at moments of intense excitement, especially if they
have been preceded by days of worry and fatigue and nights of
disturbed rest. The secondary personality is not a complete
personality, but is a manifestation of the original ego with the
memory for past events as a _tabula rasa_. It is well known that the
memory is one of the intellectual faculties most dependent on physical
conditions. It is the lowest in the scale of mental qualities and is
shared to a very large degree by the animals. Injuries to the head not
infrequently produce lacunae in the memory. These lacunae often have
very striking limitations. It is not an unusual thing to find that old
people remember events of their very early childhood better than
things that have happened within a few years. Still more interesting
is the fact that languages learned in youth may continue to be easily
used, when those that were learned later in life, though perhaps known
better than the previously studied languages, are forgotten.

It has often been noted that people who suffer from apoplexy may have
peculiar affections of their memory. This may include such striking
peculiarities as the forgetting of the uses of things, though their
names are retained, or more commonly, the forgetting of names while
the knowledge of uses remains. The one form of memory disturbance is
called "Word Amnesia;" the other is called "Apraxia." It is on {264}
record that a person suffering from a hemorrhage in the brain has lost
completely the use of a language acquired later in life, though the
memory of the native language, long since fallen into disuse, was
perfectly retained. One apoplectic woman patient who had left Germany
before she was ten years of age, and who had lived in America until
she was fifty, forgot absolutely the English she knew so well and had
to set herself to work to learn it over again, though her German came
back to her very naturally. These are wonderful peculiarities of
memory-pathology that show how much this faculty is dependent on the
physical basis of mind and upon the cellular constituents of the
brain.

It is not surprising, then, to find that lapses of memory may occur
and that, as a consequence, so many of the facts that ordinarily
enable us to identify ourselves as particular persons may be in
abeyance. That apparently a secondary personality asserts
itself,--though not in the sense that there is ever another ego
present, another mind or another will,--practically all experts in
psychology and nervous diseases are now ready to concede. There are,
however, involved in this question a number of important problems of
responsibility that have not as yet been entirely worked out, and with
regard to which prudent persons are withholding their judgment. Each
case must be studied entirely on its own merits, with a leaning in
favour of the criminal or patient, in case there are evidences in past
life of serious disturbances of mentality, though only of very
temporary nature, or if there is a strong nervous or mental heredity.

The notion of the possibility of a secondary personality asserting
itself is a much older idea than it is usually thought to be. When
Stevenson wrote _Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde_, the immediate widespread
popularity of the book was not due to recent psychological studies on
dual personality and popular interest in a rare but striking mental
phenomenon, but rather to the traditional feeling, long existent, of
the possibility of two personalities in almost any individual. The
other law in his members, of which St. Paul speaks, is an expression
of this feeling, and its recognition was not original with him since
it is after all a phenomenon at least as old {265} as the existence of
conscience. It is one of the basic ideas in religious feeling. Nearly
everyone has something of the consciousness that there is in him
possibilities for evil that somehow he escapes, and yet the escape is
not entirely due to his own will power. There is here the mystery of
temptation, of free will and of grace as the drama of conscience works
itself out in every human being. At times the evil inclination seems
to get beyond the power of the will and a period of irresponsibility
sets in. Needless to say, the adjudication of how much may be due to
the habitual neglect of repression of lower instincts is extremely
difficult, and this constitutes the problem which the alienist must
try to solve. In the meantime there is need in many mysterious cases
where secondary personality may play a role, of the exercise of a
larger Christian charity than that hitherto practised. Pretenders may
succeed in deceiving only too often, but in the past not a few
innocent individuals have been held to a responsibility for actions
for which they were not quite accountable.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{266}

