XIX

HYSTERIA

The term Hysteria ([Greek text] uterus) has been handed down from the
days when physicians thought there was a connection between
womb-disorders and the set of nervous symptoms grouped under the title
hysteria. It is now etymologically meaningless,--men also grow
hysterical. Briquet found 11 male to 204 female hysterics, and later
statistics increase the number of males.

The disease is not readily definable. The patient is usually a young
emotional woman, oftenest between 15 and 20 years of age. She commonly
has anaesthetic spots on her body, concentric limitations of the field
of vision, and hystero-genetic zones, or tender points, which, when
pressed, appear to inhibit the hysterical fit. The symptoms enumerated
here are not, however, found in every case of hysteria, and it is
difficult at times to diagnose the disease.

The various manifestations of hysteria are (1) apt to come and go
suddenly. A severe paralysis that suddenly disappears for a time is
hysterical; (2) even if they last for years they may be suddenly
cured; (3) they are dominated more by mental and moral influences than
are the symptoms of any other disease; (4) we find no organic lesion
with which we can connect the symptoms.

The conditions that bring about hysteria are hysteria in a parent, or
insanity, alcoholism, or some similar neurotic taint in an ancestor.
There is no direct connection between hysteria and the disorders of
the sexual organs.

Immediate causes are acute depressive emotions, shocks from danger,
sudden grief, severe revulsions of feeling, as from disappointment in
love; and, secondly, cumulative {236} emotional disturbance, as from
worry, poverty, ill treatment, unhappy marriage, or religious
revivals. Certain diseased conditions, as anaemia, chronic
intoxications, pelvic trouble, cause hysteria, or, more exactly, start
it into activity where it is latent. It is also communicated by
imitation and it may become epidemic.

After the great plague, the Black Death, in the fourteenth century,
there were very remarkable epidemics of imitative hysteria in Germany
and elsewhere. In 1374, at Aix-la-Chapelle, crowds of men and women
danced together in the streets until they fell exhausted in a
cataleptic state. These dances spread over Holland and Belgium and
went to Cologne and Metz. It is said that in Metz there were 1100 of
the dancers seen at the same time.

The "Dancing Plague" broke out again in 1418 at Strasburg, in Belgium,
and along the Lower Rhine.

  "Viel hundert fingen zu Strassburg an
  Zu tanzen und springen Frau und Mann,
  Am offnen Markt, Gassen und Strassen;
  Tag und Nacht ihrer viel nicht assen,
  Bis ihn das Wuethen wieder gelag.
  St. Vits Tanz ward genannt die Plag."

Beckmann (_Historia des Fuerstenthums Anhalt_. Zerbst. 1710) tells of a
similar outbreak in 1237, wherein nearly a hundred children were
seized by the disease at Erfurt, and they went along the road to
Arnstadt, dancing and jumping hysterically. A number of these children
died of exhaustion. The same infection is often at work in the fury of
a mob, the panic of a beaten army, and it probably was an element in
the Children's Crusade.

The Tarantism so common in Italy from the fifteenth to the eighteenth
century is another example of epidemic hysteria. The Bubonic Plague
ravaged Italy sixteen times between 1119 and 1340, and smallpox was at
work when the black death could find no fresh victims. As a
consequence of economic disturbance and fear the people were generally
neurasthenic, and a slight shock was enough at times to set whole
villages into hysterical convulsions.

{237}

In 1787, at Hodden Bridge in Lancashire, England, a girl in a cotton
mill threw a mouse upon another girl that had a great dread of this
animal. The frightened girl was thrown into a hysterical convulsion
which lasted for hours. The next day three girls that had watched her
were in convulsions, the following day six more, and two days later
fourteen more girls and a man were in fits. American white and negro
camp-meetings result in similar outbreaks, and the French
_Convulsionnaires_, who did outrageous things from 1731 to 1790, were
also afflicted with imitative hysteria. The Cornish Jumpers, founded
in 1760 by Harris Rowland and William Williams, and the American
Barkers were also hysterical. The Barkers in the meetings would run
about on all fours growling, "to show the degeneration of their human
nature," and they would end in almost general fits of imitative
hysteria.

There was an epidemic of hysteria in Tennessee, Kentucky, and a part
of Virginia, which began in 1800 and lasted for a number of years. It
started at revivals. The majority of the cases were in persons from 15
to 25 years of age, although it was observed in every age from 6 years
to 60. The muscles affected were those of the neck, trunk, and arms.
The contractions were so violent that the patients were thrown to the
ground, and their motions there exactly resembled those of a live fish
thrown out of the water upon the land.

There are numerous theories formulated to explain hysteria; some are
ingenious, especially that of Janet, but none is convincing.
Convulsions, tremors, paralyses of various forms and degrees are
common in hysteria. In major hysteria the patient falls into a
convulsion gently. There is checked breathing, up to apparent danger
of suffocation. Then follows a furious convulsion, even with bloody
froth at the mouth, but there is a trace of wilfulness or purpose in
the movements. Next may come a stage of opisthotonos, where the body
is bent back in a rigid arch till the patient rests on her heels and
head only, and this is followed by relaxation and recurrence of the
contortions. An ecstatic phase succeeds this, at times in the
so-called crucifix position, with outbursts of various emotions, and a
final regaining of a {238} normal state. Any of these stages, however,
may constitute the whole fit.

In minor hysteria there is commonly a sensation of a rising ball in
the throat (the _globus hystericus_). There may be uncontrollable
laughter or weeping. Muscular rigidity is frequently found. The
patient, especially if she is a child, may mimic dogs and other
animals. The snarling, biting, and barking of false hydrophobia are
hysterical; these symptoms do not occur in real hydrophobia.

There are almost innumerable physical symptoms of the disease, which
are chiefly of medical interest, but the mental phases are such as to
involve questions of morality. The hysterical character is marked by
an overmastering desire to be an object of general sympathy,
admiration, or interest, rather than by a tendency to baser
indulgence. The will is weak, the emotions explosive, the patient is
impulsive and lacking in self-control. She is a "giggler," who goes
from absurd laughter into floods of tears. The desire for sympathy and
attention makes the patient exaggerate her symptoms or simulate
diseases and conditions that do not exist in her case. Hysterics will
swallow pins or stick them into their flesh to force attention.
Sometimes the simulation of disease is not willed. If there are a
number of hysterical girls in a hospital ward and one develops, say, a
peculiar paralysis, within two or three hours every hysterical woman
in the room will have the same paralysis,--not pretended, but real,
although temporary. It must be remembered that the disease, with all
its perversity, is as much a fact as pneumonia, and the element of
sham is only one of its symptoms. Some authorities go so far as to
hold that a woman who will not lie is not hysterical. They invent most
extraordinary slanders against even their own immediate family, and it
is never prudent to believe an accusation made by an hysterical
patient, no matter how plausible the story.

Acquired hysteria in many cases may be cured, but the congenital
condition is practically hopeless, yet the latter kind may be kept
from violent outbreaks.

We can not prevent drunkards, epileptics, and lunatics from
propagating their kind, and therefore we shall still have the {239}
hysteric with us. The child that has a bad ancestry and shows
hysterical tendencies should be carefully reared. If it has an
hysterical father or mother it should, if possible, be removed from
this evil influence. Keep it from long hours of mechanical work that
leaves opportunity for dreaming. Shut out novels and "art for art's
sake," especially music. Give it a practical education. Teach it
obedience, self-control, and truthfulness. Harden its will by exercise
at things it does not like, and do not coddle it. Do not marry off an
hysterical girl to cure her. Do not inflict her presence upon some
unfortunate young man because he is a good citizen. Marriage will not
cure hysteria,--the worst cases are married women, and they beget
other hysterics in spreading succession.

When the disease shows itself offer no sympathy,--do not try to put
out a fire with oil. When a "good, pious girl" grows hysterical, the
chief obstacles to her cure are untactful and sympathetic visits from
friends, lay and clerical. A visit from the pastor, because of his
importance, is always harmful, and if the bishop drives up in his
carriage so that the neighbours may see him, all the physicians in the
city can not help her. If you wish to keep an hysterical girl in her
vapours, get her a physician that will grow excited over her, take the
dear child out of school and weep above her couch, let the family and
its friends assure the unfortunate attending physician in her presence
that he is heartless, and she will stay hysterical to her soul's
content.

If you wish to control the attack, or even remove the disease under
certain conditions, call in an experienced physician, leave the
treatment to him, and pay no attention to her. Do not make light of
the disease, do not speak of it at all. There are attacks that may be
cured by the razor-strop or a bucket of cold water, but these are
exceptional. They are new cases or old professional offenders. Rough
treatment is not so good as patient tact, but at times roughness is
the only cure.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{240}

