XVIII

NEURASTHENIA

Neurasthenia, or nerve-weakness, "the vapours" of the old novelists
and dramatists, is a very common malady, and it gives the clergyman
trouble by the turmoil it causes in families, religious communities,
in themselves, and elsewhere. Whether the condition is a distinct
disease or not, and that question has been voluminously discussed, is
not altogether an important matter, but that there is such a group of
symptoms is unfortunately a weighty fact. It takes so many forms that
it is bewildering, and therefore not readily reduced to unity.

The cerebral form often exists independently. There is such a thing as
"brain fag," although many complainants may have very little material
for the fag to work on. Often such a patient is robust, even an
athlete, and his assertions meet with ridicule or abuse instead of
treatment. If the patient is a woman she is not seldom called
"hysterical." She is not hysterical. Hysteria, by the way, is as
distinct a trouble as a broken leg, and far more serious, and not a
synonym for perverseness, as the term is popularly used.

In the cerebral form, business, reading, study "go into one ear and
out the other." The patient's memory fails him temporarily just when
he may need it most, say, in a speech or sermon; a fly buzzing on a
pane is a calamity and a source of profanity; a flat note in the
choir-singing is ample reason for doubting the divine origin of the
church, and every petty trouble that whisks its harmless tail across
his floor makes him seek the table-top. I have known a whole convent
of nuns, who were closely shut in, with bad ventilation and a worse
cook, until all were more or less neurasthenic, almost {231}
disintegrated by the presence of a lamb sent in as a pet; not because
of the bleating or any ordinary reason, but solely because of the
hideous incongruity and indecency in the fact that the lamb was a
male.

The cerebral neurasthenic makes rash, impetuous changes in his mode of
life. He leaves a religious order because the coffee is weak, he
resigns an important post in a bank because the president uses snuff,
he abandons medicine for trade because the curate meddled in the
treatment of two of his patients. He takes on anxiety, locks up the
house six times over the same night; meals are eaten in awed silence
by his trembling children; altogether he is an unmitigated nuisance.

He may get religious scruples. If he is a priest he takes an hour to
an hour and a half to say a low mass, and most of that time is spent
in searching the corporal for imaginary particles or in drying the dry
chalice. He rereads his breviary until he is exhausted. Because moral
theologians say that certain scruples are from the devil, he is
convinced that the devil takes a particular interest in his case. The
devil did probably take a special interest in his father's or
grandfather's lack of scrupulosity, for his condition is commonly a
result of alcoholism in an ancestor.

There are three chief types of neurasthenics: in one class is the
person that appears robust, and is really so except in his nervous
system, which lacks a governor. Such patients have little more than a
troubled appearance to draw the attention of a chance observer to
their condition.

A second class is made up of eloquent narrators of their troubles.
They try all the physicians in turn, then the homoeopaths and
osteopaths and similar quacks, and they add patent medicines
prescribed by themselves. They are petulant, capricious, and despite
their apparent energy they accomplish nothing.

The third class are silent, limp, clammy-handed; they are brought
against their will to see the physician; they are sulky; bitter and
unreasoning haters; inclined to melancholy. They may have a tendency
even to suicide, but this is somewhat rare. Neurasthenics are not so
liable to insanity as is popularly supposed, but such an outcome is
possible in certain {232} cases. If their vague fears go on into a
more or less fixed delusion there is cause for anxiety lest insanity
result, but care should be taken here to be sure the delusion is
really irremovable.

Some neurasthenics are afraid to cross an open square or a wide
street, others dread any closed apartment. Vertigo is common; so is
insomnia. Insomnia is almost a constant symptom. The patient may have
naps or he may have uninterrupted vigils. Sometimes there is a heavy
but unrefreshing sleep. Sleepless patients are thrown into distracting
rage by the barking of a neighbour's dog, the howling of cats, or the
cackling of a successful hen, and they haunt the magistrates' courts
in efforts to suppress such noises. They put cotton in their ears,
wear heavy nightcaps, stop clocks, board up windows in search of
sleep, which is not found.

These patients commonly have an enduring feeling of weight or
constriction in the head, especially at the occiput,--a headache that
is not actual pain. They also have vertigo, which is independent of
any aural disease, and this is transient, showing itself on abrupt
changes of position.

Another phase of neurasthenia is spinal. These cases have pain in the
back and their legs give out. The back-pain is a diffuse ache, or it
manifests itself on pressure at certain spots along the spine. There
may be severe pain at the coccyx, especially in women. The walking may
simulate paralytic forms if hysteria is mixed with the neurasthenia.
Cardiac symptoms are often prominent, especially palpitation, but
there is a nervous excitation of the heart rather than any definite
lesion.

The gastro-intestinal symptoms are often important. Pain referred to
the stomach and acidity are common, the tongue is coated, the faeces
scybalous. Digestion is torpid. Sometimes there is nervous diarrhoea.
A list of the belly symptoms described by some neurasthenics is
interminable.

We often find a sexual form, which is the worst of all and the hardest
to cure. It is commonly connected with masturbation. Such
neurasthenics are shameless in the description of their nastiness. It
is better to keep them from marriage unless they are cured, and they
are not to be foisted off on {233} any one as husband or wife to
effect a cure. Allbutt says of them: "I fear that some of our
'criminal psychologists' are encouraging many sorts of prurient
debauchees by dignifying the tales of their vice with the name of
science, a course of conduct which is in the worst interests both of
these persons themselves and of our own profession. It were a curious
inquiry how it comes that sexual perversions are so 'scientific' a
study, while the brutalities of the thieves' kitchen or the wiles of
other pests of society lie in comparative neglect."

Physical, intellectual, or emotional strain can cause neurasthenia
suddenly or gradually. Where it comes on without obvious cause there
is commonly a bad family history of nervousness or alcoholism. Anaemia
makes it worse; eye-strain, too, is a provoking factor. In some cases
a renal congestion is the cause. In many cases a lack of restraint,
bad education, uncontrolled passion, are a marked influence in fixing
the neurasthenic habit. A sedulous parent nags at a neurasthenic child
that is too weak for exertion until the child's susceptibility to
correction is blunted. Instead of treatment and help the child
receives cuffs and abuse, and hell-fire is held up before him until he
deems all religious talk dust and ashes. Encouragement will sometimes
do more good than all the threats in the _via purgativa_. Nagging
never cured anything except a tendency toward virtue, and it always
deepens neurasthenia. Be careful in the selection of a confessor for a
neurasthenic child. Get one that does not believe in kicking a soul
into paradise.

The treatment of neurasthenia is difficult. Traveling about in search
of health is not advisable. The Weir Mitchell Rest Cure is very
effective in many bad cases, but it is costly, and if not correctly
applied it is useless. It is the only cure for some patients. Sea air
helps a certain class of neurasthenics, but it makes others worse--it
is bad for the dyspeptic neurasthenic. A chronic rhinitis, a
refractive error of the eyes, a displacement of the uterus, a
congested kidney, a floating kidney, a tight prepuce, and similar
teasing disorders must be cured before the neurasthenia can be
removed; often the neurasthenia disappears with this cure.

Traumatic neurasthenia is like simple neurasthenia in {234} most
details. It is called also nerve shock, spinal irritation, railway
spine. There is always a causative shock or injury, which is followed
at once or after an interval by the symptoms of neurasthenia. In acute
traumatic neurasthenia there may be, in addition to the symptoms
observed in simple neurasthenia, high fever, and such a fever has been
observed to go as high as 113 degrees Fahrenheit.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{235}

