XX

MENSTRUAL DISEASES

Menstruation is a periodic discharge of blood from the uterus and the
Fallopian tubes. It occurs every twenty-eight or thirty days, and it
lasts from puberty to the menopause, or the cessation of the
menses,--about the forty-fifth year of age.

There is a connection between menstruation and the production of the
human ovum. During the first stage of menstruation the mucous membrane
lining the uterus swells to twice or thrice its normal thickness, and
this growth is a preparation for the reception of the ovum, which, as
a rule, is given off by one of the ovaries at this time and passes out
into the uterus. Menstruation and ovulation ordinarily occur
simultaneously, but they may be independent and take place at
different times. If, during this stage, the ovum is impregnated,
pregnancy begins, and menstruation ceases until some time after
childbirth. In married women conception is more likely to be effected
during the first stage of menstruation than during the interval of
quiescence; the contrary is almost the exception. Impregnation,
however, is likely to occur in the spring more than at other seasons,
and this fact coincides with the advent of spring in various
latitudes.

If the ovum is not impregnated, the material that made the uterine
mucous membrane thick during the first week of menstruation
degenerates and passes off, constituting the menstrual flow. This
stage lasts about five days. A reparative period of about four days
follows, and then a period of quiescence until the next menstruation
commences.

Menstruation is first observed about the fourteenth year, but it may
start earlier or later. In general, it comes on {241} earlier in warm
climates, and later in the extreme north. The menstruation, too, is
likely to show sooner in the labouring classes than in girls who do
not work.

Even in normal menstruation there is often a marked physiological
excitation which affects the entire person. Very commonly a nervous
disturbance and sensitiveness are observed, and in women that are not
robust there may be mental depression and irritability. The
temperature will rise a half degree, and drop to the normal height on
the day preceding the flow.

There are derangements of menstruation which are symptoms of various
diseases. Amenorrhoea is an absence of menstruation in conditions
other than pregnancy or lactation. Absolute amenorrhoea is a complete
absence of menstruation for several months; relative amenorrhoea is
delayed, scant menstruation.

Amenorrhoea is common during convalescence from acute diseases; it is
also a result of chronic diseases of the liver, stomach, intestines,
kidneys, and especially of the lungs; it complicates anaemia, malaria,
rheumatism, and other general pathological conditions. Fright, grief,
great anxiety, mental shock cause amenorrhoea; so do homesickness and
many forms of insanity.

There are also local causes of this condition: imperfect development
of the uterus or the organs connected therewith, and inflammations of
these organs or of the pelvic wall.

Opposed to amenorrhoea is menorrhagia, or an excessive menstrual flow.
Metrorrhagia, or hemorrhage from the uterus at any time, is a term
confounded with menorrhagia, which is an inordinate menstrual loss of
uterine blood, but the distinction is not important. Menorrhagia and
metrorrhagia commonly have an identical cause and they frequently
coexist. They are found in chronic diseases of the heart, lungs,
liver, and other organs; they are an outcome of prolonged lactation,
and of local affections of the uterus and its appendages. Any
condition also that deranges the blood may cause menorrhagia or
metrorrhagia; so do malignant tumours of the uterus, uterine
displacements, lacerations that {242} occur in childbirth, and
psychical influences, as fright, anxiety, and other strong emotions.

Dysmenorrhoea, difficult or obstructed menstruation, is a term used
for menstruation accompanied by pain. This is a common menstrual
derangement, and it may be neuralgic or inflammatory in origin, or it
may be caused by obstruction to the menstrual flow. There is another
variety of dysmenorrhoea, called membranous, in which the superficial
layer of the uterine lining is cast off partly or wholly.

In the neuralgic form the uterus and its appendages are normal in
appearance, but the pain recurs monthly, and it may have degrees from
mere discomfort to agony. This form is characterised by reflex
headache, sympathetic nausea or vomiting; and the pain may not be
confined to the uterus and its appendages. The irritation often brings
out latent hysterical phenomena, spinal irritation, and neurasthenia.
Rheumatism and gout are predisposing causes, so are indolence, lack of
physical exercise, light clothing in cold weather, forced school work
and similar depressing agents.

In the neurotic variety of dysmenorrhoea pain often persists after the
menstrual flow has set in, but in inflammatory dysmenorrhoea the flow
relieves the pain or removes it. Marriage commonly removes the
neurotic form of dismenorrhoea.

In obstructive dysmenorrhoea the menstrual fluid is retained by narrow
or tortuous outlets, flexions of the uterus, and similar causes. The
prognosis is good in all forms of dysmenorrhoea, but frequently long
and skilful treatment is required to cure such conditions, especially
the membranous form. Inflammatory, obstructive, and membranous
dysmenorrhoea are commonly made worse by marriage.

At the end of the childbearing period menstruation gradually ceases.
In temperate climates this menopause occurs about the forty-fifth
year, but it may come earlier or considerably later. Work that keeps a
woman in a heated atmosphere, as cooking, washing, and baking,
disturbs menstruation and tends to advance the menopause. Workers in
chemical factories, in badly ventilated rooms, or women that do heavy
labour in the open air, are apt to age prematurely, and have {243} an
early menopause or "change of life." This premature climacteric is
found also in women that bear many children in rapid succession.

At the menopause there may be various physical or mental disturbances
which are probably due more to the somewhat abrupt advent of old age,
at the cessation of the childbearing part of life, rather than to the
menopause itself. It is a fact, however, that often profound
disturbances coincide with the climacteric, and we know no sufficient
cause for them if the menopause itself may not be deemed such.

There are numerous disorders of the nervous system in women which are
dependent directly or indirectly upon a derangement of the pelvic
organs. Distant parts of the body are affected pathologically through
sympathetic irritation when the primary disease is in the pelvic
organs, and direct treatment of the pelvic trouble alone cures these
reflex conditions. The very common disorders of pregnancy, the marked
physiological changes in women at the beginning of menstruation with
puberty, and its cessation with the menopause, are among the first
proofs of this assertion that occur. Menstruation may aggravate
goitre, uterine fibroid tumours, skin diseases, and affections of the
blood vessels. Disordered menstruation causes sleeplessness,
melancholy, dementia, and mania, by affecting the brain; it may bring
on local paralysis; start up latent epilepsy; excite reflex cough and
difficulty in breathing; make the heart irritable; cause nausea,
vomiting, dyspepsia, flatulence, diarrhoea, skin-inflammations, pain
in the joints, and many other symptomatic phenomena.

Chorea ("St. Vitus's Dance") is caused by various irritatations, and
dysmenorrhoea can be such a cause. If a person is disposed to hysteria
by neurotic inheritance, idleness, sedentary habits, vicious
practices, excessive development of the emotions, any affection of the
uterus or its appendages will greatly aggravate the outbreaks. The
same is true in neurasthenia; and uterine disorders can directly cause
neurasthenia, a condition described in another chapter. Migraine is an
extremely severe form of headache which arises from various
excitations, and uterine disturbances are among the causes.

{244}

Insanity frequently appears in women at puberty, soon after marriage,
during pregnancy or lactation, and at the menopause; at these periods
disposed women are especially prone to outbreaks of insanity.
Irritation and exhaustion from diseases of the pelvic organs are
potent factors in bringing on insanity, although these conditions may
coexist independently of each other. Symptoms should not be mistaken
for causes, but pelvic diseases at least aggravate a tendency toward
mental unbalance.

In an article like this it is not expedient to speak of treatment, but
the conditions are described in outline so that the spiritual adviser
may recognise the need of medical aid and suggest its employment. A
woman suffering from pelvic disorders should be relieved from a
labourious or responsible office until she has been cured of her
disease, in her own interest and especially in the interest of those
affected by her condition.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{245}

