IX

HEREDITY, PHYSICAL DISEASE, AND MORAL WEAKNESS


Heredity is a very vexed question, with regard to which most varied
opinions are held even by those apparently justified in having
opinions, so that it is evident we are as yet only crossing the
threshold of definite knowledge and are not near anything like the
clear view that many people have imagined. The most striking proof of
this inchoateness of scientific knowledge of heredity is the fact that
within five years the work of a monk in Austria, done about forty
years ago, which has lain utterly unrecognised ever since, has come to
be accepted as the most striking bit of progress made--almost the only
real scientific knowledge with regard to heredity that was acquired
during the whole nineteenth century. Father Gregor Mendel's work
[Footnote 2] was done with regard to the pea plants in his monastery
garden, and it revolutionised all the supposedly scientific thinking
with regard to heredity that has been current in biology for half a
century.

  [Footnote 2: _See American Ecclesiastical Review_, Jan. 1904; Walsh,
  _A New Outlook in Heredity_. ]

This serves very well to show how far in advance of observed facts
theories of heredity have gone. There is undoubtedly a very
significant influence exerted over life and its functions by the
special powers that are transmitted by heredity. How far this
influence extends, however, and how much it may be said to rule
details of existence, of action and in human beings, that complex of
elements we call character, is entirely a matter of conjecture, and
the {121} belief in its extent, or limitation, depends absolutely on
the tendency of the individual mind to accept or discredit certain
theories in heredity which have had great vogue.

Until within a very few years it was considered a matter of common
experience and observation that under some circumstances, at least,
acquired characteristics were transmitted by heredity. That is to say,
it has been definitely asserted as probable, and by many even
intelligent people considered absolutely certain, that modifications
of a living being undergone during the course of its existence might
influence the progeny of that being in various but very definite ways.
It was not, of course, thought that if a man lost an arm and
subsequently begot a child, the child would be born without an arm,
but slighter modifications of the organism were somehow supposed to be
transmissible; and, on the other hand, modifications which affect
important organic structures of the body were somehow thought to have
a definite effect, by transmission, upon corresponding portions of the
progeny.

When this theory is stated thus baldly, very few people confess their
belief in it, yet how many there are who find ample justification for
such expressions as, "His father suffered from rheumatism and it is
not surprising then that he should have it"; "Her mother had heart
trouble and we've always been afraid she would suffer in the same
way." We are only just beginning to get beyond the period in which
consumption was thought to be directly and almost inevitably
inherited. With regard to mental ailments this was frankly conceded by
nearly every one. If the direct ancestry suffered from mental disease
of some kind, then it is not considered surprising that the immediate
descendants should be mentally affected in some way. Physicians are
quite as prone as those without medical training to make loose
statements of this kind.

Of course there is a reason for the confusion that exists in this
matter. Oliver Wendell Holmes once said that he could cure any patient
that came to him for treatment, if he but applied to him in time. For
proper success, however, he considered that many of his patients would
have had to come to him in the persons of their great grandfathers. As
{122} a matter of fact, many of the supposed hereditary influences
that are traced only to a father or a mother are family conditions
that have existed many generations, and that were probably originally
acquired, but the moment of whose acquisition cannot be definitely
determined. We know that the Hapsburg lip has been a distinguishing
feature, a persistently recurring peculiarity, in some of the members
of the Austrian ruling family in nearly every generation for seven
centuries. How much farther back than that it goes we have no way of
determining. It is a family affair, a characteristic which became a
matter of heredity perhaps ten centuries ago, but the mode of its
original acquisition is a mystery.

There is no really great scientist in biology at the present moment
who teaches the hereditary transmission of acquired characteristics.
Modifications of the organism that become matter for heredity have
existed for many generations and we cannot tell just how they began.
There is no doubt that there is some hereditary influence, for
insanity in the same family is likely to keep recurring in successive
generations. More than this, affections of certain less important
organs are evidently a common trait in certain family strains. There
is no doubt that in some families stomach affections are the rule in
successive generations. It is very hard to say, however, just when
such defective organisation became a family trait. The tendency to
nervous affections is undoubtedly a similar family affair. Certain
affections have been hereditary traits for many generations. An
excellent example of this is the so-called Huntingdon's chorea, which
several generations of American doctors, of the name of Huntingdon, by
following carefully the history of certain families on Long Island,
succeeded in tracing through four generations.

The habits of life of a father or a grandfather may so weaken the
physical constitution of his descendants as to make them less capable
of resisting infections in the physical order, or in the moral order
of withstanding trials and temptations, and the allurement to abuse of
nervous excitement to which they may be subjected. That some acquired
pathological condition, however, as stomach trouble, or heart {123}
trouble, or affection of the liver or of the brain, should be directly
transmitted, is quite as nonsensical as that the loss of an arm should
be a subject for hereditary transmission. On investigation it will be
found that the pathological conditions of immediate ancestors are
themselves only a manifestation of family traits that have existed for
many generations. The possibility of inheritance must therefore always
be borne in mind. We are utterly unable as yet to understand how such
family traits are originally developed, since, in ordinary experience,
at least, acquired characteristics are not the subject of inheritance
or transmission, and consequently it becomes difficult to understand
how they ever became impressed upon the family constitution.

Notwithstanding this general principle with regard to heredity, there
are a number of striking observations which show that even unimportant
peculiarities may occur from generation to generation, though it is
not always easy to decide where the peculiarity originated. The
well-known example of the occurrence of six toes has already been
mentioned, and is an oft-quoted bit of evidence as regards hereditary
transmission. An extra finger on the hand, or some portion of an extra
finger, at least, comes in the same category. Not long since it was
pointed out that harelip is another of these peculiarities that
readily lends itself to hereditary transmission. Recently there was
the report of a family into which there were born four girls with
harelip and cleft palate, and three boys not showing any trace of
these deformities.

Often when in such cases there is no definite history of harelip, it
is found that in either one of the parents there is a very high arched
palate and a thin upper lip, showing that the normal occlusion of the
cleft which exists here during foetal development is not quite
perfect, and this peculiarity may be traced for several generations
back, with an occasional occurrence of harelip as an exaggerated
example of the faulty tendency not to produce sufficient tissue in
this neighbourhood for the proper closure of the embryonic cleft.

An even more striking manifestation of a physical anomaly, as a family
trait, is the condition known as hemophilia. This {124} tendency to
bleed easily, so that a slight scratch, or the pulling of a tooth, may
give rise to fatal hemorrhage, occurs, as a rule, only in males, but
is transmitted through the female line. It is in the mother's male
relatives that the history of its previous occurrence is found, and
the tendency usually can be traced through several generations, until
it is lost in vague tradition. It is no wonder, with such examples
before them as six-toedness, harelip, and hemophilia, that physicians
have been ready to accept heredity of qualities in the moral order,
traits of character and disposition, and pathological tendencies to
crime or passion or indulgence.

One of the most frequently discussed conditions of supposed
pathological inheritance of this order is dipsomania. Everyone has
heard it said, "Poor fellow, how can he help it; his father was a
drunkard before him." As we have already said, in such direct cases
inheritance is absolutely unproven. An alcoholic father may transmit a
very weak physical constitution to his children, and this may prove
inadequate to enable them to withstand the emotional strain and worry
of modern great city life, and, as a consequence, they may take to
alcohol for consolation until the habit is formed, and then the
craving for stimulants supplies the place of any hereditary influence
that may be supposed to be needed.

Of course there are cases of the drink habit in which, after a number
of generations of family history of alcoholism, an individual seems to
have the craving for stimulants born in him. In such cases it is not
unusual to find that the patient, for such he must be considered, is
able to avoid indulgence in liquor entirely, except at certain times.
Every physician of any large experience has had under his care
dipsomaniacs who had no difficulty in keeping away from liquor for
weeks, or even months, but who had regularly recurring periods,
sometimes as far apart as every three months, when they had an
irresistible craving for stimulants come over them. The regularity of
the interval in these cases is often very remarkable. Here, of course,
we may be in the presence of some as yet not well-understood
periodical law of cell life, with consequent depression, and then the
irresistible craving for stimulation. {125} As a rule, however, it
would seem that in most of these cases suggestion has great influence.
As we have said elsewhere, with regard to suicide, when a man has
constantly before his mind's eye the fact that a father, perhaps a
grandfather, or other members of the family, have committed suicide,
he is likely to be much more easily led to the thought of this way of
escaping hard conditions in life than are other individuals. The man
who knows that the fact that his father indulged too freely in
stimulants will be looked upon by many as an excuse for his deviations
in this matter is likely to be more easily led to take an occasional
drink at moments of depression, or for friendship's sake, though he
realises that it so weakens his will power over himself that he is
likely to take too much before he stops.

The passage in _Julius Caesar_ (Act. I. sc. 2) in which Cassius says:

  "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves,"

illustrates one phase of the subject. There are, of course, many other
things besides the drink habit, with regard to which men are prone to
find excuses in heredity, and to consider that somehow their ancestral
tendencies make them not quite responsible for actions commonly
considered the result of malice or passion, rather than hereditary
influence, and our great English poet, knowing men so well, has stated
the truth forcibly.

In _King Lear_ there is an often quoted passage which properly
stigmatises the opinion in this matter held by those who would find
excuses for wrong-doing in hereditary qualities:

  "This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are sick
  in fortune,--often the surfeit of our own behaviour,--we make guilty
  of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if we were
  villains by necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion; knaves,
  thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance; drunkards, liars,
  and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence; and
  all that we are evil in, by a divine thrusting on; an admirable
  evasion of whore-master man, to lay his goatish disposition to the
  charge of a star!"

{126}

One phase of the question of hereditary tendencies to inebriety is
extremely interesting from a physiological and sociological point of
view. As the result of carefully gathered statistics, there seems to
be no doubt now that when children are conceived while the parents, or
either of them, is in a state of drunkenness, the offspring is very
likely to be of low-grade physical constitution and often of very
neurotic tendencies. In France, particularly in the case of a number
of insane children and idiots, histories of this nature have been
obtained in confirmation of this unfortunate factor as an element in
degeneracy. In general it may be said that about one-third of the
admissions to homes for children of low intelligence, as well as to
insane asylums, are due to this cause.

There is in this, of course, an added motive for temperance, and it
would seem that parents should be warned of the danger to which they
are subjecting their offspring by excessive indulgence in alcohol,
when it may be followed by such serious and lasting results to the
beings on whom their love and affection will be expended in the
future. This phase of alcoholic excess has never been taught as
insistently as its importance would demand, perhaps because of the
delicacy of the subjects which it involves; but it is too significant
a factor in making or marring progress in the development of the race
to allow any pusillanimous motives to prevent the spread of precious
knowledge.  [Footnote 3]

  [Footnote 3: The present conditions that obtain with regard to the
  celebration of marriages are very prone to have a certain amount of
  intoxication as their result. Perhaps, then, it is a fortunate
  thing, as has often been said, that the first child is not born
  until some considerable time after it might normally be expected. It
  has been said more than once, however, that first children are a
  little more likely to have certain degenerative defects than are
  others, and a connection has been found between certain abuses of
  stimulants and incidental exhaustion to account for this. One of the
  most amusing things to Li Hung Chang, on his travels through our
  country, was the curious publicity we give to everything connected
  with marriage, while presumably our Christian ideas should rather
  counsel a veiling of the mysteries, religious and physical,
  connected with it. Certain it is that the present tendency towards
  farewell dinners at clubs, and other festivities of various kinds,
  are not at all likely to result in benefit to the presumably
  hoped-for offspring.]

The only real light that has been thrown on the puzzling details of
heredity has come from work in the same field in which Mendel made his
ground-breaking observations. {127} De Vries, the professor of botany
at the University of Amsterdam, has succeeded in showing that new
species of plants may be made to arise by careful attention to certain
anomalous plants which occur from generation to generation. These
plants breed true, that is, maintain their own peculiarities. To begin
with, they are quite different from the parent plants, and the
difference is perpetuated by inbreeding.

So far the problem of the origin of species has been supposed to
depend upon the normal variation that is noticed in plants and
animals. All living things differ from one another, even though they
may belong to the same species, and differ sometimes in remarkable
degrees. This continuous variation was supposed to account for the
origin of new species when it became excessive. It has become well
recognised now, however, that such differences gradually disappear in
the course of the normal multiplication of plants and animals. The
tendency is much more towards the disappearance than the maintenance
of peculiarities.

There are certain discontinuous variations, however--sports, as they
are called--in plants which differ very markedly in some quality from
others, and these have the tendency to perpetuate themselves. Just why
these sports occur is not known, nor how. They occur in a certain
small percentage of all normal plants, but may die out, though it
takes but little encouragement to succeed in helping them to maintain
themselves. It is this that De Vries has done, and thus has succeeded
in raising what would be called new species of plants.

This same thing would seem to occur in human beings. Some definite
variation occurs as a consequence of a peculiar embryologic process.
This becomes stamped upon the genital material and appears in the
subsequent generations. It does not occur as a consequence of
pathological changes nor of mere embryonic faults; it is almost as if
it were something introduced from without. Once having found an
entrance, however, it affects the germinal material and thus
perpetuates itself.

With regard to plants, it has been suggested that the only explanation
available for the occurrence of sports is that there is a purposeful
introduction of them as the result of the laws of nature, and that it
is thus that evolution is intentionally {128} brought about. This is,
of course, a scientific reversion to teleology once more, but the
question of teleological influences has been discussed more seriously
in the last few years in biological circles than ever before.
Unfortunately for the coincident evolution argument involved in human
beings, the peculiarities introduced, which become the subject of
inheritance, do not make for the development, but rather for the
degeneracy, of the race. Even such peculiarities as six toes can
scarcely be said to add any special feature of advantage to man in his
struggle against his environment.

It is agreed by many of our best authorities in biology, zoology, and
botany, by such men as Professor Wilson of Columbia University,
Professor Thomas Hunt Morgan of Bryn Mawr, Professor Castle of Harvard
University, Professor Bailly of Cornell University, Professor Michael
Guyer of the University of Cincinnati, Professor Spillmann, who is the
Agrostologtst of the United States Government, and Professor Bateson
of the University of Cambridge, England, that these principles of
heredity enunciated by Father Mendel will undoubtedly revolutionise
the modern knowledge of the subject. In the meantime, however, all the
old theories are in abeyance. Darwin's work and Weissmann's brilliant
theories and observations must give way, while the application of
these new laws is being worked out to their fullest extent. While the
influence of heredity can not be denied, there is undoubtedly a
tendency to overestimate the influence on the physical being of the
power of hereditary transmission, and, on the other hand, to
underestimate the influence of this same force as regards disposition
and character. There is no doubt now that the physical basis
influences the exercise of the will, and that consequently
responsibility is not infrequently modified by the hampering influence
of unfortunate physical qualities. This truth makes for that larger
charity in the judgment of the actions of others which enables
physicians to realise how much men are to be pitied, while its failure
of recognition by the "unco guid" not only causes suffering, but in
the end adds to the amount of evil.

JAMES J. WALSH.


{129}

