III

ABORTION, MISCARRIAGE AND PREMATURE LABOUR

If pregnancy ends in the emptying of the uterus before the sixteenth
week of gestation, the condition is called an abortion; if this
happens between the sixteenth and the twenty-eighth weeks, it is
miscarriage; if the child is born after the twenty-eighth week but
before full term, the birth is premature. The term "abortion" in the
popular mind carries with it the notion of criminal interference, and
the word "miscarriage" is used for both abortion and miscarriage by
the laity; physicians, on the other hand, commonly use the term
"abortion" for both abortion and miscarriage. These conditions may
occur spontaneously or they may be induced artificially.

Spontaneous abortions are very frequent; perhaps one in every five or
six pregnancies is the proportion: the writer has known a single
physician, not a specialist in obstetrics, to be called to three in
one day and that in private practice. From 150 to 200 children in
every 1000 that are conceived never get a chance for baptism. In the
early months of pregnancy the foetus is usually dead before expulsion
takes place. Twisting of the cord, hydramnios, syphilis, an acute
infectious disease in the mother, poisonings of the mother by metals
and the like substances, maternal cardiac and renal diseases, chronic
inflammations and displacements of the womb, and violent emotions are
some of the causes of abortion. In certain women a slight exertion, a
misstep, a fall, a ride over a rough road, the _debitum conjugale_,
and similar causes bring on abortion; in other women almost no shock
is enough to make them miscarry. Inflammations and displacements of
{49} the womb cause most of the abortions in the first four months,
and after that time syphilis and Bright's disease are the chief forces
at work.

If a woman in early pregnancy begins to lose blood from the uterus,
and has pain in her back and lower abdomen, abortion is threatened; if
this hemorrhage is marked, and the cervix is dilated, the abortion
will very probably occur; and the escape of the _liquor amnii_ renders
the abortion unavoidable. In this latter case the vagina and the
cervical canal are packed with sterile gauze to check the hemorrhage,
and after twenty-four hours it is removed. Then commonly the entire
ovum comes away with the gauze, or what remains of it is taken out
with a curette.

Valvular lesions of the heart in pregnancy make a maternal mortality
of about 28 per centum, according to Guerard, and when compensation is
lost the mortality may run from 48 to even 100 per centum with
different physicians and different cases. The prognosis is good as
long as compensation is retained, but very bad if this fails. In the
latter condition premature labour is indicated, or the early removal
of the viable child. Catholic physicians may not induce artificial
abortion of an unviable foetus. The decree of the Holy Office
concerning this matter is as follows:

  Beatissime Pater,--Stephanus . . . Archiepiscopus Cameracensis . . .
  Quae sequuntur humiliter exponit:

  Titus medicus, cum ad praegnantem graviter decumbentem vocabatur,
  passim animadvertebat lethalis morbi causam aliam non subesse
  praeter ipsam praegnationem, hoc est, foetus in utero praesentia,
  una igitur, ut matrem a certa atque imminenti morte salvaret,
  praesto ipsi erat via, procurandi scilicet abortum seu foetus et
  ejectionem. Viam hanc consueto ipse inibat, adhibitis tamen mediis
  et operationibus, per se atque immediate non quidem ad id
  tendentibus, ut in materno sinu foetum occiderent, sed solummodo ut
  vivus, si fieri posset, ad lucem ederetur, quamvis proxime
  moriturus, utpote qui immaturus omnino adhuc esset.

  Jamvero lectis quae die 19 Augusti, 1888, Sancta Sedes ad
  Cameracenses Archiepiscopos rescripsit: _tuto doceri non posse_
  licitam esse quamcumque operationem directe occisivam foetus, etiam
  si hoc necessarium foret ad matrem salvandam: dubiis haeret Titius
  circa {50} liceitatem operationum chirurgicarum, quibus non raro
  ipse abortum hucusque procurabat, ut praegnantes graviter
  aegrotantes salvaret.

  Quare ut conscientiae suae consulat supplex Titius petit: utrum
  enuntiatas operationes in repetitis dictis circumstantiis instaurare
  tuto possit.

  Feria iv, die 24 Julii, 1895.

  In Congregatione generali S. Romanae et Universalis Inquisitionis .
  . . Emi ac Rmi Domini Cardinales . . . respondendum decreverunt:
  _Negative_, juxta alias decreta, diei scilicet 28 Maii, 1884, et 19
  Augusti, 1888.

  . . . Sanctissimus Dominus noster . . . approbavit.

Other documents referring to the same matter are the following:

  Epistola ad Archiepiscopum Cameracensem. . . . Anno 1886,
  Amplitudinis tuae Praedecessor dubia nonnulla hinc supremae
  Congregationi proposuit circa liceitatem quarumdem operationum
  chirurgicarum craniotomiae affinium. Quibus sedulo perpensis,
  Eminentissimi ac Reverendissimi Patres Cardinales una mecum
  Inquisitores Generales, feria iv, die 14 currentis mensis,
  respondendum mandaverunt:

  In scholis catholicis tuto doceri non posse licitam esse operationem
  chirurgicam quam craniotomiam appellant, sicut declaratum fuit die
  28 Maii, 1884, et quamcumque chirurgicam operationem directe
  occisivam foetus vel matris gestantis.

  Idque notum facio Amplitudini tuae, ut significes professoribus
  facultatis medicae Universitatis catholicae Insulensis. . . .

  Romae, die 19 Augusti, 1889. . . .

  R. CARD. MONACO.

The date of this response here is 1889, but in the preceding decree it
is given as 1888. In the _Acta Sanctae Sedis_ the date is 1889.

Another letter from Cardinal Monaco is this:

  Eme et Rme Dne,--Emi PP. mecum Inquisitores generales in
  Congregatione habita feria iv, die 28 labentis Maii, ad examen
  revocarunt dubium ab Eminentia tua propositum--An tuto doceri possit
  in scholis catholicis licitam esse operationem chirurgicam, quam
  Craniotomiam appellant, quando scilicet, ea omissa, mater et infans
  perituri sint, ea e contra admissa, salvanda sit mater, infante
  pereunte?

{51}

  --Ac omnibus diu et mature perpensis, habita quoque ratione eorum
  quae hac in re a peritis catholicis viris conscripta ac ab Eminentia
  tua hinc Congregationi transmissa sunt, respondendum esse duxerunt:
  _Tuto doceri non posse_.

  Quam responsionem cum SSmus D. N. in audientia ejusdem feriae ac
  diei plene confirmaverit, Eminentiae tuae communico. . . .

  R. CARD. MONACO.
  Romae, 31 Mail, 1884.

  Emo Archiepiscopo Lugdunensi.

Another decree concerning abortion is in part as follows:

  Beatissime Pater,--Episcopus Sinaloen. ad pedes S.V. provolutus,
  humiliter petit resolutionem insequentium dubiorum:

  I. Eritne licita partus acceleratio quoties ex mulieris arctitudine
  impossibilis evaderet foetus egressio suo naturali tempore?

  II. Et si mulieris arctitudo talis sit, ut neque partus praematurus
  possibilis censeatur, licibitne abortum provocare aut caesaream suo
  tempore perficere operationem? . . .

  Feria iv, die 4 Mail, 1898.

  In Congregatione habita, etc. . . . EE. ac RR. Patres rescribendum
  censuerunt:

  Ad I. Partus accelerationem per se illicitam non esse, dummodo
  perficiatur justis de causis et eo tempore ac modis, quibus ex
  ordinariis contingentibus matris et foetus vitae consulatur.

  Ad II. Quoad primam partem, _negative_, juxta decretum Feria iv, 24
  Julii, 1895, de abortus illiceitate. Ad secundum vero quod spectat;
  nihil obstare quominus mulier de qua agitur caesareae operationi suo
  tempore subjiciatur. . . .

  In sequenti Feria vi, die 6 ejusdem mensis et anni . . . SSmus
  responsiones EE. ac RR. Patrum approbavit.

Pyelonephritis (an inflammation of the kidney where pus is present),
from the pressure of the pregnant uterus, is a condition which
sometimes obliges the physician to bring about premature labour to
save the mother. The symptoms usually appear in the latter half of
gestation.

Chorea ("St. Vitus' Dance"), when it develops during pregnancy, has a
maternal mortality of from 17 to 22 per centum. It may cause death
before the child is viable, and to empty {52} the uterus will stop the
symptoms. Here the decrees of the Holy Office will occasionally
prevent the Catholic physician from interfering.

If a grave surgical operation is imperatively indicated during
pregnancy, and may not be put off until after delivery, it should be
undertaken in many cases, because modern technique commonly does not
bring about an abortion; but, in general, no rule can be given--each
case must be judged separately.

If a pregnant woman has at the same time considerable albumen in her
urine and a low excretion of urea, her condition is very dangerous. To
empty her uterus will, in most cases, relieve the renal trouble, but
in any case premature labour is not to be induced rashly: many women
escape, when by all the rules they should die.

Eclampsia is a very grave complication of pregnancy, and it was
formerly supposed to be uraemia. The disease is characterized by
convulsions, loss of consciousness, and coma. It occurs, commonly, in
the second half of gestation, but it has been observed as early as the
third month. About 70 to 80 per centum of the cases are in primiparous
women. The convulsions may come on altogether unexpectedly, but
commonly the attack begins with symptoms of toxaemia. Eclampsia may
occur before, during, or after parturition. When it comes before term
it usually ends in spontaneous or artificial abortion, but at times
the woman dies undelivered. Now and then she may recover and be
delivered at term.

The kidneys are usually affected, even in those cases in which
albuminous urine is not found. There is also a hemorrhagic
inflammation of the liver; and oedema and congestion of the brain,
with or without apoplexy, are other symptoms of the disease. There are
other lesions, but the chief are in the kidneys, liver, and brain.

The aetiology of the disease is not yet known, and there are very many
theories offered to explain it. The prognosis is always serious, and
the condition is one of the most dangerous found in pregnancy. The
mortality varies, but it is about from 20 to 25 per centum in the
women, and from 33 to 50 per centum in the children. It is impossible
to determine {53} the prognosis in particular cases, but a large
number of quickly recurring convulsive seizures, with a weak, thready
pulse, and a high temperature usually indicate a fatal ending.
Apoplexy, oedema of the lungs, and paralysis also, as a rule, end in
death.

If the uterus is emptied during the convulsions, these cease either
immediately or soon after delivery, in from 66 to 93 per centum of the
cases, and the maternal mortality then is about 11 per centum. With
the expectant treatment, in convulsive cases, about 28 per centum of
the women die, although a use of aconite in these cases may better the
prognosis.

Pernicious vomiting (hyperemesis gravidarum) is another complication
of pregnancy, which sometimes results fatally if the uterus is not
emptied. There are cases, especially those with high fever, which end
in death despite all treatment. Here, again, the aetiology of the
disease is not known. There is commonly an element of hysteria in the
condition, and in such a case moral suggestion often has a curative
effect Any bodily irritation is to be removed. Eye-strain alone is
enough to cause persistent vomiting. It is very difficult to decide
when premature labour is absolutely indicated, because some very bad
cases recover spontaneously when all hope is lost.

Hydramnios, or an excessive quantity of _liquor amnii,_ may so distend
the uterus as to cause grave danger to maternal life, and if the child
is viable the uterus should be emptied.

Intrauterine hemorrhage brought on by a premature separation of the
placenta is a very dangerous condition: 32 to 50 per centum of the
mothers die, and 85 to 94 per centum of the children. In a marked
hemorrhage the only way to save the mother is to empty the uterus, so
that it may contract and thus close the patulous vessels.

Placenta praevia is a placenta implanted in the neighbourhood of the
internal os of the uterine neck. This is a very perilous condition,
calling for the induction of premature labour. The medical treatment
is artificial abortion as soon as the condition is diagnosed in any
stage of gestation; but this is, of course, in conflict with the
decrees of the Holy Office. Under expectant treatment about 40 per
centum of {54} the mothers die, and 66 per centum of the children.
Those children that are born alive commonly die within ten days after
delivery. The great foetal mortality is due to premature birth and
asphyxiation. Skilful obstetricians get much better results, but
skilful obstetricians are unfortunately rare.

When the grave complications enumerated above occur in the early
months of pregnancy, before the foetus is viable, the Catholic
physician, since by the natural law and the decisions of the Holy
Office he is forbidden to induce artificial abortion, must withdraw
from the case. If there is no other physician to attend to the woman,
he must let her die. He can not withdraw without explanation, and in
many cases the explanation of the condition will promptly result in
the calling in of a physician who has no scruple in inducing this
abortion, no matter how reputable he may be. The universal medical
doctrine is to induce abortion in cases where abortion will save the
mother's life and the foetus is "too young to amount to anything."
This is looked upon as legitimate abortion by the very best men that
do not recognise the authority of the Holy Office: they deem the
position of the Catholic physician in these cases as altogether
erroneous, or even criminal.

The position of the Catholic moralists on craniotomy has turned the
attention of many non-Catholic physicians to the immorality of the
act, which formerly was deemed entirely permissible. Probably the same
good result will be effected in the matter of abortion.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.

{55}

THE CAESAREAN SECTION AND CRANIOTOMY

In the caesarean section the infant is delivered through an incision
in the abdominal or uterine walls. The operation, according to one
opinion, takes its name from Caius Julius Caesar, who, it is said, was
brought into the world in this manner, _"a caeso matris utero"_; this,
however, is a myth.

Up to 1876 the maternal mortality from the operation was about 52 per
centum. Between 1787 and 1876 in the city of Paris there was not one
successful caesarean section as far as the mothers were concerned. At
present on an average less than 10 per centum of the women are lost,
and expert surgeons have better results. Up to about 1902 Zweifel had
made 76 such sections with only one death, and Reynolds, 23 with no
death. Leopold has performed the operation four times on the same
woman, and Ahlfeld and Birnbaum have reported instances where the same
woman has had five caesarean sections performed upon her. The
operation is, of course, capital, and always most serious, even in
city hospitals.

The indication for the operation is chiefly a narrow pelvis, which
blocks the delivery of the child. There are no reliable statistics as
to the frequency of narrow pelves in the United States; but Dr.
Williams, of the Johns Hopkins University Hospital, in a series of
2133 cases found 6.9 per centum in white women and 18.82 in negroes.
Normally the average female pelvis, at its narrowest diameter, is 11
centimetres wide. This part is called the conjugata vera, and it is
the diameter from the promontory of the sacrum behind to a point on
the inner surface of the symphysis pubis in front.

In delivery much depends upon the size of the child, and in each case
the obstetrician waits until he sees that delivery {56} is impossible
by natural means before he resorts to the caesarean section or other
operative interference. Of two women with pelves of the same
contraction one may require the section and the other may have a
normal labour. A bisischial diameter at the outlet of the parturient
canal of 7 centimetres or less is an indication for section; so are
certain tumours that block the delivery of the child.

When the conjugata vera is less than 7 centimetres in flat pelves, or
7.5 centimetres in generally contracted pelves, the treatment varies
in the customary medical practice according as the child is alive or
dead, and it varies as the condition of the mother. The common medical
doctrine will first be given here before the moral questions that may
be involved are mentioned.

If the deformity is diagnosed during pregnancy, the woman is sent to a
hospital, the caesarean section is performed, and thus all the
children, and nearly all the mothers, are saved. When the narrowness
of the pelvis is discovered only during labour, the treatment varies
with the condition. If the woman is not septic, and has not been
repeatedly examined by the vagina, and if the surroundings are
favourable, caesarean section is done; if she is septic, the
indications are for the section, or symphyseotomy or craniotomy. Where
the conjugata vera is below 5 centimetres in length, the caesarean
section is the only method to get the child out, dead or alive, and
after the child has been delivered, the uterus, if septic, is removed.
If the conjugata vera is at the least 7 centimetres long,
symphyseotomy may be done; if the conjugata vera is above 5
centimetres, the mother septic, and the child dead or dying,
craniotomy is indicated. Even if the child is not dying, some
obstetricians will do craniotomy.

In cases where the conjugata vera is above 7 centimetres in flat
pelves and 7.5 centimetres in generally contracted pelves, the
treatment can not be reduced to general rules. Delivery without
operation occurs in many of these cases, but commonly the condition is
obscure to the physician for some time. We can measure the pelves, but
the size of the child's head is not satisfactorily measurable.

If the conjugata vera is from 10 to 9 centimetres, or from {57} 9.5 to
8.5 centimetres, labour without operation is the rule, and the child
can usually be delivered by forceps. Should the child die during
labour in these cases, it is best delivered by craniotomy, unless the
longer diameter of its head has already passed the narrowest part of
the pelvis.

When the conjugata vera is from 8.9 to 7.5 centimetres, about 50 per
centum of the women will be delivered with forceps, but the other half
will not. After about two hours of the second stage of labour delivery
by forceps is tried, but prolonged traction is not applied.
Occasionally delivery will come when least expected, but often it will
not. If the head sticks, caesarean section is done in favourable
circumstances, and craniotomy in unfavourable circumstances. If there
is ground for supposing that septic infection of the mother has begun,
the conditions are explained, and if she wishes to have the caesarean
section done the risk is left to her. When the breech or face of the
child presents in contracted pelves, the condition is especially
unfavourable for the child.

There are very many varieties of deformed pelves, but the same rules
apply to them as to those already mentioned, except that the caesarean
section is oftener indicated. Difficulty also not seldom occurs in
women with normal pelves from an excessive size in the child through
prolonged pregnancy, bigness of one or both parents, or the advanced
age or multiparity of the mother. The child's head alone may be of
excessive size. Some monsters offer difficulty in delivery from size
or shape, but, of course, they are human beings, and are to be
considered as such in delivery. The technique of the caesarean section
has only a medical signification, and it need not be described here.

Symphyseotomy is an operation in which the joint of the pelvis at the
symphysis pubis is cut, and the pelvis is allowed to gape so as to let
out the child. The operation has fallen into disrepute. The mortality
as regards the mother is about the same as in the caesarean section,
but the mortality of the children is higher. In symphyseotomy the
infantile mortality is about 9 per centum, while in the caesarean
section it is practically nothing. If in symphyseotomy an error is
made in estimating the size of the pelvis or the child's head--and
{58} such an error is often possible--the child will be killed, but in
the caesarean section these errors make no difference. After the
caesarean section the woman recovers promptly; after the symphyseotomy
she recovers very slowly, and she may receive permanent injury.

Craniotomy is an operation wherein the head of the child is reduced in
size to render delivery possible. The skull is perforated and the
brain is broken up and removed or crushed out. Embryotomy is a similar
operation wherein the viscera of the child are removed through an
incision made in its thorax or belly (evisceration), or the head of
the child is cut off (decapitation). There are numerous instruments
and methods for performing craniotomy and embryotomy, but they all
open the skull or belly, remove the brain or viscera, and then extract
the child's body.

If the infant is hydrocephalic and is alive, the advocates of the
operation warn us to be careful after opening the head to push the
perforator into the base of the skull and stir it around well, so as
to be sure the child will not be born alive. Pernice has recently
reported a case of hydrocephalus which was delivered by craniotomy,
but the operator did not work his perforator efficiently, and the
child recovered, and grew up an idiot. A similar case occurred in
Baltimore.

The indications for craniotomy among those that advocate its
occasional use (and they are many) is in those cases in which the
woman is so infected that caesarean section is dangerous, or where a
child is hydrocephalic, or where an after-coming head is jammed (in
this case even a caesarean section will not effect delivery), or in
the case of a narrow pelvis and a moribund child, or finally in the
practice of a country physician, who can not in an emergency get an
assistant to do a caesarean section. One man can do craniotomy, but it
requires three to perform the caesarean section. If the woman's narrow
pelvis has a conjugata vera of five or more centimetres, craniotomy,
if properly done, is not dangerous to the mother. With a conjugata
vera less than 5 centimetres it is more fatal than the caesarean
section. If the women are septic, the mortality in {59} craniotomy is
from 10 to 15 per centum; in caesarean section about 25 per centum.

As to the morality of craniotomy on the living or moribund child, it
is not permissible under any possible circumstances: a consideration
of the ethical principles set forth in the article on Ectopic
Gestation will make this assertion clear.

The Congregation of the Holy Office on August 19, 1888, decreed that
"In scholis catholicis tuto doceri non posse licitam esse operationem
chirurgicam quam Craniotomiam appellunt." They gave a similar decision
May 28, 1884, and they repeated the prohibition, with the papal
approbation, on July 24, 1895. The text of these decrees may be found
in the article on abortion, miscarriage, and premature labour.

The Porro operation consists essentially in a removal of the uterus
after caesarean section to prevent further conceptions. As a means to
prevent conception it is altogether unjustifiable, because repeated
caesarean sections in the same woman, if the surgeon is at all
competent, are practically no more dangerous than normal labour.

AUSTIN OMALLEY.


{60}

