Chapter V. On Circulating And Fixed Capital.
§ 1. Fixed and Circulating Capital.
§ 2. Increase of Fixed Capital, when, at the Expense of Circulating, might be Detrimental to the Laborers.
§ 3. -This seldom, if ever, occurs.
Chapter VI. Of Causes Affecting The Efficiency Of Production.
§ 1. General Causes of Superior Productiveness.
§ 2. Combination and Division of Labor Increase Productiveness.
§ 3. Advantages of Division of Labor.
§ 4. Production on a Large and Production on a Small Scale.
Chapter VII. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Labor.
§ 1. The Law of the Increase of Production Depends on those of Three Elements-Labor. Capital, and Land.
§ 2. The Law of Population.
§ 3. By what Checks the Increase of Population is Practically Limited.
Chapter VIII. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Capital.
§ 1. Means for Saving in the Surplus above Necessaries.
§ 2. Motive for Saving in the Surplus above Necessaries.
§ 3. Examples of Deficiency in the Strength of this Desire.
§ 4. Examples of Excess of this Desire.
Chapter IX. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Production From Land.
§ 1. The Law of Production from the Soil, a Law of Diminishing Return in Proportion to the Increased Application of Labor and Capital.
§ 2. Antagonist Principle to the Law of Diminishing Return; the Progress of Improvements in Production.
§ 3. -In Railways.
§ 4. -In Manufactures.
§ 5. Law Holds True of Mining.
Chapter X. Consequences Of The Foregoing Laws.
§ 1. Remedies for Weakness of the Principle of Accumulation.
§ 2. Even where the Desire to Accumulate is Strong, Population must be Kept within the Limits of Population from Land.
§ 3. Necessity of Restraining Population not superseded by Free Trade in Food.
§ 4. -Nor by Emigration.
Book II. Distribution.
Chapter I. Of Property.
§ 1. Individual Property and its opponents.
§ 2. The case for Communism against private property presented.
§ 3. The Socialists who appeal to state-help.
§ 4. Of various minor schemes, Communistic and Socialistic.
§ 5. The Socialist objections to the present order of Society examined.
§ 6. Property in land different from property in Movables.
Chapter II. Of Wages.
§ 1. Of Competition and Custom.
§ 2. The Wages-fund, and the Objections to it Considered.
§ 3. Examination of some popular Opinions respecting Wages.
§ 4. Certain rare Circumstances excepted, High Wages imply Restraints on Population.
§ 5. Due Restriction of Population the only Safeguard of a Laboring-Class.
Chapter III. Of Remedies For Low Wages.
§ 1. A Legal or Customary Minimum of Wages, with a Guarantee of Employment.
§ 2. -Would Require as a Condition Legal Measures for Repression of Population.
§ 3. Allowances in Aid of Wages and the Standard of Living.
§ 4. Grounds for Expecting Improvement in Public Opinion on the Subject of Population.
§ 5. Twofold means of Elevating the Habits of the Laboring-People; by Education, and by Foreign and Home Colonization.
Chapter IV. Of The Differences Of Wages In Different Employments.
§ 1. Differences of Wages Arising from Different Degrees of Attractiveness in Different Employments.
§ 2. Differences arising from Natural Monopolies.
§ 3. Effect on Wages of the Competition of Persons having other Means of Support.
§ 4. Wages of Women, why Lower than those of Men.
§ 5. Differences of Wages Arising from Laws, Combinations, or Customs.
Chapter V. Of Profits.
§ 1. Profits include Interest and Risk; but, correctly speaking, do not include Wages of Superintendence.
§ 2. The Minimum of Profits; what produces Variations in the Amount of Profits.
§ 3. General Tendency of Profits to an Equality.
§ 4. The Cause of the Existence of any Profit; the Advances of Capitalists consist of Wages of Labor.
§ 5. The Rate of Profit depends on the Cost of Labor.
Chapter VI. Of Rent.
§ 1. Rent the Effect of a Natural Monopoly.
§ 2. No Land can pay Rent except Land of such Quality or Situation as exists in less Quantity than the Demand.
§ 3. The Rent of Land is the Excess of its Return above the Return to the worst Land in Cultivation.
§ 4. -Or to the Capital employed in the least advantageous Circumstances.
§ 5. Opposing Views of the Law of Rent.
§ 6. Rent does not enter into the Cost of Production of Agricultural Produce.
Book III. Exchange.
Chapter I. Of Value.
§ 1. Definitions of Value in Use, Exchange Value, and Price.
§ 2. Conditions of Value: Utility, Difficulty of Attainment, and Transferableness.
§ 3. Commodities limited in Quantity by the law of Demand and Supply: General working of this Law.
§ 4. Miscellaneous Cases falling under this Law.
§ 5. Commodities which are Susceptible of Indefinite Multiplication without Increase of Cost. Law of their Value Cost of Production.
§ 6. The Value of these Commodities confirm, in the long run, to their Cost of Production through the operation of Demand and Supply.
Chapter II. Ultimate Analysis Of Cost Of Production.
§ 1. Of Labor, the principal Element in Cost of Production.
§ 2. Wages affect Values, only if different in different employments; "non-competing groups."
§ 3. Profits an element in Cost of Production.
§ 4. Cost of Production properly represented by sacrifice, or cost, to the Laborer as well as to the Capitalist; the relation of this conception to the Cost of Labor.
§ 5. When profits vary from Employment to Employment, or are spread over unequal lengths of Time, they affect Values accordingly.
§ 6. Occasional Elements in Cost of Production; taxes and ground-rent.
Chapter III. Of Rent, In Its Relation To Value.
§ 1. Commodities which are susceptible of indefinite Multiplication, but not without increase of Cost. Law of their Value, Cost of Production in the most unfavorable existing circumstances.
§ 2. Such commodities, when Produced in circumstances more favorable, yield a Rent equal to the difference of Cost.
§ 3. Rent of Mines and Fisheries and ground-rent of Buildings, and cases of gain analogous to Rent.
§ 4. Résumé of the laws of value of each of the three classes of commodities.
Chapter IV. Of Money.
§ 1. The three functions of Money-a Common Denominator of Value, a Medium of Exchange, a "Standard of Value".
§ 2. Gold and Silver, why fitted for those purposes.
§ 3. Money a mere contrivance for facilitating exchanges, which does not affect the laws of value.
Chapter V. Of The Value Of Money, As Dependent On Demand And Supply.
§ 1. Value of Money, an ambiguous expression.
§ 2. The Value of Money depends on its quantity.
§ 3. -Together with the Rapidity of Circulation.
§ 4. Explanations and Limitations of this Principle.
Chapter VI. Of The Value Of Money, As Dependent On Cost Of Production.
§ 1. The value of Money, in a state of Freedom, conforms to the value of the Bullion contained in it.
§ 2. -Which is determined by the cost of production.
§ 3. This law, how related to the principle laid down in the preceding chapter.
