Chapter VII. Of A Double Standard And Subsidiary Coins.
§ 1. Objections to a Double Standard.
§ 2. The use of the two metals as money, and the management of Subsidiary Coins.
§ 3. The experience of the United States with a double standard from 1792 to 1883.
Chapter VIII. Of Credit, As A Substitute For Money.
§ 1. Credit not a creation but a Transfer of the means of Production.
§ 2. In what manner it assists Production.
§ 3. Function of Credit in economizing the use of Money.
§ 4. Bills of Exchange.
§ 5. Promissory Notes.
§ 6. Deposits and Checks.
Chapter IX. Influence Of Credit On Prices.
§ 1. What acts on prices is Credit, in whatever shape given.
§ 2. Credit a purchasing Power, similar to Money.
§ 3. Great extensions and contractions of Credit. Phenomena of a commercial crisis analyzed.
§ 4. Influence of the different forms of Credit on Prices.
§ 5. On what the use of Credit depends.
§ 6. What is essential to the idea of Money?
Chapter X. Of An Inconvertible Paper Currency.
§ 1. What determines the value of an inconvertible paper money?
§ 2. If regulated by the price of Bullion, as inconvertible Currency might be safe, but not Expedient.
§ 3. Examination of the doctrine that an inconvertible Current is safe, if representing actual Property.
§ 4. Experiments with paper Money in the United States.
§ 5. Examination of the gain arising from the increase and issue of paper Currency.
§ 6. Résumé of the subject of money.
Chapter XI. Of Excess Of Supply.
§ 1. The theory of a general Over-Supply of Commodities stated.
§ 2. The supply of commodities in general can not exceed the power of Purchase.
§ 3. There can never be a lack of Demand arising from lack of Desire to Consume.
§ 4. Origin and Explanation of the notion of general Over-Supply.
Chapter XII. Of Some Peculiar Cases Of Value.
§ 1. Values of commodities which have a joint cost of production.
§ 2. Values of the different kinds of agricultural produce.
Chapter XIII. Of International Trade.
§ 1. Cost of Production not a regulator of international values. Extension of the word "international."
§ 2. Interchange of commodities between distance places determined by differences not in their absolute, but in the comparative, costs of production.
§ 3. The direct benefits of commerce consist in increased Efficiency of the productive powers of the World.
§ 4. -Not in a Vent for exports, nor in the gains of Merchants.
§ 5. Indirect benefits of Commerce, Economical and Moral; still greater than the Direct.
Chapter XIV. Of International Values.
§ 1. The values of imported commodities depend on the Terms of international interchange.
§ 2. The values of foreign commodities depend, not upon Cost of Production, but upon Reciprocal Demand and Supply.
§ 3. -As illustrated by trade in cloth and linen between England and Germany.
§ 4. The conclusion states in the Equation of International Demand.
§ 5. The cost to a country of its imports depends not only on the ratio of exchange, but on the efficiency of its labor.
Chapter XV. Of Money Considered As An Imported Commodity.
§ 1. Money imported on two modes; as a Commodity, and as a medium of Exchange.
§ 2. As a commodity, it obeys the same laws of Value as other imported Commodities.
Chapter XVI. Of The Foreign Exchanges.
§ 1. Money passes from country to country as a Medium of Exchange, through the Exchanges.
§ 2. Distinction between Variations in the Exchanges which are self-adjusting and those which can only be rectified through Prices.
Chapter XVII. Of The Distribution Of The Precious Metals Through The Commercial World.
§ 1. The substitution of money for barter makes no difference in exports and imports, nor in the Law of international Values.
§ 2. The preceding Theorem further illustrated.
§ 3. The precious metals, as money, are of the same Value, and distribute themselves according to the same Law, with the precious metals as a Commodity.
§ 4. International payments entering into the "financial account."
Chapter XVIII. Influence Of The Currency On The Exchanges And On Foreign Trade.
§ 1. Variations in the exchange, which originate in the Currency.
§ 2. Effect of a sudden increase of a metallic Currency, or of the sudden creation of Bank-Notes or other substitutes for Money.
§ 3. Effect of the increase of an inconvertible paper Currency. Real and nominal exchange.
Chapter XIX. Of The Rate Of Interest.
§ 1. The Rate of Interest depends on the Demand and Supply of Loans.
§ 2. Circumstances which Determine the Permanent Demand and Supply of Loans.
§ 3. Circumstances which Determine the Fluctuations.
§ 4. The Rate of Interest not really Connected with the value of Money, but often confounded with it.
§ 5. The Rate of Interest determines the price of land and of Securities.
Chapter XX. Of The Competition Of Different Countries In The Same Market.
§ 1. Causes which enable one Country to undersell another.
§ 2. High wages do not prevent one Country from underselling another.
§ 3. Low wages enable a Country to undersell another, when Peculiar to certain branches of Industry.
§ 4. -But not when common to All.
§ 5. Low profits as affecting the carrying Trade.
Chapter XXI. Of Distribution, As Affected By Exchange.
§ 1. Exchange and money make no Difference in the law of Wages.
§ 2. In the law of Rent.
§ 3. -Nor in the law of Profits.
Book IV. Influence Of The Progress Of Society On Production And Distribution.
Chapter I. Influence Of The Progress Of Industry And Population On Values And Prices.
§ 1. Tendency of the progress of society toward increased Command over the powers of Nature; increased Security, and increased Capacity of Co-Operation.
§ 2. Tendency to a Decline of the Value and Cost of Production of all Commodities.
§ 3. -except the products of Agriculture and Mining, which have a tendency to Rise.
§ 4. -that tendency from time to time Counteracted by Improvements in Production.
§ 5. Effect of the Progress of Society in moderating fluctuations of Value.
Chapter II. Influence Of The Progress Of Industry And Population On Rents, Profits, And Wages.
§ 1. Characteristic features of industrial Progress.
§ 2. First two cases, Population and Capital increasing, the arts of production stationary.
§ 3. The arts of production advancing, capital and population stationary.
§ 4. Theoretical results, if all three Elements progressive.
§ 5. Practical Results.
Chapter III. Of The Tendency Of Profits To A Minimum.
§ 1. Different Theories as to the fall of Profits.
§ 2. What determines the minimum rate of Profit?
§ 3. In old and opulent countries, profits habitually near to the minimum.
§ 4. -prevented from reaching it by commercial revulsions.
§ 5. -by improvements in Production.
§ 6. -by the importation of cheap Necessaries and Implements.
§ 7. -by the emigration of Capital.
Chapter IV. Consequences Of The Tendency Of Profits To A Minimum, And The Stationary State.
§ 1. Abstraction of Capital not necessarily a national loss.
§ 2. In opulent countries, the extension of machinery not detrimental but beneficial to Laborers.
§ 3. Stationary state of wealth and population dreaded by some writers, but not in itself undesirable.
