CHAPTER XII

THE HEART OF NATURE

That Nature is a Personal Being--or at least nothing _less_ than a
Personal Being--that she is actuated by an ideal, and that her ideal,
so far as we are able to judge, is an ideal of Divine Fellowship, is the
conclusion at which we have now arrived. But we shall understand
Nature better, and so see her Beauty more fully, if we can
understand how she works out this ideal in detail. And we shall best
understand how she works it out if we examine what goes on within
our own selves and see how _we_ work out the ideal with which we
believe Nature herself has inspired us. For it is in ourselves that the
dominating spirit of Nature is most clearly manifested to us. And
being ourselves the instruments and agents of Nature, and informed
through and through with her spirit, we ought to be able to
understand how she works if only we look carefully enough into the
working of our own inner selves.

What we find is that under the inspiration of the genius of Nature we
are perpetually projecting in front of us a pattern or standard of what
we think we ought to be, or should like to be, and of what we think
our country and the world ought to be. We set up an ideal. It is
generally very vague. But there is always at the back of our minds
an idea of something more perfect. And this idea we bring out from
time to time from its seclusion and set up before us as an end to aim
at.

Sometimes we deliberately try to draw the outlines of this ideal
more definitely. Each of us will picture a slightly different ideal to
the rest. The ideal men will differ just as much as actual men, and
the ideal countries as much as actual countries. No two will be
exactly alike. And each of us will probably make his ideal man very
different from himself--perhaps the exact opposite, for each will be
peculiarly conscious of his own imperfections and shortcomings.

But if the ideal man which each sets up differs in small particulars
from what others set up, the general outline of all will probably be
very much the same, as men in general are much the same when
compared with other animals. All will be based on the idea of
fellowship. So aided by examples chosen from among our friends,
we may here attempt to build up an ideal type of man. For the effort
will help us to realise better both what Nature is aiming at and how
she works.

Formerly we might have drawn this ideal man upright, straight, rigid,
unbending. More recently we might have drawn him as a super-man,
the fittest-to-survive kind of man, all muscular will, intent only on
bending every other will to his and crashing relentlessly on through
life like a bison in the forest. But nowadays we want a man with the
same reliability as the upright type, but with grace and suppleness in
place of rigidity; and with the same strength as the super-man, but
with gentleness and consideration in proportion to the strength. We
do not want a man of wood; and what we do want is not so much a
super-man as a gentle-man--a man of courtesy and grace as well as
strength.

The stiff and stilted type of a bygone age will have melted under the
warmth of deepening fellowship and become flowing and fluid. The
man of this type will not only be full of consideration for others, but
will naturally, out of a full and overflowing heart and of his own
generous prompting, eagerly enter into the lives and pursuits, the
hopes and fears, the joys and sorrows of those with whom he is
connected. And with all this wide _general_ kindliness he will be
something more than merely amiable and good-natured, and will
have capacity for intense devotion for _particular_ men and women.
He will necessarily have fine tact and address, adroitness and skill in
handling difficult and delicate situations, and the sensitiveness to
appreciate the most hidden feelings of others. Wit and distinction he
will have, too, with ability to discern the real nature of people and
events, and to distinguish the best from the good, and the good from
the indifferent and bad. He will also possess that peculiar sweetness
of disposition which is only found when behind it is the surest
strength. And with all his gentleness, tenderness, and capacity for
sympathy he will have the grit and spirit to hold his own, to battle
for his rights, and to fight for those conditions which are absolutely
necessary for his full development. He will, in addition, have the
initiative to think out and strike out his own line and to make his
own mark.

He will be a man of the world in the sense of being accustomed to
meet and mix with men in many different walks of life and of many
different nationalities. And he will be a man of the home in the
sense of being devoted to his own family circle. He will be at home
in the town and at home in the country; adapted to the varied society,
interests, and pursuits which town life can afford, but devoted also
to the country, to the open air and elemental nature and animals and
plants.

A fixed principle and firm determination with him will be to do his
duty--to do his social duty, to do the right thing at whatever
temporary cost to himself. The right thing for him will be that which
produces most good. And he will deem that the most good which
best promotes human fellowship, warms it with love, colours it with
beauty, enlightens it with truth, and sweetens it with grace. Finally,
and culminatingly, he will have that spirituality and fine
sensitiveness of soul which will put him in touch with the true Heart
of Nature and make him eagerly responsive to the subtlest
promptings which spring therefrom; so he will be possessed of a
profound conviction, rooted in the very depths of his being, that in
doing the right thing, or in other words pursuing righteousness, he is
carrying out the will and intention of that Divine Being whom we
here call Nature but whom we might also call God.

This, or something like it, is the ideal of a man which most of us
would form under the impress and impetus of the indwelling genius
of Nature. But this ideal can only be reached by an individual when
his country also has reached it. He will be driven, therefore, to make
his country behave and act up to this ideal. And his country cannot
so act till the general society of nations conducts itself on the same
general lines. His country, therefore, will be driven to make the
general society of nations behave in accordance with the principles
of high fellowship.

* * *

We have made for ourselves the ideal of a man. It remains to show
that the finest pitch of all is only reached in the union of man and
woman. The man is not complete without the woman, nor the
woman without the man. It is in their union, therefore, that the ideal
in its greatest perfection will be seen. The flower which results from
the working of the ideal in the Heart of Nature, as the flower of the
rose results from the working of the rose-ideal in the heart of the
rose-seed, we see in the love of man and woman at the supreme
moment of their union. This is the very holiest thing in Nature. It is
then that both the man and the woman are to the fullest extent
themselves, both to be and to express all that is in them to be. They
love then to their extreme capacity to love. They are gentle then to
the utmost limit of tenderness. And they are strong then to the
farthest stretch of their strength.

And while they thus reach the very acme of Nature's ideal so far as
we men can discern it, they, at the same time and in so doing, touch
the very foundations of Nature as well. Mathematicians have
discovered that there is no such thing as a perfectly straight line, and
that curvature is a fundamental property of the physical world. So
also is it in the spiritual world. As we reach the topmost height of
the ideal we find that it has curved round, and that we are at that
moment at the very base and foundation. What is attracting us
forward in the farthest distance in front is the very thing that is
urging us forward from behind. Pinnacle and foundation, source and
end, meet.

The love which attracted the man and woman together and which
they keep striving to attain in higher and higher degree, is the same
as the creative impulse which comes surging up from the very Heart
of Nature. Direct and without ever a break it has come out of the
remotest past and deepest deeps. Few seem aware of this, and yet it
is an obvious fact--and a fact which vastly increases our sense of
intimacy with Nature. It was due to the same impulse which has
brought the man and woman together that they themselves were
brought into being. Their parents had been attracted by the same
vision of love and impelled by the same impulse. Their parents'
parents had been similarly attracted and impelled, and so on back
and back through the whole long line of ancestry, through half a
million years to primitive men, back beyond them again through the
long animal ancestry for scores of millions of years to the beginning
of life. Even then there is no break. Direct from the very Fountain
Source of Things this creative impulse has come bursting up into
their hearts. At the moment of union they are straight along the
direct line of the whole world-development, so far as this planet is
concerned. The elemental in the natural impulse is the most
ultimately elemental, for it derives itself straight from the pure
Origin of Things. As they reach after the most Divine they are
impelled by the most elemental. What, in fact, happens is that the
elemental is inspired through and through with the Divine.

The union of man and woman is the flower of Nature. But, like the
rose, it bears within it the seed from which some still more beautiful
flower may result. No pair, however sublime their union, suppose
that it is the best that could by any possibility at any time exist. An
absolutely perfect union depends upon an absolutely perfect pair in
absolutely perfect surroundings. And no one supposes that he
himself is perfect or that the world around him is perfect. So there is
in the pair a consciousness of imperfection, a vision of perfection,
and a desperate yearning to be more perfect and to make the world
more perfect. Deep and strong as the creative impulse itself is the
impulse to improvement. It is due to this impulse that the mother
reaches over her child with such loving care, strives to shield it from
all harm, social as well as physical, and to give it a better chance
than she herself enjoyed. It is due to this same impulse that the man
works to leave his profession, his business, his science, his art, his
country, better than he found it. It is due to this impulse also that
men as a whole are driven to improve the whole Earth, to improve
plants, flowers, trees, animals, men, and make the world a better
place for their successors than it has ever been for them.

The pair--even the most splendid pair that has ever wedded
--have deep within them this perhaps unrecognised impulse to
improvement. They know that the rose can only bring forth roses,
and that they can only bring forth men: they know that they cannot
bring forth angels. But they know also that the rose, when wisely
mated and its offspring provided with favourable surroundings of
soil and air and sunshine, can give rise to blooms incomparably
more perfect than itself. And they know that they themselves, if they
have wisely mated, if they carefully tend their offspring and provide
them with healthy, sunny, physical and social surroundings, can give
rise, in generations to come, to unions of men and women
incomparably more perfect than their own--as much more perfect as
their union is than the unions of primitive men--richer in colour,
more graceful in form, sweeter in fragrance, and of an altogether
finer texture.

* * *

This, then, is the ideal in its completeness which we set up before us.
But we have no sooner set it up than we find that the presence of this
ideal within us makes us restless, unsatisfied, discontented, till we
have set to work to bring things up to it; and that when we do start
improving them we are forthwith involved in endless strife.
Improvement means effort. It does not come by itself. It is only
effected by strong, persistent, determined effort. It was no easy
matter for the particles in the rose-seed to battle their way through
the hard seed-case, strike down into the soil, send up shoots into the
air, stand steadfastly to their ideal of the rose, and produce a seed
capable of bringing forth a still more perfect flower. And it is no
easy matter for us to burst through our own shells, strike our roots
far down into the soil of common humanity and common animality,
and there firmly rooted strike up skyward, stand faithfully to our
ideal, and produce something which will have capacity for still
further improvement. Immense and sustained effort is required of us
for this to be accomplished.

Each man finds he has to battle with himself to make way for all the
best in himself to come to the front. Each has to battle with the
circumstances in which he is placed in order to find scope for the
exercise of the best in himself. Each has to break his way through, as
that wonder of Nature, poor primitive man, had to battle his way
through the impediments of the tropical forests and the brute beasts
by which he was surrounded. And just as primitive man was not the
animal provided with the thickest hide like the rhinoceros, nor with
sharpest claws like the lion, nor with the fiercest temper like the
tiger, but was of all his fellows the one with the most sensitive
nature, so are those nearest the ideal the most delicately sensitive of
mankind.

The ideal is never approached, much less attained, except by men
and women of the most highly-strung natures--natures peculiarly
susceptible to pain. And with this extra susceptibility to pain they
have to expose to the risk of wounds and bruises the most sensitive
parts of their natures. Suffering is therefore inevitably their lot. It is
the invariable attendant of progress however beneficent.
Excruciating pain each expects to have to endure--as every
expectant mother and every soldier anticipates on the physical plane.

We find, too, that in working out our ideal we are not only required
to endure pain, but to submit to the sternest discipline. First, we need
self-discipline. Each individual finds that he is required to exercise
his faculties to the full, make the utmost of himself, attain to the
highest of which he is capable, and be ready for any sacrifice. So he
must train his faculties to the highest. He is required also to work in
concert with his fellows. The stern obligation is therefore upon him
to forgo his own private advantage in order that the common end
may be achieved. This obligation he has readily to acknowledge and
submit to. He has also to acknowledge what he owes to Nature, what
is his _duty_ to Nature. And that duty he has to perform and her
authority he has to admit. He can retain his freedom and initiative
and enterprise. But he has to obey the laws of Nature, acknowledge
her authority, submit to her discipline. No soldiers were more full of
independence and initiative than the Australians, but no troops at the
end of the War realised better than they did that success can only be
achieved through strictest discipline as well as freedom and
initiative. The lover also knows that only through the sternest
discipline and constraint upon himself is his object attained. Thus
there is an imperative necessity upon a man to be orderly in his
behaviour, loyal, faithful, dutiful, and obedient to the ideal within
him. Any failure in loyalty and obedience is a sin against Nature and
a sin against himself. The call of honour and of humanity is upon
him, and that call he has to obey without hesitation.

Equally are men expected to be ready to _exercise_ authority, to
maintain discipline and preserve order. The exercise of authority is
no less an obligation and duty upon men than obedience to it. And
the one has to be practised just as much as the other. Or, rather, the
exercise of authority has to be practised more, for it is more difficult
and more valuable. And the proper exercise of authority,
maintenance of discipline, and preservation of order, is a duty men
owe ultimately to Nature herself. For it is from Nature that they
finally derive their authority and to Nature that they are ultimately
responsible.

Whether as captain of the eleven or as head of the house at school,
as manager of an office or a business, as policeman or foreman, as
corporal or Commander-in-Chief, as administrator or Prime
Minister, whether as nurse, parent, or schoolmistress, a man or
woman is in his position of authority directly or indirectly on the
appointment or choice of those over whom he has to exercise
authority. He is there to exercise authority for their benefit. They
have placed him--as the public place the policeman--in authority for
that purpose. And they have a right to expect that he will exercise
his authority with decision, maintain discipline with firmness, and
preserve order with even-handed justice. For only then can they
themselves know where they are, get on with their own duties and
affairs, and fulfil the law of their being. Ultimately those in authority
are chosen by, and are responsible to, those over whom they
exercise authority. And those who choose them expect and require
them to exercise authority authoritatively.

Each in his own particular sphere, in that particular place and for the
time being, has to exercise his authority with strictness. Otherwise
the rest cannot fulfil their own duties. The policeman has to exercise
his authority even over a Prince, as otherwise there might be chaos
in the streets and no one would be able to get about his business
with surety. The whole people have chosen each for his particular
position of authority, and for their benefit expect him to exercise it
strictly.

The people, again, spring from Nature as a whole. They are the
representatives of Nature. Those in authority are therefore, in their
particular province, for that particular purpose, and for the time
being the representatives of Nature. They are accountable to Nature,
and Nature expects them as her representatives to exercise authority
with wisdom and discretion, but on the same basic principles of
absolute fairness and perfect orderliness that she herself in her
elemental aspects exercises her authority.

Besides obeying authority and exercising authority, men have also
to practise _leadership._ Merely to give and obey orders is nothing
like sufficient. In most things a man follows some leader, but in
each man there is one thing--his own particular line--in which he can
_lead._ In that line he is expected to qualify himself for leadership,
and be prepared to take the risks of high adventure. For it is only
through leadership, through someone venturing out beyond the ruck
and getting his fellows to follow him, that any progress is made.
Mere obedience to authority and exercise of authority never initiate
any new departure. These only provide the conditions for progress.
In addition to these the divine gift of leadership is required.
Leadership is therefore the supremely important quality which men
require.

But men cannot intelligently act in concert and alertly; cannot
willingly submit themselves to a rigid discipline; cannot exercise
authority with confidence and weight; and cannot lead so that others
may follow, unless all are animated by the same idea. And they are
not likely to sacrifice their lives for that idea unless they are
convinced of its value. Only for the most precious things in life do
men willingly give up their lives. And before they submit to
unquestioning discipline and sacrifice themselves for an ideal they
need a clear understanding of that ideal and a just appreciation of its
value. So they think out the ideal with greater precision and make
sure that what they are aiming at is nothing short of the highest.
Now the ideal of fellowship enriched with beauty and elevated to the
Divine is one which all can understand and of which all can see the
value. Because it is the highest it is satisfying to the deepest needs
and cravings of their nature, and is therefore of a value beyond all
reckoning. Assured of that, they summon up all the courage and
fortitude that is theirs, all their spirit and mettle, to endure
unflinchingly the pain that must be theirs. And in spite of the effort,
the long, strict training, the rigid discipline, the hardship and
suffering they have to undergo, they joyfully play their part because
they are assured in their hearts that what they are living for and
would readily die for is supremely worth while. Deep in their hearts
is that divine joy of battle that fighters for the highest always feel.
And they fight with power and conviction because they know that
their ideal has come into their hearts straight from Nature herself,
and experience has shown that what Nature has in mind she does in
the end achieve: she not only has the will and intention but the
_power_ to carry into effect what she determines.

* * *

This is how we formulate the ideal to ourselves in ever-developing
completeness; and this is how with pain and effort but with
over-compensating joy we carry it into effect. And these experiences of
ours in the formulation and working out of our ideal give us the clue
to the manner in which Nature on her part works out _her_ ideal.
We are the representations and representatives of the whole, and we
may assume that the whole works in much the same way as we
ourselves work. If this be so we may expect to find that Nature will
work as an _artist_ works, that is, out of his own inner
consciousness, spontaneously generating and continually creating
new and original forms approaching (through a process of trial and
error experimentation) more and more closely to that ideal of
perfection which he has always, though often unconsciously, before
him. And this is how we actually do find Nature working. We find
her reaching after perfection of form, now in one direction, now in
another; first in plants, next in animals, then in insects, then in birds,
then in apes, then in men, here in one type and there in another,
never reaching complete perfection anywhere, any more than the
greatest artist ever does in any particular, but still reaching
perfection in a higher and higher degree, and making the state of the
whole of a richer and intenser perfection.

We have, therefore, ample evidence that Nature is actuated by an
intention to enrich perfection and is continually working towards it.
So we have confidence that Nature, hard and exacting though she be,
is _only_ exacting in order that the Highest may be attained. We
know that Nature is aiming at the Highest and nothing short of the
Highest. And all the spirit of daring and adventure in us leaps to the
call she makes.

And we respond to the call with all the greater alacrity because we
feel that the attainment of that Highest is dependent to a large degree
upon ourselves. We have a sense of real responsibility in the matter.
And for this reason--that though Nature lays down the great
constitutional laws within which man, her completest representative,
must work; and though Nature as a whole formulates the main
outlines of her ideal; yet man _within that constitution_ can make
his own laws, and within its main outlines may refine and perfect the
ideal.

Nature may be working out her ideal on other stars through the
agency of other kinds of beings more perfect than ourselves; and
while the ideal in its main outlines may be the same there as the
ideal which is working itself out on this planet, it may there have
assumed a higher form and be more nearly attained. But on this
planet the more definite formulation of the ideal and the measures
for its attainment are in the hands of men. We can perfect the ideal
for ourselves, and make laws and establish customs to ensure its
attainment. We are not the slaves of a despotic ruler, or pawns in the
hand of an external player. Within the limits of Nature's constitution,
the laws we obey are laws of our own making; the authority we obey
is the authority which we ourselves have set up; and both
authority and laws we can change in accordance with the growing
requirements of the ideal which we ourselves are perfecting.

We go forward, therefore, with inextinguishable faith in the value of
what we are battling for, and in the worthwhileness of all our efforts
and endurances. And though the ideal, with which Nature has
inspired us makes us restless and discontented, provokes us to
increasing effort, causes us endless pain and suffering, and exacts
from us the sacrifice even of our lives, we nevertheless love to have
the ideal, and love Nature for implanting it in us.

* * *

And now that we have seen what is the nature of Nature, what is the
end she has before her, and how she works to accomplish her end,
we feel that we have gone a long way towards knowing and
understanding her. We have had a vision of the hidden Divinity by
which she is inspired. And this mysterious Power we have not found
reigning remote in the empty spaces of the heavens. We have found
it dwelling in every minutest particle of which this Earth and all the
world is built, and of which we ourselves also are made--dwelling in
the earth, and in the air, and in the stars; and in every living thing, in
beast and bird and insect, in flower, plant, and man--and dwelling in
them all in their togetherness. We have found it to be both immanent
and transcendent. It only exists--and can only exist--in these its
single self-active representations. But in relation to each of them it is
transcendent. Each star and flower, each beast and man, is its partial
representation. But the whole together is that Power which while it
transcends is yet resident in, and inspires, each single part which
goes to its making. In the inmost heart of Nature, as the ground and
source of Nature, yet permeating Nature to the uttermost confines,
and reigning supreme over the whole, we find God; actuating the
heart of God we find an ideal; and actuating the heart of the ideal we
find an imperative urge towards perfection, an inborn necessity to
perfect itself for ever--just as inside the rough exterior of Abraham
Lincoln was the real Abraham Lincoln, at his heart was an ideal, and
at the heart of the ideal an inner impulse towards perfection; or as
within the exterior France is the real France, in the heart of France
an ideal, and in the heart of the ideal the determination to perfect
itself.

This view of Nature is very different from that view of her which
would regard the world as having been originally created by, and
now being governed by, an always and already perfect Being, living
as apart from it as the Sun is from the Earth, and being as distinct
and separate from it as a father is from his son. And the difference in
view must make a profound difference in our attitude to Nature, and
therefore in our capacity for seeing and enjoying Natural Beauty.
We may admire and worship but we can scarcely love, in any true
sense of the word, a Being dwelling distant and aloof from us, and
with whom, from the mere fact of his being perfect, it is most
difficult for us to be on terms of homely intimacy and affection. But
for a Being who, like our country, is one of whom we ourselves
form part, we can have not only admiration and reverence but deep
affection. We can and do love our country, for we form part of her,
and have a voice and share in making and shaping her. We know
that she cares for us, will look after us in misfortune, and will
honour and love us if we serve her well and show her loyalty and
devotion. And we can and do love Nature for precisely the same
reasons. We feel ourselves part of her, and in intimate touch with
her all round and always. And we have that which is so satisfying to
us--the feeling that there is _reciprocity_ of love between us and her.
So our love is active, and it vehemently impels us to get to know her
better and better, to get ourselves in ever closer touch with her, to
discover the utmost fulness of her Beauty, and to communicate to
others all that we have come to know and all the Beauty we have
seen, so that others may share in our enjoyment and come to love
Nature more even than we love her ourselves--love Nature in all her
aspects, love physical Nature in the mountains, seas and deserts, the
clouds, sunsets and stars, love plant Nature and animal Nature and
human Nature; and, above all, love Divine Nature as best revealed in
supreme men in their supreme moments.

In some of her aspects Nature may be stern and exacting. But she is
never sheerly hard. She is compounded of mercy and compassion as
well as of rigid orderliness. And her essential character is Love--and
Love of no impassive and insipid kind, but of a power and activity
beyond all human conception.

The importance and significance of this conclusion, if we accept it,
is that we definitely abandon the repellent conception of Nature as
governed by chance, or as cold and mechanical, or as guided solely
by the principle of the survival of the fittest, and we accept instead
the humaner and diviner view that Nature is actuated by Love; and,
accepting that more winning conception, we can enter unreservedly
into the Spirit of Nature and see her Beauty. Unless we had been
assured in our minds, without any possibility of doubt whatever, that
we could _love_ Nature, we could never really have enjoyed her
_Beauty._

* * *

So Nature is not something static, fixed, and immovable, determined
once and for all like a rock is, at least to outward appearance. Nature
is a Person, and a Person is a process. Nature flows. Nature is
always moving on. As our thoughts are all connected with one
another and passing into one another; as all events are connected
with one another and are continually passing from one into another,
and form one great all-inclusive event which is in continual process
of happening; so is Nature always in process of passing from one
state into another state, while the whole forms one great event for
ever happening. And actuating the whole process, determining the
whole great event, is an inner core of Activity which endures
through all the changes. It is the "I" of Nature, which informs,
directs, controls the whole from centre to utmost extremity through
all space and all time. It is the Soul and Spirit, the Genius of Nature.
It is what we should mean when we speak of God.

Actuated by this spirit, whose essential character is Love, the
process glides smoothly, unbrokenly, and wellnigh imperceptibly
forward. As we lift our eyes and look out upon Nature in its present
actually existing state, what we see in that instant is the whole
achievement of the past, and it contains within it here and now the
promise of all the future. All the past is in the present, and in it also
is the potency of the future. The achievement fills us with
admiration. The promise thrills us with hope. To that Spirit which
has achieved this result, which actuates the process and ourselves
with it, which determines the great event, which ensures the
uniformity and law and order which are the foundations of our
freedom, and the essential condition of all progress, our hearts are
drawn out and yearningly stretch themselves out in a love boundless
as the process itself.

The more we find ourselves drawn to Nature and in harmony and
love with her, the more Beauty do we see. In closest reciprocity
Love of Nature inspires Natural Beauty and Natural Beauty
promotes Love of Nature. And it is from the Heart of Nature that
both Love and Beauty spring. Both also remain permanent and
everlasting through all the changing processes of Nature--permanent
but ever increasing in depth and height and volume. The promise of
all the Love and Beauty of to-day was hidden in the womb of the
past. In the womb of to-day is contained the promise of a Love and
Beauty still more glorious. And ours it is to bring them into being.



