PART II

NATURAL BEAUTY AND GEOGRAPHY



PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS TO THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, DELIVERED
AT THE ANNIVERSARY MEETING, MAY 31, 1920

NATURAL BEAUTY AND GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE

I have something to say which to old-fashioned geographers may
appear very revolutionary, and which you may hesitate to accept
straight away. But it has come to me as the result of much and
varied geographical work in the field; of listening to many lectures
before this Society; and of composing this Address and five lectures
for you, firstly, as far back as 1888, on my journey across Central
Asia from Peking to India; secondly, on my journey to Hunza and
the Pamirs; thirdly, on Chitral; fourthly, on my mission to Tibet; and
fifthly, on the Himalaya. And I expect when you come to think over
what I have now to say you will find that, after all, my conclusions
are not anything desperately revolutionary but something quite
obvious and natural.

What I want to lay before you for your very earnest consideration is
this--that we should take a profounder and broader view of
Geography, of its fundamental conception, and of its scope and aim,
than we have hitherto taken; and should regard the Earth as
_Mother_-Earth, and the _Beauty_ of her features as within the
purview of Geography.

I will state my case as clearly and briefly as I can. Geography is a
science. Science is learning, knowing, understanding. The object of
geographical learning, knowing, understanding is the Earth. We
must first, then, have a true conception of what the Earth really is.
And next we must be certain in our minds as to what is most worth
knowing about it.

To begin with our conception of the Earth. At the dawn of
Geography it was believed to be a flat disc. Later it was discovered
to be a sphere. Then it was found to be not a hard solid sphere like a
billiard-ball, but to be hard only on the surface, and within to be
quick with fervent heat. Now it is coming to be regarded as spirit as
well as body--as in its essential nature spiritual rather than material.

When we get as far back as science is able to take us we find that the
ultimate particles of which the Earth is made up are not minute
specks of some substance or material, but are simply centres of
radiant energy. Even with a microscope of infinite power we should
never be able to see one, like we see a grain of pollen or a grain of
sand. And if we had fingers of infinite delicacy, we should never be
able to take one up between the forefinger and thumb and feel it.
These ultimate particles are invisible and intangible. Nothing could
be less substantial. And we find further that, inconceivably minute
as they are, they _act of themselves_ under the mutual influence of
one another. The electrons are not like shot which have been heaped
together by some outside agency, and which roll about the floor if
someone outside gives them a push, but which will otherwise remain
immobile. They congregate together of their own inner prompting.
They are like a swarm of midges or bees in which each individual
acts on its own impulsion, and, in the case of bees, all together form
themselves into a definite organisation with a collective spirit of its
own. The Earth is indeed influenced by its parent the Sun, and acts
in accordance with the same laws and is swayed by the same
impulses as govern the whole Universe, of which it is a minute
though highly important mite. But the point is that the Earth is not
something like a lump of clay which a potter takes in his hands and
moulds into a ball. The Earth moulds itself from activities that it
contains within itself.

Running through the whole mighty swarm of electrons we call the
Earth is a tendency to order, organisation, and system. The myriad
millions of ultimate particles in their all-togetherness and from their
interaction upon one another become possessed of an imperative
urge towards excellence. The electrons group themselves into atoms;
the atoms clump themselves together into molecules; the molecules
combine into chemical compounds, and these into organisms of
ever-increasing size and complexity. So in the process of the ages
there came into being, from out of the very Earth itself, first, lowly
forms of plants and animals, then higher and higher forms exhibiting
higher and higher qualities, till the flowers of the field, the animals,
and man himself came into existence.

And now we reach the point I wish to make. If this account of the
Earth which physicists and biologists give us be true, then we
geographers should take a less material and a more spiritual view of
the Earth than we have done, and should, like primitive people all
the world over, regard her as Mother-Earth, and recognise our
intimate connection with her. Primitive peoples everywhere regard
the Earth as alive and as their Mother. And so intensely do they feel
this liveness that many will not run the plough through the soil from
dislike of lacerating the bosom of Mother-Earth. They see plants and
trees spring up out of her, and these plants and trees providing them
with fruits and seeds, leaves and roots, upon which to live. And they
quite naturally look upon her as their Mother. And we men of the
more advanced races have still more cause to consider her as our
Mother, for we now know that not only the plants and trees but we
ourselves sprang from her--as indeed we are nourished by her daily,
eating her plants or the animals which feed on her plants. And as we
judge of a lily, not by its origin, the ugly bulb, but by the climax, the
exquisite flower; so we should not judge of the Earth by its origin,
the fiery mist, but by its issue--ardent human fellowship. And if we
thus judge her we shall find her a mother worthy of our affection.

So the first point I have to put before you is that we geographers
should regard the object of our science not as a magnified
billiard-ball, but as a living being--as Mother-Earth. Not as hard,
unimpressionable, dull, and inert, but as live, supple, sensitive, and
active--active with an intensity of activity past all conceivability.
Yet with no chaotic activity, but with activity having coherence and
direction, and that direction towards excellence.

* * *

Now as to what we ought to know about the Earth. While Geology
concerns itself with its anatomy, Geography, by long convention,
restricts its concern to the Earth's outward aspect. Accordingly, it is
in the face and features of Mother-Earth that we geographers are
mainly interested. We must know something of the general
principles of geology, as painters have to know something of the
anatomy of the human or animal body. But our special business as
geographers is with the outward expression. And my second point is
that the characteristic of the face and features of the Earth most
worth learning about, knowing, and understanding is their Beauty;
and that knowledge of their Beauty may be legitimately included
within the scope of geographical science.

It may be argued, indeed, that science is concerned with quantity
--with what can be measured--and that Natural Beauty is quality
which is something that eludes measurement. But geographical
science, at least, should refuse to be confined within any such
arbitrary limits and should take cognisance of quality as well as
quantity. This is my contention. I am not maintaining that the actual
enjoyment of the Natural Beauty of the Earth should be regarded as
within the scope of geographical science, though this Society as a
social body might well participate in such enjoyment. Enjoyment is
feeling, whereas science is knowing; and feeling and knowing are
distinct faculties. We can easily see the distinction. We may be
travelling to Plymouth to embark for South Africa on some
absorbing enterprise, and be so engrossed with thoughts of the
adventure before us as to be unable to enjoy the famed West
Country through which the train is passing, though all the time we
were quite aware in our minds of its beauty. We are not actually
enjoying the beauty, though we know quite well that it is there. On
another occasion we may be returning after long absence in
countries of far different character; our minds may be free from any
disturbing thoughts; and we may be in a mood to enjoy to the full
every beauty we see. England will then seem to us a veritable garden,
the greenness of everything, the trimness of the hedges, the sheets of
purple hyacinths, and some still remaining primroses, will startle us
with joy, though we have long been aware of their beauty. This time
we both know and enjoy the Natural Beauty. We see from this
instance the distinction between knowing Natural Beauty and
enjoying it. I am not claiming more than that _knowing_ Natural
Beauty--being aware of it--is part of Geography. But I _am_
claiming liberty to extend our knowing up to the extreme limit when
it merges into feeling.

What we have now to consider is the value of this Natural Beauty. A
region may be flat or mountainous, dry or wet, barren or fertile,
useful or useless for either political or commercial purposes. But it
is not its flatness or ruggedness, or its utility or inutility for
political or commercial purposes, that we may find in the end is the most
noteworthy characteristic, but its beauty--its own particular beauty.
The conventional gold or oil prospector, or railway engineer, or
seeker for sites for rubber or coffee plantation, or pasture-lands for
sheep and cattle, may not bother his head about the beauty of the
forests, the rivers, the prairies, and the mountains he is exploring. He
is much too absorbed in the practical business of life to be distracted
by anything so fanciful--as he thinks. Yet even he does see the
beauty, and long afterwards he finds it is that which has stuck most
firmly in his mind. And when he has unthinkingly destroyed it,
future generations lament his action and take measures to preserve
what remains. Advertisements, also, show us daily that nearly all
countries--and it seems more especially new countries like Canada
and New Zealand--regard Natural Beauty as one of their most
valuable assets. And the reason why the Natural Beauty of the Earth
is deemed so valuable a characteristic of its features is not hard to
understand when we come to reflect. It is because Beauty is a
quality which appeals to the universal in man--appeals to all men for
all time, and appeals to them in an increasing degree. It is something
which all men can admire and enjoy. And the more they enjoy it the
more they want to get others to share in their enjoyment. Also the
more Natural Beauty they see, the more, apparently, there is to see.
Poets in their poems, and painters in their pictures, are continually
pointing out to us less keen-sighted individuals new beauties in the
features of the Earth. The mineral wealth of the Earth has its limits;
even the productivity, though perennially renewed, is not unbounded.
But the Natural Beauty is inexhaustible. And it is not only
inexhaustible: it positively increases and multiplies the more we see
of it and the more of us see it. So it has good claim to be considered
the most valuable characteristic of the Earth.

And if Beauty should prove to be its most valuable characteristic, it
follows that knowledge of it is the knowledge about the Earth which
is most worth having. It will certainly be the case that knowledge of
other characteristics may be of more value to particular men for a
special purpose for the time being. If an engineer has to build a
railway, knowledge of the exact height above sea-level of various
points and of the general configuration of the ground is of more
value than knowledge of its beauty. But for the engineer himself,
when he is not thinking of his railway, and for mankind in general,
knowledge of the beauty may be the more valuable kind of
knowledge.

For years I was employed in exploring the region where three
Empires meet, where the Himalaya, the Hindu Kush, and mountains
which form the Roof of the World converge. I had to report on the
extent to which it afforded a barrier against the advance of Russia
towards India, and wherein it would lie the most appropriate
boundary between India and Russia, between India and China, and
between Russia and China. What I learned of that region as a barrier
against invasion was of more value to the Viceroy and Commander-in-Chief
in India and the political and military authorities in England
in the discharge of their official duties than what I learned of its
beauties. But this utility of the region as a military barrier is not the
characteristic which has most value to men in general. What to them
has most value is its beauty--the awful beauty of its terrific gorges
and stupendous heights. And it is knowledge of this beauty which is
most worth having, and which has most geographical value.

Besides exploring the far region beyond Kashmir I was also
employed for years in exercising a general supervision over the
entire administration of Kashmir itself. Reports from experts used to
come to me containing every description of geographical knowledge.
Surveyors would send in maps for general purposes, for the
construction of roads and railways, for the delimitation of village
boundaries, and for registering the ownership of individual fields.
Geologists would report on the crustal relief (as the features of
Mother-Earth are inelegantly termed). Forestry, agricultural, and
botanical experts would report on the productivity of the soil, on the
plants and trees which are or might be grown, and on their present
and possible distribution. Mineralogists would report on the
minerals, their distribution and the possibility of commercially
exploiting them. Every aspect of geographical science was presented
to me. And each particular kind of knowledge for its own particular
purpose was highly valuable. But the point I would wish to make is
that my geographical knowledge of Kashmir would have been
incomplete--and I would have been wanting in knowledge of its
most valuable characteristic--if I had had no knowledge of its beauty.
I might have had the most precise knowledge about the form and
structure of the crustal relief of this portion of the Earth, of the
productivity of the soil, of the distribution of its population, and of
animals and plants, and about the effect of the crustal forms on the
animals and plants, and of the animals and plants upon the crustal
forms and of all upon man, and of man upon them all; but if I had
had no knowledge of the beauty of these crustal forms and of the
influence which their beauty has upon man, I should not have
known what was most worth knowing about Kashmir. My geographical
knowledge of that country would have been wanting in its most
important particular.

These illustrations will, I hope, make clear what I mean when I urge
that Beauty may be the most valuable characteristic of the Earth's
features, and that the scope of Geography should certainly be
extended to include a knowledge of it.

And there should be less hesitation in accepting the latter half of this
conclusion when we note that Natural Beauty affects the movements
of man, and that man is having an increasing effect upon Natural
Beauty--spoiling it in too many cases, improving it in many others,
but certainly having an effect upon it. There is thus a quite definite
relation between man and Natural Beauty, and it should therefore be
within the scope of Geography to take note of this relationship. To
an increasing degree man now moves about in search of new Natural
Beauty or to enjoy it where it has been already found. From all over
the world men flock to Switzerland, drawn there by its beauty. Here
at home they go to the Thames Valley, or Dartmoor, or the coast of
Cornwall, or North Wales, or the Highlands, simply to enjoy the
Natural Beauty. And railway companies and the Governments of
Canada, Australia, and New Zealand think it worth while to spend
large sums of money in publishing pictures of the beauty of the
countries in which they are interested in order to attract
holiday-makers or home-seekers to them.

And here, as in other cases, man now is not content to be an
impassive spectator and to be entirely controlled by his surroundings.
He does not allow the "crustal relief" to have the upper hand in the
matter. He will not admit that all he has to do is to adapt himself to
his surroundings. That servile view of our position in the Universe is
fast departing. We are determined to have the ascendancy. And
much as we admire the Beauty of the Earth we set about improving
it. We fail disastrously at times, I allow. But sometimes
unconsciously, and sometimes deliberately, we succeed. We have in
places made the Earth more beautiful than it was before we came,
and we have certainly shown the possibility of this being done.
From what I have seen in uninhabited countries I can realise what
the river-valleys of England must have been like before the arrival
of man--beautiful, certainly; but not _so_ beautiful as now. They
must have been an unrelieved mass of forest and marsh. Now the
marshes are drained and turned into golden meadows. The woods
are cleared in part and well-kept parks take their place, with trees
specially selected, pruned, and trim, and made to stand out well by
themselves so that their umbrageous forms may be properly seen.
Gardens are laid out, the famous lawns of England are created, and
flowering and variegated shrubs from many lands are planted round
them. And homes are built--the simple homes of the poor and the
stately homes of the rich--which in the setting of trees and lawns and
gardens add unquestionably to the natural beauty of the land. St.
James's Park, with its lake, its well-tended trees, its
daisy-covered lawns, its flowerbeds, its may and lilac, laburnum and
horse-chestnut, and with the towers of Westminster Abbey and the Houses
of Parliament rising behind it, is certainly more beautiful than the
same piece of land was two thousand years ago in its natural
condition.

What has been done in this respect in England is only typical of
what is done in every country and of what has been done for ages
past. The Moghul emperors, by the planting of gardens on the
borders of the Dal Lake in Kashmir, added greatly to its beauty. And
the Japanese are famous for the choice of beautiful surroundings for
their temples and for the addition which they themselves, by the
erection of graceful temples and by properly cared-for trees and
gardens, make to the natural beauty of the place.

So man is both affected by the Beauty of the Earth's features and
himself affects that Beauty. And this relationship between man and
the Natural Beauty of the Earth is one of which Geography should
take as much cognisance as it does of the relationship between man
and the productivity of the Earth.

But Natural Beauty is manifested in an innumerable variety of forms.
The whole Beauty is never manifested in any one particular feature
or region, but each has its unique aspect. Each feature has its own
peculiar beauty different from the beauty of any other feature. And
what men naturally do, and what I would suggest geographers
should deliberately do, is to compare the beauty of one region with
the beauty of another, so that we may realise the beauty of each with
a greater intensity and clearness. We can compare the beauty of
Kashmir with the beauty of Switzerland and California. And the
comparison will enable us to see more clearly and to appreciate the
distinctive elements which make up the peculiar beauty of each of
those countries. It has been frequently noticed that people who have
always lived in the same place are unable to see its full beauty. The
inhabitants of the Gilgit frontier, when I first went among them, had
never left their mountains, and were altogether ignorant of the
special grandeur of their beauty. They thought all the world was just
the same. But men who have seen many varieties of Natural Beauty
and have taken pains to compare the varieties with one another
become trained to see more Beauty in each feature. Fresh
discoveries of Beauty are thus made, and our knowledge of the
Beauty of the Earth is thereby increased.

* * *

What I hope, then, is that this Society should definitely recognise
that learning to see the Beauty in natural features and comparing the
peculiar beauties of the different features with one another is within
the scope of Geography, and will indeed become its chief function. I
should like to see the tradition established and well known and
recognised that we encourage the search for Natural Beauty, and
look upon the discovery of a new region which possesses special
beauty, and the discovery of a new beauty in a region already well
known, as among the most important geographical discoveries to be
made. In this matter I trust our Society will take the lead.
Englishmen are born lovers of Natural Beauty and born travellers.
The search for Natural Beauty ought, therefore, to be a congenial
task for this Society. As I have tried to make clear, we cannot really
know and understand the Earth--which is the aim of Geography
--until we have seen its beauties and compared the varying beauties of
the different features with one another and seen how they affect man
and man affects them. We are constituted as a Society for the
purpose of diffusing geographical knowledge, and I trust that in
future we shall regard knowledge of the Beauty of the Earth as the
most important form of geographical knowledge that we can diffuse.

When I was Writing out the lecture which I was invited to give
before the Society on "The Geographical Results of the Tibet
Mission" I could not resist devoting special attention to the natural
beauty of Tibet. But as I read the manuscript through I feared that
this attention to Beauty would be regarded by our Society as a lapse
from the narrow path of pure Geography, and that I should be
frowned upon in consequence and not regarded as a serious
geographer. I ought, I feared, to have devoted more attention to
survey matters, to the exact trend of the mountains, and the source
and course of the rivers. But looking back now I see that my natural
instinct was a right one--that a knowledge of the beauties of Tibet
was not only one geographical result of the Mission, but the chief
geographical result; and that, in fact, I ought to have paid not less
but more attention, both in Tibet to noting its beauties in all their
multitudinous variety, and in writing my lecture to expressing with
point and precision what I had seen, so that you might share it with
me, and learn what is the most valuable characteristic of Tibet.

When the new tradition is established, and travellers become aware
that we regard knowledge of Natural Beauty as within the scope of
our activities, the error into which I fell will be avoided. We shall
think travellers barbaric if they continue to concern themselves with
all else about the face of the Earth except its Beauty. We shall no
longer tolerate a geographer who will learn everything about the
utility of a region for military, political, and commercial purposes,
but who will take no trouble to see the beauty it contains. We shall
expect a much higher standard of him. We shall expect him to
cultivate the power of the eye till he has a true eye for country--a
seeing eye; an eye that can see into the very heart and, through all
the thronging details, single out the one essential quality; an eye
which can not only observe but can make discoveries. We shall
require him to have the capacity for discriminating the essential
from the unessential, for bringing that essential into proper relief and
placing upon it the due emphasis. When he thus has true vision and
can really see a country, and when he has acquired the capacity for
expressing either in words or in painting what lie has seen, so that he
can communicate it to us, then he will have reached the standard
which this Society should demand. And this is nothing less than
saying that we expect of him that he should have in him something
of the poet and the painter.

Careless snap-shotting in the field and idle turning on of lantern
slides at our meetings will no longer satisfy us. A traveller if he is
going to photograph must spend the hours which a real artist would
devote to discovering the essential beauty of a scene, and to
composing his picture before he dreams of exposing his plate. But
we want more than photographs: we want pictures to give that
important element in Natural Beauty--the colour. And we want
pictures painted in words as well as on canvas. Not shallow
rhapsodising of the journalese and guide-book type, but true
expression in which each noun exactly fits the object, each epithet is
truly applicable, and each phrase is rightly turned, and in which the
emphasis is placed on the precisely right point, and the whole
composed so as distinctly to bring out that point.

Then in time we shall gather together the most valuable knowledge
about the Earth. And when a stranger from a far land comes to us to
know about any particular country, we shall be able to provide him
with something worth having. When an Australian comes to
England and wishes to know its essential characteristics, we shall do
something more than hand him over maps and treatises on the
orography and hydrography, the distribution of rainfall, of plants
and animals, and the population. We shall regard ourselves as
having omitted to point out to him the essential characteristic of the
land from which Englishmen have sprung and in which they dwell if
we have not shown him the beauty of its natural features. We shall
give him the maps as aids to finding his way about, and we shall
give him the treatises. But we shall tell him that these are only aids
for special purposes, and that if he is really to understand England
he must know its beauty in its many aspects. He will then have the
geographical knowledge of chief value about England.

* * *

A project in which the Society is now interested affords an excellent
opportunity of applying the principles I have been trying to persuade
you to adopt. The most prominent feature of this Earth, and the
feature of most geographical interest, is the great range of the
Himalaya Mountains. In this range the supreme summit is Mount
Everest, the highest point on the Earth, 29,002 feet above sea-level.
Attempts have been made to ascend the second highest mountain,
K2, 28,278 feet, notably by the Duke of the Abruzzi. Colonel Hon.
Charles Bruce, Major Rawling, and others have had in mind the idea
of ascending Mount Everest itself. And for more than a year past
both the Alpine Club and this Society have been definitely
entertaining the idea of helping forward the achievement of this
object. We hope within the next few years to hear of a human being
standing on the pinnacle of the Earth.

If I am asked, What is the use of climbing this highest mountain? I
reply, No use at all: no more use than kicking a football about, or
dancing, or playing on the piano, or writing a poem, or painting a
picture. The geologist predicts to a certainty that no gold will be
found on the summit, and if gold did exist there no one would be
able to work it. Climbing Mount Everest will not put a pound into
anyone's pocket. It will take a good many pounds out of people's
pockets. It will also entail the expenditure of much time and
necessitate the most careful forethought and planning on the part of
those who are organising the expedition. And it will mean that those
who carry it out will have to keep themselves at the very highest
pitch of physical fitness, mental alertness, and moral courage and
endurance. They will have to be prepared to undergo the severest
hardships and run considerable risks. And all this, I say, without the
prospect of making a single penny. So there will be no _use_ in
climbing Mount Everest. If the ascent is made at all it will be made
for the sheer love of the thing, from pure enjoyment--the enjoyment
a man gets from pitting himself against a big obstacle.

But if there is no _use,_ there is unquestionably _good_ in climbing
Mount Everest. The accomplishment of such a feat will elevate the
human spirit. It will give men--and especially us geographers--a
feeling that we really are getting the upper hand on the Earth, that
we are acquiring a true mastery of our surroundings. As long as we
impotently creep about at the foot of these mighty mountains and
gaze on their summits without attempting to ascend them, we
entertain towards them a too excessive feeling of awe. We are
almost afraid of them. We have a secret fear that they, the material,
are dominating us, the spiritual. But as soon as we have stood on
their summit we feel that _we_ dominate _them_--that we, the
spiritual, have ascendancy over them, the material. And if man
stands on Earth's highest summit he will have an increased pride and
confidence in himself in his struggle for ascendancy over matter.
This is the incalculable good which the ascent of Mount Everest will
confer.

We who have lived among the peoples of the Himalaya are better
able than most to appreciate how great this good is. We have seen
how tame and meagre is their spirit in comparison with the spirit of,
for example, the Swiss, or French, or Italian inhabitants of the Alps;
and in comparison with what men's spirit ought to be. They have
many admirable qualities, but they are fearful and unenterprising.
Contact with them brings home to us what a spirit of daring and high
adventure means to a people. And we are impressed with the
necessity of taking every step possible to create, sustain, and
strengthen this spirit in a people and in the human race generally.
The ascent of Mount Everest, we believe, will be a big step in that
direction.

The actual climbing of this mountain this Society will leave in the
hands of the Alpine Club, who have special experience in mountain
climbing. But the reconnaissance and mapping of the mountain and
its neighbourhood will fitly remain with us. And here we reach the
point where the principles I have been offering for your
consideration might be applied. Were it not that the size of the first
party will have to be limited on account of transport and supply
difficulties, I should greatly like to have a poet or a painter, or
anyhow a climber like Mr. Freshfield with a poetic soul, a member
of it. For I say quite deliberately and mean quite literally that the
geography of Mount Everest and its vicinity will not be complete
until it has been painted by some great painter and described by
some great poet. Making the most accurate map of it will not be
completing our knowledge of it. The map-maker only prepares the
way--in some cases for the soldier or the politician or the engineer
--in this case for the geologist, the naturalist, and above all for the
painter and poet. Until we have a picture and a poem--in prose or
verse--of Mount Everest we shall not really know it; our Geography
will be incomplete, and, indeed, will lack its chief essential.

The Duke of the Abruzzi, in his expedition to the second highest
mountain in the world, took with him the finest mountain
photographer there is--Signor Vittorio Sella--and he brought back
superb photographs, for he is a true artist with a natural feeling for
high mountains. But I have seen the very mountains that he
photographed, and when I look at these photographs--the best that
man can produce--I almost weep to think how little of the real
character of great mountains they communicate to us. The sight of
the photographs wrings me with disappointment that it was a
photographer and not a painter who went there. Here in Europe are
artists by the score painting year after year the same old European
scenes. And there in the Himalaya is the grandest scenery in the
world, and not a painter from Europe ever goes there--except just
one, the great Russian Verestchagin, whose pictures, alas! are now
buried somewhere in Russia. The Indian Services might do
something, and they have indeed produced one great painter of
Himalayan scenery, Colonel Tanner. But the Services are limited,
and it is to Europe that we must mainly look.

On the first expedition to Mount Everest it may be only possible to
send a photographer. But this will be a pioneering expedition to
open the way, at least, for the painter. And then we may have Mount
Everest pictured in all her varied and ever-varying moods, as I have,
from a distance, seen her for three most treasured months. Now
serene and majestic; now in a tumult of fury. Now rooted solid on
earth; now hung high in the azure. Now hard and material; now
ethereal as spirit. Now stern and austere--cold, and white, and grey;
now warm and radiant and of every most delicate hue. Now in one
aspect, now in its precisely opposite, but always sublime and
compelling; always pure and unspotted; and always pointing us
starward.

These are the pictures--either by painter or by poet--that we want.
And they can only be painted by one who has himself gone in
among the mountains, confronted them squarely, braced himself
against them, faced and overcome them--realised their greatness,
realised also that great as they are he is greater still.

And this that we want of the greatest natural feature of the Earth is
only typical of what this Society should require in regard to all
Earth's other features in order to make our Geography complete. As
men have pictured the loveliness of England, the fairness of France,
the brilliance of Greece, so we want them to picture the
spaciousness of Arabia, the luxuriance of Brazil, and the sublimity
of the Himalaya. For not till that has been done will our Geography
be complete. But when that has been accomplished and the quest for
Beauty is being pushed to the remotest lands and Earth's farthest
corners, even the British schoolboy will love his Geography, and our
science will have won its final triumph. At nothing less, then, than
the heart of the boy should our Society deign to aim.



AN ADDRESS TO THE UNION SOCIETY OF THE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON,
DELIVERED ON MARCH 17, 1921.

You have been good enough to leave to me the choice of subject on
which to address you this evening, and I have chosen the subject
"Natural Beauty and Geography" because I have the honour to hold
at present the position of President of the Royal Geographical
Society, and am therefore supposed to know something about
Geography, and because a love of Natural Beauty is one of the great
passions of my life.

I believe the two are inseparably connected with one another, and,
briefly, the view I want to put before you is this--.that a description
of the Natural Beauty of the Earth should be included in Geography.
By Geography we mean a _description_ of the Earth. And we
cannot adequately describe the Earth until we have observed it in all
its aspects and really know and understand it. And we cannot really
understand the Earth until we have entered into her spirit and feel
ourselves in harmony with it. But _when_ our spirit is in harmony
with the spirit of the Earth we, in that instant, see the Beauty of the
Earth. When we are seeing Beauty in the Earth we are understanding
the Earth. In describing the Beauty of the Earth we shall be
describing something that we really know about it--something of the
real nature of the Earth.

For this reason I maintain that Geography should be taken to include
a description of the Natural Beauty of the Earth's features. The
description of the Earth is not full and complete, and is lacking in its
most important particular, when it excludes a description of Natural
Beauty, and only includes scientific details about the size and shape
of the earth; its configuration; the composition of the crust; the depth,
area, and volume of the ocean; the temperature, degree of moisture
and pressure of the atmosphere; the height of the mountains; the
length, breadth, volume, course, and catchment area of its rivers; the
mineral and vegetable products of various regions; the political areas
into which it is divided; the relation of the political and commercial
activities of the population to the physical character of the features
and to the climate. I, of course, acknowledge the importance of all
this geographical knowledge. To the historian and the statesman it is
essential that he should know the part which a certain mountain
range or river or desert has played in human history. A soldier must
know with extreme accuracy the configuration of the country over
which his army is operating. An engineer must know the exact level
and contour of a region over which he has to lay a railway or
construct a canal. A merchant must know whether a country
produces cotton, tea, and sugar; or wheat, wool, and meat. For all
these and others, each for his own particular purpose, we want the
kind of information I have described above--that is, what usually
goes under the name of Geography. But the point I wish now to urge
is that we shall not have plucked the very flower of geographical
knowledge until in addition to all this we have a knowledge of the
_Beauty_ of the Earth.

Perhaps you will understand me better if I illustrate my point. When
a dressmaker has to make a dress for a lady she has to measure her
with the minutest accuracy. She must gain a knowledge, by careful
measurement, of the exact shape and size of the lady's body, its true
contour, and the length and breadth of the limbs--just as an engineer
must have accurate knowledge of the Earth's surface. And to the
dressmaker _as_ a dressmaker knowledge of the lady's beauty has
no value whatever. The lady may have the beauty of form of a
Venus, but if the dressmaker has only knowledge of that beauty and
has not exact measurements she will never be able to make the dress.
But for humanity at large--and, as far as that goes, for the
dressmaker herself when she is free of her dressmaking--knowledge
of the lady's beauty is the knowledge that really matters. Whether
she is twenty-six inches round the waist or only twenty-five matters
comparatively little.

Now the Earth I regard as a lady--as dear Mother-Earth. A real
living being--live enough, at any rate, to give birth to mankind, to
microscopic animalculae first and through them to man. And no one
can look at the features of Mother-Earth without recognising her
Beauty. It is there staring us in the face. So I cannot conceive why
we geographers should confine ourselves to the dressmaker attitude
of mind and describe every other characteristic of the Earth except
her Beauty. I should have thought that it was the very first thing
with which we should have concerned ourselves--that the first duty
of those who profess and call themselves geographers should have
been to describe the beauty of their Mother-Earth.

Say a visitor from Mars arrived upon the Earth, he would no doubt
report on his return that the mountains here were so many thousands
of feet high and the seas so many thousands of feet deep, and the
area of the land and sea so many thousand square miles; that the
productivity of the land in one quarter had had the effect of
attracting a large part of the population to that quarter, and the
aridity or cold of another portion had had the effect of preventing
human settlement there; and that mountains, seas, or deserts
confining certain groups of human beings tightly within given areas
had had the effect of compacting them into highly organised
political bodies. All this and much more geographical knowledge
the Martian would bring back to Mars. But his fellow-Martians
would tell him that this was all very interesting, but that what they
really wanted to know was what the Earth was _like._ They would
ask him if he had not some lantern slides of the Earth, some
photographs, something which would convey to them an impression
of the real character of the Earth. And then at last he would be
driven to describe her Beauty.

In the best words he could find he would express the impression
which the Earth had made upon him. If he were a painter and if the
Martians possess paint, he would paint pictures to express the
feelings which a contemplation of the Earth had aroused in him.
That is, he would show them the Beauty of the Earth in her various
aspects. Perhaps he might not be able to see as much Beauty in her
as we her children see. We may be too partial and see beauties that a
stranger may not perceive. On the other hand, he might see
beauties that we through being so accustomed to them have never
recognised--as men living always within sight of some superb
mountain scarcely appreciate its grandeur. Anyhow, he would
describe to the Martians whatever he had seen of the Beauty of the
Earth, and then at last they would feel that they were really able to
know and understand her.

To descend from these celestial spheres and to examine what
actually happens among ourselves when we venture into an
unknown portion of this globe and seek to know what is there, a
chief ingredient in the lure which draws men on to fill up the blank
spaces in the map is undoubtedly a love of Natural Beauty; and its
Natural Beauty is certainly what above everything else regarding
that region remains in their memories after it has been explored. It is
not _only_ love of Natural Beauty that draws men on. Love of
adventure has much to do with it also. Men feel a fearful joy in
pitting themselves against stern natural obstacles and being
compelled to exert all their physical energy and endurance, and all
their wit and nerve and courage, in order to overcome them. The
stiffer the obstacle, the more insistent do they feel the call
to measure themselves against it. They thrill to the expectation of
having their full capacities and faculties drawn out. By some curious
natural instinct they seem driven to put themselves into positions
where they are forced to exert themselves to the full stretch of their
capabilities. This same instinct tells them that they will be never so
happy as when they are making the very utmost of themselves and
exercising their whole being at its highest pitch. Anticipation of their
joy in adventure is therefore no small part of the lure which draws
men into the unknown. And with it also is ambition to make a name
and achieve fame. Some, too, are drawn on by the hope of wealth
through finding gold, diamonds, and so on. But from what I have
seen of gold and diamond prospectors on the spot in the act of
prospecting, I should say it was quite as much love of adventure as
covetousness of wealth that drew them into unknown parts. For
experience shows them only too often that it is not the prospector
but the company promoter and financier who make the money even
when the prospector finds the gold or diamonds. Yet prospectors go
forward as cheerfully as ever. They are fascinated by the life of
adventure.

All this is true. Men delight in sheer adventure and in testing and
sharpening themselves against formidable natural obstacles. Yet we
shall find that love of Natural Beauty has an even greater share than
love of adventure in enticing them to the unknown. Men picture to
themselves beauties of the most wonderful kind which they expect
to see--enchanting islands, mysterious forests, majestic rivers,
heavenly mountains, delightful lakes. Instinct tells them that they
will have the joy which comes from exerting their capacities to the
full. But somewhere in the back of their being is, also this
expectation of seeing wonders of Natural Beauty, and of seeing
_more_ of this Beauty from the very fact that they will be seeing it
as a prize truly _won_ and when their faculties are all tuned up to a
fine pitch of appreciation.

And when they return from the unknown, when the adventure is
over, when they are again relaxed, it will be the Natural Beauty
which they have seen that will remain in their memories long after
they have forgotten their exertion, long after they have expended
any wealth they may have found, long after they have recorded the
exact measurements of the various features of the region.

Curiosity to see the Natural Beauty of an unknown region is a
principal ingredient in the lure that draws men to it. And Natural
Beauty is what, above everything else in regard to the unknown
region, stands out in men's memories on their return.

This at any rate is my own experience, and we are perhaps on safer
ground when we speak of what we have ourselves experienced than
when we speak of what we imagine must be the experiences of
others. Though in this case I have good reason to believe that my
own experiences are very similar to the experiences of others, and
may therefore be taken as typical.

Almost my earliest recollections are of a Somersetshire village set in
a lovely valley, fringed with woods and surrounded by hills. Up the
hills on the side of the valley on which I lived I used constantly to
go. But over the hills on the far side of the river I was never taken.
So I used to picture to myself wonderful woods and rivers, and
castles and great cities, and I longed to go there. The lure of Natural
Beauty was beginning to make itself felt. As I grew to boyhood I
was fortunate enough to be taken to North Wales, Devonshire and
Cornwall, and later on to Switzerland and the South of France, and
everywhere I saw much Natural Beauty. But, still, that only made
me want to see more.

In all these cases, however, I only went where I was taken. I did not
go where I chose or with an object of my own. It was not till I was
in India and had the first leave from my regiment that I could go
where I liked. Now, where I liked was to the Himalaya. And if I
look back now and enquire of myself what made me choose the
Himalaya, I can say most clearly that it was because I had in my
mind a vision of long snowy ranges, and dazzling peaks, and
frowning precipices, and rushing torrents, and endless forests. I
thought how glorious it would be to be able to wander about at will
and see all the magnificent scenery, to feast on the  Natural Beauty,
and when I came back to be able to tell others of the wonders I had
seen.

So I made my first short trip in the Himalaya. But this only served to
arouse my curiosity still more. I had seen some great mountains. But
they were none of them more than 20,000 feet in height. I wanted to
see still higher mountains. I heard, too, that up the valley of the
Sutlej were some fearful gorges through which the river forced its
way. I wanted to see them too, and see a great river in the very act of
forcing its way through the mighty Himalaya. Above all, I wanted to
see what lay on the other side of the Himalaya. I wanted to get into
Tibet.

That for the time being proved impossible, and my thoughts
wandered off to the far eastern part of Asia. I had read a book called
"On the Amur," by Atkinson. Not altogether a very veracious book,
but a fascinating book for all that. In it were alluring pictures of the
broad, placid river. Rich forests came down to the water's edge. And
on its surface were depicted delightful rafts and canoes. To glide
down such a river, to camp on its banks and plunge into the forests
which clothed them, seemed a joy second only to the joy of
scrambling about the Himalaya. So with Mr. H. E. M. James--now
Sir Evan James--I went to Manchuria, not, indeed, to reach the
Amur itself, but to discover the source of its great tributary the
Sungari, and to follow it down through the forests and over the
plains for several hundred miles.

Now, what I want to impress upon you is that in all these cases it
was the Natural Beauty which was the attraction--it was the picture I
made to myself of what these countries would be like that drew me
on. And I am sure it is with others as it was with me. Natural Beauty
is at bottom what incites the traveller.

And, whether I had to go where I was taken or could go where I
chose, it was the Natural Beauty that stuck in my memory. And
when I returned it was of the Natural Beauty that I wished to tell my
friends. And this, again, is the experience of others also. To this day,
though I have never since seen them, I remember the beauties of
Cader Idris and Dolgelly, Snowdon and Carnarvon, in North Wales,
and of the rugged cliffs and long Atlantic waves on the Cornish
coast. The Dart, here rippling over boulders and between rocky
banks, here in deep, clear salmon pools, here merging into a long
inlet of the sea and everywhere framed in wooded hill-sides, I have
often again seen. But even if I had not, its beauty would never have
departed from my memory. And it is the same with the first view of
the Alps from the Jura, the view of Lake Geneva, of the Jungfrau, of
the Pyrenees from Pau, and of the valley of the Loire. I have never
seen those parts of Switzerland and of France since then, but their
beauty remains with me to this day. And it is of their beauty that I
have ever afterwards been naturally inclined to speak. When I talk
about the Loire I do not tell my friends that it rises in a certain place,
is so many miles long, at certain parts has a certain width, depth, and
volume, and eventually flows into a certain sea. What I naturally
speak about is its beauty, the rich valley through which it flows, the
graceful bridges by which it is spanned, the picturesque old towns
and romantic castles on the banks. And this is the common habit of
mankind. Our friends may bore us--and we may bore our friends
--with interminable accounts of the discomfort and inconveniences
and the petty little incidents of travel. But when they and we have
got through that and settle down to describe the country itself, it is
of its beauty that we speak.

Natural Beauty is what attracts us to a country. Its Natural Beauty is
the fact about it which remains most persistently in our memory.
And it is about its Natural Beauty that we are most inclined to speak.
Lastly, when we are in distant countries it is of the Natural Beauty
that we chiefly think. When our thoughts go back to the home
country it is not on its exact measurements and configuration that
they dwell, but on its beauty.

From all of which considerations I conclude that any description of
the Earth which excludes a description of its Natural Beauty is
incomplete. Geography must include a description of Natural Beauty.
And personally I would go so far as to say that the description of
Natural Beauty is the most important part of Geography.

Here I must answer an objection which may be raised--namely, that
Natural Beauty is the concern of Aesthetics, not of Geography. An
objector may freely acknowledge the value and importance of
recognising and describing the Natural Beauty of a country, but may
contend that this is beyond the province of Geography. It should be
left to poets and painters, he might say, and geographers should
confine themselves to the more prosaic business of exact
measurement, of accurate delineation, of reasoning regarding the
relation of the facts to one another, and of explaining the facts.

To such an objector I would reply that Geography is an art as well as
a science. And in parenthesis I may say that I doubt whether any
science can be complete which has not art behind it. We shall never
be able fully to know and understand the Earth or to describe what
we see if we use our intellectual and reasoning powers alone. If we
are to attain to a complete knowledge of the Earth, and if we are to
describe what we learn about it in an adequate manner so that others
may participate in our knowledge, then we must use our hearts as
well as our heads. We must be artists as well as meticulous
classifiers, cataloguers, and reasoners. The Earth is a living being, a
throbbing, palpitating, living being--"live" enough to have given
birth to the remote ancestors of mankind, and live enough, so some
biologists consider, to be continually to this day generating the
lowliest forms of organisms. To know and understand a living being,
particularly when that living being happens to be his own Mother,
man must use his heart as well as his head.

With his head alone the geographer may do a vast amount of most
useful and necessary work which will help us to understand the
Earth. He may collect and classify facts about her and record
measurements, and reason about these facts and measurements, but
if he is to get the deepest vision of the Earth and learn the
profoundest truth about her he must exercise his finest spiritual
senses as well. And when he brings those faculties of the soul into
play, it will be the Beauty on the face of Mother-Earth that he will
see and that will disclose to him her real nature.

And therefore I hold that if it be the function of Geography to know
the Earth and to describe the Earth, then the objection that the
description of its Natural Beauty is outside the scope of Geography
is not a valid objection. The picture and the poem are as legitimate a
part of Geography as the map.

Some years ago in lecturing to the Royal Geographical Society I
said that the Society ought to have given Wordsworth the Gold
Medal. I meant that the poet by his vision had taught us more about
the Lake District than any ordinary geographer had been able to see.
With his finer sensibility he had been able to see deeper. He had
been able to reveal to us truths about the district which no mere
ordnance surveyor was able to disclose. He was a true discoverer--a
geographical discoverer--a geographer of the highest type. He had
helped us really to know and understand the district.

Be it noted, too, that he did not, as some would think, put into the
lakes and hills and valleys something from within himself which
was not really in those natural features. The particular beauty that he
saw there was there waiting to be revealed. The natural features
aroused emotions in his sensitive soul, and his soul being aroused
saw the beauty in them. If the district had been of billiard-table
flatness, with no lakes, no hills, no valleys, then even he, with all his
poetic feeling and imagination, could not have put into the district
what it did not possess. The beauty that he saw was really there,
only it required a poetic soul to discover and reveal it. The spirit of
the poet put itself in touch with the spirit of the district and elicited
from the district what was already in it. The spirit of Wordsworth
and the spirit of the district acted and reacted upon one another and
came into harmony with one another. And as he had the capacity for
communicating to others what he himself had seen, we are now able
to see in the Lakeland beauties which our forefathers had scarcely
known.

This is why I suggest to you that Natural Beauty should be
considered as a legitimate part of Geography. And if you will look
about you, you will note that Natural Beauty is having an increasing
effect upon the movements of men. There is a very definite
relationship between the Beauty of the Earth and her human
inhabitants. The Poet Laureate builds his house on the top of Boar's
Hill not because the soil is specially productive up there so that he
may be able to grow food, for the soil is rather poor; not because
water is easily available, for it is very difficult to get, as he found
when his house took fire; not because of the climate, for the climate
is just as good a hundred feet lower down; not because it is easily
accessible to Oxford, for a big climb up the hill is entailed every
time he returns from that city--not for any of these reasons did he
build his house there, but because of the view which he obtains from
that spot. It was Natural Beauty which drew, the Poet Laureate to
Boar's Hill, as it was Natural Beauty which drew Tennyson to
Blackdown to build Aldworth with a view all over the Surrey hills
and the Sussex Downs.

It is this same spell of Natural Beauty, too, which is drawing people
all over England to build their houses on the most beautiful spots.
Our great country-seats--the pride of England--are usually placed
where the natural scenery is finest. Humbler dwellings whenever the
owner has the opportunity of making a choice are for a similar
reason built wherever a beautiful view, however limited, may be
obtained. Whole towns even are built on spots where the
surroundings are most beautiful, or, at any rate, if for some other
reason they were located where they are they tend to spread in the
direction of most beauty. Dartmouth was originally built where it is
because that site made an excellent port. But the new town has
spread all over the cliffs at the entrance of the harbour wherever a
beautiful view may be found. It is the same with Torquay. People
originally went there on account of the warm, soft air. But though
they can get much the same air in any part of the Torquay area,
where they like to build their houses is where they can get the finest
views.

On the Continent a similar tendency may be observed. Nice, Cannes,
Monte Carlo, Biarritz, Montreux, Vevey, were no doubt originally
located where they are for other reasons than only the facilities they
afford for observing Natural Beauty, but that they have grown to
what they are is undoubtedly due to Natural Beauty, and Natural
Beauty has given the direction in which they have expanded. It is
not by chance that villas and terraces and hotels have been built just
on those particular points from which the most beautiful views may
be seen.

And how great is the influence of Natural Beauty upon the
movements of men may be gathered from the amount of money
railway  companies and hotels spend in advertising the charms of the
particular localities which they serve. Railway-carriages are full of
photographs and tourist agencies of pictures of different points in
the neighbourhood of the railway or hotel. And we may be certain
that business companies would not go to the expense of setting up
these photographs and pictures if they did not think that people were
influenced by them and would be tempted to travel to the scenes
they depict.

The development of char-a-banc tours is another indication of the
attraction--and the increasing attraction--of Natural Beauty. Since
the War, especially, there has been a remarkable tendency of people
of every rank in life to rush off whenever they can get a holiday to
the most beautiful parts of these islands--to the moors of Yorkshire
and Devonshire, to the Wye, the Dart, and the Severn, to the
mountains of Wales, Westmoreland, and Scotland--to wherever
Natural Beauty may be found. It is a noteworthy and most refreshing
feature in our national life.

Every summer, too, both here and on the Continent, people make
their way to the most beautiful parts of Europe--to Switzerland or
the Pyrenees, the Vosges or the Rhine. And in the Dominions and
America whenever they get their holidays they likewise trek away to
mountain, lake, or river, wherever Nature may be enjoyed at her best.
Men may, to carry on the ordinary business of life, be compelled to
live in cities and places which are chosen for other reasons than their
facilities for observing Natural Beauty. But whenever they can get
away from their ordinary duties the tendency of men--and a
tendency increasing in strength--is to fly away to the moors and
sea-coast and river-sides and wherever else they can see the beauties of
the Earth.

Then, again, men are increasingly sensitive about preserving Natural
Beauty wherever it is best. It is quite true that men by the building of
industrial towns and the erection of hideous factories, mining plant,
gasometers, and so on terribly destroy Natural Beauty. But they are
at least becoming conscious of their sins in this respect and of what
they have lost thereby. They are therefore the more anxious to
preserve what remains. And whenever there is an attempt to build on
Box Hill, or erect an electric power-station on Dartmoor, a howl of
execration is raised. And this howl means that men do value Natural
Beauty and mean to preserve it.

Young countries also realise its value. In California the Yosemite
Valley is preserved for ever for human enjoyment. And in Canada,
Australia, and South Africa national parks are protected against the
encroachments of industrial enterprises.

Men not only preserve spots of Natural Beauty; they also seek to
improve them. The nobleman of ancient lineage and the new
millionaire alike strive to add to the beauty of their estates. The
hours they love best are the hours they can devote to opening up
vistas, planting beautiful trees or flowering shrubs from distant lands,
building up rockeries, forming artificial lakes, laying out lawns, and
stocking their gardens with the choicest flowers.

The effect of Natural Beauty upon man and of man upon Natural
Beauty is immense. Geographers take note of the effect which the
Alps by reason of their height and ruggedness, or the Rhine by
reason of its length, breadth, and depth, have upon the activities of
men--upon their history, politics, and economic life. My contention
is that equally should geographers note the effect which these same
natural features of the Earth by reason of their _beauty_ have upon
men's activities and movements.

And when Natural Beauty is fully recognised as within the province
of Geography, we shall be taught to pay to it the attention it
deserves--taught to look for it, taught how to observe it, taught how
to describe it, taught where are the regions of special beauty and
wherein their beauty lies, and lastly taught where in an ordinary
district Beauty may be found, for even in the flattest, dreariest
region _some_ beauty at some time of day or at some season may be
discovered. We shall, in short, be taught to cultivate the sense for
Natural Beauty, and how to put in fitting words a description of the
beauty we see. Our geography textbooks, besides all the
mathematical, physical, political, and commercial geography they
contain, will tell us something of the Natural Beauty of the countries
they set themselves to describe. And geographers when they set
themselves to describe a new region will not think it necessary to
confine themselves within the old limits, but will do what the
ordinary man instinctively does--describe its beauties.

Our methods of describing countries will thus radically change. A
few years ago Colonel Tanner of the Survey of India read to the
Royal Geographical Society a paper entitled "Our Present
Knowledge of the Himalaya." In that paper he gave an account of
the height of the peaks, the trend of the mountain ranges, the course
of the rivers, and a deal of other very valuable geographical
information. But in only one single line did he make any remark
about the natural beauty of that wonderful region. Yet this omission
was not due to any lack of appreciation by Colonel Tanner of
Himalayan beauty, for he himself had painted the finest pictures of
the Himalaya which have yet been produced. He made no mention
of it because he thought that to describe the natural beauty of the
Himalaya was to stray beyond the bounds of Geography.

Such a grievous misconception of the true scope of Geography will,
I trust, be removed in future. And when it no longer exists
Geography will require for its pursuit the exercise of the finest
faculties of the soul as well as the strictest qualities of the intellect.
It will call forth capacity for the closest and most accurate
observation and the highest powers of description. To us
adventure-loving and Nature-loving Englishmen it should of all
subjects be the most popular.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Heart of Nature, by Francis Younghusband

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART OF NATURE ***

***** This file should be named 27213.txt or 27213.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/1/27213/

Produced by Ruth Hart

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

