Chapter 4.



The `Athenaeum' dismissed "Paracelsus" with a half contemptuous line or two.
On the other hand, the `Examiner' acknowledged it to be
a work of unequivocal power, and predicted for its author a brilliant career.
The same critic who wrote this review contributed an article
of about twenty pages upon "Paracelsus" to the `New Monthly Magazine',
under the heading, "Evidences of a New Dramatic Poetry".
This article is ably written, and remarkable for its sympathetic insight.
"Mr. Browning," the critic writes, "is a man of genius, he has in himself
all the elements of a great poet, philosophical as well as dramatic."

The author of this enthusiastic and important critique was John Forster.
When the `Examiner' review appeared the two young men had not met:
but the encounter, which was to be the seed of so fine a flower of friendship,
occurred before the publication of the `New Monthly' article.  Before this,
however, Browning had already made one of the most momentous acquaintanceships
of his life.

His good friend and early critic, Mr. Fox, asked him to his house
one evening in November, a few months after the publication of "Paracelsus".
The chief guest of the occasion was Macready, then at the height
of his great reputation.  Mr. Fox had paved the way for the young poet,
but the moment he entered he carried with him his best recommendation.
Every one who met Browning in those early years of his buoyant manhood
seems to have been struck by his comeliness and simple grace of manner.
Macready stated that he looked more like a poet than any man he had ever met.
As a young man he appears to have had a certain ivory delicacy of colouring,
what an old friend perhaps somewhat exaggeratedly described to me
as an almost flower-like beauty, which passed ere long
into a less girlish and more robust complexion.  He appeared
taller than he was, for he was not above medium height,
partly because of his rare grace of movement, and partly from
a characteristic high poise of the head when listening intently
to music or conversation.  Even then he had that expressive wave o' the hand,
which in later years was as full of various meanings
as the `Ecco' of an Italian.  A swift alertness pervaded him,
noticeable as much in the rapid change of expression,
in the deepening and illuming colours of his singularly expressive eyes,
and in his sensitive mouth, with the upper lip ever so swift
to curve or droop in response to the most fluctuant emotion,
as in his greyhound-like apprehension, which so often grasped the subject
in its entirety before its propounder himself realised its significance.
A lady, who remembers Browning at that time, has told me that his hair --
then of a brown so dark as to appear black -- was so beautiful
in its heavy sculpturesque waves as to attract frequent notice.
Another, and more subtle, personal charm was his voice,
then with a rare flute-like tone, clear, sweet, and resonant.
Afterwards, though always with precise clarity, it became
merely strong and hearty, a little too loud sometimes,
and not infrequently as that of one simulating keen immediate interest
while the attention was almost wholly detached.

Macready, in his Journal,* about a week later than the date
of his first meeting with the poet, wrote -- "Read `Paracelsus',
a work of great daring, starred with poetry of thought, feeling, and diction,
but occasionally obscure:  the writer can scarcely fail
to be a leading spirit of his time."  The tragedian's house,
whither he went at week-ends and on holidays, was at Elstree,
a short distance to the northward of Hampstead:  and there
he invited Browning, among other friends, to come on the last day of December
and spend New Year's Day (1836).**  When alluding, in after years,
to this visit, Browning always spoke of it as one of the red-letter days
of his life.  It was here he first met Forster, with whom he at once formed
what proved to be an enduring friendship; and on this occasion, also,
that he was urged by his host to write a poetic play.

--
* For many interesting particulars concerning Macready and Browning,
  and the production of "Strafford", etc., see the `Reminiscences', vol. 1.
** It was for Macready's eldest boy, William Charles, that Browning wrote
   one of the most widely popular of his poems, "The Pied Piper of Hamelin".
   It is said to have been an impromptu performance, and to have been
   so little valued by the author that he hesitated about its inclusion
   in "Bells and Pomegranates".  It was inserted at the last moment,
   in the third number, which was short of "copy".  Some one (anonymous,
   but whom I take to be Mr. Nettleship) has publicly alluded
   to his possession of a rival poem (entitled, simply, "Hamelin")
   by Robert Browning the elder, and of a letter which he had sent to a friend
   along with the verses, in which he writes:  "Before I knew
   that Robert had begun the story of the `Rats' I had contemplated a tale
   on the same subject, and proceeded with it as far as you see,
   but, on hearing that Robert had a similar one on hand, I desisted."
   This must have been in 1842, for it was in that year
   that the third part of `Bells and Pomegranates' was published.
   In 1843, however, he finished it.  Browning's "Pied Piper"
   has been translated into French, Russian, Italian, and German.
   The latter (or one German) version is in prose.  It was made in 1880,
   for a special purpose, and occupied the whole of one number
   of the local paper of Hameln, which is a quaint townlet in Hanover.
--

Browning promised to consider the suggestion.  Six weeks later,
in company with Forster, with whom he had become intimate,
he called upon Macready, to discuss the plot of a tragedy
which he had pondered.  He told the tragedian how deeply he had been impressed
by his performance of "Othello", and how this had deflected his intention
from a modern and European to an Oriental and ancient theme.
"Browning said that I had BIT him by my performance of `Othello',
and I told him I hoped I should make the blood come."  The "blood" had come
in the guise of a drama-motive based on the crucial period in the career
of Narses, the eunuch-general of Justinian.  Macready liked the suggestion,
though he demurred to one or two points in the outline:
and before Browning left he eagerly pressed him to "go on with `Narses'."
But whether Browning mistrusted his own interest in the theme,
or was dubious as to the success with which Macready
would realise his conception, or as to the reception a play of such nature
would win from an auditory no longer reverent of high dramatic ideals,
he gave up the idea.  Some three months later (May 26th) he enjoyed
another eventful evening.  It was the night of the first performance
of Talfourd's "Ion", and he was among the personal friends of Macready
who were invited to the supper at Talfourd's rooms.
After the fall of the curtain, Browning, Forster, and other friends
sought the tragedian and congratulated him upon the success
both of the play and of his impersonation of the chief character.
They then adjourned to the house of the author of "Ion".
To his surprise and gratification Browning found himself placed
next but one to his host, and immediately opposite Macready,
who sat between two gentlemen, one calm as a summer evening,
and the other with a tempestuous youth dominating his sixty years,
whom the young poet at once recognised as Wordsworth and Walter Savage Landor.
Every one was in good spirits:  the host perhaps most of all,
who was celebrating his birthday as well as the success of "Ion".
Possibly Macready was the only person who felt at all bored --
unless it was Landor -- for Wordsworth was not, at such a function,
an entertaining conversationalist.  There is much significance
in the succinct entry in Macready's journal concerning the Lake-poet --
"Wordsworth, who pinned me." . . .  When Talfourd rose
to propose the toast of "The Poets of England" every one probably expected
that Wordsworth would be named to respond.  But with a kindly grace the host,
after flattering remarks upon the two great men then honouring him
by sitting at his table, coupled his toast with the name
of the youngest of the poets of England -- "Mr. Robert Browning,
the author of `Paracelsus'."  It was a very proud moment for Browning,
singled out among that brilliant company:  and it is pleasant to know,
on the authority of Miss Mitford, who was present, that "he performed his task
with grace and modesty," looking, the amiable lady adds,
even younger than he was.  Perhaps, however, he was prouder still
when Wordsworth leaned across the table, and with stately affability said,
"I am proud to drink your health, Mr. Browning:"  when Landor,
also, with a superbly indifferent and yet kindly smile,
also raised his glass to his lips in courteous greeting.

Of Wordsworth Browning saw not a little in the ensuing few years,
for on the rare visits the elderly poet paid to London,
Talfourd never failed to ask the author of "Paracelsus",
for whom he had a sincere admiration, to meet the great man.
It was not in the nature of things that the two poets could become friends,
but though the younger was sometimes annoyed by the elder's pooh-poohing
his republican sympathies, and contemptuously waiving aside as a mere nobody
no less an individual than Shelley, he never failed of respect
and even reverence.  With what tenderness and dignity he has commemorated
the great poet's falling away from his early ideals, may be seen
in "The Lost Leader", one of the most popular of Browning's short poems,
and likely to remain so.  For several reasons, however,
it is best as well as right that Wordsworth should not be more
than merely nominally identified with the Lost Leader.
Browning was always imperative upon this point.

Towards Landor, on the other hand, he entertained a sentiment
of genuine affection, coupled with a profound sympathy and admiration:
a sentiment duly reciprocated.  The care of the younger for the elder,
in the old age of the latter, is one of the most beautiful incidents
in a beautiful life.

But the evening was not to pass without another memorable incident,
one to which we owe "Strafford", and probably "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon".
Just as the young poet, flushed with the triumphant pleasure of the evening,
was about to leave, Macready arrested him by a friendly grip of the arm.
In unmistakable earnestness he asked Browning to write him a play.
With a simplicity equal to the occasion, the poet contented himself
with replying, "Shall it be historical and English?  What do you say
to a drama on Strafford?"

Macready was pleased with the idea, and hopeful that his friend would be
more successful with the English statesman than with the eunuch Narses.

A few months elapsed before the poet, who had set aside the long work
upon which he was engaged ("Sordello"), called upon Macready
with the manuscript of "Strafford".  The latter hoped much from it.
In March the MS. was ready.  About the end of the month
Macready took it to Covent Garden Theatre, and read it to Mr. Osbaldiston,
"who caught at it with avidity, and agreed to produce it without delay."

It was an eventful first of May -- an eventful twelvemonth, indeed,
for it was the initial year of the Victorian era, notable, too,
as that wherein the Electric Telegraph was established, and, in letters,
wherein a new dramatic literature had its origin.  For "Strafford",
already significant of a novel movement, and destined, it seems to me,
to be still more significant in that great dramatic period towards which
we are fast converging, was not less important to the Drama in England,
as a new departure in method and radically indicative of a fresh standpoint,
than "Hernani" was in France.  But in literary history
the day itself is doubly memorable, for in the forenoon
Carlyle gave the first of his lectures in London.  The play was a success,
despite the shamefully inadequate acting of some of those entrusted with
important parts.  There was once, perhaps there were more occasions than one,
where success poised like the soul of a Mohammedan on the invisible thread
leading to Paradise, but on either side of which lies perdition.
There was none to cry `Timbul' save Macready, except Miss Helen Faucit,
who gained a brilliant triumph as Lady Carlisle.  The part of Charles I.
was enacted so execrably that damnation for all was again and again
within measurable distance.  "The Younger Vane" ranted so that a hiss,
like an embodied scorn, vibrated on vagrant wings throughout the house.
There was not even any extraneous aid to a fortunate impression.
The house was in ill repair:  the seats dusty, the "scenery" commonplace
and sometimes noticeably inappropriate, the costumes and accessories
almost sordid.  But in the face of all this, a triumph was secured.
For a brief while Macready believed that the star of regeneration had arisen.
Unfortunately 'twas, in the words of a contemporary dramatic poet,
"a rising sorrow splendidly forlorn."  The financial condition
of Covent Garden Theatre was so ruinous that not even the most successful play
could have restored its doomed fortunes.

After the fifth night one of the leading actors, having received
a better offer elsewhere, suddenly withdrew.

This was the last straw.  A collapse forthwith occurred.
In the scramble for shares in the few remaining funds
every one gained something, except the author, who was to have received
12 Pounds for each performance for the first twenty-five nights,
and 10 Pounds each for ten nights further.  This disaster
was a deep disappointment to Browning, and a by no means transitory one,
for three or four years later he wrote (Advt. of "Bells and Pomegranates"):
"Two or three years ago I wrote a play, about which the chief matter
I much care to recollect at present is, that a pitful of good-natured people
applauded it.  Ever since, I have been desirous of doing something
in the same way that should better reward their attention."
But, except in so far as its abrupt declension from the stage hurt its author
in the eyes of the critics, and possibly in those of theatrical managers,
"Strafford" was certainly no failure.  It has the elements
of a great acting play.  Everything, even the language
(and here was a stumbling-block with most of the critics and criticasters),
was subordinated to dramatic exigencies:  though the subordination
was in conformity with a novel shaping method.  "Strafford" was not, however,
allowed to remain unknown to those who had been unable to visit
Covent Garden Theatre.*  Browning's name had quite sufficient literary repute
to justify a publisher in risking the issue of a drama by him,
one, at any rate, that had the advantage of association with Macready's name.
The Longmans issued it, and the author had the pleasure of knowing
that his third poetic work was not produced at the expense of a relative,
but at that of the publishers.  It had but an indifferent reception, however.

--
* "It is time to deny a statement that has been repeated ad nauseam
  in every notice that professes to give an account of Mr. Browning's career.
  Whatever is said or not said, it is always that his plays have `failed'
  on the stage.  In point of fact, the three plays which he has brought out
  have all succeeded, and have owed it to fortuitous circumstances
  that their tenure on the boards has been comparatively short."
  -- E. W. Gosse, in article in `The Century Magazine'.
--

Most people who saw the performance of "Strafford" given in 1886,
under the auspices of the Browning Society, were surprised
as well as impressed:  for few, apparently, had realised from perusal
the power of the play as made manifest when acted.  The secret of this
is that the drama, when privily read, seems hard if not heavy in its diction,
and to be so inornate, though by no means correspondingly simple,
as to render any comparison between it and the dramatic work of Shakespeare
out of the question.  But when acted, the artistry of the play is revealed.
Its intense naturalness is due in great part to the stern concision
of the lines, where no word is wasted, where every sentence is fraught
with the utmost it can convey.  The outlines which disturbed us
by their vagueness become more clear:  in a word, we all see in enactment
what only a few of us can discern in perusal.  The play has its faults,
but scarcely those of language, where the diction is noble and rhythmic,
because it is, so to speak, the genuine rind of the fruit it envelops.
But there are dramatic faults -- primarily, in the extreme economy
of the author in the presentment of his `dramatis personae',
who are embodied abstractions -- monomaniacs of ideas,
as some one has said of Hugo's personages -- rather than men as we are,
with manifold complexities in endless friction or fusion.  One cardinal fault
is the lack of humour, which to my mind is the paramount objection
to its popular acceptance.  Another, is the misproportionate length
of some of the speeches.  Once again, there is, as in the greater portion
of Browning's longer poems and dramas, a baneful equality of emphasis.
The conception of Charles I. is not only obviously weak, but strangely
prejudiced adversely for so keen an analyst of the soul as Browning.
For what a fellow-dramatist calls this "Sunset Shadow of a King",
no man or woman could abase every hope and energy.  Shakespeare would never
have committed the crucial mistake of making Charles the despicable deformity
he is in Browning's drama.  Strafford himself disappears too soon:
in the fourth act there is the vacuum abhorred of dramatic propriety.

When he again comes on the scene, the charm is partly broken.
But withal the play is one of remarkable vigour and beauty.
It seems to me that too much has been written against it
on the score of its metrical rudeness.  The lines are beat out by a hammer,
but in the process they are wrought clear of all needless alloy.
To urge, as has been lately urged, that it lacks all human touch
and is a mere intellectual fanfaronade, and that there is not once
a line of poignant insight, is altogether uncritical.  Readers of this mind
must have forgotten or be indifferent to those lines, for example,
where the wretched Charles stammeringly excuses himself to his loyal minister
for his death-warrant, crying out that it was wrung from him,
and begging Strafford not to curse him:  or, again, that wonderfully
significant line, so full of a too tardy knowledge and of concentrated scorn,
where Strafford first begs the king to "be good to his children,"
and then, with a contempt that is almost sublime, implores, "Stay, sir,
do not promise, do not swear!"  The whole of the second scene in the fifth act
is pure genius.  The reader, or spectator, knows by this time
that all hope is over:  that Strafford, though all unaware,
is betrayed and undone.  It is a subtle dramatic ruse,
that of Browning's representing him sitting in his apartment in the Tower
with his young children, William and Anne, blithely singing.

Can one read and ever forget the lines giving the gay Italian rhyme,
with the boy's picturesquely childish prose-accompaniment?
Strafford is seated, weary and distraught: --

                        "`O bell' andare
                        Per barca in mare,
                        Verso la sera
                        Di Primavera!'
    William.    The boat's in the broad moonlight all this while --
                        `Verso la sera
                        Di Primavera!'
                And the boat shoots from underneath the moon
                Into the shadowy distance; only still
                You hear the dipping oar --
                        `Verso la sera,'
                And faint, and fainter, and then all's quite gone,
                Music and light and all, like a lost star.
    Anne.       But you should sleep, father:  you were to sleep.
    Strafford.  I do sleep, Anne; or if not -- you must know
                There's such a thing as . . .
    William.                                  You're too tired to sleep.
    Strafford.  It will come by-and-by and all day long,
                In that old quiet house I told you of:
                We sleep safe there.
    Anne.                             Why not in Ireland?
    Strafford.                                             No!
                Too many dreams! --"

To me this children's-song and the fleeting and now plaintive echo of it,
as "Voices from Within" -- "Verso la sera, Di Primavera" --
in the terrible scene where Strafford learns his doom,
is only to be paralleled by the song of Mariana in "Measure for Measure",
wherein, likewise, is abduced in one thrilling poignant strain
the quintessential part of the tense life of the whole play.

So much has been written concerning the dramas of Robert Browning --
though indeed there is still room for a volume of careful criticism,
dealing solely with this theme -- that I have the less regret
in having so inadequately to pass in review works of such poetic magnitude
as those enumerated above.

But it would be impossible, in so small a book as this,
to examine them in detail without incurring a just charge of misproportion.
The greatness and the shortcomings of the dramas and dramatic poems
must be noted as succinctly as practicable; and I have dwelt more liberally
upon "Pauline", "Paracelsus", and "Strafford", partly because
(certainly without more than one exception, "Sordello")
these are the three least read of Browning's poems, partly because
they indicate the sweep and reach of his first orient eagle-flight
through new morning-skies, and mainly because in them
we already find Browning at his best and at his weakest,
because in them we hear not only the rush of his sunlit pinions,
but also the low earthward surge of dullard wings.

Browning is foreshadowed in his earliest writings, as perhaps
no other poet has been to like extent.  In the "Venus and Adonis",
and the "Rape of Lucrece", we have but the dimmest foreview of the author
of "Hamlet", "Othello", and "Macbeth"; had Shakespeare died prematurely
none could have predicted, from the exquisite blossoms of his adolescence,
the immortal fruit of his maturity.  But, in Browning's three earliest works,
we clearly discern him, as the sculptor of Melos previsioned his Venus
in the rough-hewn block.

Thenceforth, to change the imagery, he developed rapidly upon the same lines,
or doubled upon himself in intricate revolutions; but already
his line of life, his poetic parallel, was definitely established.

In the consideration of Browning's dramas it is needful to be sure
of one's vantage for judgment.  The first step towards this assurance
is the ablation of the chronic Shakespearian comparison.  Primarily,
the shaping spirit of the time wrought Shakespeare and Browning
to radically divergent methods of expression, but each to a method
in profound harmony with the dominant sentiment of the age in which he lived.
Above all others, the Elizabethan era was rich in romantic adventure,
of the mind as well as of the body, and above all others,
save that of the Renaissance in Italy, animated by a passionate curiosity.
So, too, supremely, the Victorian era has been prolific of novel and vast
Titanic struggles of the human spirit to reach those Gates of Truth
whose lowest steps are the scarce discernible stars and furthest suns we scan,
by piling Ossas of searching speculation upon Pelions of hardly-won
positive knowledge.  The highest exemplar of the former is Shakespeare,
Browning the profoundest interpreter of the latter.
To achieve supremacy the one had to create a throbbing actuality,
a world of keenest living, of acts and intervolved situations and episodes:
the other to fashion a mentality so passionately alive
that its manifold phases should have all the reality
of concrete individualities.  The one reveals individual life to us
by the play of circumstance, the interaction of events,
the correlative eduction of personal characteristics:
the other by his apprehension of that quintessential movement or mood or phase
wherein the soul is transitorily visible on its lonely pinnacle of light.
The elder poet reveals life to us by the sheer vividness of his own vision:
the younger, by a newer, a less picturesque but more scientific abduction,
compels the complex rayings of each soul-star to a singular simplicity,
as by the spectrum analysis.  The one, again, fulfils his aim
by a broad synthesis based upon the vivid observance and selection
of vital details:  the other by an extraordinary acute psychic analysis.
In a word, Shakespeare works as with the clay of human action:
Browning as with the clay of human thought.

As for the difference in value of the two methods it is useless to dogmatise.
The psychic portraiture produced by either is valuable
only so far as it is convincingly true.

The profoundest insight cannot reach deeper than its own possibilities
of depth.  The physiognomy of the soul is never visible in its entirety,
barely ever even its profile.  The utmost we can expect to reproduce,
perhaps even to perceive in the most quintessential moment,
is a partially faithful, partially deceptive silhouette.
As no human being has ever seen his or her own soul,
in all its rounded completeness of good and evil, of strength and weakness,
of what is temporal and perishable and what is germinal and essential,
how can we expect even the subtlest analyst to adequately depict
other souls than his own.  It is Browning's high distinction
that he has this soul-depictive faculty -- restricted as even in his instance
it perforce is -- to an extent unsurpassed by any other poet,
ancient or modern.  As a sympathetic critic has remarked,
"His stage is not the visible phenomenal England (or elsewhere) of history;
it is a point in the spiritual universe, where naked souls meet and wrestle,
as they play the great game of life, for counters, the true value of which
can only be realised in the bullion of a higher life than this."
No doubt there is "a certain crudeness in the manner in which
these naked souls are presented," not only in "Strafford" but elsewhere
in the plays.  Browning markedly has the defects of his qualities.

As part of his method, it should be noted that his real trust
is upon monologue rather than upon dialogue.  To one who works
from within outward -- in contradistinction to the Shakespearian method
of striving to win from outward forms "the passion and the life
whose fountains are within" -- the propriety of this dramatic means
can scarce be gainsaid.  The swift complicated mental machinery
can thus be exhibited infinitely more coherently and comprehensibly
than by the most electric succinct dialogue.  Again and again
Browning has nigh foundered in the morass of monologue, but, broadly speaking,
he transcends in this dramatic method.

At the same time, none must take it for granted that
the author of "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon", "Luria", "In a Balcony",
is not dramatic in even the most conventional sense.  Above all, indeed
-- as Mr. Walter Pater has said -- his is the poetry of situations.
In each of the `dramatis personae', one of the leading characteristics
is loyalty to a dominant ideal.  In Strafford's case
it is that of unswerving devotion to the King:  in Mildred's and in Thorold's,
in "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon", it is that of subservience respectively
to conventional morality and family pride (Lord Tresham, it may be added,
is the most hopelessly monomaniacal of all Browning's "monomaniacs"):
in Valence's, in "Colombe's Birthday", to chivalric love:
in Charles, in "King Victor and King Charles", to kingly and filial duty:
in Anael's and Djabal's, in "The Return of the Druses",
respectively to religion and unscrupulous ambition modified by patriotism:
in Chiappino's, in "A Soul's Tragedy", to purely sordid ambition:
in Luria's, to noble steadfastness:  and in Constance's, in "In a Balcony",
to self-denial.  Of these plays, "The Return of the Druses" seems to me
the most picturesque, "Luria" the most noble and dignified,
and "In a Balcony" the most potentially a great dramatic success.
The last is in a sense a fragment, but, though the integer
of a great unaccomplished drama, is as complete in itself
as the Funeral March in Beethoven's `Eroica' Symphony.
"A Blot in the 'Scutcheon" has the radical fault characteristic of
writers of sensational fiction, a too promiscuous "clearing the ground"
by syncope and suicide.  Another is the juvenility of Mildred: --
a serious infraction of dramatic law, where the mere tampering with history,
as in the circumstances of King Victor's death in the earlier play,
is at least excusable by high precedent.  More disastrous, poetically,
is the ruinous banality of Mildred's anticlimax when,
after her brother reveals himself as her lover's murderer,
she, like the typical young `Miss Anglaise' of certain French novelists,
betrays her incapacity for true passion by exclaiming, in effect,
"What, you've murdered my lover!  Well, tell me all.  Pardon?
Oh, well, I pardon you:  at least I THINK I do.  Thorold, my dear brother,
how very wretched you must be!"

I am unaware if this anticlimax has been pointed out by any one,
but surely it is one of the most appalling lapses of genius
which could be indicated.  Even the beautiful song in
the third scene of the first act, "There's a woman like a dew-drop,
she's so purer than the purest," is, in the circumstances,
nearly over the verge which divides the sublime from the ridiculous.
No wonder that, on the night the play was first acted,
Mertoun's song, as he clambered to his mistress's window,
caused a sceptical laugh to ripple lightly among the tolerant auditory.
It is with diffidence I take so radically distinct a standpoint from that
of Dickens, who declared he knew no love like that of Mildred and Mertoun,
no passion like it, no moulding of a splendid thing after its conception,
like it; who, further, at a later date, affirmed that he would rather have
written this play than any work of modern times:  nor with less reluctance,
that I find myself at variance with Mr. Skelton, who speaks of the drama
as "one of the most perfectly conceived and perfectly executed tragedies
in the language."  In the instance of Luria, that second Othello,
suicide has all the impressiveness of a plenary act of absolution:
the death of Anael seems as inevitable as the flash of lightning
after the concussion of thunder-clouds.  But Thorold's suicide
is mere weakness, scarce a perverted courage; and Mildred's broken heart
was an ill not beyond the healing of a morally robust physician.
"Colombe's Birthday" has a certain remoteness of interest,
really due to the reader's more or less acute perception
of the radical divergence, for all Valence's greatness of mind and spirit,
between the fair young Duchess and her chosen lover:
a circumstance which must surely stand in the way of its popularity.
Though "A Soul's Tragedy" has the saving quality of humour,
it is of too grim a kind to be provocative of laughter.

In each of these plays* the lover of Browning will recall passage
after passage of superbly dramatic effect.  But supreme in his remembrance
will be the wonderful scene in "The Return of the Druses", where the Prefect,
drawing a breath of relief, is almost simultaneously assassinated;
and that where Anael, with every nerve at tension in her fierce
religious resolve, with a poignant, life-surrendering cry,
hails Djabal as `Hakeem' -- as Divine -- and therewith falls dead at his feet.
Nor will he forget that where, in "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon",
Mildred, with a dry sob in her throat, stammeringly utters --

         "I -- I -- was so young!
    Besides I loved him, Thorold -- and I had
    No mother; God forgot me:  so I fell ----"

or that where, "at end of the disastrous day," Luria takes the phial of poison
from his breast, muttering --

    "Strange!  This is all I brought from my own land
    To help me."

--
* "Strafford", 1837; "King Victor and King Charles", 1842;
  "The Return of the Druses", and "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon", 1843;
  "Colombe's Birthday", 1844; "Luria", and "A Soul's Tragedy", 1845.
--

Before passing on from these eight plays to Browning's most imperishable
because most nearly immaculate dramatic poem, "Pippa Passes",
and to "Sordello", that colossal derelict upon the ocean of poetry,
I should like -- out of an embarrassing quantity of alluring details --
to remind the reader of two secondary matters of interest, pertinent to
the present theme.  One is that the song in "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon",
"There's a woman like a dew-drop", written several years before
the author's meeting with Elizabeth Barrett, is so closely
in the style of "Lady Geraldine's Courtship", and other ballads
by the sweet singer who afterwards became a partner in the loveliest marriage
of which we have record in literary history, that, even were there nothing
to substantiate the fact, it were fair to infer that Mertoun's song to Mildred
was the electric touch which compelled to its metric shape
one of Mrs. Browning's best-known poems.

The further interest lies in the lordly acknowledgment
of the dedication to him of "Luria", which Landor sent to Browning --
lines pregnant with the stateliest music of his old age: --

    "Shakespeare is not our poet but the world's,
    Therefore on him no speech! and brief for thee,
    Browning!  Since Chaucer was alive and hale
    No man has walked along our roads with step
    So active, so enquiring eye, or tongue
    So varied in discourse.  But warmer climes
    Give brighter plumage, stronger wing:  the breeze
    Of Alpine heights thou playest with, borne on
    Beyond Sorrento and Amalfi, where
    The Siren waits thee, singing song for song."




