Chapter 3.



It has been commonly asserted that "Pauline" was almost wholly disregarded,
and swiftly lapsed into oblivion.

This must be accepted with qualification.  It is like
the other general assertion, that Browning had to live fifty years
before he gained recognition -- a statement as ludicrous when examined as
it is unjust to the many discreet judges who awarded, publicly and privately,
that intelligent sympathy which is the best sunshine for the flower
of a poet's genius.  If by "before he gained recognition" is meant
a general and indiscriminate acclaim, no doubt Browning had, still has indeed,
longer to wait than many other eminent writers have had to do:
but it is absurd to assert that from the very outset of his poetic career
he was met by nothing but neglect, if not scornful derision.
None who knows the true artistic temperament will fall into any such mistake.

It is quite certain that neither Shakespeare nor Milton
ever met with such enthusiastic praise and welcome as Browning encountered
on the publication of "Pauline" and "Paracelsus".  Shelley,
as far above Browning in poetic music as the author of so many
parleyings with other people's souls is the superior in
psychic insight and intellectual strength, had throughout his too brief life
not one such review of praiseful welcome as the Rev. W. J. Fox wrote
on the publication of "Pauline" (or, it may be added, as Allan Cunningham's
equally kindly but less able review in the `Athenaeum'),
or as John Forster wrote in `The Examiner' concerning "Paracelsus",
and later in the `New Monthly Magazine', where he had the courage
to say of the young and quite unknown poet, "without the slightest hesitation
we name Mr. Robert Browning at once with Shelley, Coleridge, Wordsworth."
His plays even (which are commonly said to have "fallen flat")
were certainly not failures.  There is something effeminate, undignified,
and certainly uncritical, in this confusion as to what is and what is not
failure in literature.  So enthusiastic was the applause he encountered,
indeed, that had his not been too strong a nature to be thwarted by adulation
any more than by contemptuous neglect, he might well have become spoilt --
so enthusiastic, that were it not for the heavy and prolonged
counterbalancing dead weight of public indifference, a huge amorphous mass
only of late years moulded into harmony with the keenest minds of the century,
we might well be suspicious of so much and long-continued eulogium,
and fear the same reversal of judgment towards him on the part of those
who come after us as we ourselves have meted to many an one
among the high gods of our fathers.

Fortunately the deep humanity of his work in the mass conserves it against
the mere veerings of taste.  A reaction against it will inevitably come;
but this will pass:  what, in the future, when the unborn readers of Browning
will look back with clear eyes untroubled by the dust of our footsteps,
not to subside till long after we too are dust, will be the place
given to this poet, we know not, nor can more than speculatively estimate.
That it will, however, be a high one, so far as his weightiest (in bulk,
it may possibly be but a relatively slender) accomplishment is concerned,
we may rest well assured:  for indeed "It lives, If precious be
the soul of man to man."

So far as has been ascertained there were only three reviews
or notices of "Pauline":  the very favourable article by Mr. Fox
in the `Monthly Repository', the kindly paper by Allan Cunningham
in the `Athenaeum', and, in `Tait's Edinburgh Magazine',
the succinctly expressed impression of either an indolent
or an incapable reviewer:  "Pauline; a Fragment of a Confession;
a piece of pure bewilderment" -- a "criticism" which anticipated
and thus prevented the insertion of a highly favourable review
which John Stuart Mill voluntarily wrote.

Browning must have regarded his first book with mingled feelings.
It was a bid for literary fortune, in one sense, but a bid so handicapped
by the circumstances of its publication as to be almost certainly of no avail.
Probably, however, he was well content that it should have mere existence.
Already the fever of an abnormal intellectual curiosity was upon him:
already he had schemed more potent and more vital poems:
already, even, he had developed towards a more individualistic method.
So indifferent was he to an easily gained reputation that he seems
to have been really urgent upon his relatives and intimate acquaintances
not to betray his authorship.  The Miss Flower, however,
to whom allusion has already been made, could not repress her admiration
to the extent of depriving her friend, Mr. Fox, of a pleasure
similar to that she had herself enjoyed.  The result was the generous notice
in the `Monthly Repository'.  The poet never forgot his indebtedness
to Mr. Fox, to whose sympathy and kindness much direct and indirect good
is traceable.  The friendship then begun was lifelong,
and was continued with the distinguished Unitarian's family
when Mr. Fox himself ended his active and beneficent career.

But after a time the few admirers of "Pauline" forgot to speak about it:
the poet himself never alluded to it:  and in a year or two it was almost
as though it had never been written.  Many years after, when articles
upon Robert Browning were as numerous as they once had been scarce,
never a word betrayed that their authors knew of the existence of "Pauline".
There was, however, yet another friendship to come out of this book,
though not until long after it was practically forgotten by its author.

One day a young poet-painter came upon a copy of the book
in the British Museum Library, and was at once captivated by its beauty.
One of the earliest admirers of Browning's poetry, Dante Gabriel Rossetti --
for it was he -- felt certain that "Pauline" could be by none other
than the author of "Paracelsus".  He himself informed me that he had
never heard this authorship suggested, though some one had spoken to him
of a poem of remarkable promise, called "Pauline", which he ought to read.
If I remember aright, Rossetti told me that it was on the forenoon of the day
when the "Burden of Nineveh" was begun, conceived rather,
that he read this story of a soul by the soul's ablest historian.
So delighted was he with it, and so strong his opinion it was by Browning,
that he wrote to the poet, then in Florence, for confirmation,
stating at the same time that his admiration for "Pauline" had led him
to transcribe the whole of it.

Concerning this episode, Robert Browning wrote to me, some seven years ago,
as follows: --

==
                              St. Pierre de Chartreuse,
                                             Isere, France.

     .    .    .    .    .

"Rossetti's `Pauline' letter was addressed to me at Florence
more than thirty years ago.  I have preserved it, but, even were I at home,
should be unable to find it without troublesome searching.
It was to the effect that the writer, personally and altogether unknown to me,
had come upon a poem in the British Museum, which he copied the whole of,
from its being not otherwise procurable -- that he judged it to be mine,
but could not be sure, and wished me to pronounce in the matter --
which I did.  A year or two after, I had a visit in London
from Mr. (William) Allingham and a friend -- who proved to be Rossetti.
When I heard he was a painter I insisted on calling on him,
though he declared he had nothing to show me -- which was far enough
from the case.  Subsequently, on another of my returns to London,
he painted my portrait, not, I fancy, in oils, but water-colours,
and finished it in Paris shortly after.  This must have been in the year
when Tennyson published `Maud', for I remember Tennyson reading the poem
one evening while Rossetti made a rapid pen-and-ink sketch of him, very good,
from one obscure corner of vantage, which I still possess, and duly value.
This was before Rossetti's marriage."*

--
* The highly interesting and excellent portrait of Browning here alluded to
  has never been exhibited.
--
==

As a matter of fact, as recorded on the back of the original drawing,
the eventful reading took place at 13 Dorset Street, Portman Square,
on the 27th of September 1855, and those present, besides the Poet-Laureate,
Browning, and Rossetti, were Mrs. E. Barrett Browning
and Miss Arabella Barrett.

When, a year or two ago, the poet learned that a copy of his first work,
which in 1833 could not find a dozen purchasers at a few shillings,
went at a public sale for twenty-five guineas, he remarked
that had his dear old aunt been living he could have returned to her,
much to her incredulous astonishment, no doubt, he smilingly averred,
the cost of the book's publication, less 3 Pounds 15s.
It was about the time of the publication of "Pauline"
that Browning began to see something of the literary and artistic life
for which he had such an inborn taste.  For a brief period
he went often to the British Museum, particularly the Library,
and to the National Gallery.  At the British Museum Reading Room he perused
with great industry and research those works in philosophy and medical history
which are the bases of "Paracelsus", and those Italian Records
bearing upon the story of Sordello.  Residence in Camberwell, in 1833,
rendered night engagements often impracticable:  but nevertheless
he managed to mix a good deal in congenial society.  It is not commonly known
that he was familiar to these early associates as a musician and artist
rather than as a poet.  Among them, and they comprised many well-known workers
in the several arts, were Charles Dickens and "Ion" Talfourd.
Mr. Fox, whom Browning had met once or twice in his early youth,
after the former had been shown the Byronic verses which had
in one way gratified and in another way perturbed the poet's father,
saw something more of his young friend after the publication of "Pauline".
He very kindly offered to print in his magazine any short poems
the author of that book should see fit to send -- an offer, however,
which was not put to the test for some time.

Practically simultaneously with the publication of "Pauline"
appeared another small volume, containing the "Palace of Art",
"Oenone", "Mariana", etc.  Those early books of Tennyson and Browning
have frequently, and somewhat uncritically, been contrasted.  Unquestionably,
however, the elder poet showed a consummate and continuous mastery of his art
altogether beyond the intermittent expressional power of Browning
in his most rhythmic emotion at any time of his life.  To affirm that
there is more intellectual fibre, what Rossetti called fundamental brain-work,
in the product of the younger poet, would be beside the mark.
The insistence on the supremacy of Browning over all poets since Shakespeare
because he has the highest "message" to deliver, because his intellect
is the most subtle and comprehensive, because his poems have
this or that dynamic effect upon dormant or sluggish or other active minds,
is to be seriously and energetically deprecated.  It is with presentment
that the artist has, fundamentally, to concern himself.
If he cannot PRESENT poetically then he is not, in effect, a poet,
though he may be a poetic thinker, or a great writer.  Browning's eminence
is not because of his detachment from what some one has foolishly called
"the mere handiwork, the furnisher's business, of the poet."
It is the delight of the true artist that the product of his talent
should be wrought to a high technique equally by the shaping brain
and the dexterous hand.  Browning is great because of his formative energy:
because, despite the excess of burning and compulsive thought --

    "Thoughts swarming thro' the myriad-chambered brain
    Like multitudes of bees i' the innumerous cells,
    Each staggering 'neath the undelivered freight ----"

he strikes from the FUROR of words an electric flash
so transcendently illuminative that what is commonplace
becomes radiant with that light which dwells not in nature,
but only in the visionary eye of man.  Form for the mere beauty of form,
is a playing with the wind, the acceptance of a shadow for the substance.
If nothing animate it, it may possibly be fair of aspect,
but only as the frozen smile upon a dead face.

We know little of Browning's inner or outer life in 1833 and 1834.
It was a secretive, not a productive period.  One by one
certain pinnacles of his fair snow-mountain of Titanic aim melted away.
He began to realise the first disenchantment of the artist:
the sense of dreams never to be accomplished.  That land
of the great unwritten poems, the great unpainted pictures:
what a heritance there for the enfranchised spirits of great dreamers!

In the autumn of 1833 he went forth to his University,
that of the world of men and women.  It was ever a favourite answer of his,
when asked if he had been at either Oxford or Cambridge, --
"Italy was my University."

But first he went to Russia, and spent some time in St. Petersburg,
attracted thither by the invitation of a friend.  The country interested him,
but does not seem to have deeply or permanently engaged his attention.
That, however, his Russian experiences were not fruitless is manifest
from the remarkably picturesque and technically very interesting poem,
"Ivan Ivanovitch" (the fourth of the `Dramatic Idyls', 1879).
Of a truth, after his own race and country -- readers will at once
think of "Home Thoughts from the Sea", or the thrilling lines
in "Home Thoughts from Abroad", beginning --

    "Oh, to be in England,
    Now that April's there!" --

or perhaps, those lines in his earliest work --

                        "I cherish most
    My love of England -- how, her name, a word
    Of hers in a strange tongue makes my heart beat!"

-- it was of the mystic Orient or of the glowing South
that he oftenest thought and dreamed.  With Heine he might have cried:
"O Firdusi! O Ischami! O Saadi!  How do I long after the roses of Schiraz!"
As for Italy, who of all our truest poets has not loved her:
but who has worshipped her with so manly a passion, so loyal a love,
as Browning?  One alone indeed may be mated with him here,
she who had his heart of hearts, and who lies at rest
in the old Florentine cemetery within sound of the loved waters of Arno.
Who can forget his lines in "De Gustibus", "Open my heart and you will see,
graved inside of it, Italy."

It would be no difficult task to devote a volume larger than the present one
to the descriptive analysis of none but the poems inspired by Italy,
Italian personages and history, Italian Painting, Sculpture,
Architecture, and Music.  From Porphyria and her lover to Pompilia
and all the direful Roman tragedy wherein she is as a moon of beauty
above conflicting savage tides of passion, what an unparalleled
gallery of portraits, what a brilliant phantasmagoria,
what a movement of intensest life!

It is pleasant to know of one of them, "The Italian in England",
that Browning was proud, because Mazzini told him he had read this poem
to certain of his fellow-exiles in England to show how an Englishman
could sympathise with them.

After leaving Russia the young poet spent the rest of his `Wanderjahr'
in Italy.  Among other places he visited was Asolo,
that white little hill-town of the Veneto, whence he drew hints
for "Sordello" and "Pippa Passes", and whither he returned
in the last year of his life, as with unconscious significance
he himself said, "on his way homeward."

In the summer of 1834, that is, when he was in his twenty-second year,
he returned to Camberwell.  "Sordello" he had in some fashion begun,
but had set aside for a poem which occupied him throughout
the autumn of 1834 and winter of 1835, "Paracelsus".  In this period, also,
he wrote some short poems, two of them of particular significance.
The first of the series was a sonnet, which appeared above the signature `Z'
in the August number of the `Monthly Repository' for 1834.
It was never reprinted by the author, whose judgment
it is impossible not to approve as well as to respect.
Browning never wrote a good sonnet, and this earliest effort
is not the most fortunate.  It was in the `Repository' also,
in 1835 and 1836, that the other poems appeared, four in all.

The song in "Pippa Passes", beginning "A King lived long ago,"
was one of these; and the lyric, "Still ailing, wind?
Wilt be appeased or no?" afterwards revised and incorporated in "James Lee",
was another.  But the two which are much the most noteworthy
are "Johannes Agricola" and "Porphyria".  Even more distinctively
than in "Pauline", in their novel sentiment, new method,
and generally unique quality, is a new voice audible in these two poems.
They are very remarkable as the work of so young a poet,
and are interesting as showing how rapidly he had outgrown the influence
of any other of his poetic kindred.  "Johannes Agricola" is significant
as being the first of those dramatic studies of warped religiosity,
of strange self-sophistication, which have afforded
so much matter for thought.  In its dramatic concision,
its complex psychological significance, and its unique,
if to unaccustomed ears somewhat barbaric, poetic beauty,
"Porphyria" is still more remarkable.

It may be of this time, though possibly some years later,
that Mrs. Bridell-Fox writes: --  "I remember him as looking in often
in the evenings, having just returned from his first visit to Venice.
I cannot tell the date for certain.  He was full of enthusiasm
for that Queen of Cities.  He used to illustrate his glowing descriptions
of its beauties, the palaces, the sunsets, the moonrises,
by a most original kind of etching.  Taking up a bit of stray notepaper,
he would hold it over a lighted candle, moving the paper about gently
till it was cloudily smoked over, and then utilising the darker smears
for clouds, shadows, water, or what not, would etch with a dry pen
the forms of lights on cloud and palace, on bridge or gondola
on the vague and dreamy surface he had produced.  My own passionate longing
to see Venice dates from those delightful, well-remembered evenings
of my childhood."

"Paracelsus", begun about the close of October or early in November 1834,
was published in the summer of the following year.  It is a poem
in blank verse, about four times the length of "Pauline",
with interspersed songs.  The author divided it into five sections
of unequal length, of which the third is the most extensive:
"Paracelsus Aspires"; "Paracelsus Attains"; "Paracelsus";
"Paracelsus Aspires"; "Paracelsus Attains".  In an interesting note,
which was not reprinted in later editions of his first acknowledged poem,
the author dissuades the reader from mistaking his performance
for one of a class with which it has nothing in common,
from judging it by principles on which it was not moulded,
and from subjecting it to a standard to which it was never meant to conform.
He then explains that he has composed a dramatic poem,
and not a drama in the accepted sense; that he has not set forth
the phenomena of the mind or the passions by the operation
of persons and events, or by recourse to an external machinery of incidents
to create and evolve the crisis sought to be produced.  Instead of this,
he remarks, "I have ventured to display somewhat minutely the mood itself
in its rise and progress, and have suffered the agency,
by which it is influenced and determined, to be generally discernible
in its effects alone, and subordinate throughout, if not altogether excluded:
and this for a reason.  I have endeavoured to write a poem, not a drama."
A little further, he states that a work like "Paracelsus" depends,
for its success, immediately upon the intelligence and sympathy of the reader:
"Indeed, were my scenes stars, it must be his co-operating fancy which,
supplying all chasms, shall connect the scattered lights
into one constellation -- a Lyre or a Crown."

In the concluding paragraph of this note there is a point of interest --
the statement of the author's hope that the readers of "Paracelsus" will not
"be prejudiced against other productions which may follow in a more popular,
and perhaps less difficult form."  From this it might fairly be inferred
that Browning had not definitively adopted his characteristic method:
that he was far from unwilling to gain the general ear:  and that he was alert
to the difficulties of popularisation of poetry written on lines
similar to those of "Paracelsus".  Nor would this inference be wrong:
for, as a matter of fact, the poet, immediately upon the publication
of "Paracelsus", determined to devote himself to poetic work which
should have so direct a contact with actual life that its appeal should reach
even to the most uninitiate in the mysteries and delights of verse.

In his early years Browning had always a great liking for walking in the dark.
At Camberwell he was wont to carry this love to the point of losing
many a night's rest.  There was, in particular, a wood near Dulwich,
whither he was wont to go.  There he would walk swiftly and eagerly
along the solitary and lightless byways, finding a potent stimulus
to imaginative thought in the happy isolation thus enjoyed,
with all the concurrent delights of natural things, the wind moving
like a spirit through the tree-branches, the drifting of poignant fragrances,
even in winter-tide, from herb and sappy bark, imperceptible almost
by the alertest sense in the day's manifold detachments.  At this time, too,
he composed much in the open air.  This he rarely, if ever, did in later life.
Not only many portions of "Paracelsus", but several scenes in "Strafford",
were enacted first in these midnight silences of the Dulwich woodland.  Here,
too, as the poet once declared, he came to know the serene beauty of dawn:
for every now and again, after having read late, or written long,
he would steal quietly from the house, and walk till the morning twilight
graded to the pearl and amber of the new day.

As in childhood the glow of distant London had affected him to a pleasure
that was not without pain, perhaps to a pain rather that was a fine delirium,
so in his early manhood the neighbourhood of the huge city, felt in those
midnight walks of his, and apprehended more by the transmutive shudder
of reflected glare thrown fadingly upward against the stars,
than by any more direct vision or even far-borne indeterminate hum,
dominated his imagination.  At that distance, in those circumstances,
humanity became more human.  And with the thought, the consciousness
of this imperative kinship, arose the vague desire, the high resolve
to be no curious dilettante in novel literary experiments, but to compel
an interpretative understanding of this complex human environment.

Those who knew the poet intimately are aware of the loving regard
he always had for those nocturnal experiences:  but perhaps few recognise
how much we owe to the subtle influences of that congenial isolation
he was wont to enjoy on fortunate occasions.

It is not my intention -- it would, obviously, be a futile one,
if entertained -- to attempt an analysis or elaborate criticism
of the many poems, long and short, produced by Robert Browning.
Not one volume, but several, of this size, would have to be allotted
to the adequate performance of that end.  Moreover,
if readers are unable or unwilling to be their own expositors,
there are several trustworthy hand-books which are easily procurable.
Some one, I believe, has even, with unselfish consideration
for the weaker brethren, turned "Sordello" into prose -- a superfluous task,
some scoffers may exclaim.  Personally, I cannot but think this craze
for the exposition of poetry, this passion for "dissecting a rainbow",
is harmful to the individual as well as humiliating to the high office
of Poetry itself, and not infrequently it is ludicrous.

I must be content with a few words anent the more important
or significant poems, and in due course attempt an estimate
by a broad synthesis, and not by cumulative critical analyses.

In the selection of Paracelsus as the hero of his first mature poem,
Browning was guided first of all by his keen sympathy
with the scientific spirit -- the spirit of dauntless inquiry,
of quenchless curiosity, of a searching enthusiasm.  Pietro of Abano,
Giordano Bruno, Galileo, were heroes whom he regarded with an admiration
which would have been boundless but for the wise sympathy
which enabled him to apprehend and understand their weaknesses
as well as their lofty qualities.  Once having come to the conclusion
that Paracelsus was a great and much maligned man, it was natural for him
to wish to portray aright the features he saw looming through the mists
of legend and history.  But over and above this, he half unwittingly,
half consciously, felt the fascination of that mysticism
associated with the name of the celebrated German scientist --
a mysticism, in all its various phases, of which he is now acknowledged
to be the subtlest poetic interpreter in our language,
though, profound as its attraction always was for him,
never was poet with a more exquisite balance of intellectual sanity.

Latest research has proved that whatsoever of a pretender
Paracelsus may have been in certain respects, he was unquestionably
a man of extraordinary powers:  and, as a pioneer in a science
of the first magnitude of importance, deserving of high honour.
If ever the famous German attain a high place in the history
of the modern intellectual movement in Europe, it will be primarily
due to Browning's championship.

But of course the extent or shallowness of Paracelsus' claim
is a matter of quite secondary interest.  We are concerned
with the poet's presentment of the man -- of that strange soul
whom he conceived of as having anticipated so far, and as having focussed
all the vagrant speculations of the day into one startling beam of light,
now lambently pure, now lurid with gross constituents.*

--
* Paracelsus has two particular claims upon our regard.
  He gave us laudanum, a discovery of incalculable blessing to mankind.
  And from his fourth baptismal name, which he inherited from his father,
  we have our familiar term, `bombast'.  Readers interested
  in the known facts concerning the "master-mind, the thinker,
  the explorer, the creator," the forerunner of Mesmer and even
  of Darwin and Wallace, who began life with the sounding appellation
  "Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus ab Hohenheim",
  should consult Browning's own learned appendical note,
  and Mr. Berdoe's interesting essay in the Browning Society Papers, No. 49.
--

Paracelsus, his friends Festus and his wife Michal, and Aprile,
an Italian poet, are the characters who are the personal media
through which Browning's already powerful genius found expression.
The poem is, of a kind, an epic:  the epic of a brave soul
striving against baffling circumstance.  It is full of passages
of rare technical excellence, as well as of conceptive beauty:
so full, indeed, that the sympathetic reader of it as a drama
will be too apt to overlook its radical shortcomings,
cast as it is in the dramatic mould.  But it must not be forgotten
that Browning himself distinctly stated he had attempted to write
"a poem, not a drama":  and in the light of this simple statement
half the objections that have been made fall to the ground.

Paracelsus is the protagonist:  the others are merely incidental.
The poem is the soul-history of the great medical student
who began life so brave of aspect and died so miserably at Salzburg:
but it is also the history of a typical human soul, which can be read
without any knowledge of actual particulars.

Aprile is a projection of the poet's own poetical ideal.  He speaks,
but he does not live as Festus lives, or even as Michal, who, by the way,
is interesting as being the first in the long gallery of Browning's women --
a gallery of superbly-drawn portraits, of noble and striking
and always intensely human women, unparalleled except in Shakespeare.
Pauline, of course, exists only as an abstraction, and Porphyria
is in no exact sense a portrait from the life.  Yet Michal can be revealed
only to the sympathetic eye, for she is not drawn, but again and again
suddenly silhouetted.  We see her in profile always:  but when she exclaims
at the last, "I ever did believe," we feel that she has withdrawn the veil
partially hiding her fair and generous spirit.

To the lover of poetry "Paracelsus" will always be a Golconda.
It has lines and passages of extraordinary power, of a haunting beauty,
and of a unique and exquisite charm.  It may be noted, in exemplification of
Browning's artistic range, that in the descriptive passages he paints as well
in the elaborate Pre-Raphaelite method as with a broad synthetic touch:  as in

         "One old populous green wall
    Tenanted by the ever-busy flies,
    Grey crickets and shy lizards and quick spiders,
    Each family of the silver-threaded moss --
    Which, look through near, this way, and it appears
    A stubble-field or a cane-brake, a marsh
    Of bulrush whitening in the sun. . . ."

But oftener he prefers the more succinct method of landscape-painting,
the broadest impressionism:  as in

    "Past the high rocks the haunts of doves, the mounds
    Of red earth from whose sides strange trees grow out,
    Past tracks of milk-white minute blinding sand."

And where in modern poetry is there a superber union
of the scientific and the poetic vision than in this magnificent passage --
the quintessence of the poet's conception of the rapture of life: --

    "The centre-fire heaves underneath the earth,
    And the earth changes like a human face;
    The molten ore bursts up among the rocks,
    Winds into the stone's heart, outbranches bright
    In hidden mines, spots barren river-beds,
    Crumbles into fine sand where sunbeams bask --
    God joys therein.  The wroth sea's waves are edged
    With foam, white as the bitten lip of hate,
    When in the solitary waste, strange groups
    Of young volcanoes come up, cyclops-like,
    Staring together with their eyes on flame --
    God tastes a pleasure in their uncouth pride.
    Then all is still; earth is a wintry clod:
    But Spring-wind, like a dancing psaltress, passes
    Over its breast to waken it, rare verdure
    Buds tenderly upon rough banks, between
    The withered tree-rests and the cracks of frost,
    Like a smile striving with a wrinkled face;
    The grass grows bright, the boughs are swoln with blooms
    Like chrysalids impatient for the air,
    The shining dorrs are busy, beetles run
    Along the furrows, ants make their ado;
    Above, birds fly in merry flocks, the lark
    Soars up and up, shivering for very joy;
    Afar the ocean sleeps; white fishing gulls
    Flit where the strand is purple with its tribe
    Of nested limpets; savage creatures seek
    Their loves in wood and plain -- and God renews
    His ancient rapture."

In these lines, particularly in their close, is manifest
the influence of the noble Hebraic poetry.  It must have been at this period
that Browning conned over and over with an exultant delight
the simple but lordly diction of Isaiah and the other prophets,
preferring this Biblical poetry to that even of his beloved Greeks.
There is an anecdote of his walking across a public park
(I am told Richmond, but more probably it was Wimbledon Common)
with his hat in his left hand and his right waving to and fro declamatorily,
while the wind blew his hair around his head like a nimbus:
so rapt in his ecstasy over the solemn sweep of the Biblical music that
he did not observe a small following consisting of several eager children,
expectant of thrilling stump-oratory.  He was just the man, however,
to accept an anti-climax genially, and to dismiss his disappointed auditory
with something more tangible than an address.

The poet-precursor of scientific knowledge is again and again manifest:
as, for example, in

    "Hints and previsions of which faculties
    Are strewn confusedly everywhere about
    The inferior natures, and all lead up higher,
    All shape out dimly the superior race,
    The heir of hopes too fair to turn out false,
    And man appears at last."*

--
* Readers interested in Browning's inspiration from,
  and treatment of, Science, should consult the excellent essay on him
  as "A Scientific Poet" by Mr. Edward Berdoe, F.R.C.S., and, in particular,
  compare with the originals the references given by Mr. Berdoe
  to the numerous passages bearing upon Evolution and the several sciences,
  from Astronomy to Physiology.
--

There are lines, again, which have a magic that cannot be defined.
If it be not felt, no sense of it can be conveyed through another's words.

    "Whose memories were a solace to me oft,
    As mountain-baths to wild fowls in their flight."

    "Ask the gier-eagle why she stoops at once
    Into the vast and unexplored abyss,
    What full-grown power informs her from the first,
    Why she not marvels, strenuously beating
    The silent boundless regions of the sky."

There is one passage, beautiful in itself, which has
a pathetic significance henceforth.  Gordon, our most revered hero,
was wont to declare that nothing in all nonscriptural literature
was so dear to him, nothing had so often inspired him in moments of gloom: --

                        "I go to prove my soul!
    I see my way as birds their trackless way.
    I shall arrive!  What time, what circuit first,
    I ask not:  but unless God send His hail
    Or blinding fireballs, sleet or stifling snow,
    In some time, His good time, I shall arrive:
    He guides me and the bird.  In his good time."

As for the much misused `Shakespearian' comparison, so often
mistakenly applied to Browning, there is nothing in "Paracelsus"
in the least way derivative.  Because Shakespeare is the greatest genius
evolved from our race, it does not follow that every lofty intellect,
every great objective poet, should be labelled "Shakespearian".
But there is a certain quality in poetic expression which we so specify,
because the intense humanity throbbing in it finds highest utterance
in the greatest of our poets:  and there is at least one instance
of such poignant speech in "Paracelsus", worthy almost to be ranked
with the last despairing cry of Guido calling upon murdered Pompilia: --

    "Festus, strange secrets are let out by death
    Who blabs so oft the follies of this world:
    And I am death's familiar, as you know.
    I helped a man to die, some few weeks since,
    Warped even from his go-cart to one end --
    The living on princes' smiles, reflected from
    A mighty herd of favourites.  No mean trick
    He left untried, and truly well-nigh wormed
    All traces of God's finger out of him:
    Then died, grown old.  And just an hour before,
    Having lain long with blank and soulless eyes,
    He sat up suddenly, and with natural voice
    Said that in spite of thick air and closed doors
    God told him it was June; and he knew well
    Without such telling, harebells grew in June;
    And all that kings could ever give or take
    Would not be precious as those blooms to him."

Technically, I doubt if Browning ever produced any finer long poem,
except "Pippa Passes", which is a lyrical drama, and neither exactly a `play'
nor exactly a `poem' in the conventional usage of the terms.
Artistically, "Paracelsus" is disproportionate, and has faults,
obtrusive enough to any sensitive ear:  but in the main
it has a beauty without harshness, a swiftness of thought and speech
without tumultuous pressure of ideas or stammering.  It has not,
in like degree, the intense human insight of, say, "The Inn Album",
but it has that charm of sequent excellence too rarely to be found in
many of Browning's later writings.  It glides onward like a steadfast stream,
the thought moving with the current it animates and controls,
and throbbing eagerly beneath.  When we read certain portions of "Paracelsus",
and the lovely lyrics interspersed in it, it is difficult
not to think of the poet as sometimes, in later life,
stooping like the mariner in Roscoe's beautiful sonnet,
striving to reclaim "some loved lost echo from the fleeting strand."
But it is the fleeting shore of exquisite art, not of the far-reaching
shadowy capes and promontories of "the poetic land".

Of the four interlusive lyrics the freer music is in the unique chant,
"Over the sea our galleys went":  a song full of melody and blithe lilt.
It is marvellously pictorial, and yet has a freedom that places it among
the most delightful of spontaneous lyrics: --

    "We shouted, every man of us,
    And steered right into the harbour thus,
    With pomp and paean glorious."

It is, however, too long for present quotation, and as an example
of Browning's early lyrics I select rather the rich and delicate
second of these "Paracelsus" songs, one wherein the influence of Keats
is so marked, and yet where all is the poet's own: --

    "Heap cassia, sandal-buds and stripes
     Of labdanum, and aloe-balls,
    Smeared with dull nard an Indian wipes
     From out her hair:  such balsam falls
     Down sea-side mountain pedestals,
    From tree-tops where tired winds are fain,
    Spent with the vast and howling main,
    To treasure half their island-gain.

    "And strew faint sweetness from some old
     Egyptian's fine worm-eaten shroud
    Which breaks to dust when once unrolled;
     Or shredded perfume, like a cloud
     From closet long to quiet vowed,
    With mothed and dropping arras hung,
    Mouldering her lute and books among,
    As when a queen, long dead, was young."

With this music in our ears we can well forgive some of
the prosaic commonplaces which deface "Paracelsus" -- some of those lapses
from rhythmic energy to which the poet became less and less sensitive,
till he could be so deaf to the vanishing "echo of the fleeting strand"
as to sink to the level of doggerel such as that which closes
the poem called "Popularity".

"Paracelsus" is not a great, but it is a memorable poem:
a notable achievement, indeed, for an author of Browning's years.
Well may we exclaim with Festus, when we regard the poet
in all the greatness of his maturity --

                                  "The sunrise
    Well warranted our faith in this full noon!"




