Chapter 2.

He wishes to be a poet; writes in the style of Byron and Pope;
the "Death of Harold"; his poems, written when twelve years old,
shown to Miss Flower; the Rev. W. J. Fox's criticisms on them;
he comes across Shelley's "Daemon of the World"; Mrs. Browning
procures Shelley's poems, also those of Keats, for her son;
the perusal of these volumes proves an important event
in his poetic development; he leaves school when fourteen years old,
and studies at home under a tutor; attends a few lectures
at University College, 1829-30; chooses his career, at the age of twenty;
earliest record of his utterances concerning his youthful life printed
in `Century Magazine', 1881; he plans a series of monodramatic epics;
Browning's lifework, collectively one monodramatic "epic";
Shakespeare's and Browning's methods compared; Browning writes "Pauline"
in 1832; his own criticism on it; his parents' opinions;
his aunt's generous gift; the poem published in January 1833;
description of the poem; written under the inspiring stimulus of Shelley;
its autopsychical significance; its importance to the student
of the poet's works; quotations from "Pauline".


Chapter 3.

The public reception of "Pauline"; criticisms thereupon;
Mr. Fox's notice in the `Monthly Repository', and its results;
Dante Gabriel Rossetti reads "Pauline" and writes to the author;
Browning's reference to Tennyson's reading of "Maud" in 1855;
Browning frequents literary society; reads at the British Museum;
makes the acquaintance of Charles Dickens and "Ion" Talfourd;
a volume of poems by Tennyson published simultaneously with "Pauline";
in 1833 he commences his travels; goes to Russia; the sole record
of his experiences there to be found in the poem "Ivan Ivanovitch",
published in `Dramatic Idyls', 1879; his acquaintance with Mazzini;
Browning goes to Italy; visits Asolo, whence he drew hints
for "Sordello" and "Pippa Passes"; in 1834 he returns to Camberwell;
in autumn of 1834 and winter of 1835 commences "Sordello",
writes "Paracelsus", and one or two short poems; his love for Venice;
a new voice audible in "Johannes Agricola" and "Porphyria";
"Paracelsus", published in 1835; his own explanation of it;
his love of walking in the dark; some of "Paracelsus" and of "Strafford"
composed in a wood near Dulwich; concerning "Paracelsus" and Browning's
sympathy with the scientific spirit; description and scope of the poem;
quotations therefrom; estimate of the work, and its four lyrics.


Chapter 4.

Criticisms upon "Paracelsus", important one written by John Forster;
Browning meets Macready at the house of Mr. Fox; personal description
of the poet; Macready's opinion of the poem; Browning spends
New Year's Day, 1836, at the house of the tragedian and meets John Forster;
Macready urges him to write a play; his subsequent interview
with the tragedian; he plans a drama to be entitled "Narses";
meets Wordsworth and Walter Savage Landor at a supper party,
when the young poet is toasted, and Macready again proposes
that Browning should write a play, from which arose the idea of "Strafford";
his acquaintance with Wordsworth and Landor; MS. of "Strafford" accepted;
its performance at Covent Garden Theatre on the 26th May 1837;
runs for five nights; the author's comments; the drama issued
by Messrs. Longman & Co.; the performance in 1886; estimate of "Strafford";
Browning's dramas; comparison between the Elizabethan and Victorian
dramatic eras; Browning's soul-depictive faculty; his dramatic method;
estimate of his dramas; Landor's acknowledgment of the dedication to him
of "Luria".


Chapter 5.

"Profundity" and "Simplicity"; the faculty of wonder;
Browning's first conception of "Pippa Passes"; his residence in London;
his country walks; his ways and habits, and his heart-episodes;
debates whether to become a clergyman; is "Pippa Passes" a drama?
estimate of the poem; Browning's rambles on Wimbledon Common
and in Dulwich Wood, where he composes his lines upon Shelley;
asserts there is romance in Camberwell as well as in Italy;
"Sordello"; the charge of obscurity against "Sordello";
the nature and intention of the poem; quotations therefrom;
anecdote about Douglas Jerrold; Tennyson's, Carlyle's,
and M. Odysse Barot's opinions on "Sordello"; "enigmatic" poetry;
in 1863 Browning contemplated the re-writing of "Sordello";
dedication to the French critic, Milsand.


Chapter 6.

Browning's three great dramatic poems; "The Ring and the Book"
his finest work; its uniqueness; Carlyle's criticism of it;
Poetry versus Tour-de-Force; "The Ring and the Book" begun in 1866;
analysis of the poem; kinship of "The Ring and the Book" and "Aurora Leigh";
explanation of title; the idea taken from a parchment volume
Browning picked up in Florence; the poem planned at Casa Guidi;
"O Lyric Love", etc.; description and analysis of "The Ring and the Book",
with quotations; compared as a poem with "The Inn Album", "Pauline",
"Asolando", "Men and Women", etc.; imaginary volumes,
to be entitled "Transcripts from Life" and "Flowers o' the Vine";
Browning's greatest period; Browning's primary importance.


Chapter 7.

Early life of Elizabeth Barrett Browning; born in 1820;*
the chief sorrow of her life; the Barrett family settle in London;
"The Cry of the Children" and its origin; Miss Barrett's friends;
effect on her of Browning's poetry; she makes Browning's acquaintance in 1846;
her early belief in him as a poet; her physical delicacy
and her sensitiveness of feeling; personal appearance of Robert Browning;
his "electric" hand; Elizabeth Barrett discerns his personal worth,
and is susceptible to the strong humanity of Browning's song;
Mr. Barrett's jealousy; their engagement; Miss Barrett's acquaintance
with Mrs. Jameson; quiet marriage in 1846; Mr. Barrett's resentment;
the Brownings go to Paris; thence to Italy with Mrs. Jameson;
Wordsworth's comments; residence in Pisa; "Sonnets from the Portuguese";
in the spring they go to Florence, thence to Ancona,
where "The Guardian Angel" was written; Casa Guidi;
W. W. Story's account of the rooms at Casa Guidi; perfect union.

--
* This date is a typographical error, but the date given in the text itself,
  1809, is also incorrect -- it should be 1806.  Mr. Sharp's
  lack of knowledge on this subject is understandable, however,
  as, to quote from Mrs. Orr's "Life and Letters of Robert Browning" (1891):
  "She looked much younger than her age, which [Robert Browning]
  only recently knew to have been six years beyond his own."  -- A. L., 1996.
--


