Chapter 2.



It was certainly about this time, as he admitted once
in one of his rare reminiscent moods, that Browning felt the artistic impulse
stirring within him, like the rising of the sap in a tree.
He remembered his mother's music, and hoped to be a musician:  he recollected
his father's drawings, and certain seductive landscapes and seascapes
by painters whom he had heard called "the Norwich men", and he wished
to be an artist:  then reminiscences of the Homeric lines he loved,
of haunting verse-melodies, moved him most of all.

    "I shall never, in the years remaining,
    Paint you pictures, no, nor carve you statues,
    Make you music that should all-express me:
    . . . verse alone, one life allows me."

He now gave way to the compulsive Byronic vogue, with an occasional relapse
to the polished artificialism of his father's idol among British poets.
There were several ballads written at this time:  if I remember aright,
the poet specified the "Death of Harold" as the theme of one.  Long afterwards
he read these boyish forerunners of "Over the sea our galleys went",
and "How they Brought the Good News from Ghent to Aix",
and was amused by their derivative if delicate melodies.
Mrs. Browning was very proud of these early blooms of song,
and when her twelve-year-old son, tired of vain efforts
to seduce a publisher from the wary ways of business,
surrendered in disgust his neatly copied out and carefully stitched MSS.,
she lost no opportunity -- when Mr. Browning was absent --
to expatiate upon their merits.  Among the people to whom she showed them
was a Miss Flower.  This lady took them home, perused them,
discerned dormant genius lurking behind the boyish handwriting,
read them to her sister (afterwards to become known as Sarah Flower Adams),
copied them out before returning them, and persuaded the celebrated Rev.
William Johnson Fox to read the transcripts.  Mr. Fox agreed with Miss Flower
as to the promise, but not altogether as to the actual accomplishment,
nor at all as to the advisability of publication.  The originals are supposed
to have been destroyed by the poet during the eventful period when,
owing to a fortunate gift, poetry became a new thing for him:  from a dream,
vague, if seductive, as summer-lightning, transformed to a dominating reality.
Passing a bookstall one day, he saw, in a box of second-hand volumes,
a little book advertised as "Mr. Shelley's Atheistical Poem:  very scarce."
He had never heard of Shelley, nor did he learn for a long time
that the "Daemon of the World", and the miscellaneous poems appended thereto,
constituted a literary piracy.  Badly printed, shamefully mutilated,
these discarded blossoms touched him to a new emotion.  Pope became
further removed than ever:  Byron, even, lost his magnetic supremacy.
From vague remarks in reply to his inquiries, and from one or two
casual allusions, he learned that there really was a poet called Shelley;
that he had written several volumes; that he was dead.

Strange as it may seem, Browning declared once that the news
of this unknown singer's death affected him more poignantly than did,
a year or less earlier, the tidings of Byron's heroic end at Missolonghi.
He begged his mother to procure him Shelley's works,
a request not easily complied with, for the excellent reason
that not one of the local booksellers had even heard of the poet's name.
Ultimately, however, Mrs. Browning learned that what she sought
was procurable at the Olliers' in Vere Street, London.

She was very pleased with the result of her visit.  The books, it is true,
seemed unattractive:  but they would please Robert, no doubt.
If that packet had been lost we should not have had "Pauline":  we might
have had a different Browning.  It contained most of Shelley's writings,
all in their first edition, with the exception of "The Cenci":
in addition, there were three volumes by an even less known poet, John Keats,
which kindly Mrs. Browning had been persuaded to include in her purchase
on Mr. Ollier's assurance that they were the poetic kindred
of Shelley's writings, and that Mr. Keats was the subject of the elegiac poem
in the purple paper cover, with the foreign-looking type
and the imprint "Pisa" at the foot of the title-page, entitled "Adonais".
What an evening for the young poet that must have been.  He told a friend
it was a May night, and that in a laburnum, "heavy with its weight of gold,"
and in a great copper-beech at the end of a neighbour's garden,
two nightingales strove one against the other.  For a moment
it is a pleasant fancy to imagine that there the souls of Keats and Shelley
uttered their enfranchised music, not in rivalry but in welcome.
We can realise, perhaps, something of the startled delight,
of the sudden electric tremors, of the young poet when, with eager eyes,
he turned over the pages of "Epipsychidion" or "Prometheus Unbound",
"Alastor" or "Endymion", or the Odes to a Nightingale, on Melancholy,
on a Grecian Urn.

More than once Browning alluded to this experience as his first pervasive joy,
his first free happiness in outlook.  Often in after life he was fain,
like his "wise thrush", to "recapture that first fine carefree rapture."
It was an eventful eve.

    "And suddenly, without heart-wreck, I awoke
    As from a dream."

Thenceforth his poetic development was rapid, and continuous.
Shelley enthralled him most.  The fire and spirit of the great poet's verse,
wild and strange often, but ever with an exquisiteness of music
which seemed to his admirer, then and later, supreme, thrilled him to
a very passion of delight.  Something of the more richly coloured,
the more human rhythm of Keats affected him also.  Indeed,
a line from the Ode to a Nightingale, in common with one
of the loveliest passages in "Epipsychidion", haunted him above all others:
and again and again in his poems we may encounter vague echoes
of those "remote isles" and "perilous seas" -- as, for example,
in "the dim clustered isles of the blue sea" of "Pauline",
and the "some isle, with the sea's silence on it --
some unsuspected isle in the far seas!" of "Pippa Passes".

But of course he had other matters for mental occupation besides poetry.
His education at Mr. Ready's private academy seems to have been excellent
so far as it went.  He remained there till he was fourteen.
Perhaps because of the few boarders at the school, possibly from
his own reticence in self-disclosure, he does not seem
to have impressed any school-mate deeply.  We hear of no one
who "knew Browning at school."  His best education, after all, was at home.
His father and mother incidentally taught him as much as Mr. Ready:
his love of painting and music was fostered, indirectly:
and in the `dovecot' bookshelf above the fireplace in his bedroom,
were the precious volumes within whose sway and magic was his truest life.

His father, for some reason which has not been made public,
but was doubtless excellent, and is, in the light in which we now regard it,
a matter for which to be thankful, decided to send his son
neither to a large public school, nor, later, to Oxford or Cambridge.
A more stimulative and wider training was awaiting him elsewhere.

For a time Robert's education was superintended by a tutor,
who came to the house in Camberwell for several hours daily.
The afternoons were mainly devoted to music, to exercise,
and occasionally to various experimental studies in technical science.
In the evenings, after his preparatory tasks were over,
when he was not in the entertaining company of his father,
he read and assiduously wrote.  After poetry, he cared most for history:
but as a matter of fact, little came amiss to his eager intellectual appetite.
It was a period of growth, with, it may be, a vague consciousness
that his mind was expanding towards compulsive expression.

    "So as I grew, I rudely shaped my life
    To my immediate wants, yet strong beneath
    Was a vague sense of powers folded up --
    A sense that though those shadowy times were past,
    Their spirit dwelt in me, and I should rule."

When Mr. Browning was satisfied that the tutor had fulfilled his duty
he sent his son to attend a few lectures at University College,
in Gower Street, then just founded.  Robert Browning's name
is on the registrar's books for the opening session, 1829-30.
"I attended with him the Greek class of Professor Long" (wrote a friend,
in the `Times', Dec. 14:'89), "and I well recollect the esteem and regard
in which he was held by his fellow-students.  He was then a bright,
handsome youth, with long black hair falling over his shoulders."
So short was his period of attendance, however, and so unimportant
the instruction he there derived, that to all intents it may be said
Browning had no University training.

Notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Browning but slightly appreciated
his son's poetic idols and already found himself in an opposite literary camp,
he had a profound sympathy with the boy's ideals and no little confidence
in his powers.  When the test came he acted wisely as well as with
affectionate complaisance.  In a word, he practically left the decision
as to his course of life to Robert himself.  The latter was helped thereto
by the knowledge that his sister would be provided for, and that, if need be,
there was sufficient for himself also.  There was of course
but one way open to him.  He would not have been a true poet, an artist,
if he had hesitated.  With a strange misconception of the artistic spirit,
some one has awarded the poet great credit for his choice,
because he had "the singular courage to decline to be rich."
Browning himself had nothing of this bourgeois spirit:
he was the last man to speak of an inevitable artistic decision
as "singular courage".  There are no doubt people who estimate his resolve
as Mr. Barrett, so his daughter declared, regarded Horne
when he heard of that poet having published "Orion" at a farthing:
"Perhaps he is going to shoot the Queen, and is preparing evidence
of monomania."

With Browning there never could have been two sides to the question:
it were excusable, it were natural even, had his father wavered.
The outcome of their deliberations was that Robert's further education should
be obtained from travel, and intercourse with men and foreign literatures.

By this time the poet was twenty.  His youth had been uneventful; in a sense,
more so than his boyhood.  His mind, however, was rapidly unfolding,
and great projects were casting a glory about the coming days.
It was in his nineteenth year, I have been told on good authority,
that he became ardently in love with a girl of rare beauty,
a year or two older than himself, but otherwise, possibly,
no inappropriate lover for this wooer.  Why and when this early passion
came to a close, or was rudely interrupted, is not known.
What is certain is that it made a deep impression on the poet's mind.
It may be that it, of itself, or wrought to a higher emotion
by his hunger after ideal beauty, was the source of "Pauline",
that very unequal but yet beautiful first fruit of Browning's genius.

It was not till within the last few years that the poet spoke at all freely
of his youthful life.  Perhaps the earliest record of these utterances
is that which appeared in the `Century Magazine' in 1881.
From this source, and from what the poet himself said at various times
and in various ways, we know that just about the time Balzac,
after years of apparently waste labour, was beginning to forecast
the Titanic range of the `Comedie Humaine', Browning planned
"a series of monodramatic epics, narratives of the life of typical souls --
a gigantic scheme at which a Victor Hugo or a Lope de Vega
would start back aghast."

Already he had set himself to the analysis of the human soul
in its manifold aspects, already he had recognised that for him at least
there was no other study worthy of a lifelong devotion.
In a sense he has fulfilled this early dream:  at any rate
we have a unique series of monodramatic poems, illustrative of typical souls.
In another sense, the major portion of Browning's life-work is, collectively,
one monodramatic "epic".  He is himself a type of the subtle, restless,
curious, searching modern age of which he is the profoundest interpreter.
Through a multitude of masks he, the typical soul, speaks,
and delivers himself of a message which could not be presented
emphatically enough as the utterance of a single individual.
He is a true dramatic poet, though not in the sense in which Shakespeare is.
Shakespeare and his kindred project themselves into the lives
of their imaginary personages:  Browning pays little heed to external life,
or to the exigencies of action, and projects himself
into the minds of his characters.

In a word, Shakespeare's method is to depict a human soul in action,
with all the pertinent play of circumstance, while Browning's is to portray
the processes of its mental and spiritual development:  as he said
in his dedicatory preface to "Sordello", "little else is worth study."
The one electrifies us with the outer and dominant actualities;
the other flashes upon our mental vision the inner, complex,
shaping potentialities.  The one deals with life dynamically,
the other with life as Thought.  Both methods are compassed by art.
Browning, who is above all modern writers the poet of dramatic situations,
is surpassed by many of inferior power in continuity of dramatic sequence.
His finest work is in his dramatic poems, rather than in his dramas.
He realised intensely the value of quintessential moments,
as when the Prefect in "The Return of the Druses" thrusts aside the arras,
muttering that for the first time he enters without a sense of imminent doom,
"no draught coming as from a sepulchre" saluting him,
while that moment the dagger of the assassin plunges to his heart:
or, further in the same poem, when Anael, coming to denounce Djabal
as an impostor, is overmastered by her tyrannic love, and falls dead
with the too bitter freight of her emotion, though not till
she has proclaimed him the God by her single worshipping cry, `Hakeem!' --
or, once more, in "The Ring and the Book", where, with the superbest close
of any dramatic poem in our literature, the wretched Guido,
at the point of death, cries out in the last extremity
not upon God or the Virgin, but upon his innocent and murdered wife --
"Abate, -- Cardinal, -- Christ, -- Maria, -- God, . . .
Pompilia, will you let them murder me?"  Thus we can imagine Browning,
with his characteristic perception of the profound significance
of a circumstance or a single word even, having written of the knocking
at the door in "Macbeth", or having used, with all its marvellous
cumulative effect, the word `wrought' towards the close of "Othello",
when the Moor cries in his bitterness of soul, "But being wrought,
perplext in the extreme":  we can imagine this, and yet could not credit
the suggestion that even the author of "The Ring and the Book"
could by any possibility have composed the two most moving tragedies
writ in our tongue.

In the late autumn of 1832 Browning wrote a poem of singular
promise and beauty, though immature in thought and crude in expression.*
Thirty-four years later he included "Pauline" in his "Poetical Works"
with reluctance, and in a note explained the reason of his decision --
namely, to forestall piratical reprints abroad.  "The thing was
my earliest attempt at `poetry always dramatic in principle,
and so many utterances of so many imaginative persons, not mine,'
which I have since written according to a scheme less extravagant,
and scale less impracticable, than were ventured upon
in this crude preliminary sketch -- a sketch that, on reviewal,
appears not altogether wide of some hint of the characteristic features
of that particular `dramatis persona' it would fain have reproduced:
good draughtsmanship, however, and right handling were far beyond the artist
at that time."  These be hard words.  No critic will ever adventure upon
so severe a censure of "Pauline":  most capable judges agree that,
with all its shortcomings, it is a work of genius, and therefore
ever to be held treasurable for its own sake as well as for its significance.

--
* Probably from the fact of "Richmond" having been added
  to the date at the end of the preface to "Pauline",
  have arisen the frequent misstatements as to the Browning family
  having moved west from Camberwell in or shortly before 1832.
  Mr. R. Barrett Browning tells me that his father "never lived at Richmond,
  and that that place was connected with `Pauline', when first printed,
  as a mystification."
--

On the fly-leaf of a copy of this initial work, the poet,
six years after its publication, wrote:  "Written in pursuance
of a foolish plan I forget, or have no wish to remember;
the world was never to guess that such an opera, such a comedy,
such a speech proceeded from the same notable person. . . .
Only this crab remains of the shapely Tree of Life in my fool's Paradise."
It was in conformity with this plan that he not only
issued "Pauline" anonymously, but enjoined secrecy upon those
to whom he communicated the fact of his authorship.

When he read the poem to his parents, upon its conclusion,
both were much impressed by it, though his father made severe strictures upon
its lack of polish, its terminal inconcision, and its vagueness of thought.
That he was not more severe was accepted by his son as high praise.
The author had, however, little hope of seeing it in print.
Mr. Browning was not anxious to provide a publisher with a present.
So one day the poet was gratified when his aunt, handing him
the requisite sum, remarked that she had heard he had written a fine poem,
and that she wished to have the pleasure of seeing it in print.

To this kindly act much was due.  Browning, of course, could not now
have been dissuaded from the career he had forecast for himself,
but his progress might have been retarded or thwarted
to less fortunate grooves, had it not been for the circumstances
resultant from his aunt's timely gift.

The MS. was forthwith taken to Saunders & Otley, of Conduit Street,
and the little volume of seventy pages of blank verse, comprising only
a thousand and thirty lines, was issued by them in January 1833.
It seems to us, who read it now, so manifestly a work of exceptional promise,
and, to a certain extent, of high accomplishment, that were it not
for the fact that the public auditory for a new poet
is ever extraordinarily limited, it would be difficult to understand
how it could have been overlooked.

"Pauline" has a unique significance because of its autopsychical hints.
The Browning whom we all know, as well as the youthful dreamer,
is here revealed; here too, as well as the disciple of Shelley,
we have the author of "The Ring and the Book".  In it the long series
culminating in "Asolando" is foreshadowed, as the oak is observable
in the sapling.  The poem is prefaced by a Latin motto from
the `Occult Philosophy' of Cornelius Agrippa, and has also a note in French,
set forth as being by Pauline, and appended to her lover's manuscript
after his death.  Probably Browning placed it in the mouth of Pauline
from his rooted determination to speak dramatically and impersonally:
and in French, so as to heighten the effect of verisimilitude.*

--
* "I much fear that my poor friend will not be always perfectly understood
  in what remains to be read of this strange fragment,
  but it is less calculated than any other part to explain
  what of its nature can never be anything but dream and confusion.
  I do not know, moreover, whether in striving at a better connection
  of certain parts, one would not run the risk of detracting from
  the only merit to which so singular a production can pretend --
  that of giving a tolerably precise idea of the manner (genre)
  which it can merely indicate.  This unpretending opening,
  this stir of passion, which first increases, and then gradually subsides,
  these transports of the soul, this sudden return upon himself,
  and above all, my friend's quite peculiar turn of mind,
  have made alterations almost impossible.  The reasons which
  he elsewhere asserts, and others still more cogent, have secured
  my indulgence for this paper, which otherwise I should have advised him
  to throw into the fire.  I believe none the less in the great principle
  of all composition -- in that principle of Shakespeare, of Raphael,
  and of Beethoven, according to which concentration of ideas
  is due much more to their conception than to their execution;
  I have every reason to fear that the first of these qualities
  is still foreign to my friend, and I much doubt whether redoubled labour
  would enable him to acquire the second.  It would be best to burn this,
  but what can I do?"  -- (Mrs. Orr.)
--

"Pauline" is a confession, fragmentary in detail but synthetic in range,
of a young man of high impulses but weak determination.
In its over-emphasis upon errors of judgment, as well as upon
real if exaggerated misdeeds, it has all the crudeness of youth.
An almost fantastic self-consciousness is the central motive:
it is a matter of question if this be absolutely vicarious.
To me it seems that the author himself was at the time confused
by the complicated flashing of the lights of life.

The autobiographical and autopsychical lines and passages
scattered through the poem are of immediate interest.
Generously the poet repays his debt to Shelley, whom he apostrophises
as "Sun-treader", and invokes in strains of lofty emotion --
"Sun-treader -- life and light be thine for ever."  The music of "Alastor",
indeed, is audible ever and again throughout "Pauline".
None the less is there a new music, a new poetic voice, in

    "Thou wilt remember one warm morn, when Winter
    Crept aged from the earth, and Spring's first breath
    Blew soft from the moist hills -- the black-thorn boughs,
    So dark in the bare wood, when glistening
    In the sunshine were white with coming buds,
    Like the bright side of a sorrow -- and the banks
    Had violets opening from sleep like eyes."

If we have an imaginary Browning, a Shelleyan phantasm, in

    "I seemed the fate from which I fled; I felt
    A strange delight in causing my decay;
    I was a fiend, in darkness chained for ever
    Within some ocean-wave:"

we have the real Browning in

    "So I will sing on -- fast as fancies come
    Rudely -- the verse being as the mood it paints.
         .    .    .    .    .
    I am made up of an intensest life,"

and all the succeeding lines down to "Their spirit dwelt in me,
and I should rule."

Even then the poet's inner life was animated by his love
of the beautiful Greek literature.  Telling how in "the first dawn of life,"
"which passed alone with wisest ancient books," Pauline's lover
incorporated himself in whatsoever he read -- was the god wandering
after beauty, the giant standing vast against the sunset-light,
the high-crested chief sailing with troops of friends to Tenedos --
his second-self cries, "I tell you, nought has ever been so clear
as the place, the time, the fashion of those lives."  Never for him,
then, had there been that alchemy of the soul which turns
the inchoate drift of the world into golden ore, not then had come to him
the electric awakening flash from "work of lofty art, nor woman's beauty,
nor sweet nature's face" --

    "Yet, I say, never morn broke clear as those
    On the dim clustered isles in the blue sea:
    The deep groves, and white temples, and wet caves --
    And nothing ever will surprise me now --
    Who stood beside the naked Swift-footed,
    Who bound my forehead with Proserpine's hair."

Further, the allusion to Plato, and the more remote one to Agamemnon, the

                                  "old lore
    Loved for itself, and all it shows -- the King
    Treading the purple calmly to his death,"

and the beautiful Andromeda passage, afford ample indication
of how deeply Browning had drunk of that vital stream
whose waters are the surest conserver of the ideal loveliness
which we all of us, in some degree, cherish in various guises.

Yet, as in every long poem that he has written (and, it must be admitted,
in too many of the shorter pieces of his later period)
there is an alloy of prose, of something that is not poetry,
so in "Pauline", written though it was in the first flush of his genius
and under the inspiring stimulus of Shelley, the reader encounters
prosaic passages, decasyllabically arranged.  "'Twas in my plan
to look on real life, which was all new to me; my theories were firm,
so I left them, to look upon men, and their cares, and hopes,
and fears, and joys; and, as I pondered on them all,
I sought how best life's end might be attained, an end comprising every joy."
Again:  "Then came a pause, and long restraint chained down my soul,
till it was changed.  I lost myself, and were it not
that I so loathe that time, I could recall how first I learned
to turn my mind against itself . . . at length I was restored,
yet long the influence remained; and nought but the still life I led,
apart from all, which left my soul to seek its old delights,
could e'er have brought me thus far back to peace."  No reader,
alert to the subtle and haunting music of rarefied blank verse
(and unless it be rarefied it should not be put forward as poetry),
could possibly accept these lines as expressionally poetical.
It would seem as though, from the first, Browning's ear was keener
for the apprehension than for the sustained evocation of the music of verse.
Some flaw there was, somewhere.  His heart, so to say, beat too fast,
and the singing in his ears from the o'er-fevered blood
confused the serene rhythm haunting the far perspectives of the brain,
"as Arab birds float sleeping in the wind."

I have dwelt at this length upon "Pauline" partly because
of its inherent beauty and autopsychical significance,
and partly because it is the least familiar of Browning's poems,
long overshadowed as it has been by his own too severe strictures:
mainly, however, because of its radical importance to the student
who would arrive at a broad and true estimate of the power and scope
and shaping constituents of its author's genius.  Almost every quality
of his after-verse may be found here, in germ or outline.
It is, in a word, more physiognomic than any other single poem by Browning,
and so must ever possess a peculiar interest quite apart
from its many passages of haunting beauty.

To these the lover of poetry will always turn with delight.
Some will even regard them retrospectively with alien emotion
to that wherewith they strive to possess their souls in patience
over some one or other of the barbarisms, the Titanic excesses,
the poetic banalities recurrent in the later volumes.

How many and how haunting these delicate oases are!
Those who know and love "Pauline" will remember the passage where the poet,
with that pantheistic ecstasy which was possibly inspired
by the singer he most loved, tells how he can live the life of plants,
content to watch the wild bees flitting to and fro, or to lie
absorbent of the ardours of the sun, or, like the night-flowering columbine,
to trail up the tree-trunk and through its rustling foliage
"look for the dim stars;" or, again, can live the life of the bird,
"leaping airily his pyramid of leaves and twisted boughs of some
tall mountain-tree;" or be a fish, breathing the morning air in the misty
sun-warm water.  Close following this is another memorable passage,
that beginning "Night, and one single ridge of narrow path;"
which has a particular interest for two notes of a deeper and broader music
to be evolved long afterwards.  For, as it seems to me, in

    "Thou art so close by me, the roughest swell
    Of wind in the tree-tops hides not the panting
    Of thy soft breasts ----"

(where, by the way, should be noticed the subtle correspondence
between the conceptive and the expressional rhythm) we have a hint
of that superb scene in "Pippa Passes", where, on a sinister night of July,
a night of spiritual storm as well as of aerial tempest,
Ottima and Sebald lie amid the lightning-searcht forest,
with "the thunder like a whole sea overhead."  Again,
in the lovely Turneresque, or rather Shelleyan picture of morning,
over "the rocks, and valleys, and old woods," with the high boughs
swinging in the wind above the sun-brightened mists,
and the golden-coloured spray of the cataract amid the broken rocks,
whereover the wild hawks fly to and fro, there is at least a suggestion,
an outline, of the truly magnificent burst of morning music
in the poet's penultimate volume, beginning --

    "But morning's laugh sets all the crags alight
    Above the baffled tempest:  tree and tree
    Stir themselves from the stupor of the night,
    And every strangled branch resumes its right
    To breathe, shakes loose dark's clinging dregs, waves free
    In dripping glory.  Prone the runnels plunge,
    While earth, distent with moisture like a sponge,
    Smokes up, and leaves each plant its gem to see,
    Each grass-blade's glory-glitter," etc.

Who that has ever read "Pauline" will forget the masterful poetry
descriptive of the lover's wild-wood retreat, the exquisite lines beginning
"Walled in with a sloped mound of matted shrubs, tangled, old and green"?
There is indeed a new, an unmistakable voice here.

    "And tongues of bank go shelving in the waters,
    Where the pale-throated snake reclines his head,
    And old grey stones lie making eddies there;
    The wild mice cross them dry-shod" . . . .

What lovelier image in modern poetry than that depictive of the forest-pool in
depths of savage woodlands, unvisited but by the shadows of passing clouds, --

                   "the trees bend
    O'er it as wild men watch a sleeping girl."

How the passionate sexual emotion, always deep and true in Browning,
finds lovely utterance in the lines where Pauline's lover
speaks of the blood in her lips pulsing like a living thing,
while her neck is as "marble misted o'er with love-breath," and

    ". . . her delicious eyes as clear as heaven,
    When rain in a quick shower has beat down mist,
    And clouds float white in the sun like broods of swans."

In the quotations I have made, and in others that might be selected
(e.g., "Her fresh eyes, and soft hair, and `lips which bleed like
a mountain berry'"), it is easy to note how intimate an observer of nature
the youthful poet was, and with what conscious but not obtrusive art
he brings forward his new and striking imagery.  Browning, indeed,
is the poet of new symbols.

"Pauline" concludes with lines which must have been in the minds of many
on that sad day when the tidings from Venice sent a thrill of startled,
half-incredulous, bewildered pain throughout the English nations --

    "Sun-treader, I believe in God, and truth,
    And love; . . .
    . . . but chiefly when I die . . .
    All in whom this wakes pleasant thoughts of me,
    Know my last state is happy -- free from doubt,
    Or touch of fear."

Never again was Browning to write a poem with such conceptive crudeness,
never again to tread the byways of thought so falteringly or so negligently:
but never again, perhaps, was he to show so much over-rapturing joy
in the world's loveliness, such Bacchic abandon to the ideal beauty
which the true poet sees glowing upon the forlornest height and brooding
in the shadow-haunted hollows of the hills.  The Browning who might have been
is here:  henceforth the Browning we know and love stands unique
among all the lords of song.  But sometimes do we not turn longingly,
wonderingly at least, to the young Dionysos upon whose forehead
was the light of another destiny than that which descended upon him?
The Icelanders say there is a land where all the rainbows that have ever been,
or are yet to be, forever drift to and fro, evanishing and reappearing,
like immortal flowers of vapour.  In that far country, it may be,
are also the unfulfilled dreams, the visions too perfect
to be fashioned into song, of the young poets who have gained the laurel.

We close the little book lovingly:

    "And I had dimly shaped my first attempt,
    And many a thought did I build up on thought,
    As the wild bee hangs cell to cell -- in vain;
    For I must still go on:  my mind rests not."




