Chapter 9.



It is needless to dwell upon what followed.  The world has all
that need be known.  To Browning himself it was the abrupt,
the too deeply pathetic, yet not wholly unhappy ending of a lovelier poem
than any he or another should ever write, the poem of their married life.

There is a rare serenity in the thought of death when it is known to be
the gate of life.  This conviction Browning had, and so his grief
was rather that of one whose joy has westered earlier.
The sweetest music of his life had withdrawn:  but there was still music
for one to whom life in itself was a happiness.  He had his son,
and was not void of other solace:  but even had it been otherwise
he was of the strenuous natures who never succumb, nor wish to die --
whatever accident of mortality overcome the will and the power.

It was in the autumn following his wife's death that he wrote
the noble poem to which allusion has already been made:  "Prospice".
Who does not thrill to its close, when all of gloom or terror

    "Shall change, shall become first a peace out of pain,
            Then a light, then thy breast,
    O thou soul of my soul!  I shall clasp thee again,
            And with God be the rest."

There are few direct allusions to his wife in Browning's poems.
Of those prior to her death the most beautiful is "One Word More",
which has been already quoted in part:  of the two or three
subsequent to that event none surpasses the magic close
of the first part of "The Ring and the Book".

Thereafter the details of his life are public property.
He all along lived in the light, partly from his possession of that serenity
which made Goethe glad to be alive and to be able to make others
share in that gladness.  No poet has been more revered and more loved.
His personality will long be a stirring tradition.  In the presence
of his simple manliness and wealth of all generous qualities
one is inclined to pass by as valueless, as the mere flying spray
of the welcome shower, the many honours and gratifications that befell him.
Even if these things mattered, concerning one by whose genius
we are fascinated, while undazzled by the mere accidents pertinent thereto,
their recital would be wearisome -- of how he was asked
to be Lord Rector of this University, or made a doctor of laws at that:
of how letters and tributes of all kinds came to him from every district
in our Empire, from every country in the world:  and so forth.
All these things are implied in the circumstance that his life was throughout
"a noble music with a golden ending."

In 1866 his father died in Paris, strenuous in life until the very end.
After this event Miss Sarianna Browning went to reside with her brother,
and from that time onward was his inseparable companion,
and ever one of the dearest and most helpful of friends.
In latter years brother and sister were constantly seen together,
and so regular attendants were they at such functions as the "Private Views"
at the Royal Academy and Grosvenor Gallery, that these never seemed complete
without them.  A Private View, a first appearance of Joachim or Sarasate,
a first concert of Richter or Henschel or Halle, at each of these,
almost to a certainty, the poet was sure to appear.
The chief personal happiness of his later life was in his son.
Mr. R. Barrett Browning is so well known as a painter and sculptor
that it would be superfluous for me to add anything further here,
except to state that his successes were his father's keenest pleasures.

Two years after his father's death, that is in 1868,
the "Poetical Works of Robert Browning, M.A., Honorary Fellow
of Balliol College, Oxford", were issued in six volumes.
Here the equator of Browning's genius may be drawn.  On the further side
lie the "Men and Women" of the period anterior to "The Ring and the Book":
midway is the transitional zone itself:  on the hither side
are the "Men and Women" of a more temperate if not colder clime.

The first part of "The Ring and the Book" was not published till November.
In September the poet was staying with his sister and son at Le Croisic,
a picturesque village at the mouth of the Loire, at the end of
the great salt plains which stretch down from Guerande to the Bay of Biscay.
No doubt, in lying on the sand-dunes in the golden September glow,
in looking upon the there somewhat turbid current of the Loire,
the poet brooded on those days when he saw its inland waters
with her who was with him no longer save in dreams and memories.
Here he wrote that stirring poem, "Herve Riel", founded upon
the valorous action of a French sailor who frustrated
the naval might of England, and claimed nothing as a reward
save permission to have a holiday on land to spend a few hours with his wife,
"la belle Aurore".  "Herve Riel" (which has been translated into French,
and is often recited, particularly in the maritime towns,
and is always evocative of enthusiastic applause) is one of Browning's
finest action-lyrics, and is assured of the same immortality
as "How they brought the Good News from Ghent to Aix",
or the "Pied Piper" himself.

In 1872 there was practical proof of the poet's growing popularity.
Baron Tauchnitz issued two volumes of excellently selected poems,
comprising some of the best of "Men and Women", "Dramatis Personae",
and "Dramatic Romances", besides the longer "Soul's Tragedy",
"Luria", "In a Balcony", and "Christmas Eve and Easter Day" --
the most Christian poem of the century, according to one eminent cleric,
the heterodox self-sophistication of a free-thinker, according to another:
really, the reflex of a great crisis, that of the first movement
of the tide of religious thought to a practically limitless freedom.
This edition also contained "Bishop Blougram", then much discussed,
apart from its poetic and intellectual worth, on account of
its supposed verisimilitude in portraiture of Cardinal Wiseman.
This composition, one of Browning's most characteristic, is so clever
that it is scarcely a poem.  Poetry and Cleverness do not well agree,
the muse being already united in perfect marriage to Imagination.
In his Essay on Truth, Bacon says that one of the Fathers
called poetry `Vinum Daemonum', because it filleth the imagination.
Certainly if it be not `vinum daemonum' it is not Poetry.

In this year also appeared the first series of "Selections"
by the poet's latest publishers:  "Dedicated to Alfred Tennyson.
In Poetry -- illustrious and consummate:  In Friendship -- noble and sincere."
It was in his preface to this selection that he wrote the often-quoted words:
"Nor do I apprehend any more charges of being wilfully obscure,
unconscientiously careless, or perversely harsh."  At or about
the date of these "Selections" the poet wrote to a friend,
on this very point of obscurity, "I can have little doubt that my writing
has been in the main too hard for many I should have been pleased
to communicate with; but I never designedly tried to puzzle people,
as some of my critics have supposed.  On the other hand,
I never pretended to offer such literature as should be
a substitute for a cigar or a game at dominoes to an idle man.
So perhaps, on the whole, I get my deserts, and something over --
not a crowd, but a few I value more."

In 1877 Browning, ever restless for pastures new, went with his sister
to spend the autumn at La Saisiaz (Savoyard for "the sun"),
a villa among the mountains near Geneva; this time with the additional company
of Miss Anne Egerton Smith, an intimate and valued friend.
But there was an unhappy close to the holiday.  Miss Smith died
on the night of the fourteenth of September, from heart complaint.
"La Saisiaz" is the direct outcome of this incident,
and is one of the most beautiful of Browning's later poems.
Its trochaics move with a tide-like sound.

At the close, there is a line which might stand as epitaph for the poet --

    "He, at least, believed in Soul, was very sure of God."

In the following year "La Saisiaz" was published along with
"The Two Poets of Croisic", which was begun and partly written
at the little French village ten years previously.
There is nothing of the eight-score stanzas of the "Two Poets"
to equal its delightful epilogue, or the exquisite prefatory lyric,
beginning

    "Such a starved bank of moss
     Till that May-morn
    Blue ran the flash across:
     Violets were born."

Extremely interesting -- and for myself I cannot find
"The Two Poets of Croisic" to be anything more than "interesting" --
it is as a poem distinctly inferior to "La Saisiaz".
Although detached lines are often far from truly indicative
of the real poetic status of a long poem, where proportion and harmony
are of more importance than casual exfoliations of beauty,
yet to a certain extent they do serve as musical keys
that give the fundamental tone.  One certainly would have to search in vain
to find in the Croisic poem such lines as

    "Five short days, scarce enough to
    Bronze the clustered wilding apple, redden ripe the mountain ash."

Or these of Mont Blanc, seen at sunset, towering over
icy pinnacles and teeth-like peaks,

    "Blanc, supreme above his earth-brood, needles red and white and green,
    Horns of silver, fangs of crystal set on edge in his demesne."

Or, again, this of the sun swinging himself above the dark shoulder of Jura --

    "Gay he hails her, and magnific, thrilled her black length burns to gold."

Or, finally, this sounding verse --

    "Past the city's congregated peace of homes and pomp of spires."

The other poems later than "The Ring and the Book" are, broadly speaking,
of two kinds.  On the one side may be ranged the groups which really cohere
with "Men and Women".  These are "The Inn Album", the miscellaneous poems
of the "Pacchiarotto" volume, the "Dramatic Idyls", some of "Jocoseria",
and some of "Asolando".  "Ferishtah's Fancies" and "Parleyings" are not,
collectively, dramatic poems, but poems of illuminative insight guided by
a dramatic imagination.*  They, and the classical poems and translations
(renderings, rather, by one whose own individuality dominates them
to the exclusion of that NEARNESS of the original author,
which it should be the primary aim of the translator to evoke),
the beautiful "Balaustion's Adventure", "Aristophanes' Apology",
and "The Agamemnon of Aeschylus", and the third group,
which comprises "Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau", "Red Cotton Nightcap Country",
and "Fifine at the Fair" -- these three groups are of the second kind.

--
* In a letter to a friend, Browning wrote: --  "I hope and believe
  that one or two careful readings of the Poem [Ferishtah's Fancies]
  will make its sense clear enough.  Above all, pray allow
  for the Poet's inventiveness in any case, and do not suppose
  there is more than a thin disguise of a few Persian names and allusions.
  There was no such person as Ferishtah -- the stories are all inventions.
  . . .  The Hebrew quotations are put in for a purpose,
  as a direct acknowledgment that certain doctrines may be found
  in the Old Book, which the Concocters of Novel Schemes of Morality
  put forth as discoveries of their own."
--

Remarkable as are the three last-named productions, it is extremely doubtful
if the first and second will be read for pleasure by readers born
after the close of this century.  As it is impossible, in my narrow limits,
to go into any detail about poems which personally I do not regard
as essential to the truest understanding of Browning, the truest because
on the highest level, that of poetry -- as distinct from dogma,
or intellectual suasion of any kind that might, for all its aesthetic charm,
be in prose -- it would be presumptuous to assert anything derogatory of them
without attempting adequate substantiation.  I can, therefore,
merely state my own opinion.  To reiterate, it is that, for different reasons,
these three long poems are foredoomed to oblivion -- not, of course,
to be lost to the student of our literature and of our age,
a more wonderful one even than that of the Renaissance,
but to lapse from the general regard.  That each will for a long time find
appreciative readers is certain.  They have a fascination for alert minds,
and they have not infrequent ramifications which are worth pursuing
for the glimpses afforded into an always evanishing Promised Land.
"Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau" (the name, by the way,
is not purely fanciful, being formed from Hohen Schwangau,
one of the castles of the late King of Bavaria) is Browning's complement
to his wife's "Ode to Napoleon III."  "Red Cotton Nightcap Country"
is a true story, the narrative of the circumstances pertinent to
the tragic death of one Antonio Mellerio, a Paris jeweller,
which occurred in 1870 at St. Aubin in Normandy, where, indeed,
the poet first heard of it in all its details.  It is a story which,
if the method of poetry and the method of prose could for a moment
be accepted as equivalent, might be said to be of the school
of a light and humorously grotesque Zola.  It has the fundamental weakness
of "The Ring and the Book" -- the weakness of an inadequate ethical basis.
It is, indeed, to that great work what a second-rate novelette is
to a masterpiece of fiction.

"Fifine at the Fair", on the other hand, is so powerful
and often so beautiful a poem that one would be rash indeed were he,
with the blithe critical assurance which is so generally snuffed out
like a useless candle by a later generation, to prognosticate
its inevitable seclusion from the high place it at present occupies
in the estimate of the poet's most uncompromising admirers.
But surely equally rash is the assertion that it will be
the "poem of the future".  However, our concern is not
with problematical estimates, but with the poem as it appears to US.
It is one of the most characteristic of Browning's productions.
It would be impossible for the most indolent reader or critic to attribute it,
even if anonymous, to another parentage.  Coleridge alludes somewhere
to certain verses of Wordsworth's, with the declaration that if he
had met them howling in the desert he would have recognised their authorship.
"Fifine" would not even have to howl.

Browning was visiting Pornic one autumn, when he saw the gipsy
who was the original of "Fifine".  In the words of Mrs. Orr,
"his fancy was evidently set roaming by the gipsy's audacity, her strength --
the contrast which she presented to the more spiritual types of womanhood;
and this contrast eventually found expression in a pathetic theory of life,
in which these opposite types and their corresponding modes of attraction
became the necessary complement of each other.  As he laid down the theory,
Mr. Browning would be speaking in his own person.  But he would turn
into some one else in the act of working it out -- for it insensibly
carried with it a plea for yielding to those opposite attractions,
not only successively, but at the same time; and a modified Don Juan
would grow up under his pen."

One drawback to an unconditional enjoyment of Balzac
is that every now and again the student of the `Comedie Humaine'
resents the too obvious display of the forces that propel the effect --
a lesser phase of the weariness which ensues upon much reading
of the mere "human documents" of the Goncourt school of novelists.
In the same way, we too often see Browning working up
the electrical qualities, so that, when the fulmination comes,
we understand "just how it was produced," and, as illogically as children
before a too elaborate conjurer, conclude that there is not so much
in this particular poetic feat as in others which, like Herrick's maids,
continually do deceive.  To me this is affirmable of "Fifine at the Fair".
The poet seems to know so very well what he is doing.
If he did not take the reader so much into his confidence,
if he would rely more upon the liberal grace of his earlier verse
and less upon the trained subtlety of his athletic intellect,
the charm would be the greater.  The poem would have
a surer duration as one of the author's greater achievements,
if there were more frequent and more prolonged insistence
on the note struck in the lines (Section 73) about the hill-stream,
infant of mist and dew, falling over the ledge of the fissured cliff
to find its fate in smoke below, as it disappears into the deep,
"embittered evermore, to make the sea one drop more big thereby:"
or in the cloudy splendour of the description of nightfall (Section 106):
or in the windy spring freshness of

    "Hence, when the earth began afresh its life in May,
    And fruit-trees bloomed, and waves would wanton, and the bay
    Ruffle its wealth of weed, and stranger-birds arrive,
    And beasts take each a mate." . . .

But its chief fault seems to me to be its lack of that transmutive
glow of rhythmic emotion without which no poem can endure.
This rhythmic energy is, inherently, a distinct thing
from intellectual emotion.  Metric music may be alien
to the adequate expression of the latter, whereas rhythmic emotion
can have no other appropriate issue.  Of course, in a sense,
all creative art is rhythmic in kind:  but here I am speaking
only of that creative energy which evolves the germinal idea
through the medium of language.  The energy of the intellect
under creative stimulus may produce lordly issues in prose:
but poetry of a high intellectual order can be the outcome
only of an intellect fused to white heat, of intellectual emotion on fire --
as, in the fine saying of George Meredith, passion is noble strength on fire.
Innumerable examples could be taken from any part of the poem,
but as it would not be just to select the most obviously defective passages,
here are two which are certainly fairly representative of the general level --

    "And I became aware, scarcely the word escaped my lips,
    that swift ensued in silence and by stealth, and yet with certitude,
    a formidable change of the amphitheatre which held the Carnival;
    ALTHOUGH THE HUMAN STIR CONTINUED JUST THE SAME
    AMID THAT SHIFT OF SCENE."  (No. 105)

    "And where i' the world is all this wonder, you detail so trippingly,
    espied?  My mirror would reflect a tall, thin, pale, deep-eyed personage,
    pretty once, it may be, doubtless still loving -- a certain grace
    yet lingers if you will -- but all this wonder, where?"  (No. 40)

Here, and in a hundred other such passages, we have the rhythm,
if not of the best prose, at least not that of poetry.
Will "Fifine" and poems of its kind stand re-reading,
re-perusal over and over?  That is one of the most definite tests.
In the pressure of life can we afford much time to anything but the very best
-- nay, to the vast mass even of that which closely impinges thereupon?

For myself, in the instance of "Fifine", I admit that if re-perusal
be controlled by pleasure I am content (always excepting
a few scattered noble passages) with the Prologue and Epilogue.
A little volume of those Summaries of Browning's -- how stimulating
a companion it would be in those hours when the mind
would fain breathe a more liberal air!

As for "Jocoseria",* it seems to me the poorest of Browning's works,
and I cannot help thinking that ultimately the only gold grain discoverable
therein will be "Ixion", the beautiful penultimate poem beginning --

    "Never the time and the place
        And the loved one altogether;"

and the thrush-like overture, closing --

    "What of the leafage, what of the flower?
    Roses embowering with nought they embower!
    Come then! complete incompletion, O comer,
    Pant through the blueness, perfect the summer!
          Breathe but one breath
          Rose-beauty above,
          And all that was death
          Grows life, grows love,
              Grows love!"

--
* In a letter to a friend, along with an early copy of this book,
  Browning stated that "the title is taken from the work
  of Melander (`Schwartzmann'), reviewed, by a curious coincidence,
  in the `Blackwood' of this month.  I referred to it
  in a note to `Paracelsus'.  The two Hebrew quotations
  (put in to give a grave look to what is mere fun and invention)
  being translated amount to (1) `A Collection of Many Lies':
  and (2), an old saying, `From Moses to Moses arose none like Moses' . . . ."
--

In 1881 the "Browning Society" was established.  It is easy to ridicule
any institution of the kind -- much easier than to be considerate of
other people's earnest convictions and aims, or to be helpful to their object.
There is always a ridiculous side to excessive enthusiasm,
particularly obvious to persons incapable of enthusiasm of any kind.
With some mistakes, and not a few more or less grotesque absurdities,
the members of the various English and American Browning Societies are yet
to be congratulated on the good work they have, collectively, accomplished.
Their publications are most interesting and suggestive:
ultimately they will be invaluable.  The members have also done a good work
in causing some of Browning's plays to be produced again on the stage,
and in Miss Alma Murray and others have found sympathetic and able exponents
of some of the poet's most attractive `dramatis personae'.
There can be no question as to the powerful impetus given by the Society
to Browning's steadily-increasing popularity.  Nothing shows
his judicious good sense more than the letter he wrote, privately,
to Mr. Edmund Yates, at the time of the Society's foundation.

==
"The Browning Society, I need not say, as well as Browning himself,
are fair game for criticism.  I had no more to do with the founding it
than the babe unborn; and, as Wilkes was no Wilkeite, I am quite other
than a Browningite.  But I cannot wish harm to a society of,
with a few exceptions, names unknown to me, who are busied about my books
so disinterestedly.  The exaggerations probably come of the fifty-years'-long
charge of unintelligibility against my books; such reactions are possible,
though I never looked for the beginning of one so soon.
That there is a grotesque side to the thing is certain;
but I have been surprised and touched by what cannot but have been
well intentioned, I think.  Anyhow, as I never felt inconvenienced
by hard words, you will not expect me to wax bumptious
because of undue compliment:  so enough of `Browning', --
except that he is yours very truly, `while this machine is to him.'"
==

The latter years of the poet were full of varied interest for himself,
but present little of particular significance for specification in a monograph
so concise as this must perforce be.  Every year he went abroad,
to France or to Italy, and once or twice on a yachting trip
in the Mediterranean.*  At home -- for many years, at 19 Warwick Crescent,
in what some one has called the dreary Mesopotamia of Paddington,
and for the last three or four years of his life at 29 De Vere Gardens,
Kensington Gore -- his avocations were so manifold that it is difficult
to understand where he had leisure for his vocation.  Everybody wished him
to come to dine; and he did his utmost to gratify Everybody.
He saw everything; read all the notable books; kept himself acquainted
with the leading contents of the journals and magazines;
conducted a large correspondence; read new French, German,
and Italian books of mark; read and translated Euripides and Aeschylus;
knew all the gossip of the literary clubs, salons, and the studios;
was a frequenter of afternoon-tea parties; and then, over and above it,
he was Browning:  the most profoundly subtle mind that has exercised itself
in poetry since Shakespeare.  His personal grace and charm of manner
never failed.  Whether he was dedicating "Balaustion's Adventure"
in terms of gracious courtesy, or handing a flower from some jar of roses,
or lilies, or his favourite daffodils, with a bright smile or merry glance,
to the lady of his regard, or when sending a copy of a new book of poetry
with an accompanying letter expressed with rare felicity,
or when generously prophesying for a young poet the only true success
if he will but listen and act upon "the inner voice", -- he was in all these,
and in all things, the ideal gentleman.  There is so charming
and characteristic a touch in the following note to a girl-friend,
that I must find room for it: --

--
* It was on his first experience of this kind, more than
  a quarter of a century earlier, that he wrote the nobly patriotic lines
  of "Home Thoughts from the Sea", and that flawless strain of bird-music,
  "Home Thoughts from Abroad":  then, also, that he composed
  "How they brought the Good News".  Concerning the last, he wrote, in 1881
  (see `The Academy', April 2nd), "There is no sort of historical foundation
  about [this poem].  I wrote it under the bulwark of a vessel
  off the African coast, after I had been at it long enough to appreciate
  even the fancy of a gallop on the back of a certain good horse, `York',
  then in my stable at home.  It was written in pencil
  on the fly-leaf of Bartoli's `Simboli', I remember."
--

==
                                   29 De Vere Gardens, W.,
                                        6th July 1889.

My beloved Alma, --  I had the honour yesterday of dining with the Shah,
whereupon the following dialogue: --

"Vous e^tes poe"te?"

"On s'est permis de me le dire quelquefois."

"Et vous avez fait des livres?"

"Trop de livres."

"Voulez-vous m'en donner un, afin que je puisse me ressouvenir de vous?"

"Avec plaisir."

I have been accordingly this morning to town, where the thing is procurable,
and as I chose a volume of which I judged the binding might take
the imperial eye, I said to myself, "Here do I present my poetry
to a personage for whom I do not care three straws; why should I not venture
to do as much for a young lady I love dearly, who, for the author's sake,
will not impossibly care rather for the inside than the outside
of the volume?"  So I was bold enough to take one and offer it
for your kind acceptance, begging you to remember in days to come
that the author, whether a good poet or no, was always, my Alma,
your affectionate friend,
                                   Robert Browning.
==

His look was a continual and serene gleam.  Lamartine, who remarks this
of Bossuet in his youth, adds a phrase which, as observant acquaintances
of the poet will agree, might be written of Browning --
"His lips quivered often without utterance, as if with the wind
of an internal speech."

Except for the touching and beautiful letter which he wrote from Asolo
about two months before his death, to Mr. Wilfrid Meynell,
about a young writer to whom the latter wished to draw
the poet's kindly attention -- a letter which has a peculiar pathos
in the words, "I shall soon depart for Venice, on my way homeward" --
except for this letter there is none so well worth repetition here
as his last word to the Poet-Laureate.  The friendship between
these two great poets has in itself the fragrance of genius.
The letter was written just before Browning left London.

==
                                   29 De Vere Gardens, W.,
                                        August 5th, 1889.

My dear Tennyson, --  To-morrow is your birthday -- indeed, a memorable one.
Let me say I associate myself with the universal pride of our country
in your glory, and in its hope that for many and many a year
we may have your very self among us -- secure that your poetry
will be a wonder and delight to all those appointed to come after.
And for my own part, let me further say, I have loved you dearly.
May God bless you and yours.

At no moment from first to last of my acquaintance with your works,
or friendship with yourself, have I had any other feeling,
expressed or kept silent, than this which an opportunity
allows me to utter -- that I am and ever shall be, my dear Tennyson,
admiringly and affectionately yours,
                                   Robert Browning.
==

Shortly after this he was at Asolo once more, the little hill-town
in the Veneto, which he had visited in his youth, and where he heard again
the echo of Pippa's song --

    "God's in His heaven,
    All's right with the world!"

Mr. W. W. Story writes to me that he spent three days with the poet
at this time, and that the latter seemed, except for a slight asthma,
to be as vigorous in mind and body as ever.  Thence, later in the autumn,
he went to Venice, to join his son and daughter-in-law
at the home where he was "to have a corner for his old age,"
the beautiful Palazzo Rezzonico, on the Grand Canal.  He was never happier,
more sanguine, more joyous, than here.  He worked for three or four hours
each morning, walked daily for about two hours, crossed occasionally
to the Lido with his sister, and in the evenings visited friends
or went to the opera.  But for some time past, his heart --
always phenomenally slow in its action, and of late ominously intermittent --
had been noticeably weaker.  As he suffered no pain and little inconvenience,
he paid no particular attention to the matter.  Browning had
as little fear of death as doubt in God.  In a controlling Providence
he did indeed profoundly believe.  He felt, with Joubert,
that "it is not difficult to believe in God, if one does not worry oneself
to define Him."*

--
* "Browning's `orthodoxy' brought him into many a combat
  with his rationalistic friends, some of whom could hardly believe
  that he took his doctrine seriously.  Such was the fact, however;
  indeed, I have heard that he once stopped near an open-air assembly
  which an atheist was haranguing, and, in the freedom of his `incognito',
  gave strenuous battle to the opinions uttered.  To one who had spoken
  of an expected `Judgment Day' as a superstition, I heard him say:
  `I don't see that.  Why should there not be a settling day in the universe,
  as when a master settles with his workmen at the end of the week?'
  There was something in his tone and manner which suggested his
  dramatic conception of religious ideas and ideals."  -- Moncure D. Conway.
--

"How should externals satisfy my soul?" was his cry in "Sordello",
and it was the fundamental strain of all his poetry,
as the fundamental motive is expressible in

    "-- a loving worm within its sod
    Were diviner than a loveless god
    Amid his worlds" --

love being with him the golden key wherewith to unlock the world
of the universe, of the soul, of all nature.  He is as convinced
of the two absolute facts of God and Soul as Cardinal Newman
in writing of "Two and two only, supreme and luminously self-evident beings,
myself and my Creator."  Most fervently he believes that

    "Haply for us the ideal dawn shall break . . .
    And set our pulse in tune with moods divine" --

though, co-equally, in the necessity of "making man sole sponsor of himself."
Ever and again, of course, he was betrayed by the bewildering and defiant
puzzle of life:  seeing in the face of the child the seed of sorrow,
"in the green tree an ambushed flame, in Phosphor a vaunt-guard of Night."
Yet never of him could be written that thrilling saying
which Sainte-Beuve uttered of Pascal, "That lost traveller
who yearns for home, who, strayed without a guide in a dark forest,
takes many times the wrong road, goes, returns upon his steps,
is discouraged, sits down at a crossing of the roads,
utters cries to which no one responds, resumes his march with frenzy and pain,
throws himself upon the ground and wants to die, and reaches home at last
only after all sorts of anxieties and after sweating blood."  No darkness,
no tempest, no gloom, long confused his vision of `the ideal dawn'.
As the carrier-dove is often baffled, yet ere long surely finds her way
through smoke and fog and din to her far country home, so he too,
however distraught, soon or late soared to untroubled ether.
He had that profound inquietude, which the great French critic says
`attests a moral nature of a high rank, and a mental nature
stamped with the seal of the archangel.'  But, unlike Pascal --
who in Sainte-Beuve's words exposes in the human mind itself two abysses,
"on one side an elevation toward God, toward the morally beautiful,
a return movement toward an illustrious origin, and on the other side
an abasement in the direction of evil" -- Browning sees, believes in,
holds to nothing short of the return movement, for one and all,
toward an illustrious origin.

The crowning happiness of a happy life was his death in the city he loved
so well, in the arms of his dear ones, in the light of a world-wide fame.
The silence to which the most eloquent of us must all one day lapse
came upon him like the sudden seductive twilight of the Tropics,
and just when he had bequeathed to us one of his finest utterances.

It seems but a day or two ago that the present writer
heard from the lips of the dead poet a mockery of death's vanity --
a brave assertion of the glory of life.  "Death, death!
It is this harping on death I despise so much," he remarked
with emphasis of gesture as well as of speech -- the inclined head and body,
the right hand lightly placed upon the listener's knee, the abrupt change
in the inflection of the voice, all so characteristic of him --
"this idle and often cowardly as well as ignorant harping!
Why should we not change like everything else?  In fiction, in poetry,
in so much of both, French as well as English, and, I am told,
in American art and literature, the shadow of death -- call it what you will,
despair, negation, indifference -- is upon us.  But what fools who talk thus!
Why, `amico mio', you know as well as I that death is life,
just as our daily, our momentarily dying body is none the less alive
and ever recruiting new forces of existence.  Without death,
which is our crapelike churchyardy word for change, for growth,
there could be no prolongation of that which we call life.
Pshaw! it is foolish to argue upon such a thing even.  For myself,
I deny death as an end of everything.  Never say of me that I am dead!"

On the evening of Thursday, the 12th of December (1889), he was in bed,
with exceeding weakness.  In the centre of the lofty ceiling
of the room in which he lay, and where it had been his wont to work,
there is a painting by his son.  It depicts an eagle
struggling with a serpent, and is illustrative of a superb passage
in Shelley's "Revolt of Islam".  What memories, what deep thoughts,
it must have suggested; how significant, to us, the circumstance!
But weak as the poet was, he yet did not see the shadow
which had begun to chill the hearts of the watchers.
Shortly before the great bell of San Marco struck ten,
he turned and asked if any news had come concerning "Asolando",
published that day.  His son read him a telegram from the publishers,
telling how great the demand was and how favourable were the advance-articles
in the leading papers.  The dying poet smiled and muttered, "How gratifying!"
When the last toll of St. Mark's had left a deeper stillness than before,
those by the bedside saw a yet profounder silence on the face of him
whom they loved.

  --------

It is needless to dwell upon the grief everywhere felt and expressed for
the irreparable loss.  The magnificent closing lines of Shelley's "Alastor"
must have occurred to many a mourner; for gone, indeed,
was "a surpassing Spirit".  The superb pomp of the Venetian funeral,
the solemn grandeur of the interment in Westminster Abbey, do not seem
worth recording:  so insignificant are all these accidents of death made
by the supreme fact itself.  Yet it is fitting to know that Venice
has never in modern times afforded a more impressive sight, than those
craped processional gondolas following the high flower-strewn funeral-barge
through the thronged waterways and out across the lagoon
to the desolate Isle of the Dead:  that London has rarely seen
aught more solemn than the fog-dusked Cathedral spaces,
echoing at first with the slow tramp of the pall-bearers,
and then with the sweet aerial music swaying upward
the loved familiar words of the `Lyric Voice' hushed so long before.
Yet the poet was as much honoured by those humble friends,
Lambeth artisans and a few poor working-women, who threw sprays of laurel
before the hearse -- by that desolate, starving, woe-weary gentleman,
shivering in his threadbare clothes, who seemed transfixed with
a heart-wrung though silent emotion, ere he hurriedly drew from his sleeve
a large white chrysanthemum, and throwing it beneath the coffin
as it was lifted inward, disappeared in the crowd, which closed again
like the sea upon this lost wandering wave.

Who would not honour this mighty dead?  All who could be present were there,
somewhere in the ancient Abbey.  One of the greatest,
loved and admired by the dead poet, had already put the mourning of many
into the lofty dignity of his verse: --

    "Now dumb is he who waked the world to speak,
    And voiceless hands the world beside his bier,
    Our words are sobs, our cry of praise a tear:
    We are the smitten mortal, we the weak.
    We see a spirit on Earth's loftiest peak
    Shine, and wing hence the way he makes more clear:
    See a great Tree of Life that never sere
    Dropped leaf for aught that age or storms might wreak:
    Such ending is not Death:  such living shows
    What wide illumination brightness sheds
    From one big heart -- to conquer man's old foes:
    The coward, and the tyrant, and the force
    Of all those weedy monsters raising heads
    When Song is murk from springs of turbid source."*

--
* George Meredith.
--

One word more of "light and fleeting shadow".  In the greatness of his nature
he must be ranked with Milton, Defoe, and Scott.  His very shortcomings,
such as they were, were never baneful growths, but mere weeds,
with a certain pleasant though pungent savour moreover,
growing upon a rich, an exuberant soil.  Pluck one of the least lovely --
rather call it the unworthy arrow shot at the body of a dead comrade,
so innocent of ill intent:  yet it too has a beauty of its own,
for the shaft was aflame from the fulness of a heart whose love had withstood
the chill passage of the years.

  --------

On the night of Browning's death a new star suddenly appeared in Orion.*
The coincidence is suggestive if we like to indulge in the fancy
that in that constellation --

    "No more subjected to the change or chance
    Of the unsteady planets ----"

gleam those other "abodes where the Immortals are."  Certainly,
a wandering fire has passed away from us.  Whither has it gone?
To that new star in Orion:  or whirled to remote silences
in the trail of lost meteors?  Whence, and for how long,
will its rays reach our storm and gloom-beleaguered earth?

--
* Mrs. Orr disputes this statement.  -- A. L., 1996.

  "The alleged fact is disproved by the statement of the Astronomer Royal,
  to whom it has been submitted; but it would have been
  a beautiful symbol of translation, such as affectionate fancy
  might gladly cherish if it were true."  -- Mrs. Sutherland Orr,
  "Life and Letters of Robert Browning" (1891).
--

Such questions cannot meanwhile be solved.  Our eyes are still confused
with the light, with that ardent flame, as we knew it here.
But this we know, it was indeed "a central fire descending upon many altars."
These, though touched with but a spark of the immortal principle,
bear enduring testimony.  And what testimony!  How heartfelt:
happily also how widespread, how electrically stimulative!

But the time must come when the poet's personality will have
the remoteness of tradition:  when our perplexed judgments
will be as a tale of sound and fury, signifying nothing.
It is impossible for any student of literature, for any interested reader,
not to indulge in some forecast as to what rank in the poetic hierarchy
Robert Browning will ultimately occupy.  The commonplace as to
the impossibility of prognosticating the ultimate slow decadence,
or slower rise, or, it may be, sustained suspension, of a poet's fame,
is often insincere, and but an excuse of indolence.
To dogmatise were the height of presumption as well as of folly:
but to forego speculation, based upon complete present knowledge,
for an idle contentment with narrow horizons, were perhaps foolisher still.
But assuredly each must perforce be content with his own prevision.
None can answer yet for the generality, whose decisive franchise
will elect a fit arbiter in due time.

So, for myself, let me summarise what I have already written
in several sections of this book, and particularly in the closing pages
of Chapter 6.  There, it will be remembered -- after having found
that Browning's highest achievement is in his second period --
emphasis was laid on the primary importance of his life-work in its having
compelled us to the assumption of a fresh critical standpoint involving
the construction of a new definition.  In the light of this new definition
I think Browning will ultimately be judged.  As the sculptor in "Pippa Passes"
was the predestinated novel thinker in marble, so Browning himself
appears as the predestinated novel thinker in verse; the novel thinker,
however, in degree, not in kind.  But I do not for a moment believe
that his greatness is in his status as a thinker:  even less,
that the poet and the thinker are indissociable.  Many years ago
Sainte-Beuve destroyed this shallow artifice of pseudo-criticism:
"Venir nous dire que tout poe"te de talent est, par essence,
un grand PENSEUR, et que tout vrai PENSEUR est ne/cessairement
artiste et poe"te, c'est une pre/tention insoutenable et que de/ment
a\ chaque instant la re/alite/."

When Browning's enormous influence upon the spiritual and mental life
of our day -- an influence ever shaping itself to wise and beautiful issues --
shall have lost much of its immediate import, there will still surely be
discerned in his work a formative energy whose resultant is pure poetic gain.
It is as the poet he will live:  not merely as the "novel thinker in verse".
Logically, his attitude as `thinker' is unimpressive.  It is the attitude,
as I think some one has pointed out, of acquiescence with codified morality.
In one of his `Causeries', the keen French critic quoted above
has a remark upon the great Bossuet, which may with singular aptness
be repeated of Browning: --  "His is the Hebrew genius extended,
fecundated by Christianity, and open to all the acquisitions
of the understanding, but retaining some degree of sovereign interdiction,
and closing its vast horizon precisely where its light ceases."
Browning cannot, or will not, face the problem of the future
except from the basis of assured continuity of individual existence.
He is so much in love with life, for life's sake, that he cannot even credit
the possibility of incontinuity; his assurance of eternity in another world
is at least in part due to his despair at not being eternal in this.
He is so sure, that the intellectually scrupulous detect
the odours of hypotheses amid the sweet savour of indestructible assurance.
Schopenhauer says, in one of those recently-found Annotations of his
which are so characteristic and so acute, "that which is called
`mathematical certainty' is the cane of a blind man without a dog,
or equilibrium in darkness."  Browning would sometimes have us accept
the evidence of his `cane' as all-sufficient.  He does not entrench himself
among conventions:  for he already finds himself within the fortified lines
of convention, and remains there.  Thus is true what Mr. Mortimer says
in a recent admirable critique -- "His position in regard
to the thought of the age is paradoxical, if not inconsistent.
He is in advance of it in every respect but one, the most important of all,
the matter of fundamental principles; in these he is behind it.
His processes of thought are often scientific in their precision of analysis;
the sudden conclusion which he imposes upon them is transcendental and inept."
Browning's conclusions, which harmonise so well with
our haphazard previsionings, are sometimes so disastrously facile
that they exercise an insurrectionary influence.  They occasionally suggest
that wisdom of Gotham which is ever ready to postulate
the certainty of a fulfilment because of the existence of a desire.
It is this that vitiates so much of his poetic reasoning.
Truth may ring regnant in the lines of Abt Vogler --

    "And what is our failure here but a triumph's evidence
    For the fulness of the days?" --

but, unfortunately, the conclusion is, in itself, illogical.

We are all familiar with, and in this book I have dwelt more than once upon,
Browning's habitual attitude towards Death.  It is not a novel one.
The frontage is not so much that of the daring pioneer,
as the sedate assurance of `the oldest inhabitant'.  It is of good hap,
of welcome significance:  none the less there is an aspect of our mortality
of which the poet's evasion is uncompromising and absolute.
I cannot do better than quote Mr. Mortimer's noteworthy words hereupon,
in connection, moreover, with Browning's artistic relation to Sex,
that other great Protagonist in the relentless duel of Humanity
with Circumstance.  "The final inductive hazard he declines for himself;
his readers may take it if they will.  It is part of the insistent
and perverse ingenuity which we display in masking with illusion
the more disturbing elements of life.  Veil after veil is torn down,
but seldom before another has been slipped behind it,
until we acquiesce without a murmur in the concealment
that we ourselves have made.  Two facts thus carefully shrouded
from full vision by elaborate illusion conspicuously round in our lives --
the life-giving and life-destroying elements, Sex and Death.
We are compelled to occasional physiologic and economic discussion of the one,
but we shrink from recognising the full extent to which it bases
the whole social fabric, carefully concealing its insurrections,
and ignoring or misreading their lessons.  The other, in certain aspects,
we are compelled to face, but to do it we tipple on illusions,
from our cradle upwards, in dread of the coming grave,
purchasing a drug for our poltroonery at the expense of our sanity.
We uphold our wayward steps with the promises and the commandments
for crutches, but on either side of us trudge the shadow Death
and the bacchanal Sex, and we mumble prayers against the one,
while we scourge ourselves for leering at the other.
On one only of these can Browning be said to have spoken with novel force --
the relations of sex, which he has treated with a subtlety and freedom,
and often with a beauty, unapproached since Goethe.  On the problem of Death,
except in masquerade of robes and wings, his eupeptic temperament
never allowed him to dwell.  He sentimentalised where Shakespeare thought."
Browning's whole attitude to the Hereafter is different from that of Tennyson
only in that the latter `faintly', while he strenuously,
"trusts the larger hope."  To him all credit, that, standing upon
the frontiers of the Past, he can implicitly trust the Future.

    "High-hearted surely he;
    But bolder they who first off-cast
    Their moorings from the habitable Past."

The teacher may be forgotten, the prophet may be hearkened to no more,
but a great poet's utterance is never temporal, having that in it
which conserves it against the antagonism of time, and the ebb and flow
of literary ideals.  What range, what extent of genius!
As Mr. Frederick Wedmore has well said, `Browning is not a book --
he is a literature.'

But that he will "stand out gigantic" in MASS of imperishable work,
in that far-off day, I for one cannot credit.  His poetic shortcomings
seem too essential to permit of this.  That fatal excess of cold
over emotive thought, of thought that, however profound, incisive,
or scrupulously clear, is not yet impassioned, is a fundamental defect of his.
It is the very impetuosity of this mental energy to which is due
the miscalled obscurity of much of Browning's work -- miscalled,
because, however remote in his allusions, however pedantic even,
he is never obscure in his thought.  His is that "palace infinite
which darkens with excess of light."  But mere excess in itself
is nothing more than symptomatic.  Browning has suffered more
from intellectual exploitation than any writer.  It is a ruinous process --
for the poet.  "He so well repays intelligent study."
That is it, unfortunately.  There are many, like the old Scotch lady
who attempted to read Carlyle's `French Revolution',
who think they have become "daft" when they encounter a passage such as,
for example,

                        "Rivals, who . . .
    Tuned, from Bocafoli's stark-naked psalms,
    To Plara's sonnets spoilt by toying with,
    `As knops that stud some almug to the pith
    Pricked for gum, wry thence, and crinkled worse
    Than pursed eyelids of a river-horse
    Sunning himself o' the slime when whirrs the breeze --
    GAD-FLY, that is.'"

The old lady persevered with Carlyle, and, after a few days,
found "she was nae sae daft, but that she had tackled
a varra dee-fee-cult author."  What would even that indomitable student
have said to the above quotation, and to the poem whence it comes?
To many it is not the poetry, but the difficulties, that are the attraction.
They rejoice, after long and frequent dippings, to find their plummet,
almost lost in remote depths, touch bottom.  Enough `meaning'
has been educed from `Childe Roland', to cite but one instance,
to start a School of Philosophy with:  though it so happens
that the poem is an imaginative fantasy, written in one day.
Worse still, it was not inspired by the mystery of existence,
but by `a red horse with a glaring eye standing behind a dun one
on a piece of tapestry that used to hang in the poet's drawing-room.'*
Of all his faults, however, the worst is that jugglery,
that inferior legerdemain, with the elements of the beautiful in verse:
most obvious in "Sordello", in portions of "The Ring and the Book",
and in so many of the later poems.  These inexcusable violations
are like the larvae within certain vegetable growths:  soon or late
they will destroy their environment before they perish themselves.
Though possessive above all others of that science of the percipient
in the allied arts of painting and music, wherein he found
the unconventional Shelley so missuaded by convention,
he seemed ever more alert to the substance than to the manner of poetry.
In a letter of Mrs. Browning's she alludes to a friend's "melodious feeling"
for poetry.  Possibly the phrase was accidental, but it is significant.
To inhale the vital air of poetry we must love it, not merely
find it "interesting", "suggestive", "soothing", "stimulative":  in a word,
we must have a "melodious feeling" for poetry before we can deeply enjoy it.
Browning, who has so often educed from his lyre melodies and harmonies
of transcendent, though novel, beauty, was too frequently, during composition,
without this melodious feeling of which his wife speaks.
The distinction between literary types such as Browning or Balzac
on the one hand, and Keats or Gustave Flaubert on the other,
is that with the former there exists a reverence for the vocation
and a relative indifference to the means, in themselves --
and, with the latter, a scrupulous respect for the mere means
as well as for that to which they conduce.  The poet who does not love words
for themselves, as an artist loves any chance colour upon his palette,
or as the musician any vagrant tone evoked by a sudden touch
in idleness or reverie, has not entered into the full inheritance
of the sons of Apollo.  The writer cannot aim at beauty,
that which makes literature and art, without this heed --
without, rather, this creative anxiety:  for it is certainly not enough,
as some one has said, that language should be used merely
for the transportation of intelligence, as a wheelbarrow carries brick.
Of course, Browning is not persistently neglectful of this
fundamental necessity for the literary artist.  He is often
as masterly in this as in other respects.  But he is not always,
not often enough, alive to the paramount need.  He writes with
"the verse being as the mood it paints:"  but, unfortunately,
the mood is often poetically unformative.  He had no passion
for the quest for seductive forms.  Too much of his poetry
has been born prematurely.  Too much of it, indeed, has not died
and been born again -- for all immortal verse is a poetic resurrection.
Perfect poetry is the deathless part of mortal beauty.
The great artists never perpetuate gross actualities,
though they are the supreme realists.  It is Schiller, I think,
who says in effect, that to live again in the serene beauty of art,
it is needful that things should first die in reality.
Thus Browning's dramatic method, even, is sometimes disastrous in its untruth,
as in Caliban's analytical reasoning -- an initial absurdity,
as Mr. Berdoe has pointed out, adding epigrammatically,
`Caliban is a savage, with the introspective powers of a Hamlet,
and the theology of an evangelical Churchman.'  Not only Caliban,
but several other of Browning's personages (Aprile, Eglamour, etc.)
are what Goethe calls `schwankende Gestalten', mere "wavering images".

--
* One account says `Childe Roland' was written in three days;
  another, that it was composed in one.  Browning's rapidity in composition
  was extraordinary.  "The Return of the Druses" was written in five days,
  an act a day; so, also, was "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon".
--

Montaigne, in one of his essays, says that to stop gracefully
is sure proof of high race in a horse:  certainly to stop in time
is imperative upon the poet.  Of Browning may be said
what Poe wrote of another, that his genius was too impetuous
for the minuter technicalities of that elaborate ART
so needful in the building up of monuments for immortality.
But has not a greater than Poe declared that "what distinguishes the artist
from the amateur is `architectonike' in the highest sense;
that power of execution which creates, forms, and constitutes:
not the profoundness of single thoughts, not the richness of imagery,
not the abundance of illustration."  Assuredly, no "new definition"
can be an effective one which conflicts with Goethe's incontrovertible dictum.

But this much having been admitted, I am only too willing to protest
against the uncritical outcry against Browning's musical incapacity.

A deficiency is not incapacity, otherwise Coleridge, at his highest
the most perfect of our poets, would be lowly estimated.

    "Bid shine what would, dismiss into the shade
    What should not be -- and there triumphs the paramount
    Surprise o' the master." . . .

Browning's music is oftener harmonic than melodic:  and musicians know
how the general ear, charmed with immediately appellant melodies,
resents, wearies of, or is deaf to the harmonies of a more remote,
a more complex, and above all a more novel creative method.
He is, among poets, what Wagner is among musicians;
as Shakespeare may be likened to Beethoven, or Shelley to Chopin.
The common assertion as to his incapacity for metric music
is on the level of those affirmations as to his not being
widely accepted of the people, when the people have the chance;
or as to the indifference of the public to poetry generally --
and this in an age when poetry has never been so widely understood,
loved, and valued, and wherein it is yearly growing
more acceptable and more potent!

A great writer is to be adjudged by his triumphs, not by his failures:
as, to take up Montaigne's simile again, a famous race-horse
is remembered for its successes and not for the races which it lost.
The tendency with certain critics is to reverse the process.
Instead of saying with the archbishop in Horne's "Gregory VII.",
"He owes it all to his Memnonian voice!  He has no genius:"
or of declaring, as Prospero says of Caliban in "The Tempest",
"He is as disproportioned in his manners as in his shape:"
how much better to affirm of him what Ben Jonson wrote of Shakespeare,
"Hee redeemed his vices with his vertues:  there was ever more in him
to bee praysed than to bee pardoned."  In the balance of triumphs
and failures, however, is to be sought the relative measure of genius --
whose equipoise should be the first matter of ascertainment
in comparative criticism.

For those who would discriminate between what Mr. Traill
succinctly terms his GENERIC greatness as thinker and man of letters,
and his SPECIFIC power as poet, it is necessary to disabuse the mind
of Browning's "message".  The question is not one of weighty message,
but of artistic presentation.  To praise a poem because of its optimism
is like commending a peach because it loves the sunshine,
rather than because of its distinguishing bloom and savour.
The primary concern of the artist must be with his vehicle of expression.
In the instance of a poet, this vehicle is language emotioned
to the white-heat of rhythmic music by impassioned thought or sensation.
Schopenhauer declares it is all a question of style now with poetry;
that everything has been sung, that everything has been duly cursed,
that there is nothing left for poetry but to be the glowing forge of words.
He forgets that in quintessential art there is nothing of the past,
nothing old:  even the future has part therein only in that
the present is always encroaching upon, becoming, the future.
The famous pessimistic philosopher has, in common with other critics,
made, in effect, the same remark -- that Style exhales the odour of the soul:
yet he himself has indicated that the strength of Shakespeare
lay in the fact that `he had no taste,' that `he was not a man of letters.'
Whenever genius has displayed epic force it has established a new order.
In the general disintegration and reconstruction of literary ideals
thus involved, it is easier to be confused by the novel flashing
of strange lights than to discern the central vivifying altar-flame.
It may prove that what seem to us the regrettable accidents
of Browning's genius are no malfortunate flaws, but as germane thereto
as his Herculean ruggednesses are to Shakespeare, as the laboured inversions
of his blank verse are to Milton, as his austere concision is to Dante.
Meanwhile, to the more exigent among us at any rate, the flaws seem flaws,
and in nowise essential.

But when we find weighty message and noble utterance in union,
as we do in the magnificent remainder after even the severest ablation
of the poor and mediocre portion of Browning's life-work,
how beneficent seem the generous gods!  Of this remainder
most aptly may be quoted these lines from "The Ring and the Book",

    "Gold as it was, is, shall be evermore;
    Prime nature with an added artistry."

How gladly, in this dubious hour -- when, as an eminent writer has phrased it,
a colossal Hand, which some call the hand of Destiny and others
that of Humanity, is putting out the lights of Heaven one by one,
like candles after a feast -- how gladly we listen to this poet
with his serene faith in God, and immortal life, and the soul's
unending development!  "Hope hard in the subtle thing that's Spirit,"
he cries in the Prologue to "Pacchiarotto":  and this, in manifold phrasing,
is his `leit-motif', his fundamental idea, in unbroken line from
the "Pauline" of his twenty-first to the "Asolando" of his seventy-sixth year.
This superb phalanx of faith -- what shall prevail against it?

How winsome it is, moreover:  this, and the humanity of his song.
Profoundly he realised that there is no more significant study than
the human heart.  "The development of a soul:  little else is worth study,"
he wrote in his preface to "Sordello":  so in his old age,
in his last "Reverie" --

    "As the record from youth to age
     Of my own, the single soul --
    So the world's wide book:  one page
     Deciphered explains the whole
    Of our common heritage."

He had faith also that "the record from youth to age" of his own soul
would outlast any present indifference or neglect -- that whatever tide
might bear him away from our regard for a time would ere long flow again.
The reaction must come:  it is, indeed, already at hand.
But one almost fancies one can hear the gathering of the remote waters
once more.  We may, with Strafford,

                             "feel sure
    That Time, who in the twilight comes to mend
    All the fantastic day's caprice, consign
    To the low ground once more the ignoble Term,
    And raise the Genius on his orb again, --
    That Time will do me right." . . .

Indeed, Browning has the grand manner, for all it is more that
of the Scandinavian Jarl than of the Italian count or Spanish grandee.

And ever, below all the stress and failure, below all the triumph of his toil,
is the beauty of his dream.  It was "a surpassing Spirit"
that went from out our midst.

    "One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
        Never doubted clouds would break,
    Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
    Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
            Sleep to wake."

"Speed, fight on, fare ever There as here!" are the last words of this
brave soul.  In truth, "the air seems bright with his past presence yet."

    "Sun-treader -- life and light be thine for ever;
    Thou art gone from us -- years go by -- and spring
    Gladdens, and the young earth is beautiful,
    Yet thy songs come not -- other bards arise,
    But none like thee -- they stand -- thy majesties,
    Like mighty works which tell some Spirit there
    Hath sat regardless of neglect and scorn,
    Till, its long task completed, it hath risen
    And left us, never to return."




  --------





Index.

[This index is included to allow the reader to browse the main subjects
included in this book.  The numbers in brackets are the number of mentions
in the original index -- as each mention may be long or short,
these numbers should be used only as a general indication.]



"Abt Vogler" [3]
"After" [1]
"Agamemnon of Aeschylus" [1]
Alma ----, Letter to [1]
"Amphibian" [1]
Ancona [1]
"Andrea del Sarto" [2]
"Andromeda" [1]
"Another way of Love" [1]
"Any Wife to any Husband" [2]
"Apparent Failure" [2]
"Appearances" [1]
Appearance, Browning's personal [2]
Aprile [3]
"Aristophanes' Apology" [1]
"Ask not one least word of praise" [1]
"Asolando" [8]
Asolo [2]
`The Athenaeum' [1]
"Aurora Leigh" [5]

Bagni di Lucca [2]
Bailey's "Festus" [1]
"Balaustion's Adventure" [2]
Balzac [6]
Barrett, Arabella [2]
Barrett, Edward [1]
Barrett, Mr. [3]
"Beatrice Signorini" [1]
Beautiful in Verse, the [1]
Beethoven [1]
"Before" [1]
"Bells and Pomegranates" [3]
"Ben Karshook's Wisdom" [1]
Berdoe, E. [3]
"Bifurcations" [1]
"Bishop Blougram" [2]
Blake, William [1]
"A Blot in the 'Scutcheon" [6]
Bossuet and Browning [1]
Browning, Clara [1]
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett:  Browning's early influence on [1];
  born March 4, 1809 (really 1806) [1]; her girlhood and early work [1];
  death of brother [1]; residence in London [1];
  "The Cry of the Children" [1]; friendships with Horne and Kenyon [1];
  her appreciation of Browning's poems [1]; correspondence with him [1];
  engagement [1]; acquaintance with Mrs. Jameson [1]; marriage [1];
  Mr. Barrett's resentment [1]; journey to Paris [1]; thence to Pisa [1];
  Browning's love for his wife [1]; "Sonnets from the Portuguese" [1];
  in spring to Florence [1]; to Ancona, via Ravenna, in June [1];
  winter at Casa Guidi [1]; "Aurora Leigh" [1]; description of poetess [2];
  birth of son in 1849 [1]; "Casa Guidi Windows" [1];
  1850, spring in Rome [1]; proposal to confer poet-laureateship
  on Mrs. Browning [2]; 1851, visits England [1]; winter in Paris [1];
  she is enthusiastic about Napoleon III. and interested in Spiritualism [1];
  summer in London [1]; autumn at Casa Guidi [1]; winter 1853-4 in Rome,
  1856 "Aurora Leigh", death of Kenyon, legacies [1];
  1857, death of Mr. Barrett [1]; 1858, delicacy of Mrs. Browning [1];
  July 1858, Brownings travel to Normandy; "Two Poems by Elizabeth Barrett
  and Robert Browning", 1854 [1]; 1860, "Poems before Congress",
  and death of Arabella Barrett [1]; "North and South" [1];
  return to Casa Guidi, and death on 28th June 1861 [2].
Browning, Reuben [3]
Browning, Robert:  born in London in 1812 [3]; his literary and artistic
  antecedents and contemporaries [1]; his parentage and ancestry [2];
  concerning traces of Semitic origin [1]; his sisters [1]; his father [1];
  his mother [2]; his uncle, Reuben Browning [1]; the Camberwell home [1];
  his childhood [1]; early poems [1]; translation of the odes of Horace [1];
  goes to school at Peckham [1]; his holiday afternoons [1];
  "Death of Harold" [1]; criticisms of Miss Flower and Mr. Fox [1];
  he reads Shelley's and Keats's poems [2]; he has a tutor [1];
  attends Gower Street University College [1]; he decides to be a poet [1];
  writes "Pauline", 1832 [1]; it is published in 1833 [1];
  "Pauline" [1]; criticisms thereon [1]; Rossetti and "Pauline",
  studies at British Museum [2]; travels in 1833 to Russia [1];
  to Italy [1]; return to Camberwell, 1834 [1]; and begins "Paracelsus",
  sonnet signed "Z", 1834 [1]; love for Venice [1]; "Paracelsus" [2];
  criticisms thereon [2]; he meets Macready [1]; "Narses" [1];
  he meets Talfourd, Wordsworth, Landor [1]; "Strafford" [1];
  his dramas [1]; his love of the country [1]; "Pippa Passes" [2];
  "Sordello" [1]; origin of "The Ring and the Book", 1865 [1];
  "The Ring and the Book" [1]; "The Inn Album" [1]; "Men and Women" [1];
  proposed "Transcripts from Life" [1]; "Flower o' the Vine" [1];
  correspondence between him and Miss Barrett [1]; meeting in 1846 [1];
  engagement [1]; marriage, 12th September 1846 [1]; sojourn in Pisa [1];
  they go to Florence [1]; to Ancona, via Ravenna [1];
  "The Guardian Angel" [1]; Casa Guidi [1]; birth of son, March 9th, 1849 [1];
  they go to Vallombrosa and Bagni di Lucca for the autumn,
  and winter at Casa Guidi [1]; spring of 1850 in Rome [1];
  "Two in the Campagna" [1]; 1851, they visit England [1];
  description of Browning [1]; winter 1851-2 in Paris with Robert Browning,
  senior [1]; Browning writes Prefatory Essay to Moxon's edition
  of Shelley's Letters [1]; midsummer, Baths of Lucca [1]; in Florence [1];
  "In a Balcony" [1]; winter in Rome, 1853-4 [1]; the work written there [1];
  "Ben Karshook's Wisdom" [1]; "Men and Women" published [1]; Kenyon's death,
  and legacies to the Brownings [1]; poems written between 1855-64 [1];
  July 1858, Brownings go to Normandy [1]; "Legend of Pornic",
  "Gold Hair" [1]; autumn of 1859 in Sienna [1]; winter 1860-61 in Rome [1];
  death of Mrs. Browning, June 1861 [1]; "Prospice" [1];
  1866, Browning loses his father; Miss Sarianna resides with Browning [1];
  his ways of life [1]; first collected edition of his works, 1868 [1];
  first part of "The Ring and the Book" published [1]; "Herve Riel" [1];
  Tauchnitz edition, 1872 [1]; "Bishop Blougram" [1]; "Selections" [1];
  "La Saisiaz", 1877 [1]; "The Two Poets of Croisic" [1];
  later works [1]; "Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau",
  "Red Cotton Nightcap Country" [2]; "Fifine at the Fair" [3];
  "Jocoseria" [1]; 1881, Browning Society established [1];
  his latter years [1]; revisits Asolo [1]; Palazzo Rezzonico [1];
  religious belief [1]; death, December 12th, 1889 [2];
  funeral [1]; to be estimated by a new definition [1];
  as poet, rather than as thinker [1]; his love of life [1];
  his, like Bossuet's, a Hebrew genius fecundated by Christianity [1];
  his artistic relations to Death and Sex [1]; where, in standpoint,
  he differs from Tennyson [1]; as to quality of his MASS of work [1];
  intellectually exploited [1]; his difficulties, and their attraction
  to many [1]; his attitude to the future, influence, and significance [1];
  summary of his life-work [1].
Browning, Robert Wiedemann Barrett [5]
Browning, Robert (senior) [8]
Browning, Sarianna (Mrs.) [4]
Browning, Sarianna (Miss) [3]
Browning Society, the [2]
Browning, William Shergold [1]
Byron [1]
"By the Fireside" [1]

"Caliban upon Setebos" [3]
Camberwell [7]
Carlyle, Thomas [6]
Casa Guidi [6]
"Cavalier Tunes" [1]
"Childe Roland" [2]
Chopin [1]
"Christmas Eve and Easter Day" [2]
"Cleon" [1]
Coleridge [1]
"Colombe's Birthday" [1]
"The Confessional" [1]
"Confessions" [1]
Contemporaries, literary and artistic, of Browning [1]
Conway, Moncure [2]
"Cristina" [1]
"Cristina and Manaldeschi" [1]
Cunningham, Allan [2]

Dante [4]
Death, Browning on [3]
"Death of Harold" [1]
"A Death in the Desert" [2]
Defoe [1]
"De Gustibus" [3]
Dickens, Charles [2]
"Dis Aliter Visum" [2] <Di^s>
Domett, Alfred (Waring) [1]
Dramas, Browning's [1]
"Dramatic Idyls" [2]
"Dramatic Romances" [2]
"Dramatis Personae" [3]
Dulwich Wood [4]

"Earth's Immortalities" [1]
"Echetlos" [1]
Epics, series of monodramatic [1]
Equator of Browning's genius, the [1]
"Evelyn Hope" [2]

"A Face" [1]
Faucit, Miss Helen [1]
"Ferishtah's Fancies" [1]
"Fifine at the Fair" [4]
Flaubert, Gustave [1]
"Flight of the Duchess" [2]
"The Flower's Name" [2]
Flower o' the Vine [1]
Flower, Miss Sarah (afterwards Adams) [2]
"A Forgiveness" [1]
Form, Artistic [1]
Forster, John [3]
Fox, Mrs. Bridell- [1]
Fox, Rev. William Johnson [6]
"Fra Lippo Lippi" [3]
Furnivall, Dr. [2]
Future, Browning and the [1]

Goethe [4]
"Gold Hair" [2]
Gordon, General [1]
Gosse, E. W. [1]
"A Grammarian's Funeral" [2]
"The Guardian Angel" [2]

"Halburt and Hob" [1]
Hawthorne, Nathaniel [2]
"Heap Cassia", etc. [1]
Heine [2]
"The Heretic's Tragedy" [1]
"Herve Riel" [2] <Herve/>
Hillard, G. S. [1]
"Holy Cross Day" [1]
"Home Thoughts from Abroad" [4]
"Home Thoughts from the Sea" [3]
Hood, Thomas [1]
Horne, R. H. [6]
Houghton, Lord [1]
"How they brought the Good News", etc. [3]
Hugo, Victor [2]

"Imperante Augusto" [1]
"In a Balcony" [5]
"In a Gondola" [1]
"Inapprehensiveness" [1]
"In a Year" [1]
"The Inn Album" [5]
"Instans Tyrannus" [1]
"The Italian in England" [1]
Italian Art, Music, etc. --  Influence of, on Browning [1]
Italy, first visit to [1]
"Ivan Ivanovitch" [2] <Iva\n Iva\novitch>
"Ixion" [1]

Jameson, Mrs. [1]
"James Lee's Wife" [3]
Jerrold, Douglas [1]
"Jocoseria" [3]
"Johannes Agricola" [1]
Joubert [1]

"Karshish, Epistle to" [2]
Keats [6]
Kenyon, John [3]
"King Victor and King Charles" [2]

"The Lady and the Painter" [1]
Lamartine on Bossuet [1]
Landor, Walter Savage [2]
"La Saisiaz" [2]
"The Last Ride Together" [1]
Le Croisic [1]
Lehmann's, Rudolf, portrait of Browning [2]
`Leit-Motif', Browning's [1]
Letter to a Girl Friend [1]
"Life in a Love" [1]
"A Light Woman" [1]
"A Likeness" [1]
"The Lost Leader" [2]
"Love among the Ruins" [3]
"Love in a Life" [1]
"A Lover's Quarrel" [1]
Lowell, James Russell [1]
"Luria" [3]

Macpherson, Mrs. [1]
Macready [1]
"Magical Nature" [1]
Manner, Browning's [1]
Marlowe [1]
"Mary Wollstonecraft and Fuseli" [1]
"Master Hugues of Saxe-Gotha" [2]
"May and Death" [1]
Mazzini [1]
"Meeting at Night" [2]
"Memorabilia" [2]
"Men and Women" [8]
Meredith, George [4]
Meynell, Wilfrid [1]
Montaigne [1]
Mortimer [1]
Motive, Browning's fundamental poetic [1]
Mill, John Stuart [1]
Milsand, J. [1]
Milton [4]
"Misconceptions" [1]
Mitford, Mary [1]
"Muleykeh" [1] <Mule/ykeh>
Murray, Alma [1]
Music of Browning's verse [1]
"My Last Duchess" [1]
"My Star" [1]

"Narses" [1]
"Natural Magic" [1]
Nature, Browning's observation of [1]
Nettleship, J. [2]
"Never the Time and the Place" [2]
Newman, Cardinal [1]
`New Spirit of the Age' [1]
Normandy, the Brownings in [1]
"Now" [1]
"Numpholeptos" [1]

Obscurity, Browning's [2]
"Old Pictures in Florence" [1]
"O Lyric Love" [3]
"One Way of Love" [1]
"One Word More" [2]
Optimism, Browning's [1] (and see Summary)
Orion, new star in [1]
Orr, Mrs. Sutherland [4]
Orthodoxy, Browning's [1]
"Over the seas our galleys went" [1]

"Pacchiarotto" [5]
Palazzo Rezzonico [1]
"Pan and Luna" [1]
"Paracelsus" [6]
Paris, the Brownings in [1]
"Parleyings" [1]
"Parting at Morning" [1]
Pater, Walter [1]
"Pauline" [9]
"A Pearl" [1]
"Pheidippides" [1]
"Pictor Ignotus" [1]
"Pied Piper of Hamelin" [3]
"Pippa Passes" [9]
Pisa [1]
"Pisgah Sights" [1]
Plato [1]
Poe, Edgar Allan [1]
Poems, Early [5]
"Poetical Works" [1]
"Poetics" [1]
Pompilia [2]
"The Pope" [1]
"Popularity" [1]
"Porphyria" [2]
Portraits of Browning [3]
"A Pretty Woman" [1]
Primary importance, Browning's [1]
"Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau" [3]
Profundity, Browning's [1]
"Prospice" [3]

Rabbi Ben Ezra [2]
Rawdon Brown, Sonnet to [1]
"Red Cotton Nightcap Country" [2]
Religious Opinions [1+]
"Rephan" [1]
"The Return of the Druses" [3]
"Reverie" [3]
Richmond [1]
"The Ring and the Book" [8]
Romance, Browning and [1]
Rome, the Brownings in [2]
Roscoe, W. C. [1]
"Rosny" [1]
Rossetti, Dante Gabriel [3]
"The Round of Day" [1]
Ruskin, J. [2]
Russia, Visit to [1]

Sainte-Beuve [2]
"Saul" [3]
Schiller [1]
School, Peckham [2]
Schopenhauer [2]
Shortcomings, Browning's artistic [1]
Science, Browning and [1]
Scott, David [1]
Scott, Sir W. [1]
"Serenade at the Villa" [1]
Sex, Browning's artistic relation to [1]
Shakespeare [8]
Shelley [11]
Shelley Letters, the [1]
"Sibrandus Schafnaburgensis" [2]
Skelton, John [1]
"Sludge the Medium" [2]
Songs --  "Nay but you" [1]; "Round us the wild creatures" [1];
  "Once I saw" [1]; "Man I am" [1]; "You groped your way" [1];
  "Wish me no wish unspoken" [1].
Sonnets, Browning's [1]
"Sonnets from the Portuguese" [2]
"Sordello" [12]
Soul, Browning and the [1]
"A Soul's Tragedy" [3]
"Speculative" [1]
Spiritual influence, Browning's [1]
"The Statue and the Bust" [1]
"St. Martin's Summer" [1]
Story, W. W. [3]
"Strafford" [5]
Summary of Criticism [1]
Swinburne, A. C. [1]

Talfourd [2]
Tauchnitz edition [1]
Taylor, Bayard [1]
Tennyson, Lord [6]
"There's a woman like a dew-drop" [3]
Thinker, Browning as [1]
"Through the Metidja to Abd-el-Kadr" [1]
"A Toccata of Galuppi's" [2]
"Tokay" [1]
"The Tomb at St. Praxed's" [2]
"Too Late" [1]
"Touch him ne'er so lightly" [1]
Tour-de-force, Poetry and [1]
Transcripts from Life [1]
Traill, H. D. [1]
"Two in the Campagna" [3]
"Two Poets of Croisic" [2]

University College [1]

Venice [3]
"Verse-making" [1]

Wagner [1]
Wedmore, F. [1]
Westminster Abbey [1]
"What of the Leafage", etc. [1]
"Why from the World" [1]
Wiedemann, Mr. [1]
"A Woman's Last Word" [1]
Women, Browning's [1]
"Women and Roses" [1]
Wonder Spirit, Browning and the [1]
Wordsworth [4]
Work, Browning's mass of [1]

Yates, E., Letter from Browning to [1]
York, the horse [2]
"Youth and Art" [2]

"Z" signed Sonnet [1]






Bibliography.

by John P. Anderson (British Museum).

  ========

  I.  Works.
 II.  Single Works.
III.  Contributions to Magazines.
 IV.  Printed Letters.
  V.  Selections.
 VI.  Appendix --
        Biography, Criticism, etc.
        Magazine Articles.
VII.  Chronological List of Works.


  --------


  I.  Works.


Poems.  2 vols.  A new edition.  London, 1849, 16mo.
  Vol. 1:  Paracelsus; Pippa Passes, a Drama; King Victor and King Charles,
  a Tragedy; Colombe's Birthday, a Play.
  Vol. 2:  A Blot in the 'Scutcheon, a Tragedy; The Return of the Druses,
  a Tragedy; Luria, a Tragedy; A Soul's Tragedy; Dramatic Romances and Lyrics.

The Poetical Works of Robert Browning.  Third edition.  3 vols.
London, 1863, 8vo.
  Vol. 1:  Lyrics; Romances; Men and Women.
  Vol. 2:  Tragedies and other Plays.
  Vol. 3:  Paracelsus; Christmas Eve and Easter Day; Sordello.

The Poetical Works of Robert Browning.  6 vols.  London, 1868, 8vo.
  Vol. 1:  Pauline; Paracelsus; Strafford.
  Vol. 2:  Sordello; Pippa Passes.
  Vol. 3:  King Victor and King Charles; Dramatic Lyrics;
    The Return of the Druses.
  Vol. 4:  A Blot in the 'Scutcheon; Colombe's Birthday; Dramatic Romances.
  Vol. 5:  A Soul's Tragedy; Luria; Christmas Eve and Easter Day;
    Men and Women.
  Vol. 6:  In a Balcony; Dramatis Personae.

Complete Works of Robert Browning.  A reprint from the latest English edition.
Chicago, 1872-74, 8vo.
  Nos. 1-19 of the "Official Guide of the Chicago and Alton R. R.
  and Monthly Reprint and Advertiser."

The Poetical Works of Robert Browning.  2 vols.  Leipzig, 1872, 8vo.
  Vols. 1197, 1198 of the "Tauchnitz Collection of British Authors".

The Poetical Works of Robert Browning.  16 vols.  London, 1888-9, 8vo.
  Vol. 1:  Pauline; Sordello.
  Vol. 2:  Paracelsus; Strafford.
  Vol. 3:  Pippa Passes; King Victor and King Charles;
    The Return of the Druses; A Soul's Tragedy.
  Vol. 4:  A Blot in the 'Scutcheon; Colombe's Birthday; Men and Women.
  Vol. 5:  Dramatic Romances; Christmas Eve and Easter Day.
  Vol. 6:  Dramatic Lyrics; Luria.
  Vol. 7:  In a Balcony; Dramatis Personae.
  Vols. 8-10:  The Ring and the Book, 3 vols.
  Vol. 11:  Balaustion's Adventure; Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau;
    Fifine at the Fair.
  Vol. 12:  Red Cotton Nightcap Country; The Inn Album.
  Vol. 13:  Aristophanes' Apology; The Agamemnon of Aeschylus.
  Vol. 14:  Pacchiarotto and how he worked in Distemper, with other Poems.
  Vol. 15:  Dramatic Idyls; Jocoseria.
  Vol. 16:  Ferishtah's Fancies; Parleyings with Certain People.



 II.  Single Works.


The Agamemnon of Aeschylus, transcribed by Robert Browning.
London, 1877, 8vo.

Aristophanes' Apology, including a transcript from Euripides,
being the Last Adventure of Balaustion.  London, 1875, 8vo.

Asolando:  Fancies and Facts.  London, 1890 [1889], 8vo.
  Now in seventh edition.

Balaustion's Adventure; including a transcript from Euripides
[i.e., a translation of the "Alcestis"].  London, 1871, 8vo.
  Now in third edition.

Bells and Pomegranates.  8 Nos.  London, 1841-1846, 8vo.
  No. 1:  Pippa Passes.  1841.
  No. 2:  King Victor and King Charles.  1842.
  No. 3:  Dramatic Lyrics.  1842.
  No. 4:  The Return of the Druses.  1843.
  No. 5:  A Blot in the 'Scutcheon.  1843.
  No. 6:  Colombe's Birthday.  1844.
  No. 7:  Dramatic Romances and Lyrics.  1845.
  No. 8:  Luria; A Soul's Tragedy.  1846.

Christmas Eve and Easter Day.  A poem.  London, 1850, 16mo.

Cleon.  Moxon:  London, 1855, 8vo.
  Reprinted in `Men and Women'.

Dramatic Idyls.  2 series.  London, 1879-80, 8vo.
  The First Series now in 2nd edition.

Dramatis Personae.  London, 1864, 8vo.
  Three poems in this book were reprinted from advance copies
  in the Atlantic Monthly in vol. 13, 1864, viz. `Gold Hair', pp. 596-599;
  `Prospice', p. 694; `Under the Cliff', pp. 737, 738.

---- Second edition.  London, 1864, 8vo.

Ferishtah's Fancies.  London, 1884, 8vo.
  Now in third edition.

Fifine at the Fair.  London, 1872, 8vo.

Gold Hair:  a Legend of Pornic.  [London], 1864, 8vo.
  Reprinted in `Dramatis Personae'.  `Gold Hair' appeared
  in the Atlantic Monthly, May 1864, and `Dramatis Personae'
  was published on May 28, 1864.

The Inn Album.  London, 1875, 8vo.

Jocoseria.  London, 1883, 8vo.
  Now in third edition.

La Saisiaz.  The Two Poets of Croisic.  London, 1878, 8vo.

Men and Women.  2 vols.  London, 1855, 8vo.

Pacchiarotto and how he worked in distemper:  with other poems.
London, 1876, 8vo.

Paracelsus.  London, 1835, 8vo.

Parleyings with Certain People of Importance in their Day.
Introduced by a Dialogue between Apollo and the Fates, etc.
London, 1887, 8vo.

Pauline, a Fragment of a Confession.  London, 1833, 8vo.
  There are only five known copies extant, two of which
  are in the British Museum.

---- A reprint of the original edition of 1833.  Edited by T. J. Wise.
London, 1886, 12mo.
  Four copies were printed on vellum.

The Pied Piper of Hamelin, with 35 illustrations by Kate Greenaway.
London [1889], 4to.
  Appeared originally in `Dramatic Lyrics' (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 3),
  1842.

Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau:  Saviour of Society.  London, 1871, 8vo.

Red Cotton Nightcap Country; or Turf and Towers.  London, 1873, 8vo.

The Ring and the Book.  4 vols.  London, 1868-69, 8vo.
  Now in second edition.

Sordello.  London, 1840, 8vo.

The Statue and the Bust.  Moxon:  London, 1855, 8vo.
  Reprinted in `Men and Women'.

Strafford:  an historical tragedy.  London, 1837, 8vo.

---- [Acting edition for the use of the North London Collegiate School
for Girls.]  [London, 1882.]  8vo.

---- Another edition.  With notes and preface by E. H. Hickey,
and an introduction by S. R. Gardiner.  London, 1884, 8vo.

Two Poems.  By Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Robert Browning.
London, 1854, 8vo.
  These two poems, "A Plea for the Ragged Schools of London",
  by Elizabeth B. Browning, and "The Twins", by Robert Browning,
  were printed by Miss Arabella Barrett, for a bazaar in aid of
  a "Refuge for Young Destitute Girls".  "The Twins" was reprinted
  in "Men and Women", in 1855.



III.  Contributions to Magazines.


Sonnet. --  "Eyes, calm beside thee, (Lady couldst thou know!)"
Dated August 17, 1834; signed "Z".  (`Monthly Repository', vol. 8 N.S.,
1834, p. 712.)

The King. --  "A King lived long ago."  Signed "Z".  (`Monthly Repository',
vol. 9 N.S., 1835, pp. 707, 708.)
  Reprinted with six fresh lines and revised throughout,
  in `Pippa Passes' (1841).

Porphyria. --  "The rain set early in to-night."  Signed "Z".
(`Monthly Repository', vol. 10 N.S., 1836, pp. 43, 44.)

Johannes Agricola. --  "There's Heaven above; and night by night."
Signed "Z".  (`Monthly Repository', vol. 10 N.S., 1836, pp. 45, 46.)
  `Porphyria' and `Johannes Agricola' were reprinted
  in "Bells and Pomegranates", No. 3, with the title `Madhouse Cells'.

Lines. --  "Still ailing, wind?  Wilt be appeased or no?"  Signed "Z".
(`Monthly Repository', vol. 10 N.S., 1836, pp. 270, 271.)
  Reprinted revised, in `Dramatis Personae', 1864,
  as the first six stanzas of VI. of "James Lee".

The Laboratory (Ancient Regime).  (`Hood's Magazine',
vol. 1, 1844, pp. 513, 514.)
  Reprinted in `Dramatic Romances and Lyrics' (1845),
  as the first of two poems called "France and England".

Claret and Tokay.  (`Hood's Magazine', vol. 1, 1844, p. 525.)
  Reprinted in `Dramatic Romances and Lyrics' (1845).

Garden Fancies.  I. The Flower's Name; II. Sibrandus Schafnaburgensis.
(`Hood's Magazine', vol. 2, 1844, pp. 45-48.)
  Reprinted in `Dramatic Romances and Lyrics' (1845).

The Boy and the Angel.  (`Hood's Magazine', vol. 2, 1844, pp. 140-142.)
  Reprinted revised, and with five fresh couplets,
  in `Dramatic Romances and Lyrics' (1845).

The Tomb at St. Praxed's (Rome 15--).  (`Hood's Magazine',
vol. 3, 1845, pp. 237-239.)
  Reprinted in `Dramatic Romances and Lyrics' (1845).

The Flight of the Duchess.  (`Hood's Magazine', vol. 3, 1845, pp. 313-318.)
  Reprinted in `Dramatic Romances and Lyrics' (1845).

Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley.  [A fabrication.]
With an introductory essay, by Robert Browning.  London, 1852, 8vo.

---- On the poet, objective and subjective; on the latter's aim;
on Shelley as man and poet.  [Being a reprint of the Introductory Essay
to "Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley".]  London, 1881, 8vo.
  Published for the Browning Society.

---- A reprint of the Introductory Essay prefixed to the volume
of Letters of Shelley.  Edited by W. Tyas Harden.  London, 1888, 8vo.

Ben Karshook's Wisdom.  (`The Keepsake', 1856, p. 16.)

May and Death.  (`The Keepsake', 1857, p. 164.)
  Reprinted in `Dramatis Personae' (1864).

Orpheus and Eurydice.  F. Leighton.  8 lines.  (`Royal Academy
Exhibition Catalogue' 1864, p. 13.)
  Reprinted in `Poetical Works', 1868, where it is included
  in `Dramatis Personae'.

Gold Hair.  See note to `Dramatis Personae'.

Prospice.  See note to `Dramatis Personae'.

Under the Cliff.  See note to `Dramatis Personae'.

A selection from the poetry of Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
[First series edited by Robert Browning.]  2 series.  London, 1866-80, 8vo.

Herve Riel.  (`Cornhill Magazine', vol. 23, 1871, pp. 257-260.)
  Reprinted in `Pacchiarotto and other Poems', 1876.

"Oh Love, Love":  the Lyric of Euripides in his Hippolytus.
(`Euripides'.  By J. P. Mahaffy, p. 116.)  London, 1879, 12mo.

"The Blind Man to the Maiden said."  (`The Hour will Come,
by Wilhelmine von Hillern.  From the German by Clara Bell', vol. 2, p. 174.)
London [1879], 8vo.
  Printed anonymously; quoted with statement of authorship
  in the `Whitehall Review', March 1, 1883.  Reprinted in
  `Browning Society's Papers', Pt. 4, p. 410.

Ten new lines to "Touch him ne'er so lightly".  (`Dramatic Idyls', 2nd ser.,
1880, p. 149.)  Lines written in an autograph album, Oct. 14, 1880.
(`Century Magazine', vol. 25, 1882, pp. 159, 160.)
  Printed without Mr. Browning's consent.  Reprinted in
  the `Browning Society's Papers', Pt. 3, p. 48.

Sonnet on Goldoni (dated "Venice, Nov. 27, 1883").
Written for the Album of the Committee of the Goldoni Monument at Venice,
and inserted on the first page.  (`Pall Mall Gazette', Dec. 8, 1883.)
  Reprinted in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, p. 98*.

Sonnet on Rawdon Brown (dated Nov. 28, 1883).  (`Century Magazine',
vol. 27, 1884, p. 640.)
  Reprinted in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, p. 132*.

Paraphrase from Horace.  Four lines, written impromptu
for Mr. Felix Moscheles.  (`Pall Mall Gazette', Dec. 13, 1883, p. 6.)
  Reprinted in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, p. 99*.

Helen's Tower:  Sonnet, dated "April 26, 1870."  Written for
the Earl of Dufferin, who built a tower in memory of his mother,
Helen, Countess of Gifford, on his estate at Clandeboye.
(`Pall Mall Gazette', Dec. 28, 1883, p. 2.)
  Reprinted in `Sonnets of this Century', edited by William Sharp, 1886,
  and in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, p. 97*.

The Founder of the Feast:  Sonnet.  (Dated "April 5, 1884.")
Inscribed by Mr. Browning in the Album presented to Mr. Arthur Chappell,
director of the St. James's Hall Concerts, etc.
(`The World', April 16, 1884.)
  Reprinted in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 7, p. 18*.

"The Names".  Sonnet on Shakespeare.  Contributed to
the "Shaksperian Show-Book" of the Shaksperian Show, held at the Albert Hall,
on May 29-31, 1884.
  Reprinted in the `Pall Mall Gazette', May 29, and in
  the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, p. 105*.

The Divine Order and other Sermons and Addresses, by the late Thomas Jones.
Edited by Brynmor Jones.  With a short introduction by Robert Browning.
London, 1884, 8vo.

Why I am a Liberal:  Sonnet.  (`Why I am a Liberal', edited by Andrew Reid.
London, 1885, p. 11.)
  Reprinted in `Sonnets of this Century', edited by William Sharp, 1886,
  and in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, p. 92*.

Prefatory Note to the `Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett Browning', 1889,
dated "Dec. 10, 1887."

To Edward Fitzgerald.  "I chanced upon a new book yesterday."
12 lines, dated "July 8, 1889"  (`Athenaeum', July 13, 1889, p. 64).



 IV.  Printed Letters.


Letter to Laman Blanchard [? April, 1841], dated "Craven Cottage, Saturday."
(`Poetical Works of Laman Blanchard', pp. 6-8.)  London, 1876, 8vo.

Letters to Henry Fothergill Chorley on his novels Pomfret (1845)
and Roccabella (1860).  (`Autobiography, Memoir, and Letters
of Henry Fothergill Chorley', vol. 2, pp. 25, 26, 169-174.)

Letter to R. H. Horne, dated Pisa, Dec. 4 [1846].  Another dated London,
Sept. 24 [1851], signed Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
(`Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning to R. H. Horne, 1877,
vol. 2, pp. 182-3, 194-5.)  London, 1877, 8vo.

Letter to William Etty, R.A., dated "Bagni di Lucca, Sept. 21, 1849."
(`Life of William Etty, R.A.'  By Alexander Gilchrist, vol. 2, pp. 280-81.)
London, 1855, 8vo.

Letter to Leigh Hunt (dated "Bagni di Lucca, 6th Oct., 1857").
(`Correspondence of Leigh Hunt, edited by his eldest son',
vol. 2, pp. 264-267.)  London, 1862, 8vo.

Letter to the Editor of `The Daily News', dated "19 Warwick Crescent, W.,
Feb. 9," stating that his contribution to the French Relief Fund
was his publishers' payment for a lyrical poem (Herve Riel).
(`Daily News', Feb. 10, 1871.)

Letter to the Editor of `The Daily News', dated "Nov. 20."
On line 131, "Gave us the doctrine of the enclitic De" of the poem,
`A Grammarian's Funeral'.  (`Daily News', Nov. 21, 1874.)

Letter to the Rev. Alexander B. Grosart, on the Poem of `The Lost Leader'
and `Wordsworth', dated "19 Warwick Crescent, Feb. 24, 1875."
(`The Prose Works of William Wordsworth'.  Edited by the Rev. A. B. Grosart,
vol. 1, p. xxxvii.)  London, 1876, 8vo.

The Lord Rectorship of St. Andrew's.  Letter to the Editor of `The Times',
dated "19 Warwick Crescent, Nov. 19."  (`Times', Nov. 20, 1877.)

Letter to F. J. Furnivall.  (`Academy', Dec. 20, 1878.)

Letter to Mr. J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps, and printed by the latter in 1881.

Letter to Mr. Charles Kent, dated "29 De Vere Gardens, W.,
28 August, 1889." Accompanied by a presentation copy
of the 3rd vol. of the new collective edition of "Poems".
(`Athenaeum', Dec. 21, 1889, p. 860).

In Berdoe's "Browning's Message to his Time", etc., London, 1890,
there are a number of letters from Browning.

In the new edition of Kingsland's "Robert Browning", London, 1890,
there are several letters from Browning.

[Mrs. Sutherland Orr's "Life and Letters of Robert Browning", London, 1891,
includes a number of his letters, and a few fugitive poems.  -- A. L., 1996.]



  V.  Selections.


Selections from the Poetical Works of Robert Browning.
[Edited by J. Forster and B. W. Procter.]  London, 1863 [1862], 16mo.

Moxon's Miniature Poets.  A Selection from the Works of Robert Browning.
London, 1865, 8vo.

Selections from the Poetical Works of Robert Browning.  2 series.
London, 1872-80, 8vo.

Favourite Poems.  Illustrated.  Boston, 1877, 16mo.

A Selection from the Works of Robert Browning.  With a memoir of the author,
and explanatory notes.  Edited by F. H. Ahn.  Berlin, 1882, 8vo.
  Vol. 8 of Ahn's "Collection of British and American Standard Authors."

Stories from Robert Browning.  By F. M. Holland.  With an introduction
by Mrs. Sutherland Orr.  London, 1882, 8vo.

Lyrical and Dramatic Poems selected from the works of Robert Browning.
With an extract from Stedman's "Victorian Poets".  Edited by E. T. Mason.
New York, 1883, 8vo.

Selections from the Poetry of Robert Browning.  With an introduction
by R. G. White.  New York [1883], 8vo.

Pomegranates from an English Garden:  a selection from the poems
of Robert Browning.  With introduction and notes by J. M. Gibson.
New York, 1885, 8vo.

Select Poems of Robert Browning.  Edited, with notes,
by William J. Rolfe and Heloise E. Hersey.  New York, 1886, 8vo.

Lyrics, Idyls, and Romances from the poetic and dramatic works
of Robert Browning.  Boston, 1887, 8vo.

Good and True Thoughts from Robert Browning.  Selected by Amy Cross.
New York, 1888, 4to.
  Printed in blue ink, and on one side of the leaf.

The Browning Reciter:  Poems for Recitation, by Robert Browning
and other writers.  Edited by A. H. Miles.  London, 1889, 8vo.
  Part of the "Platform Series".



 VI.  Appendix --


        Biography, Criticism, etc.

Alexander, William John. --  An Introduction to the poetry of Robert Browning.
Boston, 1889, 8vo.

Austin, Alfred. --  The Poetry of the Period.  London, 1870, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 38-76.  Appeared originally in `Temple Bar',
  vol. 26, 1869, pp. 316-333.

Bagehot, Walter. --  Literary Studies.  2 vols.  London, 1879, 8vo.
  Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Browning; or, Pure, Ornate, and Grotesque Art
  in English Poetry, vol. 2, pp. 338-390.  Appeared originally
  in the `National Review', vol. 19, 1864, pp. 27-67.

Barnett, Professor. --  Browning's Jews and Shakespeare's Jew.
Read at the 54th meeting of the Browning Society, Nov. 25th, 1887.
London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 10, pp. 207-220.

Beale, Dorothea. --  The Religious Teaching of Browning.
(Read at the 10th meeting of the Browning Society, Oct. 27th, 1882.)
London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 3, pp. 323-338.

Berdoe, Edward. --  Browning as a Scientific Poet.
(Read at the meeting of the Browning Society, April 24th, 1885.)
London, 1885, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 7, pp. 33-54.

---- Browning's Estimate of Life.  (Read at the meeting of the Society,
Oct. 28, 1887.)  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 10, pp. 200-206.

---- Browning's Message to his Time:  His Religion, Philosophy, and Science.
[With facsimile letters of Browning and portrait.]  London, 1890, 8vo.

Birrell, Augustine. --  Obiter Dicta.  London, 1884, 8vo.
  On the alleged obscurity of Mr. Browning's poetry, pp. 55-95.

Browning, Robert. --  Robert Browning's Poetry.  Outline Studies
published for the Chicago Browning Society.  Chicago, 1886, 8vo.

Browning Society. --  The Browning Society's Papers.  In progress.
London, 1881, etc., 8vo.

Buchanan, Robert. --  Master-Spirits.  London, 1873, 8vo.
  Browning's Masterpiece, pp. 89-109.  A revised reprint
  of the Athenaeum reviews of "The Ring and the Book"
  in December and March 1870.

Bulkeley, Rev. J. H. --  James Lee's Wife.  (Read at the 16th meeting
of the Browning Society, May 25, 1883.)  London, 1883, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 4, pp. 455-468.

---- The Reasonable Rhythm of some of Browning's poems.
Read at the 42nd meeting of the Browning Society, May 28, 1886.
London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 119-131.

Burt, Mary E. --  Browning's Women, etc.  Chicago, 1887, 8vo.

Bury, John B. --  Browning's Philosophy.  (Read at the 6th meeting
of the Browning Society, April 28, 1882.)  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 3, pp. 259-277.

---- On "Aristophanes' Apology".  Read at the 38th meeting
of the Browning Society, Jan. 29, 1886.  London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 79-86.

C. C. S., i.e., C. S. Calverley. --  Fly Leaves.  Cambridge, 1872, 8vo.
  "The Cock and the Bull", a Parody on `The Ring and the Book', pp. 113-120.

Cooke, Bancroft. --  An Introduction to Robert Browning.
A criticism of the purpose and method of his earlier works.
London [1883], 8vo.

Cooke, George Willis. --  Poets and Problems.  London [1886], 8vo.
  Browning, pp. 269-388.

Cooper, Thompson. --  Men of Mark, etc., London, 1881, 4to.
  Robert Browning, with photograph.  Fifth Series, No. 17.

Corson, Hiram. --  The Idea of Personality, as embodied in
Robert Browning's Poetry.  (Read at the 8th meeting of the Browning Society,
June 23, 1882.)  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 3, pp. 293-321.
  [Also included in:]

---- An Introduction to the Study of Robert Browning's Poetry.
Boston, 1886, 8vo.
  [3rd ed. is now online.]

Courtney, W. L. --  Studies New and Old.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, Writer of Plays, pp. 100-123.

Devey, J. --  A Comparative Estimate of Modern English Poets.
London, 1873, 8vo.
  Browning, pp. 376-421.

Dowden, Edward. --  Mr. Tennyson and Mr. Browning.  (`The Afternoon Lectures
on Literature and Art delivered in . . . Dublin, 1867 and 1868', pp. 141-179.)
Dublin, 1869, 8vo.
  Reprinted in E. Dowden's "Studies in Literature", 1878, pp. 191-239.

---- Studies in Literature, 1789-1877.  London, 1878, 8vo.
  Mr. Browning's place in recent literature, pp. 80-84;
  Mr. Tennyson and Mr. Browning, pp. 191-239.

---- Transcripts and Studies.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  Mr. Browning's "Sordello", pp. 474-525.

Eyles, F. A. H. --  Popular Poets of the Period, etc.
London, 1888, etc., 8vo.
  Robert Browning, by Alexander H. Japp, No. 7, pp. 193-199.

Fleming, Albert. --  Andrea del Sarto.  Read at the 39th meeting
of the Browning Society, Feb. 26, 1886.  London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 95-102.

Forman, H. Buxton. --  Our Living Poets.  London, 1871, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 103-152.

Fotheringham, James. --  Studies in the Poetry of Robert Browning.
London, 1887, 8vo.

---- Second edition, revised and enlarged.  London, 1888, 8vo.

Friswell, J. Hain. --  Modern Men of Letters honestly criticised.
London, 1870, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 119-131.

Fuller, S. Margaret. --  Papers on Literature and Art.  2 parts.
London, 1846, 8vo.
  Browning's Poems, pt. 2, pp. 31-45.

Furnivall, Frederick J. --  A Bibliography of Robert Browning, from 1833-81.
London, 1881-82, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, 1881-4, Pts. 1 and 2.

---- How the Browning Society came into being.  With some words
on the characteristics and contrasts of Browning's early and late work.
London, 1884, 8vo.

---- A grammatical analysis of "O Lyric Love".  Read at the 48th meeting
of the Browning Society, Feb. 25, 1887.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 9, pp. 165-168.

Galton, Arthur. --  Urbana Scripta.  Studies of five living poets, etc.
London, 1885, 8vo.
  Mr. Browning, pp. 59-76.

Gannon, Nicholas J. --  An Essay on the characteristic errors
of our most distinguished living poets.  Dublin, 1853, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 25-32.

Glazebrook, Mrs. M. G. --  "A Death in the Desert".  Read at the 48th meeting
of the Browning Society, Feb. 25, 1887.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 9, pp. 153-164.

Halliwell-Phillipps, James O. --  Copy of Correspondence
[between J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps and Robert Browning,
concerning expressions respecting Halliwell-Phillipps, used by F. J. Furnivall
in the preface to a facsimile of the second edition of Hamlet,
published in 1880].  [Brighton? 1881] fol.

Hamilton, Walter. --  Parodies of the Works of English and American Authors.
London, 1889, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, vol. 6, pp. 46-55.

Haweis, Rev. H. R. --  Poets in the Pulpit.  London, 1880, 8vo.
  Robert Browning.  New Year's Eve, pp. 117-143.

Herford, C. H. --  Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau.  London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 133-145.

Hodgkins, Louise Manning. --  Nineteenth Century Authors.  Robert Browning.
Boston [1889], 8vo.

Holland, F. May. --  Sordello.  A Story from Robert Browning.
New York, 1881, 8vo.
  Very scarce.

Horne, R. H. --  A New Spirit of the Age.  2 vols.  London, 1844, 8vo.
  Robert Browning (with a portrait engraved by J. C. Armytage)
  and J. W. Marston, vol. 2, pp. 153-186.

Hutton, Richard Holt. --  Essays, Theological and Literary.  2 vols.
London, 1871, 8vo.
  Mr. Browning, vol. 2, pp. 190-247.

Johnson, Rev. Prof. Edwin. --  On "Bishop Blougram's Apology".
(Read at the 7th meeting of the Browning Society, May 26, 1882.)
London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 3, pp. 279-292.

---- Conscience and Art in Browning.  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 3, pp. 345-379.

---- On "Mr. Sludge the Medium".  Read at the 31st meeting
of the Browning Society, March 27, 1885.  London, 1885, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 7, pp. 13-32.

Kingsland, William G. --  Robert Browning:  chief poet of the age.
An essay addressed primarily to beginners in the study of Browning's poems.
London, 1887, 8vo.

---- New edition, with biographical and other additions.  London, 1890, 8vo.

Landor, Walter Savage. --  The Works of Walter Savage Landor.  2 vols.
London, 1846, 8vo.
  Poem "To Robert Browning", vol. 2, p. 673.

M`Cormick, William S. --  Three Lectures on English Literature.
Paisley, 1889, 8vo.
  The poetry of Robert Browning, pp. 125-184.

Macdonald, George. --  Orts.  London, 1882, 8vo.
  Browning's "Christmas Eve", pp. 195-217.

---- The Imagination and other Essays.  Boston [1883], 8vo.
  Browning's "Christmas Eve", pp. 195-217.

McNicoll, Thomas. --  Essays on English Literature.  London, 1861, 8vo.
  New Poems of Browning and Landor (1856), pp. 298-314.

McCrie, George. --  The Religion of our Literature.  Essays upon
Thomas Carlyle, Robert Browning, Alfred Tennyson, etc.  London, 1875, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 69-109.

Macready, William Charles. --  Macready's Reminiscences
and Selections from his diaries and letters.  2 vols.  London, 1875, 8vo.
  Numerous references to Browning.

Mayor, Joseph B. --  Chapters on English Metre.  London, 1886, 8vo.
  Tennyson and Browning, Chap. 12, pp. 184-196.

Morison, J. Cotter. --  "Caliban upon Setebos", with some notes
on Browning's Subtlety and Humour.  (Read at the 24th Meeting
of the Browning Society, April 25, 1884.)  London, 1884, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, pp. 489-498.

Morrison, Jeanie. --  Sordello.  An outline analysis of Mr. Browning's Poem.
London, 1889, 8vo.

Nettleship, John T. --  Essays on Robert Browning's Poetry.
London, 1868, 8vo.

---- New edition.  New York, 1890, 8vo.

---- On Browning's "Fifine at the Fair".  To be read at
the 4th Meeting of the Browning Society, Feb. 24, 1882.  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 2, pp. 199-230.

---- Classification of Browning's Works.  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 2, pp. 231-234.

---- Browning's Intuition, specially in regard of music and the Plastic Arts.
(Read at the 13th meeting of the Browning Society, Feb. 23, 1883.)
London, 1883, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 4, pp. 381-396.

---- On the development of Browning's Genius in his capacity as poet or maker.
Read at the 35th Meeting of the Browning Society, Oct. 30, 1885.
London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 55-77.

Noel, Hon. Roden. --  Essays on Poetry and Poets.  London, 1886, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 256-282; Robert Browning's Poetry, pp. 283-303.

Notes and Queries. --  Notes and Queries.  7 Series.  London, 1849-1889, 4to.
  Numerous references to Browning.

O'Byrne, George. --  Robert Browning.  In Memoriam.  An Epicedium.
Nottingham [1890], 8vo.

O'Conor, William Anderson. --  Essays in Literature and Ethics.
Manchester, 1889, 8vo.
  Browning's "Childe Roland", pp. 1-24.

Ormerod, Helen J. --  Some Notes on Browning's Poems referring to Music.
Read at the 51st Meeting of the Browning Society, May 27, 1887.
London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 9, pp. 180-195.

---- Abt Vogler, the Man.  Read at the 55th Meeting of the Browning Society,
Jan. 27th, 1888.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 10, pp. 221-236.

Orr, Mrs. Sutherland. --  A Handbook to the Works of Robert Browning.
London, 1885, 8vo.

---- Second edition, revised.  London, 1886, 8vo.

---- Classification of Browning's Poems.  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 2, pp. 235-238.

[Orr, Mrs. Sutherland. --  Life and Letters of Robert Browning.  2nd ed.
Smith, Elder, & Co.:  London, 1891, 8vo.  Now online.  -- A. L., 1996.]

Outram, Leonard S. --  Love's Value.  Colombe's Birthday.  Act IV.
(The Avowal of Valence.)  Read at the 38th Meeting of the Browning Society,
Jan. 29, 1886.  London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 87-94.

Pearson, Howard S. --  On Browning as a Landscape Painter.
Read at the 41st Meeting of the Browning Society, April 30, 1886.
London, 1886, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 8, pp. 103-118.

Pollock, Frederick. --  Leading cases done into English.
By an Apprentice of Lincoln's Inn [Frederick Pollock].  Second edition.
London, 1876, 8vo.
  IV.  "Scott v. Shepherd (1 Sm. L. C. 477.), Any Pleader to any Student",
  pp. 15-19.  A Parody on Browning.

Portrait. --  The Portrait.  Vol. 1.  London, 1877, 4to.
  Robert Browning, by G. Barnett Smith, 4 pages.
  The portrait is from a photograph by Elliott & Fry.

Portrait Gallery. --  National Portrait Gallery.  London [1877], 4to.
  Robert Browning (with portrait), 4th Series, pp. 73-80.

Powell, Thomas. --  The Living Authors of England.  New York, 1849, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 71-85.

---- Pictures of the Living Authors of Britain.  London, 1851, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 61-75.

Radford, Ernest. --  Illustrations to Browning's Poems;
with a notice of the artists and the pictures, by E. Radford.  2 pts.
London, 1882-3, fol.
  Published for the Browning Society.

Raleigh, W. A. --  On some prominent points in Browning's Teaching.
(Read at the 22nd Meeting of the Browning Society, Feb. 22, 1884.)
London, 1884, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, pp. 477-488.

Reeve, Lovell. --  Portraits of Men of Eminence in Literature,
Science, and Art, with biographical memoirs, etc.  6 vols.
London, 1863-67, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, vol. 1, pp. 109-112.

Revell, William F. --  Browning's Poems on God and Immortality
as bearing on life here.  (Read at the 14th Meeting of the Browning Society,
March 30, 1883.)  London, 1883, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 4, pp. 435-454.

---- Browning's Views of Life.  Address on Oct. 28, 1887.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 10, pp. 197-199.

Sharp, William. --  Browning and the Arts.  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 3, pp. 34*-40*.

Sharpe, Rev. John. --  On "Pietro of Abano" and the leading ideas
of "Dramatic Idyls".  Second series, 1880.  (Read at the 2nd Meeting
of the Browning Society, Nov. 25, 1881.)  London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 2, pp. 191-197.

---- Jocoseria.  (Read at the 20th Meeting of the Browning Society,
Nov. 23, 1883.)  London, 1884, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, pp. 93*-97*.

Shirley, (pseud.) [i.e., John Skelton]. --  A Campaigner at Home.
London, 1865, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 247-283.  Appeared originally in Fraser's Magazine,
  vol. 67, 1863, pp. 240-256.

Stedman, Edmund Clarence. --  Victorian Poets.  Boston, 1876, 8vo.
  Robert Browning, pp. 293-341.

---- Another edition.  Boston, 1887, 8vo.

Stoddart, Anna M. --  "Saul".  Read at the 59th Meeting
of the Browning Society, May 25, 1888.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 10, pp. 264-274.

Swinburne, Algernon C. --  The Works of George Chapman:
Poems and Minor Translations.  London, 1875, 8vo.
  On Browning, pp. xiv-xix of the "Essay on George Chapman's
  poetical and dramatic works."

---- Specimens of Modern Poets.  The Heptalogia, or the Seven against Sense,
etc.  London, 1880, 8vo.
  John Jones, pp. 9-39.  A parody on James Lee.

Symons, Arthur. --  Is Browning Dramatic?  (Read at the 29th Meeting
of the Browning Society, Jan. 30, 1885.)  London, 1885, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 7, pp. 1-12.

---- An Introduction to the Study of Browning.  London, 1886, 8vo.

---- Some Notes on Mr. Browning's last volume.  (On Parleyings
with Certain People.)  Read at the 50th Meeting of the Browning Society,
April 29, 1887.  London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 9, pp. 169-179.

Thomson, James. --  Notes on the Genius of Robert Browning.
(Read at the 3rd Meeting of the Browning Society, Jan. 27, 1882.)
London, 1882, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 2, pp. 239-250.

Todhunter, Dr. John. --  "The Ring and the Book".  (Read at the 19th Meeting
of the Browning Society, Oct. 26, 1883.)  London, 1884, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, pp. 85*-92*.

---- "Strafford" at the Strand Theatre, Dec. 21, 1886.
Read at the 47th Meeting of the Browning Society, Jan. 28, 1887.
London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 9, pp. 147-152.

Turnbull, Mrs. --  Abt Vogler.  (Read at the 17th Meeting
of the Browning Society, June 22, 1883.)  London, 1883, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 4, pp. 469-476.

---- In a Balcony.  (Read at the Annual Meeting of the Browning Society,
July 4, 1884.)  London, 1884, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 5, pp. 499-502.

Wall, Annie. --  Sordello's Story retold in prose.  Boston, 1886, 8vo.

West, E. D. --  One aspect of Browning's Villains.  (Read at the 15th Meeting
of the Browning Society, April 27, 1883.)  London, 1883, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 4, pp. 411-434.

Westcott, B. F. --  On some points in Browning's View of Life.
A paper read before the Cambridge Browning Society, November, 1882.
Cambridge, 1883, 8vo.
  Printed also in the Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 4, pp. 397-410.

Whitehead, Miss C. M. --  Browning as a Teacher of the Nineteenth Century.
Read at the 58th Meeting of the Browning Society, April 27, 1888.
London, 1888, 8vo.
  The Browning Society's Papers, Pt. 10, pp. 237-263.


        Magazine Articles.

Browning, Robert.
-- Sharpe's London Magazine, vol. 8, 1849, pp. 60-62, 122-127.
-- Revue des Deux Mondes, by J. Milsand, 15 Aug. 1851, pp. 661-689.
-- London Quarterly Review, vol. 6, 1856, pp. 493-501, vol. 22, p. 30, etc.
-- Revue Contemporaine, by J. Milsand, vol. 27, 1856, pp. 511-546.
-- Fraser's Magazine, by J. Skelton, vol. 67, 1863, pp. 240-256;
reprinted in "A Campaigner at Home", 1865.
-- Victoria Magazine, by M. D. Conway, vol. 2, 1864, pp. 298-316.
-- Contemporary Review, vol. 4, 1867, pp. 1-15, 133-148;
same article, Eclectic Magazine, vol. 5 N.S., pp. 314-323, 501-513.
-- Revue des Deux Mondes, by Louis Etienne, tom. 85, 1870, pp. 704-735.
-- Appleton's Journal (with portrait), by R. H. Stoddard,
vol. 6, 1871, pp. 533-536.
-- Once a Week, vol. 9 N.S., 1872, pp. 164-167.
-- Scribner's Monthly, by E. C. Stedman, vol. 9, 1874, pp. 167-183.
-- Galaxy, by J. H. Browne, vol. 19, 1875, pp. 764-774.
-- St. James's Magazine, by T. Bayne, vol. 32, 1877, pp. 153-164.
-- Dublin University Magazine (with portrait), vol. 3 N.S., 1878,
pp. 322-335, 416-443.
-- Gentleman's Magazine, by A. N. McNicoll, vol. 244, 1879, pp. 54-67.
-- Congregationalist, vol. 8, 1879, pp. 915-922.
-- International Review, by G. Barnett Smith, vol. 6, 1879, pp. 176-194.
-- Literary World (Boston), by F. J. Furnivall, H. E. Scudder, etc.,
vol. 13, 1882, pp. 76-81.
-- Critic, by J. H. Morse, vol. 3, 1883, pp. 263, 264.
-- Contemporary Review, by Hon. Roden Noel, vol. 44, 1883, pp. 701-718;
same article, Littell's Living Age, vol. 159, pp. 771-781.
-- British Quarterly Review, vol. 80, 1884, pp. 1-28.
-- Family Friend, by J. Fuller Higgs, vol. 18, 1887, pp. 10-13.
-- Graphic, with portrait, Jan. 15, 1887.
-- Athenaeum, Dec. 21, 1889, pp. 858-860.
-- Atalanta, by Edmund Gosse, Feb. 1889, pp. 361-364.
-- Atlantic Monthly, Feb. 1890, pp. 243-248.
-- Contemporary Review, by the Rev. Stopford A. Brooke, Jan. 1890,
pp. 141-152.
-- Universal Review, by Gabriel Sarrazin, Feb. 1890, pp. 230-246.
-- Art and Literature, with portrait, Feb. 1890, pp. 17-19.
-- Congregational Review, by Ruth J. Pitt, Jan. 1890, pp. 57-66.
-- Expository Times, by the Rev. Professor Salmond, Feb. 1890, pp. 110, 111.
-- The Speaker, by Augustine Birrell, Jan. 4, 1890, pp. 16, 17.
-- National Review, by H. D. Traill, Jan. 1890, pp. 592-597.
-- Scots Magazine, Jan. 1890, pp. 131-136.
-- Argosy, by E. F. Bridell-Fox, Feb. 1890, pp. 108-114.
-- New Church Magazine, by C. E. Rowe, Feb. 1890, pp. 49-58.

---- `Agamemnon'.
-- Edinburgh Review, vol. 147, 1878, pp. 409-436.
-- Athenaeum, Oct. 27, 1877, pp. 525-527.
-- Academy, by J. A. Symonds, Nov. 3, 1877, pp. 419, 420.
-- Literary World (Boston), vol. 13, 1882, p. 419.

---- and Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
-- Leisure Hour (with portraits), 1883, pp. 396-404.
-- Manhattan, by K. M. Rowland, June 1884, pp. 553-562.

---- and the Edinburgh Review.
-- Reader, by Gerald Massey, Nov. 26, 1864, pp. 674, 675.

---- and the Epic of Psychology.
-- London Quarterly Review, vol. 32, 1869, pp. 325-357.

---- and the Greek Drama.
-- Manchester Quarterly, by A. S. Wilkins, vol. 2, 1883, pp. 377-390.

---- and James Russell Lowell.
-- New Englander, vol. 29, 1870, pp. 125-136.

---- and Tennyson.
-- Eclectic Review, vol. 7 N.S., 1864, pp. 361-389.
-- Leisure Hour, Feb. 1890, pp. 231-234.

---- `Another Way of Love'.
-- Critic (New York), by F. L. Turnbull, Sept. 26, 1885, pp. 151, 152.

---- `Aristophanes' Apology'.
-- London Quarterly Review, vol. 44, 1875, pp. 354-376.
-- Academy, by J. A. Symonds, April 17, 1875, pp. 389, 390.
-- Athenaeum, April 17, 1875, pp. 513, 514.

---- as a Preacher.
-- Dark Blue, by E. D. West, vol. 2, 1872, pp. 171-184, 305-319;
same article, Littell's Living Age, vol. 3, pp. 707-723.

---- as a Religious Teacher.
-- Month, by the Rev. John Rickaby, Feb. 1890, pp. 173-190.
-- Good Words, by R. H. Hutton, Feb. 1890, pp. 87-93.

---- as a Teacher.  In Memoriam.
-- Gentleman's Magazine, by Mrs. Alexander Ireland, Feb. 1890, pp. 177-184.

---- as Theologian.
-- Time, by H. W. Massingham, Jan. 1890, pp. 90-96.

---- as a Writer of Plays.
-- Fortnightly Review, by W. L. Courtney, vol. 33 N.S., 1883, pp. 888-900;
same article, Eclectic Magazine, vol. 38 N.S., pp. 358-366.

---- `Balaustion's Adventure'.
-- Contemporary Review, by Matthew Browne, vol. 18, 1871, pp. 284-296.
-- Nation, by J. R. Dennett, vol. 13, 1871, pp. 178, 179.
-- Fortnightly Review, by Sidney Colvin, vol. 10 N.S., 1871, pp. 478-490.
-- Edinburgh Review, vol. 135, 1872, pp. 221-249.
-- London Quarterly Review, vol. 37, 1871, pp. 346-368.
-- Athenaeum, Aug. 12, 1871, pp. 199, 200.
-- Penn Monthly, by R. E. Thompson, vol. 6, 1875, pp. 928-940.
-- St. Paul's Magazine, by E. J. Hasell, vol. 12, 1873, pp. 680-699;
vol. 13, pp. 49-66.
-- Pioneer, Oct. 1887, pp. 159-162.

---- `Bells and Pomegranates'.
-- Christian Remembrancer, vol. 11 N.S., 1846, pp. 316-330.
-- People's Journal, by H. F. Chorley, vol. 2, 1847, pp. 38-40, 104-106.

---- Browning Society.
-- Saturday Review, vol. 53, 1882, pp. 12, 13; vol. 58, 1884, pp. 721, 722.

---- `Childe Roland'.
-- Papers of the Manchester Literary Club, by the Rev. W. A. O'Conor,
vol. 3, 1877, pp. 12-25.
-- Critic (New York), by J. E. Cooke, vol. 8, 1886, pp. 201, 202,
and by A. Bates, pp. 231, 232.

---- ---- `Childe Roland', `Childe Harold', and the `Sangrail'.
-- Papers of the Manchester Literary Club, by John Mortimer,
vol. 3, 1877, pp. 26-31.

---- `Christmas Eve and Easter Day'.
-- Prospective Review, vol. 6, 1850, pp. 267-279.
-- Littell's Living Age (from the Examiner), vol. 25, pp. 403-409.
-- The Germ, No. 4, by W. M. Rossetti, pp. 187-192.
-- Day of Rest, by George MacDonald, vol. 1, 1873, pp. 34-36, 55, 56.

---- Clubs in the United States.
-- Literary World (Boston), by H. Corson, vol. 14, 1883, p. 127.

---- Day with the Brownings at Pratolino.
-- Scribner's Monthly, by E. C. Kinney, vol. 1, 1870, pp. 185-188.

---- `Dead in Venice'.  (Verses.)
-- Athenaeum, Dec. 21, 1889, p. 860.

---- The "Detachment" of.
-- Athenaeum, Jan. 4, 1890, pp. 18, 19.

---- `Dramatic Idyls'.
-- Fortnightly Review, by Grant Allen, vol. 26 N.S., 1879, pp. 149-154.
-- Contemporary Review, by Mrs. Sutherland Orr, vol. 35, 1879, pp. 289-302.
-- Saturday Review, June 21, 1879, pp. 774, 775.
-- Fraser's Magazine, vol. 20 N.S., 1879, pp. 103-124.
-- St. James's Magazine, by T. Bayne, vol. 8, fourth series, 1880,
pp. 108-118.
-- Athenaeum, May 10, 1879, pp. 593-595.
-- Academy, by Frank Wedmore, May 10, 1879, pp. 403, 404.
-- Athenaeum, July 10, 1880, pp. 39-41.
-- Literary World, July 23, 1880, pp. 49-51.

---- `Dramatis Personae'.
-- St. James's Magazine, by R. Bell, vol. 10, 1864, pp. 477-491.
-- New Monthly Magazine, by T. F. Wedmore, vol. 133, 1865, pp. 186-194.
-- Dublin University Magazine, vol. 64, 1864, pp. 573-579.
-- Eclectic Review, by E. Paxton Hood, vol. 7 N.S., 1864, pp. 62-72.

---- Early Writings of.
-- Century, by E. W. Gosse, vol. 23, 1881, pp. 189-200.

---- `Ferishtah's Fancies'.
-- Athenaeum, Dec. 6, 1884, pp. 725-727.
-- Saturday Review, vol. 58, 1884, pp. 727, 728.
-- Spectator, Dec. 6, 1884, pp. 1614-1616.
-- Academy, by H. C. Beeching, Dec. 13, 1884, pp. 385, 386.
-- Critic (New York), Dec. 13, 1884, p. 279.
-- Oxford Magazine, vol. 3, 1885, pp. 161, 162.

---- `Fifine at the Fair'.
-- Old and New, by C. C. Everett, vol. 6, 1872, pp. 609-615.
-- Canadian Monthly, by Goldwin Smith, vol. 2, 1872, pp. 285-287.
-- Temple Bar, vol. 37, 1873, pp. 315-328.
-- Literary World, July 12, 1872, pp. 17, 18, and July 19, pp. 42, 43.
-- Fortnightly Review, by Sidney Colvin, vol. 12 N.S., 1872, pp. 118-120.
-- Saturday Review, vol. 34, 1872, pp. 220, 221.

---- First Poem of.
-- St. James's Magazine, vol. 7 N.S., 1871, pp. 485-496.

---- Funeral of.
-- Scots Magazine, by Elizabeth R. Chapman, Feb. 1890, pp. 216-223.

---- Handbook to the Works of, Orr's.
-- Academy, by J. T. Nettleship, vol. 27, 1885, pp. 429-431.
-- Athenaeum, Sept. 26, 1885, pp. 396, 397.

---- in 1869.
-- Cornhill Magazine, vol. 19, 1869, pp. 249-256.

---- `In a Balcony'.
-- Theatre, by B. L. Mosely, May 1, 1885, pp. 225-230.

---- In Memoriam.
-- New Review, by Edmund W. Gosse, Jan. 1890, pp. 91-96.

---- `Inn Album'.
-- Macmillan's Magazine, by A. C. Bradley, vol. 33, 1876, pp. 347-354.
-- Nation, by Henry James, junr., vol. 22, 1876, pp. 49, 50.
-- International Review, by Bayard Taylor, vol. 3, 1876, pp. 402-404.
-- Athenaeum, Nov. 27, 1875, pp. 701, 702.
-- Academy, by J. A. Symonds, Nov. 27, 1875, pp. 543, 544.
-- Spectator, December 11, 1875, pp. 1555-1557.
-- Examiner, Dec. 11, 1875, pp. 1389-1390.

---- in Westminster Abbey.
-- Speaker, by Henry James, Jan. 4, 1890, pp. 10-12.

---- `Jocoseria'.
-- National Review, by W. J. Courthope, vol. 1, 1883, pp. 548-561.
-- Atlantic Monthly, vol. 51, 1883, pp. 840-845.
-- Cambridge Review, vol. 4, 1883, pp. 352, 353.
-- Gentleman's Magazine, by R. H. Shepherd, vol. 254, 1883, pp. 624-630.
-- Academy, by J. A. Symonds, vol. 23, 1883, pp. 213, 214.
-- Athenaeum, March 24, 1883, pp. 367, 368.
-- Saturday Review, vol. 55, 1883, pp. 376, 377.
-- Spectator, March 17, 1883, pp. 351-353.

---- Kingsland's.
-- Literary Opinion, May 1, 1887.

---- `La Saisiaz'.  `The Two Poets of Croisic'.
-- Academy, by G. A. Simcox, vol. 13, 1878, pp. 478-480.
-- Athenaeum, May 25, 1878, pp. 661-664.
-- Saturday Review, June 15, 1878, pp. 759, 760.

---- Love Poems of.
-- Journal of Education, by Arthur Sidgwick, May 1, 1882, pp. 139-143.

---- Lyrical and Dramatic Poems.
-- Literary World (Boston), Feb. 24, 1883, p. 58.

---- `Men and Women'.
-- Bentley's Miscellany, vol. 39, 1856, pp. 64-70.
-- British Quarterly Review, vol. 23, 1856, pp. 151-180.
-- Rambler, vol. 5 N.S., 1856, pp. 55-71.
-- Christian Remembrancer, vol. 31 N.S., 1856, pp. 281-294;
vol. 34 N.S., 1857, pp. 361-390.
-- Dublin University Magazine, vol. 47, 1856, pp. 673-675.
-- Fraser's Magazine, by G. Brimley, vol. 53, 1856, pp. 105-116.
-- Irish Quarterly Review, vol. 6, 1856, pp. 21-28.
-- Westminster Review, vol. 9 N.S., 1856, pp. 290-296.

---- Note on.
-- Art Review, by W. Mortimer, Jan. 1890, pp. 28-32.

---- `One Way of Love'.
-- Literary World (Boston), by C. R. Corson, July 26, 1884, pp. 250, 251.

---- `Pacchiarotto'.
-- Academy, by Edward Dowden, July 29, 1876, pp. 99, 100.
-- Athenaeum, July 22, 1876, pp. 101, 102.

---- `Paracelsus'.
-- New Monthly Magazine, by John Forster, vol. 46, 1836, pp. 289-308.
-- Examiner, by John Forster, Sept. 6, 1835, pp. 563-565.
-- Theologian, vol. 2, 1845, pp. 276-282.
-- Monthly Repository, by W. J. Fox, vol. 9 N.S., 1835, pp. 716-727.
-- Fraser's Magazine, by J. Heraud, vol. 13, 1836, pp. 363-374.
-- Leigh Hunt's Journal, vol. 2, 1835, pp. 405-408.
-- Revue des Deux Mondes, by Philarete Chasles, tom. 22, 1840, pp. 127-133.

---- `Parleyings with Certain People'.
-- Literary Opinion, March 1, 1887.

---- `Pauline'.
-- Monthly Repository, by W. J. Fox, vol. 7 N.S., 1833, pp. 252-262.
-- Athenaeum, April 6, 1833, p. 216.

---- Place of, in Literature.
-- Contemporary Review, by Mrs. Sutherland Orr, vol. 23, 1874, pp. 934-965;
same article, Littell's Living Age, vol. 122, pp. 67-85.

---- Plays and Poems.
-- North American Review, by J. R. Lowell, vol. 66, 1848, pp. 357-400.

---- Poems.
-- British Quarterly Review, vol. 6, 1847, pp. 490-509.
-- Eclectic Review, vol. 26 N.S., 1849, pp. 203-214.
-- Eclectic Magazine, vol. 18, 1849, pp. 453-469.
-- Christian Examiner, by C. C. Everett, vol. 48, 1850, pp. 361-372.
-- Massachusetts Quarterly Review, vol. 3, 1850, pp. 347-385.
-- Fraser's Magazine, vol. 43, 1851, pp. 170-182.
-- Putnam's Monthly Magazine, vol. 7, 1856, pp. 372-381.
-- North British Review, vol. 34, 1861, pp. 350-374.
-- Chambers's Journal, vol. 19, 1863, pp. 91-95; vol. 20, pp. 39-41.
-- National Review, vol. 17, 1863, pp. 417-446.
-- Eclectic Review, by E. P. Hood, vol. 4 N.S., 1863, pp. 436-454;
vol. 7 N.S., 1864, pp. 62-72.
-- Edinburgh Review, vol. 120, 1864, pp. 537-565.
-- Christian Examiner, by C. C. Everett, vol. 77, 1864, pp. 51-64.
-- Quarterly Review, vol. 118, 1865, pp. 77-105.
-- Nuova Antologia di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, by Enrico Nencioni,
July 1867, pp. 468-481.
-- North British Review, by J. Hutchinson Stirling,
vol. 49, 1868, pp. 353-408.
-- Temple Bar, by Alfred Austin, vol. 26, 1869, pp. 316-333;
vol. 27, pp. 170-186; vol. 28, pp. 33-48.
-- British Quarterly Review, vol. 49, 1869, pp. 435-459.
-- Saint Paul's Magazine, by E. J. Hasell, vol. 7, 1871, pp. 257-276;
same article, Eclectic Magazine, vol. 13 N.S., pp. 267-279,
and in Littell's Living Age, vol. 108, pp. 155-166.
-- Church Quarterly Review, by the Hon. and Rev. Arthur Lyttleton,
vol. 7, 1878, pp. 65-92.
-- Cambridge Review, vol. 3, 1881, pp. 126, 127.
-- Scottish Review, vol. 2, 1883, pp. 349-358.
-- London Quarterly Review, vol. 65, 1886, pp. 238-250.

---- `Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau'.
-- New Englander, by J. S. Sewall, vol. 33, 1874, pp. 493-505.
-- Examiner, Dec. 23, 1871, pp. 1267, 1268.
-- Academy, by G. A. Simcox, Jan. 15, 1872, pp. 24-26.
-- Literary World, Jan. 5, 1872, pp. 8, 9.

---- `Red Cotton Nightcap Country'.
-- Nation, by J. R. Dennett, vol. 17, 1873, pp. 116-118.
-- Contemporary Review, by Mrs. Sutherland Orr, vol. 22, 1873, pp. 87-106.
-- Penn Monthly Magazine, vol. 4, 1873, pp. 657-661.
-- Athenaeum, May 10, 1873, pp. 593, 594.

---- `Ring and the Book'.
-- Athenaeum, Dec. 26, 1868, pp. 875, 876; March 20, 1869, pp. 399, 400.
-- Edinburgh Review, vol. 130, 1869, pp. 164-186.
-- Dublin Review, vol. 13 N.S., 1869, pp. 48-62.
-- Chambers's Journal, July 24, 1869, pp. 473-476.
-- Fortnightly Review, by John Morley, vol. 5 N.S., 1869, pp. 331-343.
-- Macmillan's Magazine, by J. A. Symonds, vol. 19, 1869, pp. 258-262,
and by J. R. Mozley, pp. 544-552.
-- North American Review, by E. J. Cutler, vol. 109, 1869, pp. 279-283.
-- Nation, by J. R. Dennett, vol. 8, 1869, pp. 135, 136.
-- Tinsley's Magazine, vol. 3, 1869, pp. 665-674.
-- Christian Examiner, by J. W. Chadwick, vol. 86, 1869, pp. 295-315.
-- Gentleman's Magazine, by James Thomson, vol. 251, 1881, pp. 682-695.
-- St. James's Magazine, vol. 2 N.S., 1869, pp. 460-464.
-- Saint Paul's, vol. 7, 1871, pp. 377-397; same article, Eclectic Magazine,
vol. 13 N.S., pp. 400-412, and in Littell's Living Age, vol. 108, pp. 771-783.
-- North British Review, vol. 51, 1870, pp. 97-126.
-- Quarterly Review, vol. 126, 1869, pp. 328-359.

---- ---- Some of the Teachings of "The Ring and the Book".
-- Poet-Lore, by F. B. Hornbrooke, July 1889, pp. 314-320.

---- Science of.
-- Poet-Lore, by Edward Berdoe, Aug. 15, 1889, pp. 353-362.

---- Selections from.
-- London Quarterly Review, by Frank T. Marzials, vol. 20, 1863, pp. 527-532.
-- Literary World, May 19, 1883, p. 157.

---- Sequence of Sonnets on death of.
-- Fortnightly Review, by Algernon C. Swinburne, Jan. 1890, pp. 1-4.

---- Some Thoughts on.
-- Macmillan's Magazine, by M. A. Lewis, vol. 46, 1882, pp. 205-219;
same article, Littell's Living Age, vol. 154, pp. 238-246.

---- Sonnets to.
-- Macmillan's Magazine, by Aubrey de Vere, Feb. 1890, p. 258.
-- Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, by Sir Theodore Martin, Jan. 1890, p. 112.
-- Household Words, vol. 4, 1852, p. 213.

---- Sonnets of.
-- Manchester Quarterly, by Benjamin Sagar, vol. 6, 1887, pp. 148-159.

---- `Sordello'.
-- Fraser's Magazine, by E. Dowden, vol. 76, pp. 518-530.
-- Macmillan's Magazine, by R. W. Church, vol. 55, 1887, pp. 241-253.

---- ---- `Sordello' at the East End.
-- Journal of Education, July 1, 1885, pp. 281-283.

---- Stories from, Holland's.
-- Academy, by J. A. Blaikie, vol. 22, 1882, pp. 287, 288.

---- `Strafford:  a Tragedy'.
-- Edinburgh Review, vol. 65, 1837, pp. 132-151.

---- Study of.
-- Overland Monthly, by Caroline Le Conte, vol. 3, 2nd series,
1884, pp. 645-651.
-- Literary World (Boston), vol. 17, 1886, p. 44.

---- Two Sonnets to.
-- New Monthly Magazine, vol. 48, 1836, p. 48.

---- Types of Womanhood.
-- Woman's World, by Annie E. Ireland, Nov. 1889, pp. 47-50.

---- Verses on.
-- Art Review (with portrait), by William Sharp, Feb. 1890, pp. 33-36.
-- Murray's Magazine, by Rev. H. D. Rawnsley, Feb. 1890, pp. 145-150.
-- Belford's Magazine (poem of 20 six-line stanzas), by William Sharp,
March 1890.

---- Wordsworth and Tennyson.
-- National Review, by Walter Bagehot, vol. 19, 1864, pp. 27-67;
reprinted in "Literary Studies", 1879; same article, Eclectic Magazine,
vol. 1 N.S., pp. 273-284, 415-427, and in Littell's Living Age,
vol. 84, pp. 3-24.



VII.  Chronological List of Works.


  1833

Pauline


  1835

Paracelsus


  1837

Strafford


  1840

Sordello


  1841

Pippa Passes.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 1)


  1842

King Victor and King Charles.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 2)

Dramatic Lyrics.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 3)
  Cavalier Tunes.
      I.  Marching Along.
     II.  Give a Rouse.
    III.  My Wife Gertrude.
  Italy and France.
      I.  Italy.
     II.  France.
  Camp and Cloister.
      I.  Camp (French).
     II.  Cloister (Spanish).
  In a Gondola.
  Artemis Prologuizes.
  Waring.
  Queen Worship.
      I.  Rudel and the Lady of Tripoli.
     II.  Cristina.
  Madhouse Cells.
      I.  Johannes Agricola.
     II.  Porphyria.
  Through the Metidja.
  The Pied Piper of Hamelin.


  1843

The Return of the Druses.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 4)

A Blot in the 'Scutcheon.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 5)


  1844

Colombe's Birthday.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 6)


  1845

Dramatic Romances and Lyrics.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 7)
  How they brought the Good News from Ghent to Aix.
  Pictor Ignotus.
  Italy in England.
  England in Italy.
  The Lost Leader.
  The Lost Mistress.
  Home Thoughts from Abroad.
  The Tomb at St. Praxed's.
  Garden Fancies.
      I.  The Flower's Name.
     II.  Sibrandus Schafnaburgensis.
  France and Spain.
      I.  The Laboratory.
     II.  The Confessional.
  The Flight of the Duchess.
  Earth's Immortalities.
  Song.
  The Boy and the Angel.
  Night and Morning.
  Claret and Tokay.
  Saul.  (Part 1)
  Time's Revenges.
  The Glove.


  1846

Luria.
  &
A Soul's Tragedy.  (Bells and Pomegranates, No. 8)


  1850

Christmas Eve and Easter Day.


  1852

Introductory Essay to Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley.


  1855

Men and Women.

      Vol. 1.
  Love among the Ruins.
  A Lover's Quarrel.
  Evelyn Hope.
  Up at a Villa -- Down in the City.
  A Woman's Last Word.
  Fra Lippo Lippi.
  A Toccata of Galuppi's.
  By the Fireside.
  Any Wife to any Husband.
  An Epistle of Karshish.
  Mesmerism.
  A Serenade at the Villa.
  My Star.
  Instans Tyrannus.
  A Pretty Woman.
  "Childe Roland to the Dark Tower came".
  Respectability.
  A Light Woman.
  The Statue and the Bust.
  Love in a Life.
  Life in a Love.
  How it strikes a Contemporary.
  The Last Ride Together.
  The Patriot.
  Master Hugues of Saxe-Gotha.
  Bishop Blougram's Apology.
  Memorabilia.

      Vol. 2.
  Andrea del Sarto.
  Before.
  After.
  In Three Days.
  In a Year.
  Old Pictures in Florence.
  In a Balcony.
  Saul.
  "De Gustibus ----"
  Women and Roses.
  Protus.
  Holy-Cross Day.
  The Guardian Angel.
  Cleon.
  The Twins.
  Popularity.
  The Heretic's Tragedy.
  Two in the Campagna.
  A Grammarian's Funeral.
  One Way of Love.
  Another Way of Love.
  "Transcendentalism".
  Misconceptions.
  One Word More.


  1864

Dramatis Personae.
  James Lee's Wife.
  Gold Hair.
  The Worst of It.
  Dis Aliter Visum.
  Too Late.
  Abt Vogler.
  Rabbi Ben Ezra.
  A Death in the Desert.
  Caliban upon Setebos.
  Confessions.
  May and Death.
  Prospice.
  Youth and Art.
  A Face.
  A Likeness.
  Mr. Sludge the Medium.
  Apparent Failure.
  Epilogue.


  1868-69

The Ring and the Book.


  1871

Balaustion's Adventure.

Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau.


  1872

Fifine at the Fair.


  1873

Red Cotton Nightcap Country.


  1875

Aristophanes' Apology.

The Inn Album.


  1876

Pacchiarotto, and other Poems.
  Prologue.
  Of Pacchiarotto.
  At the "Mermaid".
  House.
  Shop.
  Pisgah Sights, I. and II.
  Fears and Scruples.
  Natural Magic.
  Magical Nature.
  Bifurcation.
  Numpholeptos.
  Appearances.
  St. Martin's Summer.
  Herve Riel.  (Reprinted from Cornhill Magazine, March 1871.)
  A Forgiveness.
  Cenciaja.
  Filippo Baldinucci.
  Epilogue.


  1877

The Agamemnon of Aeschylus.


  1878

La Saisiaz.
  &
The Two Poets of Croisic.


  1879-80

Dramatic Idyls.

      Series 1.
  Martin Relph.
  Pheidippides.
  Halbert and Hob.
  Ivan Ivanovitch.
  Tray.
  Ned Bratts.

      Series 2.
  Proem.
  Echetlos.
  Clive.
  Muleykeh.
  Pietro of Abano.
  Doctor ----.
  Pan and Luna.
  Epilogue.


  1883

Jocoseria.
  Wanting is -- What?
  Donald.
  Solomon and Balkis.
  Cristina and Monaldeschi.
  Mary Wollstonecraft and Fuseli.
  Adam, Lilith, and Eve.
  Ixion.
  Jochanan Hakkadosh.
  Never the Time and the Place.
  Pambo.


  1884

Ferishtah's Fancies.
  Prologue.
  Ferishtah's Fancies:
   1.  The Eagle.
   2.  Melon-Seller.
   3.  Shah Abbas.
   4.  The Family.
   5.  The Sun.
   6.  Mihrab Shah.
   7.  A Camel-Driver.
   8.  Two Camels.
   9.  Cherries.
  10.  Plot-Culture.
  11.  A Pillar at Sebzevah.
  12.  A Bean-stripe; also
  Apple-Eating.
  Epilogue.


  1887

Parleyings with Certain People of Importance in their Day.
  Apollo and the Fates -- a Prologue.
    I.  With Bernard de Mandeville.
   II.  With Daniel Bartoli.
  III.  With Christopher Smart.
   IV.  With George Bubb Dodington.
    V.  With Francis Furini.
   VI.  With Gerard de Lairesse.
  VII.  With Charles Avison.
  John Fust and his Friends -- an Epilogue.


  1890

Asolando.
  Prologue.
  Rosny.
  Dubiety.
  Now.
  Humility.
  Poetics.
  Summum Bonum.
  A Pearl, a Girl.
  Speculative.
  White Witchcraft.
  Bad Dreams.
  Inapprehensiveness.
  Which?
  The Cardinal and the Dog.
  The Pope and the Net.
  The Bean-Feast.
  Muckle-mouth Meg.
  Arcades Ambo.
  The Lady and the Painter.
  Ponte dell' Angelo, Venice.
  Beatrice Signorini.
  Flute-music, with an Accompaniment.
  "Imperante Augusto natus est ----"
  Development.
  Rephan.
  Reverie.
  Epilogue.






  --------
Printed by Walter Scott, Felling, Newcastle-on-Tyne






End of this etext of Life of Browning by William Sharp


