Chapter 8.



With the flower-tide of spring in 1849 came a new happiness to the two poets:
the son who was born on the 9th of March.  The boy was called
Robert Wiedemann Barrett, the second name, in remembrance of Browning's
much-loved mother, having been substituted for the "Sarianna"
wherewith the child, if a girl, was to have been christened.
Thereafter their "own young Florentine" was an endless joy and pride to both:
and he was doubly loved by his father for his having brought a renewal of life
to her who bore him.

That autumn they went to the country, to the neighbourhood of Vallombrosa,
and then to the Bagni di Lucca.  There they wandered content
in chestnut-forests, and gathered grapes at the vintage.

Early in the year Browning's "Poetical Works" were published in two volumes.
Some of the most beautiful of his shorter poems are to be found therein.
What a new note is struck throughout, what range of subject there is!
Among them all, are there any more treasurable than two of the simplest,
"Home Thoughts from Abroad" and "Night and Morning"?

    "Oh, to be in England
    Now that April's there,
    And whoever wakes in England
    Sees, some morning, unaware,
    That the lowest boughs and the brushwood sheaf
    Round the elm-tree bole are in tiny leaf,
    While the chaffinch sings on the orchard bough
    In England -- now!

    And after April, when May follows,
    And the whitethroat builds, and all the swallows!
    Hark, where my blossomed pear-tree in the hedge
    Leans to the field and scatters on the clover
    Blossoms and dewdrops -- at the bent spray's edge --
    That's the wise thrush; he sings each song twice over,
    Lest you should think he never could recapture
    The first fine careless rapture!"

A more significant note is struck in "Meeting at Night"
and "Parting at Morning".

          Meeting.

            I.

    The grey sea and the long black land;
    And the yellow half-moon large and low;
    And the startled little waves that leap
    In fiery ringlets from their sleep,
    As I gain the cove with pushing prow,
    And quench its speed i' the slushy sand.

            II.

    Then a mile of warm sea-scented beach;
    Three fields to cross till a farm appears;
    A tap at the pane, the quick sharp scratch
    And blue spurt of a lighted match,
    And a voice less loud, through its joys and fears,
    Than the two hearts beating each to each!

          Parting.

    Round the cape of a sudden came the sea,
    And the sun looked over the mountain's rim:
    And straight was a path of gold for him,
    And the need of a world of men for me.

The following winter, when they were again at their Florentine home,
Browning wrote his "Christmas Eve and Easter Day", that remarkable
`apologia' for Christianity, and close-reasoned presentation
of the religious thought of the time.  It is, however, for this reason
that it is so widely known and admired:  for it is ever easier
to attract readers by dogma than by beauty, by intellectual argument
than by the seduction of art.  Coincidently, Mrs. Browning wrote
the first portion of "Casa Guidi Windows".

In the spring of 1850 husband and wife spent a short stay in Rome.
I have been told that the poem entitled `Two in the Campagna'
was as actually personal as the already quoted "Guardian Angel".
But I do not think stress should be laid on this and kindred localisations.
Exact or not, they have no literary value.  To the poet,
the dramatic poet above all, locality and actuality of experience are,
so to say, merely fortunate coigns of outlook, for the winged genius to
temporally inhabit.  To the imaginative mind, truth is not simply actuality.
As for `Two in the Campagna':  it is too universally true
to be merely personal.  There is a gulf which not the profoundest search
can fathom, which not the strongest-winged love can overreach:
the gulf of individuality.  It is those who have loved most deeply
who recognise most acutely this always pathetic and often terrifying
isolation of the soul.  None save the weak can believe
in the absolute union of two spirits.  If this were demonstratable,
immortality would be a palpable fiction.  The moment individuality
can lapse to fusion, that moment the tide has ebbed, the wind has fallen,
the dream has been dreamed.  So long as the soul remains inviolate
amid all shock of time and change, so long is it immortal.
No man, no poet assuredly, could love as Browning loved, and fail to be aware,
often with vague anger and bitterness, no doubt, of this insuperable isolation
even when spirit seemed to leap to spirit, in the touch of a kiss,
in the evanishing sigh of some one or other exquisite moment.
The poem tells us how the lovers, straying hand in hand one May day
across the Campagna, sat down among the seeding grasses, content at first
in the idle watching of a spider spinning her gossamer threads
from yellowing fennel to other vagrant weeds.  All around them

    "The champaign with its endless fleece
     Of feathery grasses everywhere!
    Silence and passion, joy and peace,
     An everlasting wash of air -- . . .

    "Such life here, through such length of hours,
     Such miracles performed in play,
    Such primal naked forms of flowers,
     Such letting nature have her way." . . .

Let us too be unashamed of soul, the poet-lover says,
even as earth lies bare to heaven.  Nothing is to be overlooked.
But all in vain:  in vain "I drink my fill at your soul's springs."

    "Just when I seemed about to learn!
     Where is the thread now? off again!
    The old trick!  Only I discern --
     Infinite passion, and the pain
    Of finite hearts that yearn."

It was during this visit to Rome that both were gratified by the proposal
in the leading English literary weekly, that the Poet-Laureateship,
vacant by the death of Wordsworth, should be conferred upon Mrs. Browning:
though both rejoiced when they learned that the honour had devolved upon one
whom each so ardently admired as Alfred Tennyson.  In 1851 a visit was paid
to England, not one very much looked forward to by Mrs. Browning,
who had never had cause to yearn for her old home in Wimpole Street,
and who could anticipate no reconciliation with her father,
who had persistently refused even to open her letters to him,
and had forbidden the mention of her name in his home circle.

Bayard Taylor, in his travel-sketches published under the title
"At Home and Abroad", has put on record how he called upon the Brownings
one afternoon in September, at their rooms in Devonshire Street,
and found them on the eve of their return to Italy.

In his cheerful alertness, self-possession, and genial suavity
Browning impressed him as an American rather than as an Englishman,
though there can be no question but that no more thorough Englishman
than the poet ever lived.  It is a mistake, of course,
to speak of him as a typical Englishman:  for typical he was not,
except in a very exclusive sense.  Bayard Taylor describes him
in reportorial fashion as being apparently about seven-and-thirty
(a fairly close guess), with his dark hair already streaked with grey
about the temples:  with a fair complexion, just tinged with faintest olive:
eyes large, clear, and grey, and nose strong and well-cut,
mouth full and rather broad, and chin pointed, though not prominent:
about the medium height, strong in the shoulders, but slender at the waist,
with movements expressive of a combination of vigour and elasticity.
With due allowance for the passage of five-and-thirty years,
this description would not be inaccurate of Browning the septuagenarian.

They did not return direct to Italy after all, but wintered in Paris
with Robert Browning the elder, who had retired to a small house
in a street leading off the Champs Elysees.  The pension he drew
from the Bank of England was a small one, but, with what he otherwise had,
was sufficient for him to live in comfort.  The old gentleman's health
was superb to the last, for he died in 1866 without ever having known
a day's illness.

Spring came out and found them still in Paris, Mrs. Browning
enthusiastic about Napoleon III. and interested in spiritualism:
her husband serenely sceptical concerning both.  In the summer
they again went to London:  but they appear to have seen more
of Kenyon and other intimate friends than to have led a busy social life.
Kenyon's friendship and good company never ceased to have a charm
for both poets.  Mrs. Browning loved him almost as a brother:
her husband told Bayard Taylor, on the day when that
good poet and charming man called upon them, and after another visitor
had departed -- a man with a large rosy face and rotund body,
as Taylor describes him -- "there goes one of the most splendid men living --
a man so noble in his friendship, so lavish in his hospitality,
so large-hearted and benevolent, that he deserves to be known
all over the world as Kenyon the Magnificent."

In the early autumn a sudden move towards Italy was again made,
and after a few weeks in Paris and on the way the Brownings found themselves
at home once more in Casa Guidi.

But before this, probably indeed before they had left Paris for London,
Mr. Moxon had published the now notorious Shelley forgeries.
These were twenty-five spurious letters, but so cleverly manufactured
that they at first deceived many people.  In the preceding November
Browning had been asked to write an introduction to them.
This he had gladly agreed to do, eager as he was for a suitable opportunity
of expressing his admiration for Shelley.  When the letters reached him,
he found that, genuine or not, though he never suspected they were forgeries,
they contained nothing of particular import, nothing that afforded
a just basis for what he had intended to say.  Pledged as he was, however,
to write something for Mr. Moxon's edition of the Letters, he set about
the composition of an Essay, of a general as much as of an individual nature.
This he wrote in Paris, and finished by the beginning of December.
It dealt with the objective and subjective poet; on the relation
of the latter's life to his work; and upon Shelley in the light of
his nature, art, and character.  Apart from the circumstance that
it is the only independent prose writing of any length from Browning's pen,
this is an exceptionally able and interesting production.

Dr. Furnivall deserves general gratitude for his obtaining
the author's leave to re-issue it, and for having published it
as one of the papers of the Browning Society.  As that enthusiastic student
and good friend of the poet says in his "foretalk" to the reprint,
the essay is noteworthy, not merely as a signal service
to Shelley's fame and memory, but for Browning's statement of his own aim
in his own work, both as objective and subjective poet.
The same clearsightedness and impartial sympathy, which are
such distinguishing characteristics of his dramatic studies
of human thought and emotion, are obvious in Browning's Shelley essay.
"It would be idle to enquire," he writes, "of these two kinds
of poetic faculty in operation, which is the higher or even rarer endowment.
If the subjective might seem to be the ultimate requirement of every age,
the objective in the strictest state must still retain its original value.
For it is with this world, as starting-point and basis alike,
that we shall always have to concern ourselves; the world is not to be learned
and thrown aside, but reverted to and reclaimed."

Of its critical subtlety -- the more remarkable as by a poet-critic
who revered Shelley the poet and loved and believed in Shelley the man --
the best example, perhaps, is in those passages where he alludes
to the charge against the poet's moral nature -- "charges which,
if substantiated to their wide breadth, would materially disturb,
I do not deny, our reception and enjoyment of his works, however wonderful
the artistic qualities of these.  For we are not sufficiently supplied
with instances of genius of his order to be able to pronounce certainly
how many of its constituent parts have been tasked and strained
to the production of a given lie, and how high and pure
a mood of the creative mind may be dramatically simulated
as the poet's habitual and exclusive one."

The large charity, the liberal human sympathy, the keen
critical acumen of this essay, make one wish that the author
had spared us a "Sludge the Medium" or a "Pacchiarotto",
or even a "Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau", and given us more
of such honourable work in "the other harmony".

Glad as the Brownings were to be home again at Casa Guidi,
they could not enjoy the midsummer heats of Florence,
and so went to the Baths of Lucca.  It was a delight for them
to ramble among the chestnut-woods of the high Tuscan forests,
and to go among the grape-vines where the sunburnt vintagers were busy.
Once Browning paid a visit to that remote hill-stream and waterfall,
high up in a precipitous glen, where, more than three-score years earlier,
Shelley had been wont to amuse himself by sitting naked on a rock
in the sunlight, reading `Herodotus' while he cooled, and then plunging
into the deep pool beneath him -- to emerge, further up stream,
and then climb through the spray of the waterfall till he was like
a glittering human wraith in the middle of a dissolving rainbow.

Those Tuscan forests, that high crown of Lucca, must always
have special associations for lovers of poetry.  Here Shelley lived,
rapt in his beautiful dreams, and translated the `Symposium'
so that his wife might share something of his delight in Plato.
Here, ten years later, Heine sneered, and laughed and wept,
and sneered again -- drank tea with "la belle Irlandaise",
flirted with Francesca "la ballerina", and wrote alternately
with a feathered quill from the breast of a nightingale and with a lancet
steeped in aquafortis:  and here, a quarter of a century afterward,
Robert and Elizabeth Browning also laughed and wept and "joyed i' the sun,"
dreamed many dreams, and touched chords of beauty whose vibration has become
incorporated with the larger rhythm of all that is high and enduring
in our literature.

On returning to Florence (Browning with the MS. of the greater part
of his splendid fragmentary tragedy, "In a Balcony", composed mainly
while walking alone through the forest glades), Mrs. Browning found
that the chill breath of the `tramontana' was affecting her lungs,
so a move was made to Rome, for the passing of the winter (1853-4).
In the spring their little boy, their beloved "Pen",* became ill with malaria.
This delayed their return to Florence till well on in the summer.
During this stay in Rome Mrs. Browning rapidly proceeded with "Aurora Leigh",
and Browning wrote several of his "Men and Women", including the exquisite
`Love among the Ruins', with its novel metrical music;
`Fra Lippo Lippi', where the painter, already immortalised by Landor,
has his third warrant of perpetuity; the `Epistle of Karshish' (in part);
`Memorabilia' (composed on the Campagna); `Saul', a portion of which
had been written and published ten years previously,
that noble and lofty utterance, with its trumpet-like note
of the regnant spirit; the concluding part of "In a Balcony";
and `Holy Cross Day' -- besides, probably, one or two others.
In the late spring (April 27th) also, he wrote the short dactylic lyric,
`Ben Karshook's Wisdom'.  This little poem was given to a friend
for appearance in one of the then popular `Keepsakes' -- literally given,
for Browning never contributed to magazines.  The very few exceptions
to this rule were the result of a kindliness stronger than scruple:
as when (1844), at request of Lord Houghton (then Mr. Monckton Milnes),
he sent `Tokay', the `Flower's Name', and `Sibrandus Schafnaburgensis',
to "help in making up some magazine numbers for poor Hood,
then at the point of death from hemorrhage of the lungs,
occasioned by the enlargement of the heart, which had been brought on
by the wearing excitement of ceaseless and excessive literary toil."
As `Ben Karshook's Wisdom', though it has been reprinted in several quarters,
will not be found in any volume of Browning's works, and was omitted from
"Men and Women" by accident, and from further collections by forgetfulness,
it may be fitly quoted here.  Karshook, it may be added,
is the Hebraic word for a thistle.

          I.

    "`Would a man 'scape the rod?' --
     Rabbi Ben Karshook saith,
    `See that he turns to God
     The day before his death.'

    `Ay, could a man inquire
     When it shall come!' I say.
    The Rabbi's eye shoots fire --
     `Then let him turn to-day!'

          II.

    Quoth a young Sadducee, --
     `Reader of many rolls,
    Is it so certain we
     Have, as they tell us, souls?' --

    `Son, there is no reply!'
     The Rabbi bit his beard:
    `Certain, a soul have _I_ ----
     WE may have none,' he sneer'd.

    Thus Karshook, the Hiram's-Hammer,
     The Right-Hand Temple column,
    Taught babes their grace in grammar,
     And struck the simple, solemn."

--
* So-called, it is asserted, from his childish effort to pronounce
  a difficult name (Wiedemann).  But despite the good authority
  for this statement, it is impossible not to credit rather
  the explanation given by Nathaniel Hawthorne, who, moreover,
  affords the practically definite proof that the boy was at first,
  as a term of endearment, called "Pennini", which was later abbreviated
  to "Pen".  The cognomen, Hawthorne states, was a diminutive of "Apennino",
  which was bestowed upon the boy in babyhood because he was very small,
  there being a statue in Florence of colossal size called "Apennino".

  [See Mrs. Orr's "Life and Letters of Robert Browning" (now online)
  for a different opinion.  -- A. L., 1996.]
--

It was in this year (1855) that "Men and Women" was published.
It is difficult to understand how a collection comprising poems
such as "Love among the Ruins", "Evelyn Hope", "Fra Lippo Lippi",
"A Toccata of Galuppi's", "Any Wife to any Husband",
"Master Hugues of Saxe-Gotha", "Andrea del Sarto", "In a Balcony", "Saul",
"A Grammarian's Funeral", to mention only ten now almost universally known,
did not at once obtain a national popularity for the author.
But lovers of literature were simply enthralled:  and the two volumes
had a welcome from them which was perhaps all the more ardent
because of their disproportionate numbers.  Ears alert to novel poetic music
must have thrilled to the new strain which sounded first --
"Love among the Ruins", with its Millet-like opening --

    "Where the quiet-coloured end of evening smiles,
            Miles and miles
    On the solitary pastures where our sheep
            Half asleep
    Tinkle homeward through the twilight, stray or stop
            As they crop --
    Was the site once of a city great and gay . . ."

Soon after the return to Florence, which, hot as it was, was preferable
in July to Rome, Mrs. Browning wrote to her frequent correspondent
Miss Mitford, and mentioned that about four thousand lines
of "Aurora Leigh" had been written.  She added a significant passage:
that her husband had not seen a single line of it up to that time --
significant, as one of the several indications that the union
of Browning and his wife was indeed a marriage of true minds,
wherein nothing of the common bane of matrimonial life found existence.
Moreover, both were artists, and, therefore, too full of respect
for themselves and their art to bring in any way the undue influence
of each other into play.

By the spring of 1856, however, the first six "books" were concluded:
and these, at once with humility and pride, Mrs. Browning placed
in her husband's hands.  The remaining three books were written,
in the summer, in John Kenyon's London house.

It was her best, her fullest answer to the beautiful dedicatory poem,
"One Word More", wherewith her husband, a few months earlier,
sent forth his "Men and Women", to be for ever associated with "E. B. B."

        I.

    "There they are, my fifty men and women
    Naming me the fifty poems finished!
    Take them, Love, the book and me together:
    Where the heart lies, let the brain lie also.

         .    .    .    .    .

        XVIII.

    This I say of me, but think of you, Love!
    This to you -- yourself my moon of poets!
    Ah, but that's the world's side, there's the wonder,
    Thus they see you, praise you, think they know you!
    There, in turn I stand with them and praise you --
    Out of my own self, I dare to phrase it.
    But the best is when I glide from out them,
    Cross a step or two of dubious twilight,
    Come out on the other side, the novel
    Silent silver lights and darks undreamed of,
    Where I hush and bless myself with silence."

The transference from Florence to London was made in May.
In the summer "Aurora Leigh" was published, and met with
an almost unparalleled success:  even Landor, most exigent of critics,
declared that he was "half drunk with it," that it had an imagination
germane to that of Shakespeare, and so forth.

The poem was dedicated to Kenyon, and on their homeward way
the Brownings were startled and shocked to hear of his sudden death.
By the time they had arrived at Casa Guidi again they learned
that their good friend had not forgotten them in the disposition
of his large fortune.  To Browning he bequeathed six thousand,
to Mrs. Browning four thousand guineas.  This loss was followed
early in the ensuing year (1857) by the death of Mr. Barrett,
steadfast to the last in his refusal of reconciliation with his daughter.

Winters and summers passed happily in Italy -- with one period
of feverish anxiety, when the little boy lay for six weeks dangerously ill,
nursed day and night by his father and mother alternately --
with pleasant occasionings, as the companionship for a season
of Nathaniel Hawthorne and his family, or of weeks spent at Siena
with valued and lifelong friends, W. W. Story, the poet-sculptor,
and his wife.

So early as 1858 Mrs. Hawthorne believed she saw the heralds of death
in Mrs. Browning's excessive pallor and the hectic flush upon the cheeks,
in her extreme fragility and weakness, and in her catching, fluttering breath.
Even the motion of a visitor's fan perturbed her.  But "her soul was mighty,
and a great love kept her on earth a season longer.  She was a seraph
in her flaming worship of heart."  "She lives so ardently,"
adds Mrs. Hawthorne, "that her delicate earthly vesture
must soon be burnt up and destroyed by her soul of pure fire."

Yet, notwithstanding, she still sailed the seas of life,
like one of those fragile argonauts in their shells of foam and rainbow-mist
which will withstand the rude surge of winds and waves.
But slowly, gradually, the spirit was o'erfretting its tenement.
With the waning of her strength came back the old passionate longing for rest,
for quiescence from that "excitement from within", which had been
almost over vehement for her in the calm days of her unmarried life.

It is significant that at this time Browning's genius
was relatively dormant.  Its wings were resting for
the long-sustained flight of "The Ring and the Book",
and for earlier and shorter though not less royal aerial journeyings.
But also, no doubt, the prolonged comparatively unproductive period
of eight or nine years (1855-1864), between the publication
of "Men and Women" and "Dramatis Personae", was due in some measure
to the poet's incessant and anxious care for his wife,
to the deep sorrow of witnessing her slow but visible passing away,
and to the profound grief occasioned by her death.  However,
barrenness of imaginative creative activity can be only
very relatively affirmed, even of so long a period, of years wherein
were written such memorable and treasurable poems as `James Lee's Wife',
among Browning's writings what `Maud' is among Lord Tennyson's;
`Gold Hair:  a Legend of Pornic'; `Dis Aliter Visum';
`Abt Vogler', the most notable production of its kind in the language;
`A Death in the Desert', that singular and impressive study;
`Caliban upon Setebos', in its strange potency of interest
and stranger poetic note, absolutely unique; `Youth and Art';
`Apparent Failure'; `Prospice', that noble lyrical defiance of death;
and the supremely lofty and significant series of weighty stanzas,
`Rabbi Ben Ezra', the most quintessential of all the distinctively
psychical monologues which Browning has written.  It seems to me
that if these two poems only, "Prospice" and "Rabbi Ben Ezra",
were to survive to the day of Macaulay's New Zealander, the contemporaries
of that meditative traveller would have sufficient to enable them
to understand the great fame of the poet of "dim ancestral days",
as the more acute among them could discern something of the real Shelley,
though time had preserved but the three lines --

    "Yet now despair itself is mild,
    Even as the winds and waters are;
    I could lie down like a tired child" . . .

something of the real Catullus, through the mists of remote antiquity,
if there had not perished the single passionate cry --

                             "Lesbia illa,
    Illa Lesbia, quam Catullus unam
    Plus quam se, atque suos amavit omnes!"

At the beginning of July (1858), the Brownings left Florence
for the summer and autumn, and by easy stages travelled to Normandy.
Here the invalid benefited considerably at first:  and here,
I may add, Browning wrote his `Legend of Pornic', `Gold Hair'.
This poem of twenty-seven five-line stanzas (which differs only
from that in more recent "Collected Works", and "Selections",
in its lack of the three stanzas now numbered 21, 22, and 23)
was printed for limited private circulation, though primarily
for the purpose of securing American copyright.  Browning several times
printed single poems thus, and for the same reasons --
that is, either for transatlantic copyright, or when the verses
were not likely to be included in any volume for a prolonged period.
These leaflets or half-sheetlets of `Gold Hair' and `Prospice',
of `Cleon' and `The Statue and the Bust' -- together with
the `Two Poems by Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning',
published, for benefit of a charity, in 1854 -- are among the rarest "finds"
for the collector, and are literally worth a good deal more
than their weight in gold.

In the tumultuous year of 1859 all Italy was in a ferment.
No patriot among the Nationalists was more ardent in her hopes
than the delicate, too fragile, dying poetess, whose flame of life
burned anew with the great hopes that animated her for her adopted country.
Well indeed did she deserve, among the lines which the poet Tommaseo wrote
and the Florence municipality caused to be engraved in gold
upon a white marble slab, to be placed upon Casa Guidi,
the words `fece del suo verso aureo anello fra Italia e Inghilterra' --
"who of her Verse made a golden link connecting England and Italy."

The victories of Solferino and San Martino made the bitterness
of the disgraceful Treaty of Villafranca the more hard to bear.
Even had we not Mr. Story's evidence, it would be a natural conclusion
that this disastrous ending to the high hopes of the Italian patriots
accelerated Mrs. Browning's death.  The withdrawal of hope
is often worse in its physical effects than any direct bodily ill.

It was a miserable summer for both husband and wife, for more private sorrows
also pressed upon them.  Not even the sweet autumnal winds blowing upon Siena
wafted away the shadow that had settled upon the invalid:
nor was there medicine for her in the air of Rome, where the winter was spent.
A temporary relief, however, was afforded by the more genial climate,
and in the spring of 1860 she was able, with Browning's help,
to see her Italian patriotic poems through the press.  It goes without saying
that these "Poems before Congress" had a grudging reception from the critics,
because they dared to hint that all was not roseate-hued in England.
The true patriots are those who love despite blemishes,
not those who cherish the blemishes along with the virtues.
To hint at a flaw is "not to be an Englishman."

The autumn brought a new sadness in the death of Miss Arabella Barrett --
a dearly loved sister, the "Arabel" of so many affectionate letters.
Once more a winter in Rome proved temporally restorative.
But at last the day came when she wrote her last poem --
"North and South", a gracious welcome to Hans Christian Andersen
on the occasion of his first visit to the Eternal City.

Early in June of 1861 the Brownings were once more at Casa Guidi.
But soon after their return the invalid caught a chill.
For a few days she hovered like a tired bird -- though her friends
saw only the seemingly unquenchable light in the starry eyes,
and did not anticipate the silence that was soon to be.

By the evening of the 28th day of the month she was in sore peril
of failing breath.  All night her husband sat by her, holding her hand.
Two hours before dawn she realised that her last breath
would ere long fall upon his tear-wet face.  Then, as a friend has told us,
she passed into a state of ecstasy:  yet not so rapt therein
but that she could whisper many words of hope, even of joy.
With the first light of the new day, she leaned against her lover.
Awhile she lay thus in silence, and then, softly sighing "It is beautiful!"
passed like the windy fragrance of a flower.




