Chapter 8.

March 1849, birth of Robert Wiedemann Barrett Browning;
Browning writes his "Christmas Eve and Easter Day";
"Casa Guidi Windows" commenced; 1850, they go to Rome;
"Two in the Campagna"; proposal to confer poet-laureateship on Mrs. Browning;
return to London; winter in Paris; summer in London; Kenyon's friendship;
return in autumn to Casa Guidi; Browning's Essay on Shelley
for the twenty-five spurious Shelley letters; midsummer at Baths of Lucca,
where "In a Balcony" was in part written; winter of 1853-4 in Rome;
record of work; "Pen's" illness; "Ben Karshook's Wisdom"; return to Florence;
(1856) "Men and Women" published; the Brownings go to London;
in summer "Aurora Leigh" issued; 1858, Mrs. Browning's waning health;
1855-64 comparatively unproductive period with R. Browning;
record of work; July 1855, they travel to Normandy; "Legend of Pornic";
Mrs. Browning's ardent interest in the Italian struggle of 1859;
winter in Rome; "Poems before Congress"; her last poem, "North and South";
death of Mrs. Browning at Casa Guidi, 28th June 1861.


Chapter 9.

Browning's allusions to death of his wife; Miss Browning
resides with her brother from 1866; 1868, collected works published;
first part of "The Ring and the Book" published in November 1866;
"Herve Riel" written; Browning's growing popularity;
Tauchnitz editions of his poems in 1872; also first book of selections;
dedication to Lord Tennyson; 1877, he goes to La Saisiaz, near Geneva;
"La Saisiaz" and "The Two Poets of Croisic" published 1878;
Browning's later poems; Browning Society established 1881;
Browning's letter thereupon to Mr. Yates; trips abroad; his London residences;
his last letter to Tennyson; revisits Asolo; Palazzo Rezzonico;
his belief in immortality; his death, Thursday, Dec. 12th, 1889;
funeral in Westminster Abbey; Sonnet by George Meredith; new star in Orion;
R. Browning's place in literature; Summary, etc.






Note.



In all important respects I leave this volume to speak for itself.
For obvious reasons it does not pretend to be more
than a `Memoire pour servir':  in the nature of things,
the definitive biography cannot appear for many years to come.
None the less gratefully may I take the present opportunity
to express my indebtedness to Mr. R. Barrett Browning,
and to other relatives and intimate friends of Robert Browning,
who have given me serviceable information, and otherwise rendered kindly aid.
For some of the hitherto unpublished details my thanks are,
in particular, due to Mrs. Fraser Corkran and Miss Alice Corkran,
and to other old friends of the poet and his family,
here, in Italy, and in America; though in one or two instances, I may add,
I had them from Robert Browning himself.  It is with pleasure
that I further acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Furnivall,
for the loan of the advance-proofs of his privately-printed pamphlet
on "Browning's Ancestors"; and to the Browning Society's Publications --
particularly to Mrs. Sutherland Orr's and Dr. Furnivall's biographical
and bibliographical contributions thereto; to Mr. Gosse's biographical article
in the `Century Magazine' for 1881; to Mr. Ingram's `Life of E. B. Browning';
and to the `Memoirs of Anna Jameson', the `Italian Note-Books'
of Nathaniel Hawthorne, Mr. G. S. Hillard's `Six Months in Italy' (1853),
and the Lives and Correspondence of Macready, Miss Mitford, Leigh Hunt,
and Walter Savage Landor.  I regret that the imperative need of concision
has prevented the insertion of many of the letters, anecdotes,
and reminiscences, so generously placed at my disposal;
but possibly I may have succeeded in educing from them
some essential part of that light which they undoubtedly cast
upon the personality and genius of the poet.





------------------------
Life of Robert Browning.
------------------------





Chapter 1.



It must, to admirers of Browning's writings, appear singularly appropriate
that so cosmopolitan a poet was born in London.  It would seem
as though something of that mighty complex life, so confusedly petty
to the narrow vision, so grandiose and even majestic to the larger ken,
had blent with his being from the first.  What fitter birthplace for the poet
whom a comrade has called the "Subtlest Assertor of the Soul in Song",
the poet whose writings are indeed a mirror of the age?

A man may be in all things a Londoner and yet be a provincial.
The accident of birthplace does not necessarily involve
parochialism of the soul.  It is not the village which produces the Hampden,
but the Hampden who immortalises the village.  It is a favourite jest
of Rusticus that his urban brother has the manner of Omniscience
and the knowledge of a parish beadle.  Nevertheless,
though the strongest blood insurgent in the metropolitan heart
is not that which is native to it, one might well be proud
to have had one's atom-pulse atune from the first with the large rhythm
of the national life at its turbulent, congested, but ever ebullient centre.
Certainly Browning was not the man to be ashamed of his being a Londoner,
much less to deny his natal place.  He was proud of it:  through good sense,
no doubt, but possibly also through some instinctive apprehension of the fact
that the great city was indeed the fit mother of such a son.
"Ashamed of having been born in the greatest city of the world!"
he exclaimed on one occasion; "what an extraordinary thing to say!
It suggests a wavelet in a muddy shallow grimily contorting itself
because it had its birth out in the great ocean."

On the day of the poet's funeral in Westminster Abbey,
one of the most eminent of his peers remarked to me that Browning came to us
as one coming into his own.  This is profoundly true.
There was in good sooth a mansion prepared against his advent.
Long ago, we should have surrendered as to a conqueror:  now, however,
we know that princes of the mind, though they must be valorous and potent
as of yore, can enter upon no heritance save that which naturally awaits them,
and has been made theirs by long and intricate processes.

The lustrum which saw the birth of Robert Browning,
that is the third in the nineteenth century, was a remarkable one indeed.
Thackeray came into the world some months earlier than the great poet,
Charles Dickens within the same twelvemonth, and Tennyson three years sooner,
when also Elizabeth Barrett was born, and the foremost naturalist
of modern times first saw the light.  It is a matter of significance
that the great wave of scientific thought which ultimately bore forward
on its crest so many famous men, from Brewster and Faraday to Charles Darwin,
had just begun to rise with irresistible impulsion.  Lepsius's birth
was in 1813, and that of the great Flemish novelist, Henri Conscience,
in 1812:  about the same period were the births of Freiligrath,
Gutzkow, and Auerbach, respectively one of the most lyrical poets,
the most potent dramatist, the most charming romancer of Germany:
and, also, in France, of Theophile Gautier and Alfred de Musset.
Among representatives of the other arts -- with two of which
Browning must ever be closely associated -- Mendelssohn and Chopin were born
in 1809, and Schumann, Liszt, and Wagner within the four succeeding years:
within which space also came Diaz and Meissonier and the great Millet.
Other high names there are upon the front of the century.
Macaulay, Cardinal Newman, John Stuart Mill (one of the earliest, by the way,
to recognise the genius of Browning), Alexandre Dumas, George Sand,
Victor Hugo, Ampere, Quinet, Prosper Merimee, Sainte-Beuve,
Strauss, Montalambert, are among the laurel-bearers who came into existence
betwixt 1800 and 1812.

When Robert Browning was born in London in 1812, Sheridan had still
four years to live; Jeremy Bentham was at the height
of his contemporary reputation, and Godwin was writing glibly
of the virtues of humanity and practising the opposite qualities,
while Crabbe was looked upon as one of the foremost of living poets.
Wordsworth was then forty, Sir Walter Scott forty-one, Coleridge forty-two,
Walter Savage Landor and Charles Lamb each in his forty-fifth year.
Byron was four-and-twenty, Shelley not yet quite of age,
two radically different men, Keats and Carlyle, both youths of seventeen.
Abroad, Laplace was in his maturity, with fifteen years more yet to live;
Joubert with twelve; Goethe, with twenty; Lamarck, the Schlegels,
Cuvier, Chateaubriand, Hegel, Niebuehr (to specify some leading names only),
had many years of work before them.  Schopenhauer was only four-and-twenty,
while Beranger was thirty-two.  The Polish poet Mickiewicz
was a boy of fourteen, and Poushkin was but a twelvemonth older;
Heine, a lad of twelve, was already enamoured of the great Napoleonic legend.
The foremost literary critic of the century was running about the sands
of Boulogne, or perhaps wandering often along the ramparts of the old town,
introspective even then, with something of that rare and insatiable curiosity
which we all now recognise as so distinctive of Sainte-Beuve.  Again,
the greatest creative literary artist of the century, in prose at any rate,
was leading an apparently somewhat indolent schoolboy life at Tours,
undreamful yet of enormous debts, colossal undertakings, gigantic failures,
and the `Comedie Humaine'.  In art, Sir Henry Raeburn, William Blake,
Flaxman, Canova, Thorwaldsen, Crome, Sir Thomas Lawrence, Constable,
Sir David Wilkie, and Turner were in the exercise of their happiest faculties:
as were, in the usage of theirs, Beethoven, Weber, Schubert, Spohr,
Donizetti, and Bellini.

It is not inadvisedly that I make this specification of great names,
of men who were born coincidentally with, or were in the broader sense
contemporaries of Robert Browning.  There is no such thing
as a fortuitous birth.  Creation does not occur spontaneously,
as in that drawing of David Scott's where from the footprint of the Omnipotent
spring human spirits and fiery stars.  Literally indeed,
as a great French writer has indicated, a man is the child of his time.
It is a matter often commented upon by students of literature, that great men
do not appear at the beginning, but rather at the acme of a period.
They are not the flying scud of the coming wave, but the gleaming crown
of that wave itself.  The epoch expends itself in preparation
for these great ones.

If Nature's first law were not a law of excess, the economy of life
would have meagre results.  I think it is Turgeniev
who speaks somewhere of her as a gigantic Titan, working in gloomy silence,
with the same savage intentness upon a subtler twist of a flea's joints
as upon the Destinies of Man.

If there be a more foolish cry than that poetry is on the wane, it is that
the great days had passed away even before Robert Browning and Alfred Tennyson
were born.  The way was prepared for Browning, as it was for Shakespeare:
as it is, beyond doubt, for the next high peer of these.

There were `Roberts' among the sons of the Browning family
for at least four generations.  It has been affirmed, on disputable authority,
that the surname is the English equivalent for Bruning, and that the family
is of Teutonic origin.  Possibly:  but this origin is too remote
to be of any practical concern.  Browning himself, it may be added,
told Mr. Moncure Conway that the original name was De Bruni.
It is not a matter of much importance:  the poet was,
personally and to a great extent in his genius, Anglo-Saxon.
Though there are plausible grounds for the assumption, I can find nothing
to substantiate the common assertion that, immediately, or remotely,
his people were Jews.*

--
* Fairly conclusive evidence to the contrary, on the paternal side,
  is afforded in the fact that, in 1757, the poet's great-grandfather
  gave one of his sons the baptismal name of Christian.
  Dr. Furnivall's latest researches prove that there is absolutely
  "no ground for supposing the presence of any Jewish blood
  in the poet's veins."
--

As to Browning's physiognomy and personal traits, this much may be granted:
if those who knew him were told he was a Jew they would not be much surprised.
In his exuberant vitality, in his sensuous love of music and the other arts,
in his combined imaginativeness and shrewdness of common sense,
in his superficial expansiveness and actual reticence,
he would have been typical enough of the potent and artistic race
for whom he has so often of late been claimed.

What, however, is most to the point is that neither to curious acquaintances
nor to intimate friends, neither to Jews nor Gentiles,
did he ever admit more than that he was a good Protestant,
and sprung of a Puritan stock.  He was tolerant of all religious forms,
but with a natural bias towards Anglican Evangelicalism.

In appearance there was, perhaps, something of the Semite in Robert Browning:
yet this is observable but slightly in the portraits of him
during the last twenty years, and scarcely at all in those which represent him
as a young man.  It is most marked in the drawing by Rudolf Lehmann,
representing Browning at the age of forty-seven, where he looks out upon us
with a physiognomy which is, at least, as much distinctively Jewish
as English.  Possibly the large dark eyes (so unlike both in colour and shape
what they were in later life) and curved nose and full lips,
with the oval face, may have been, as it were, seen judaically by the artist.
These characteristics, again, are greatly modified in Mr. Lehmann's
subsequent portrait in oils.

The poet's paternal great-grandfather, who was owner of the Woodyates Inn,
in the parish of Pentridge, in Dorsetshire, claimed to come of good
west-country stock.  Browning believed, but always conscientiously maintained
there was no proof in support of the assumption, that he was
a descendant of the Captain Micaiah Browning who, as Macaulay relates
in his `History of England', raised the siege of Derry in 1689
by springing the boom across Lough Foyle, and perished in the act.
The same ancestral line is said to comprise the Captain Browning
who commanded the ship `The Holy Ghost', which conveyed Henry V. to France
before he fought the Battle of Agincourt, and in recognition of whose services
two waves, said to represent waves of the sea, were added to his coat of arms.
It is certainly a point of some importance in the evidence,
as has been indicated, that these arms were displayed
by the gallant Captain Micaiah, and are borne by the present family.
That the poet was a pure-bred Englishman in the strictest sense,
however, as has commonly been asserted, is not the case.
His mother was Scottish, through her mother and by birth, but her father
was the son of a German from Hamburg, named Wiedemann, who, by the way,
in connection with his relationship as maternal grandfather to the poet,
it is interesting to note, was an accomplished draughtsman and musician.*
Browning's paternal grandmother, again, was a Creole.  As Mrs. Orr remarks,
this pedigree throws a valuable light on the vigour and variety
of the poet's genius.  Possibly the main current of his ancestry is as little
strictly English as German.  A friend sends me the following paragraph
from a Scottish paper: --  "What of the Scottish Brownings?  I had it long ago
from one of the name that the Brownings came originally from Ayrshire,
and that several families of them emigrated to the North of Ireland
during the times of the Covenanters.  There is, moreover,
a small town or village in the North of Ireland called Browningstown.
Might not the poet be related to these Scottish Brownings?"

--
* It has frequently been stated that Browning's maternal grandfather,
  Mr. Wiedemann, was a Jew.  Mr. Wiedemann, the son of a Hamburg merchant,
  was a small shipowner in Dundee.  Had he, or his father, been Semitic,
  he would not have baptised one of his daughters `Christiana'.
--

Browning's great-grandfather, as indicated above, was a small proprietor
in Dorsetshire.  His son, whether perforce or from choice,
removed to London when he was a youth, and speedily obtained
a clerkship in the Bank of England, where he remained for fifty years,
till he was pensioned off in 1821 with over 400 Pounds a year.
He died in 1833.  His wife, to whom he was married in or about 1780,
was one Margaret Morris Tittle, a Creole, born in the West Indies.
Her portrait, by Wright of Derby, used to hang in the poet's dining-room.
They resided, Mr. R. Barrett Browning tells me, in Battersea,
where his grandfather was their first-born.  The paternal grandfather
of the poet decided that his three sons, Robert, William Shergold, and Reuben,
should go into business, the two younger in London, the elder abroad.
All three became efficient financial clerks, and attained to good positions
and fair means.*  The eldest, Robert, was a man of exceptional powers.
He was a poet, both in sentiment and expression; and he understood,
as well as enjoyed, the excellent in art.  He was a scholar, too,
in a reputable fashion:  not indifferent to what he had learnt in his youth,
nor heedless of the high opinion generally entertained for the greatest
writers of antiquity, but with a particular care himself for Horace
and Anacreon.  As his son once told a friend, "The old gentleman's brain
was a storehouse of literary and philosophical antiquities.
He was completely versed in mediaeval legend, and seemed to have known
Paracelsus, Faustus, and even Talmudic personages, personally" --
a significant detail, by the way.  He was fond of metrical composition,
and his ease and grace in the use of the heroic couplet were the admiration,
not only of his intellectual associates, but, in later days, of his son,
who was wont to affirm, certainly in all seriousness,
that expressionally his father was a finer poetic artist than himself.
Some one has recorded of him that he was an authority
on the Letters of Junius:  fortunately he had more tangible claims than this
to the esteem of his fellows.  It was his boast that,
notwithstanding the exigencies of his vocation, he knew as much
of the history of art as any professional critic.  His extreme modesty
is deducible from this naive remark.  He was an amateur artist, moreover,
as well as poet, critic, and student.  I have seen several of his drawings
which are praiseworthy:  his studies in portraiture, particularly,
are ably touched:  and, as is well known, he had an active faculty
of pictorial caricature.  In the intervals of leisure
which beset the best regulated clerk he was addicted
to making drawings of the habitual visitors to the Bank of England,
in which he had obtained a post on his return, in 1803, from the West Indies,
and in the enjoyment of which he remained till 1853,
when he retired on a small pension.  His son had an independent income,
but whether from a bequest, or in the form of an allowance from his
then unmarried Uncle Reuben, is uncertain.  In the first year of his marriage
Mr. Browning resided in an old house in Southampton Street, Peckham,
and there the poet was born.  The house was long ago pulled down,
and another built on its site.  Mr. Browning afterwards removed
to another domicile in the same Peckham district.  Many years later,
he and his family left Camberwell and resided at Hatcham, near New Cross,
where his brothers and sisters (by his father's second marriage) lived.
There was a stable attached to the Hatcham house, and in it
Mr. Reuben Browning kept his horse, which he let his poet-nephew ride,
while he himself was at his desk in Rothschild's bank.
No doubt this horse was the `York' alluded to by the poet
in the letter quoted, as a footnote, at page 189 [Chapter 9] of this book.
Some years after his wife's death, which occurred in 1849,
Mr. Browning left Hatcham and came to Paddington, but finally went to reside
in Paris, and lived there, in a small street off the Champs Elysees,
till his death in 1866.  The Creole strain seems to have been
distinctly noticeable in Mr. Browning, so much so that it is possible
it had something to do with his unwillingness to remain at St. Kitts,
where he was certainly on one occasion treated cavalierly enough.
The poet's complexion in youth, light and ivory-toned as it was in later life,
has been described as olive, and it is said that one of his nephews,
who met him in Paris in his early manhood, took him for an Italian.
It has been affirmed that it was the emotional Creole strain in Browning
which found expression in his passion for music.**

--
* The three brothers were men of liberal education and literary tastes.
  Mr. W. S. Browning, who died in 1874, was an author of some repute.
  His `History of the Huguenots' is a standard book on the subject.
** Mrs. Sutherland Orr, in her "Life and Letters of Robert Browning" (1891),
   (now available online) refutes these statements.  -- A. L., 1996.
--

By old friends of the family I have been told that Mr. Browning
had a strong liking for children, with whom his really remarkable
faculty of impromptu fiction made him a particular favourite.
Sometimes he would supplement his tales by illustrations with pencil or brush.
Miss Alice Corkran has shown me an illustrated coloured map,
depictive of the main incidents and scenery of the `Pilgrim's Progress',
which he genially made for "the children".*

--
* Mrs. Fraser Corkran, who saw much of the poet's father
  during his residence in Paris, has spoken to me of his extraordinary
  analytical faculty in the elucidation of complex criminal cases.
  It was once said of him that his detective faculty amounted to genius.
  This is a significant trait in the father of the author
  of "The Ring and the Book".
--

He had three children himself -- Robert, born May 7th, 1812,
a daughter named Sarianna, after her mother, and Clara.
His wife was a woman of singular beauty of nature,
with a depth of religious feeling saved from narrowness of scope
only by a rare serenity and a fathomless charity.  Her son's
loving admiration of her was almost a passion:  even late in life
he rarely spoke of her without tears coming to his eyes.
She was, moreover, of an intellectual bent of mind, and with an artistic bias
having its readiest fulfilment in music, and, to some extent, in poetry.
In the latter she inclined to the Romanticists:  her husband
always maintained the supremacy of Pope.  He looked with much dubiety
upon his son's early writings, "Pauline" and "Paracelsus";
"Sordello", though he found it beyond either his artistic
or his mental apprehension, he forgave, because it was written
in rhymed couplets; the maturer works he regarded with sympathy and pride,
with a vague admiration which passed into a clearer understanding
only when his long life was drawing near its close.

Of his children's company he never tired, even when they were
scarce out of babyhood.  He was fond of taking the little Robert in his arms,
and walking to and fro with him in the dusk in "the library",
soothing the child to sleep by singing to him snatches of Anacreon
in the original, to a favourite old tune of his, "A Cottage in a Wood".
Readers of "Asolando" will remember the allusions in that volume to
"my father who was a scholar and knew Greek."  A week or two before his death
Browning told an American friend, Mrs. Corson, in reply to a statement of hers
that no one could accuse him of letting his talents lie idle:
"It would have been quite unpardonable in my case not to have done my best.
My dear father put me in a condition most favourable
for the best work I was capable of.  When I think of the many authors
who have had to fight their way through all sorts of difficulties,
I have no reason to be proud of my achievements.  My good father
sacrificed a fortune to his convictions.  He could not bear with slavery,
and left India and accepted a humble bank-office in London.
He secured for me all the ease and comfort that a literary man needs
to do good work.  It would have been shameful if I had not done my best
to realise his expectations of me."*

--
* `India' is a slip on the part either of Browning or of Mrs. Corson.
  The poet's father was never in India.  He was quite a youth
  when he went to his mother's sugar-plantation at St. Kitts,
  in the West Indies.
--

The home of Mr. Browning was, as already stated, in Camberwell,
a suburb then of less easy access than now, and where there were green trees,
and groves, and enticing rural perspectives into "real" country,
yet withal not without some suggestion of the metropolitan air.

                             "The old trees
    Which grew by our youth's home -- the waving mass
    Of climbing plants, heavy with bloom and dew --
    The morning swallows with their songs like words --
    All these seem clear. . . .
                             . . . most distinct amid
    The fever and the stir of after years."
                                                 (`Pauline'.)

Another great writer of our time was born in the same parish:
and those who would know Herne Hill and the neighbourhood
as it was in Browning's youth will find an enthusiastic guide
in the author of `Praeterita'.

Browning's childhood was a happy one.  Indeed, if the poet had been able
to teach in song only what he had learnt in suffering,
the larger part of his verse would be singularly barren of interest.
From first to last everything went well with him, with the exception
of a single profound grief.  This must be borne in mind by those
who would estimate aright the genius of Robert Browning.
It would be affectation or folly to deny that his splendid physique --
a paternal inheritance, for his father died at the age of eighty-four,
without having ever endured a day's illness -- and the exceptionally
fortunate circumstances which were his throughout life,
had something to do with that superb faith of his which finds
concentrated expression in the lines in Pippa's song --
"God's in His Heaven, All's right with the world!"

It is difficult for a happy man with an imperturbable digestion
to be a pessimist.  He is always inclined to give Nature
the benefit of the doubt.  His favourite term for this mental complaisance
is "catholicity of faith", or, it may be, "a divine hope".
The less fortunate brethren bewail the laws of Nature,
and doubt a future readjustment, because of stomachs chronically out of order.
An eminent author with a weak digestion wrote to me recently
animadverting on what he calls Browning's insanity of optimism:
it required no personal acquaintanceship to discern the dyspeptic
well-spring of this utterance.  All this may be admitted lightly
without carrying the physiological argument to extremes.
A man may have a liberal hope for himself and for humanity,
although his dinner be habitually a martyrdom.  After all,
we are only dictated to by our bodies:  we have not perforce to obey them.
A bitter wit once remarked that the soul, if it were ever discovered,
would be found embodied in the gastric juice.  He was not altogether a fool,
this man who had learnt in suffering what he taught in epigram;
yet was he wide of the mark.

As a very young child Browning was keenly susceptible to music.
One afternoon his mother was playing in the twilight to herself.
She was startled to hear a sound behind her.  Glancing round,
she beheld a little white figure distinct against an oak bookcase,
and could just discern two large wistful eyes looking earnestly at her.
The next moment the child had sprung into her arms, sobbing passionately
at he knew not what, but, as his paroxysm of emotion subsided,
whispering over and over, with shy urgency, "Play! play!"

It is strange that among all his father's collection
of drawings and engravings nothing had such fascination for him
as an engraving of a picture of Andromeda and Perseus by Caravaggio.
The story of the innocent victim and the divine deliverer
was one of which in his boyhood he never tired of hearing:
and as he grew older the charm of its pictorial presentment
had for him a deeper and more complex significance.
We have it on the authority of a friend that Browning had this engraving
always before his eyes as he wrote his earlier poems.
He has given beautiful commemoration to his feeling for it in "Pauline": --

                                  "Andromeda!
    And she is with me -- years roll, I shall change,
    But change can touch her not -- so beautiful
    With her dark eyes, earnest and still, and hair
    Lifted and spread by the salt-sweeping breeze;
    And one red beam, all the storm leaves in heaven,
    Resting upon her eyes and face and hair,
    As she awaits the snake on the wet beach,
    By the dark rock, and the white wave just breaking
    At her feet; quite naked and alone, -- a thing
    You doubt not, nor fear for, secure that God
    Will come in thunder from the stars to save her."

One of his own early recollections was that of sitting on his father's knees
in the library, and listening with enthralled attention to the Tale of Troy,
with marvellous illustrations among the glowing coals in the fireplace;
with, below all, the vaguely heard accompaniment --
from the neighbouring room where Mrs. Browning sat "in her chief happiness,
her hour of darkness and solitude and music" -- of a wild Gaelic lament,
with its insistent falling cadences.  A story concerning
his poetic precocity has been circulated, but is not worth repeating.
Most children love jingling rhymes, and one need not be a born genius
to improvise a rhyming couplet on an occasion.

It is quite certain that in nothing in these early poemicules,
in such at least as have been preserved without the poet's knowledge
and against his will, is there anything of genuine promise.
Hundreds of youngsters have written as good, or better,
Odes to the Moon, Stanzas on a Favourite Canary, Lines on a Butterfly.
What is much more to the point is, that at the age of eight he was able
not only to read, but to take delight in Pope's translation of Homer.
He used to go about declaiming certain couplets with an air
of intense earnestness highly diverting to those who overheard him.

About this time also he began to translate the simpler odes of Horace.
One of these (viii. Bk. II.) long afterwards suggested to him
the theme of his "Instans Tyrannus".  It has been put on record
that his sister remembers him, as a very little boy, walking round and round
the dining-room table, and spanning out the scansion of his verses
with his hand on the smooth mahogany.  He was scarce more than a child when,
one Guy Fawkes' day, he heard a woman singing an unfamiliar song,
whose burden was, "Following the Queen of the Gipsies, O!"  This refrain
haunted him often in the after years.  That beautiful fantastic romance,
"The Flight of the Duchess", was born out of an insistent memory
of this woman's snatch of song, heard in childhood.  He was ten when,
after several `passions malheureuses', this precocious Lothario plunged
into a love affair whose intensity was only equalled by its hopelessness.
A trifle of fifteen years' seniority and a husband complicated matters,
but it was not till after the reckless expenditure of a Horatian ode upon
an unclassical mistress that he gave up hope.  The outcome of this was what
the elder Browning regarded as a startling effusion of much Byronic verse.
The young Robert yearned for wastes of ocean and illimitable sands,
for dark eyes and burning caresses, for despair that nothing could quench
but the silent grave, and, in particular, for hollow mocking laughter.
His father looked about for a suitable school, and decided
to entrust the boy's further education to Mr. Ready, of Peckham.

Here he remained till he was fourteen.  But already he knew
the dominion of dreams.  His chief enjoyment, on holiday afternoons,
was to gain an unfrequented spot, where three huge elms re-echoed
the tones of incoherent human music borne thitherward by the west winds
across the wastes of London.  Here he loved to lie and dream.
Alas, those elms, that high remote coign, have long since passed
to the "hidden way" whither the snows of yester year have vanished.
He would lie for hours looking upon distant London --
a golden city of the west literally enough, oftentimes,
when the sunlight came streaming in long shafts from behind
the towers of Westminster and flashed upon the gold cross of St. Paul's.
The coming and going of the cloud-shadows, the sweeping of sudden rains,
the dull silvern light emanating from the haze of mist
shrouding the vast city, with the added transitory gleam of troubled waters,
the drifting of fogs, at that distance seeming like gigantic veils
constantly being moved forward and then slowly withdrawn,
as though some sinister creature of the atmosphere were casting a net among
all the dross and debris of human life for fantastic sustenance of its own
-- all this endless, ever-changing, always novel phantasmagoria had for him
an extraordinary fascination.  One of the memorable nights of his boyhood
was an eve when he found his way, not without perturbation of spirit
because of the unfamiliar solitary dark, to his loved elms.
There, for the first time, he beheld London by night.
It seemed to him then more wonderful and appalling than all the host of stars.
There was something ominous in that heavy pulsating breath:
visible, in a waning and waxing of the tremulous, ruddy glow
above the black enmassed leagues of masonry; audible,
in the low inarticulate moaning borne eastward across the crests of Norwood.
It was then and there that the tragic significance of life
first dimly awed and appealed to his questioning spirit:
that the rhythm of humanity first touched deeply in him a corresponding chord.




