Chapter 7.



There are, in literary history, few `scenes de la vie privee'
more affecting than that of the greatest of English poetesses,
in the maturity of her first poetic period, lying, like a fading flower,
for hours, for days continuously, in a darkened room in a London house.
So ill was Miss Elizabeth Barrett, early in the second half of the forties,
that few friends, herself even, could venture to hope
for a single one of those Springs which she previsioned so longingly.
To us, looking back at this period, in the light of what we know of a story
of singular beauty, there is an added pathos in the circumstance that,
as the singer of so many exquisite songs lay on her invalid's sofa,
dreaming of things which, as she thought, might never be,
all that was loveliest in her life was fast approaching --
though, like all joy, not without an equally unlooked-for sorrow.
"I lived with visions for my company, instead of men and women . . .
nor thought to know a sweeter music than they played to me."

This is not the occasion, and if it were, there would still be imperative need
for extreme concision, whereon to dwell upon the early life
of Elizabeth Barrett Browning.  The particulars of it are familiar
to all who love English literature:  for there is, in truth,
not much to tell -- not much, at least, that can well be told.
It must suffice, here, that Miss Barrett was born on the 4th of March 1809,*
and so was the senior, by three years, of Robert Browning.

--
* Should be 1806.  See note in Table of Contents.  -- A. L., 1996.
--

By 1820, in remote Herefordshire, the not yet eleven-year-old poetess
had already "cried aloud on obsolete Muses from childish lips"
in various "nascent odes, epics, and didactics."  At this time, she tells us,
the Greeks were her demi-gods, and she dreamt much of Agamemnon.
In the same year, in suburban Camberwell, a little boy was often wont
to listen eagerly to his father's narrative of the same hero, and to all
the moving tale of Troy.  It is significant that these two children,
so far apart, both with the light of the future upon their brows,
grew up in familiarity with something of the antique beauty.
It was a lifelong joy to both, that "serene air of Greece".
Many an hour of gloom was charmed away by it for the poetess
who translated the "Prometheus Bound" of Aeschylus, and wrote "The Dead Pan":
many a happy day and memorable night were spent in that "beloved environment"
by the poet who wrote "Balaustion's Adventure" and translated the "Agamemnon".

The chief sorrow of her life, however, occurred in her thirty-first year.
She never quite recovered from the shock of her well-loved brother Edward's
tragic death, a mysterious disaster, for the foundering of the little yacht
`La Belle Sauvage' is almost as inexplicable as that of the `Ariel'
in the Spezzian waters beyond Lerici.  Not only through the ensuing winter,
but often in the dreams of after years, "the sound of the waves
rang in my ears like the moans of one dying."

The removal of the Barrett household to Gloucester Place,
in Western London, was a great event.  Here, invalid though she was,
she could see friends occasionally and get new books constantly.
Her name was well known and became widely familiar when
her "Cry of the Children" rang like a clarion throughout the country.
The poem was founded upon an official report by Richard Hengist Horne,
the friend whom some years previously she had won in correspondence,
and with whom she had become so intimate, though without
personal acquaintance, that she had agreed to write a drama
in collaboration with him, to be called "Psyche Apocalypte",
and to be modelled on "Greek instead of modern tragedy."

Horne -- a poet of genius, and a dramatist of remarkable power --
was one of the truest friends she ever had, and, so far as her literary life
is concerned, came next in influence only to her poet-husband.
Among the friends she saw much of in the early forties was a distant "cousin",
John Kenyon -- a jovial, genial, gracious, and altogether delightful man,
who acted the part of Providence to many troubled souls, and, in particular,
was "a fairy godfather" to Elizabeth Barrett and to "the other poet",
as he used to call Browning.  It was to Mr. Kenyon -- "Kenyon,
with the face of a Benedictine monk, but the most jovial of good fellows,"
as a friend has recorded of him; "Kenyon the Magnificent",
as he was called by Browning -- that Miss Barrett owed her first introduction
to the poetry of her future husband.

Browning's poetry had for her an immediate appeal.  With sure insight
she discerned the special quality of the poetic wealth
of the "Bells and Pomegranates", among which she then and always
cared most for the penultimate volume, the "Dramatic Romances and Lyrics".
Two years before she met the author she had written,
in "Lady Geraldine's Courtship" --

    "Or from Browning some `Pomegranate' which, if cut deep down the middle,
    Shows a heart within blood-tinctured, of a veined humanity."

A little earlier she had even, unwittingly on either side,
been a collaborateur with "the author of `Paracelsus'."
She gave Horne much aid in the preparation of his "New Spirit of the Age",
and he has himself told us "that the mottoes, which are singularly
happy and appropriate, were for the most part supplied
by Miss Barrett and Robert Browning, then unknown to each other."
One thing and another drew them nearer and nearer.  Now it was a poem,
now a novel expression, now a rare sympathy.

An intermittent correspondence ensued, and both poets became anxious
to know each other.  "We artists -- how well praise agrees with us,"
as Balzac says.

A few months later, in 1846, they came to know one another personally.
The story of their first meeting, which has received a wide acceptance,
is apocryphal.  The meeting was brought about by Kenyon.
This common friend had been a schoolfellow of Browning's father,
and so it was natural that he took a more than ordinary interest
in the brilliant young poet, perhaps all the more so
that the reluctant tide of popularity which had promised to set in
with such unparalleled sweep and weight had since experienced a steady ebb.

And so the fates brought these two together.  The younger was already
far the stronger, but he had an unbounded admiration for Miss Barrett.
To her, he was even then the chief living poet.  She perceived
his ultimate greatness; as early as 1845 had "a full faith in him
as poet and prophet."

As Browning admitted to a friend, the love between them
was almost instantaneous, a thing of the eyes, mind, and heart --
each striving for supremacy, till all were gratified equally in a common joy.
They had one bond of sterling union:  passion for the art
to which both had devoted their lives.

To those who love love for love's sake, who `se passionnent pour la passion,'
as Prosper Merimee says, there could scarce be a more sacred spot in London
than that fiftieth house in unattractive Wimpole Street,
where these two poets first met each other; and where, in the darkened room,
"Love quivered, an invisible flame."  Elizabeth Barrett was indeed,
in her own words, "as sweet as Spring, as Ocean deep."
She, too, was always, as she wrote of Harriet Martineau,
in a hopeless anguish of body and serene triumph of spirit.
As George Sand says of one of her fictitious personages,
she was an "artist to the backbone; that is, one who feels life
with frightful intensity."  To this too keen intensity of feeling
must be attributed something of that longing for repose,
that deep craving for rest from what is too exciting from within,
which made her affirm the exquisite appeal to her of such Biblical passages as
"The Lord of peace Himself give you peace," and "He giveth His Beloved Sleep,"
which, as she says in one of her numerous letters to Miss Mitford,
"strike upon the disquieted earth with such a FOREIGNNESS of heavenly music."

Nor was he whom she loved as a man, as well as revered as a poet,
unworthy of her.  His was the robustest poetic intellect of the century;
his the serenest outlook; his, almost the sole unfaltering footsteps
along the perilous ways of speculative thought.  A fair life,
irradiate with fairer ideals, conserved his native integrity
from that incongruity between practice and precept so commonly exemplified.
Comely in all respects, with his black-brown wavy hair, finely-cut features,
ready and winsome smile, alert luminous eyes, quick, spontaneous,
expressive gestures -- an inclination of the head, a lift of the eyebrows,
a modulation of the lips, an assertive or deprecatory wave of the hand,
conveying so much -- and a voice at that time of a singular
penetrating sweetness, he was, even without that light of the future
upon his forehead which she was so swift to discern, a man to captivate
any woman of kindred nature and sympathies.  Over and above these advantages,
he possessed a rare quality of physical magnetism.  By virtue of this
he could either attract irresistibly or strongly repel.

I have several times heard people state that a handshake from Browning
was like an electric shock.  Truly enough, it did seem as though
his sterling nature rang in his genially dominant voice, and, again,
as though his voice transmitted instantaneous waves of an electric current
through every nerve of what, for want of a better phrase,
I must perforce call his intensely alive hand.  I remember once how a lady,
afflicted with nerves, in the dubious enjoyment of her first experience of
a "literary afternoon", rose hurriedly and, in reply to her hostess' inquiry
as to her motive, explained that she could not sit any longer
beside the elderly gentleman who was talking to Mrs. So-and-so,
as his near presence made her quiver all over, "like a mild attack
of pins-and-needles," as she phrased it.  She was chagrined to learn
that she had been discomposed not by `a too exuberant financier',
as she had surmised, but by, as "Waring" called Browning,
the "subtlest assertor of the Soul in song."

With the same quick insight as she had perceived Robert Browning's
poetic greatness, Elizabeth Barrett discerned his personal worth.
He was essentially manly in all respects:  so manly,
that many frail souls of either sex philandered about his over-robustness.
From the twilight gloom of an aesthetic clique came a small voice
belittling the great man as "quite too `loud', painfully excessive."
Browning was manly enough to laugh at all ghoulish cries
of any kind whatsoever.  Once in a way the lion would look round
and by a raised breath make the jackals wriggle; as when the poet
wrote to a correspondent, who had drawn his attention
to certain abusive personalities in some review or newspaper:
"Dear Sir --  I am sure you mean very kindly, but I have had
too long an experience of the inability of the human goose
to do other than cackle when benevolent and hiss when malicious,
and no amount of goose criticism shall make me lift a heel
against what waddles behind it."

Herself one whose happiest experiences were in dreamland,
Miss Barrett was keenly susceptible to the strong humanity of Browning's song,
nor less keenly attracted by his strenuous and fearless outlook,
his poetic practicality, and even by his bluntness of insight
in certain matters.  It was no slight thing to her that she could,
in Mr. Lowell's words, say of herself and of him --

    "We, who believe life's bases rest
    Beyond the probe of chemic test."

She rejoiced, despite her own love for remote imaginings,
to know that he was of those who (to quote again from the same fine poet)

    ". . . wasted not their breath in schemes
    Of what man might be in some bubble-sphere,
    As if he must be other than he seems
    Because he was not what he should be here,
    Postponing Time's slow proof to petulant dreams;"

that, in a word, while `he could believe the promise of to-morrow,' he was
at the same time supremely conscious of `the wondrous meaning of to-day.'

Both, from their youth onward, had travelled `on trails divine
of unimagined laws.'  It was sufficient for her that he kept his eyes
fixed on the goal beyond the way he followed:  it did not matter
that he was blind to the dim adumbrations of novel byways,
of strange Calvarys by the wayside, so often visible to her.

Their first meeting was speedily followed by a second -- by a third --
and then?  When we know not, but ere long, each found that happiness
was in the bestowal of the other.

The secret was for some time kept absolutely private.  From the first
Mr. Barrett had been jealous of his beloved daughter's new friend.
He did not care much for the man, he with all the prejudices
and baneful conservatism of the slave-owning planter, the other
with ardent democratic sentiments and a detestation of all forms of iniquity.
Nor did he understand the poet.  He could read his daughter's flowing verse
with pleasure, but there was to his ear a mere jumble of sound and sense
in much of the work of the author of "The Tomb at St. Praxed's"
and "Sibrandus Schafnaburgensis".  Of a selfishly genial but also
of a violent and often sullen nature, he resented more and more any friendship
which threatened to loosen the chain of affection and association
binding his daughter to himself.

Both the lovers believed that an immediate marriage would,
from every point of view, be best.  It was not advisable that it should be
long delayed, if to happen at all, for the health of Miss Barrett was so poor
that another winter in London might, probably would, mean irretrievable harm.

Some time before this she had become acquainted with Mrs. Jameson,
the eminent art-writer.  The regard, which quickly developed
to an affectionate esteem, was mutual.  One September morning
Mrs. Jameson called, and after having dwelt on the gloom and peril
of another winter in London, dwelt on the magic of Italy,
and concluded by inviting Miss Barrett to accompany her
in her own imminent departure for abroad.  The poet was touched and grateful,
but, pointing to her invalid sofa, and gently emphasising
her enfeebled health and other difficult circumstances,
excused herself from acceptance of Mrs. Jameson's generous offer.

In the "Memoirs of Mrs. Jameson" that lady's niece, Mrs. Macpherson,
relates how on the eve of her and her aunt's departure,
a little note of farewell arrived from Miss Barrett, "deploring the writer's
inability to come in person and bid her friend good-bye,
as she was `forced to be satisfied with the sofa and silence.'"

It is easy to understand, therefore, with what amazement Mrs. Jameson,
shortly after her arrival in Paris, received a letter from Robert Browning
to the effect that he AND HIS WIFE had just come from London,
on their way to Italy.  "My aunt's surprise was something almost comical,"
writes Mrs. Macpherson, "so startling and entirely unexpected was the news."
And duly married indeed the two poets had been!

From the moment the matter was mooted to Mr. Barrett, he evinced
his repugnance to the idea.  To him even the most foolish assertion of his own
was a sacred pledge.  He called it "pride in his word":  others recognised it
as the very arrogance of obstinacy.  He refused to countenance the marriage
in any way, refused to have Browning's name mentioned in his presence,
and even when his daughter told him that she had definitely made up her mind,
he flatly declined to acknowledge as even possible what was indeed
very imminent.

Nor did he ever step down from his ridiculous pinnacle of wounded self-love.
Favourite daughter though she had been, Mr. Barrett never forgave her,
held no communication with her even when she became a mother,
and did not mention her in his will.  It is needless to say anything more
upon this subject.  What Mr. and Mrs. Browning were invariably reticent upon
can well be passed over with mere mention of the facts.

At the last moment there had been great hurry and confusion.
But nevertheless, on the forenoon of the 12th of September 1846,
Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett had unceremoniously
stepped into St. Mary-le-bone Church and there been married.
So secret had the matter been kept that even such old friends
as Richard Hengist Horne and Mr. Kenyon were in ignorance of the event
for some time after it had actually occurred.

Mrs. Jameson made all haste to the hotel where the Brownings were,
and ultimately persuaded them to leave the hotel for the quieter `pension'
in the Rue Ville d'Eveque, where she and Mrs. Macpherson were staying.
Thereafter it was agreed that, as soon as a fortnight had gone by,
they should journey to Italy together.

Truly enough, as Mrs. Macpherson says, the journey must have been "enchanting,
made in such companionship."  Before departing from Paris,
Mrs. Jameson, in writing to a friend, alluded to her unexpected companions,
and added, "Both excellent:  but God help them! for I know not how
the two poet heads and poet hearts will get on through this prosaic world."
This kindly friend was not the only person who experienced similar doubts.
One acquaintance, no other than the Poet-Laureate, Wordsworth, added:
"So, Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett have gone off together!
Well, I hope they may understand each other -- nobody else could!"

As a matter of fact they did, and to such good intent
that they seem never to have had one hour of dissatisfaction,
never one jar in the music of their lives.

What a happy wayfaring through France that must have been!
The travelling had to be slow, and with frequent interruptions,
on account of Mrs. Browning's health:  yet she steadily improved,
and was almost from the start able to take more exercise,
and to be longer in the open air than had for long been her wont.
They passed southward, and after some novel experiences in `diligences',
reached Avignon, where they rested for a couple of days.
Thence a little expedition, a poetical pilgrimage, was made to Vaucluse,
sacred to the memory of Petrarch and Laura.  There, as Mrs. Macpherson
has told us, at the very source of the "chiare, fresche e dolce acque,"
Browning took his wife up in his arms, and, carrying her across
through the shallow curling waters, seated her on a rock
that rose throne-like in the middle of the stream.  Thus, indeed,
did love and poetry take a new possession of the spot immortalised
by Petrarch's loving fancy.

Three weeks passed happily before Pisa, the Brownings' destination,
was reached.  But even then the friends were unwilling to part,
and Mrs. Jameson and her niece remained in the deserted old city
for a score of days longer.  So wonderful was the change
wrought in Mrs. Browning by happiness, and by all the enfranchisement
her marriage meant for her, that, as her friend wrote to Miss Mitford,
"she is not merely improved but transformed."  In the new sunshine
which had come into her life, she blossomed like a flower-bud
long delayed by gloom and chill.  Her heart, in truth, was like a lark
when wafted skyward by the first spring-wind.

At last to her there had come something of that peace she had longed for,
and though, in the joy of her new life, her genius "like an Arab bird
slept floating in the wind," it was with that restful hush
which precedes the creative storm.  There is something deeply pathetic
in her conscious joy.  So little actual experience of life had been hers that
in many respects she was as a child:  and she had all the child's yearning
for those unsullied hours that never come when once they are missed.
But it was not till love unfastened the inner chambers of her heart and brain
that she realised to the full, what she had often doubted,
how supreme a thing mere life is.  It was in some such mood
that she wrote the lovely forty-second of the "Sonnets from the Portuguese",
closing thus --

                             "Let us stay
    Rather on earth, Beloved, -- where the unfit
    Contrarious moods of men recoil away
    And isolate pure spirits, and permit
    A place to stand and love in for a day,
    With darkness and the death-hour rounding it."

As for Browning's love towards his wife, nothing more tender and chivalrous
has ever been told of ideal lovers in an ideal romance.
It is so beautiful a story that one often prefers it
to the sweetest or loftiest poem that came from the lips of either.
That love knew no soilure in the passage of the years.
Like the flame of oriental legend, it was perennially incandescent
though fed not otherwise than by sunlight and moonshine.
If it alone survive, it may resolve the poetic fame of either
into one imperishable, luminous ray of white light:  as the uttered song
fused in the deathless passion of Sappho gleams star-like down the centuries
from the high steep of Leucadoe.

It was here, in Pisa, I have been told on indubitable authority,
that Browning first saw in manuscript those "Sonnets from the Portuguese"
which no poet of Portugal had ever written, which no man could have written,
which no other woman than his wife could have composed.
From the time when it had first dawned upon her that love was to be hers,
and that the laurel of poetry was not to be her sole coronal,
she had found expression for her exquisite trouble in these short poems,
which she thinly disguised from `inner publicity' when she issued them
as "from the Portuguese".

It is pleasant to think of the shy delight with which the delicate,
flower-like, almost ethereal poet-wife, in those memorable Pisan evenings --
with the wind blowing soundingly from the hills of Carrara,
or quiescent in a deep autumnal calm broken only by the slow wash of Arno
along the sea-mossed long-deserted quays -- showed her love-poems
to her husband.  With what love and pride he must have read
those outpourings of the most sensitive and beautiful nature he had ever met,
vials of lovely thought and lovelier emotion, all stored against
the coming of a golden day.

    "How do I love thee?  Let me count the ways.
    I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
    My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
    For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.
    I love thee to the level of every day's
    Most quiet need, by sun and candle light.
    I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;
    I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.
    I love thee with the passion put to use
    In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith.
    I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
    With my lost saints, -- I love thee with the breath,
    Smiles, tears, of all my life! -- and, if God choose,
    I shall but love thee better after Death!"

Even such heart-music as this cannot have thrilled him more
than these two exquisite lines, with their truth almost too poignant
to permit of serene joy --

    "I yield the grave for thy sake, and exchange
    My near sweet view of heaven for earth with thee!"

Their Pisan home was amid sacred associations.  It was situate
in an old palazzo built by Vasari, within sight of the Leaning Tower
and the Duomo.  There, in absolute seclusion, they wrote and planned.
Once and again they made a pilgrimage to the Lanfranchi Palace
"to walk in the footsteps of Byron and Shelley":  occasionally they went
to Vespers in the Duomo, and listened, rapt, to the music wandering spirally
through the vast solitary building:  once they were fortunate
in hearing the impressive musical mass for the dead, in the Campo Santo.
They were even reminded often of their distant friend Horne,
for every time they crossed one of the chief piazzas
they saw the statue of Cosimo de Medici looking down upon them.

In this beautiful old city, so full of repose as it lies "asleep in the sun,"
Mrs. Browning's health almost leapt, so swift was her advance towards vigour.
"She is getting better every day," wrote her husband,
"stronger, better wonderfully, and beyond all our hopes."

That happy first winter they passed "in the most secluded manner,
reading Vasari, and dreaming dreams of seeing Venice in the summer."
But early in April, when the swallows had flown inland
above the pines of Viareggio, and Shelley's favourite little Aziola
was hooting silverly among the hollow vales of Carrara,
the two poets prepared to leave what the frailer of them called
"this perch of Pisa."

But with all its charm and happy associations, the little city was dull.
"Even human faces divine are quite `rococo' with me,"
Mrs. Browning wrote to a friend.  The change to Florence
was a welcome one to both.  Browning had already been there,
but to his wife it was as the fulfilment of a dream.
They did not at first go to that romantic old palace
which will be for ever sociate with the author of "Casa Guidi Windows",
but found accommodation in a more central locality.

When the June heats came, husband and wife both declared for Ancona,
the picturesque little town which dreams out upon the Adriatic.
But though so close to the sea, Ancona is in summer time
almost insufferably hot.  Instead of finding it cooler than Florence,
it was as though they had leapt right into a cauldron.
Alluding to it months later, Mrs. Browning wrote to Horne,
"The heat was just the fiercest fire of your imagination,
and I SEETHE to think of it at this distance."

It was a memorable journey all the same.  They went to Ravenna,
and at four o'clock one morning stood by Dante's tomb, moved deeply
by the pathetic inscription and by all the associations it evoked.
All along the coast from Ravenna to Loretto was new ground to both,
and endlessly fascinating; in the passing and repassing of the Apennines
they had `wonderful visions of beauty and glory.'  At Ancona itself,
notwithstanding the heat, they spent a happy season.
Here Browning wrote one of the loveliest of his short poems,
"The Guardian Angel", which had its origin in Guercino's picture
in the chapel at Fano.  By the allusions in the sixth and eighth stanzas
it is clear that the poem was inscribed to Alfred Domett,
the poet's well-loved friend immortalised as "Waring".
Doubtless it was written for no other reason than the urgency of song,
for in it are the loving allusions to his wife, "MY angel with me too,"
and "my love is here."  Three times they went to the chapel,
he tells us in the seventh stanza, to drink in to their souls' content
the beauty of "dear Guercino's" picture.  Browning has rarely uttered
the purely personal note of his inner life.  It is this that affords
a peculiar value to "The Guardian Angel", over and above its technical beauty.
In the concluding lines of the stanzas I am about to quote
he gives the supreme expression to what was his deepest faith,
his profoundest song-motive.

    "I would not look up thither past thy head
       Because the door opes, like that child, I know,
    For I should have thy gracious face instead,
       Thou bird of God!  And wilt thou bend me low
    Like him, and lay, like his, my hands together,
    And lift them up to pray, and gently tether
       Me, as thy lamb there, with thy garment's spread?

         .    .    .    .    .

    "How soon all worldly wrong would be repaired!
       I think how I should view the earth and skies
    And sea, when once again my brow was bared
       After thy healing, with such different eyes.
    O world, as God has made it!  All is beauty:
    And knowing this, is love, and love is duty.
       What further may be sought for or declared?"

After the Adriatic coast was left, they hesitated as to returning to Florence,
the doctors having laid such stress on the climatic suitability of Pisa
for Mrs. Browning.  But she felt so sure of herself in her new strength
that it was decided to adventure upon at least one winter in the queen-city.
They were fortunate in obtaining a residence in the old palace
called Casa Guidi, in the Via Maggiore, over against the church of San Felice,
and here, with a few brief intervals, they lived till death separated them.

On the little terrace outside there was more noble verse
fashioned in the artist's creative silence than we can ever be aware of:
but what a sacred place it must ever be for the lover of poetry!
There, one ominous sultry eve, Browning, brooding over the story
of a bygone Roman crime, foreshadowed "The Ring and the Book",
and there, in the many years he dwelt in Casa Guidi, he wrote
some of his finer shorter poems.  There, also, "Aurora Leigh" was born,
and many a lyric fresh with the dew of genius.  Who has not looked
at the old sunworn house and failed to think of that night
when each square window of San Felice was aglow with festival lights,
and when the summer lightnings fell silently in broad flame
from cloud to cloud:  or has failed to hear, down the narrow street,
a little child go singing, 'neath Casa Guidi windows by the church,
`O bella liberta, O bella!'

Better even than these, for happy dwelling upon, is the poem
the two poets lived.  Morning and day were full of work, study,
or that pleasurable idleness which for the artist is so often
his best inspiration.  Here, on the little terrace, they used to sit together,
or walk slowly to and fro, in conversation that was only less eloquent
than silence.  Here one day they received a letter from Horne.
There is nothing of particular note in Mrs. Browning's reply,
and yet there are not a few of her poems we would miss rather than
these chance words -- delicate outlines left for the reader to fill in:
"We were reading your letter, together, on our little terrace --
walking up and down reading it -- I mean the letter to Robert --
and then, at the end, suddenly turning, lo, just at the edge of the stones,
just between the balustrades, and already fluttering in a breath of wind
and about to fly away over San Felice's church, we caught a glimpse
of the feather of a note to E. B. B.  How near we were to the loss of it,
to be sure!"

Happier still must have been the quiet evenings in late spring and summer,
when, the one shrouded against possible chills, the other bare-headed
and with loosened coat, walked slowly to and fro in the dark,
conscious of "a busy human sense" below, but solitary on their balcony
beyond the lamplit room.

    "While in and out the terrace-plants, and round
    One branch of tall datura, waxed and waned
    The lamp-fly lured there, wanting the white flower."

An American friend has put on record his impressions of the two poets,
and their home at this time.  He had been called upon by Browning,
and by him invited to take tea at Casa Guidi the same evening.
There the visitor saw, "seated at the tea-table of the great room
of the palace in which they were living, a very small, very slight woman,
with very long curls drooping forward, almost across the eyes,
hanging to the bosom, and quite concealing the pale, small face,
from which the piercing inquiring eyes looked out sensitively at the stranger.
Rising from her chair, she put out cordially the thin white hand
of an invalid, and in a few moments they were pleasantly chatting,
while the husband strode up and down the room, joining in the conversation
with a vigour, humour, eagerness, and affluence of curious lore which,
with his trenchant thought and subtle sympathy, make him
one of the most charming and inspiring of companions."

In the autumn the same friend, joined by one or two other acquaintances,
went with the Brownings to Vallombrosa for a couple of days,
greatly to Mrs. Browning's delight, for whom the name had had
a peculiar fascination ever since she had first encountered it in Milton.

She was conveyed up the steep way towards the monastery in a great basket,
without wheels, drawn by two oxen:  though, as she tells Miss Mitford,
she did not get into the monastery after all, she and her maid
being turned away by the monks "for the sin of womanhood."
She was too much of an invalid to climb the steeper heights,
but loved to lie under the great chestnuts upon the hill-slopes
near the convent.  At twilight they went to the little convent-chapel,
and there Browning sat down at the organ and played
some of those older melodies he loved so well.

It is, strangely enough, from Americans that we have the best account
of the Brownings in their life at Casa Guidi:  from R. H. Stoddart,
Bayard Taylor, Nathaniel Hawthorne, George Stillman Hillard, and W. W. Story.
I can find room, however, for but one excerpt: --

==
"Those who have known Casa Guidi as it was, could hardly enter
the loved rooms now, and speak above a whisper.  They who have been
so favoured, can never forget the square anteroom, with its great picture
and pianoforte, at which the boy Browning passed many an hour --
the little dining-room covered with tapestry, and where hung medallions
of Tennyson, Carlyle, and Robert Browning -- the long room filled
with plaster-casts and studies, which was Mrs. Browning's retreat --
and, dearest of all, the large drawing-room where SHE always sat.
It opens upon a balcony filled with plants, and looks out upon
the iron-grey church of Santa Felice.  There was something about this room
that seemed to make it a proper and especial haunt for poets.
The dark shadows and subdued light gave it a dreary look, which was enhanced
by the tapestry-covered walls, and the old pictures of saints
that looked out sadly from their carved frames of black wood.  Large bookcases
constructed of specimens of Florentine carving selected by Mr. Browning
were brimming over with wise-looking books.  Tables were covered
with more gaily-bound volumes, the gifts of brother authors.
Dante's grave profile, a cast of Keats's face and brow taken after death,
a pen-and-ink sketch of Tennyson, the genial face of John Kenyon,
Mrs. Browning's good friend and relative, little paintings
of the boy Browning, all attracted the eye in turn,
and gave rise to a thousand musings.  A quaint mirror, easy-chairs and sofas,
and a hundred nothings that always add an indescribable charm,
were all massed in this room.  But the glory of all,
and that which sanctified all, was seated in a low arm-chair near the door.
A small table, strewn with writing materials, books, and newspapers,
was always by her side. . . .  After her death, her husband
had a careful water-colour drawing made of this room,
which has been engraved more than once.  It still hangs in his drawing-room,
where the mirror and one of the quaint chairs above named still are.
The low arm-chair and small table are in Browning's study --
with his father's desk, on which he has written all his poems."
-- W. W. Story.
==

To Mr. and Mrs. Hawthorne, Mr. Hillard, and Mr. Story,
in particular, we are indebted for several delightful glimpses
into the home-life of the two poets.  We can see Mrs. Browning
in her "ideal chamber", neither a library nor a sitting-room,
but a happy blending of both, with the numerous old paintings
in antique Florentine frames, easy-chairs and lounges,
carved bookcases crammed with books in many languages,
bric-a-brac in any quantity, but always artistic, flowers everywhere,
and herself the frailest flower of all.

Mr. Hillard speaks of the happiness of the Brownings' home
and their union as perfect:  he, full of manly power,
she, the type of the most sensitive and delicate womanhood.
This much-esteemed friend was fascinated by Mrs. Browning.
Again and again he alludes to her exceeding spirituality:
"She is a soul of fire enclosed in a shell of pearl:"
her frame "the transparent veil for a celestial and mortal spirit:"
and those fine words which prove that he too was of the brotherhood
of the poets, "Her tremulous voice often flutters over her words
like the flame of a dying candle over the wick."




