Chapter 6.



"Pippa Passes", "The Ring and the Book", "The Inn Album", these are Browning's
three great dramatic poems, as distinct from his poetic plays.
All are dramas in the exact sense, though the three I have named
are dramas for mental and not for positive presentation.
Each reader must embody for himself the images projected on his brain by
the electric quality of the poet's genius:  within the ken of his imagination
he may perceive scenes not less moving, incidents not less thrilling,
complexities of motive and action not less intricately involved,
than upon the conventional stage.

The first is a drama of an idea, the second of the immediate and remote
consequences of a single act, the third of the tyranny of the passions.

I understand the general opinion among lovers and earnest students
of Browning's poetry to be that the highest peaks of his genius
tower from the vast tableland of "The Ring and the Book";
that thenceforth there was declension.  But Browning is not to be measured
by common estimates.  It is easy to indicate, in the instances of many poets,
just where the music reaches its sweetest, its noblest,
just where the extreme glow wanes, just where the first shadows
come leaping like greyhounds, or steal almost imperceptibly
from slow-closing horizons.

But with Browning, as with Shakespeare, as with Victor Hugo,
it is difficult for our vision to penetrate the glow
irradiating the supreme heights of accomplishment.  Like Balzac,
like Shakespeare again, he has revealed to us a territory so vast,
that while we bow down before the sun westering athwart distant Andes,
the gold of sunrise is already flashing behind us, upon the shoulder of Atlas.

It is certain that "The Ring and the Book" is unique.
Even Goethe's masterpiece had its forerunners, as in Marlowe's "Faustus",
and its ambitious offspring, as in Bailey's "Festus".
But is it a work of art?  Here is the only vital question
which at present concerns us.

It is altogether useless to urge, as so many admirers of Browning do,
that "The Ring and the Book" is as full of beauties as the sea is of waves.
Undeniably it is, having been written in the poet's maturity.
But, to keep to the simile, has this epical poem the unity of ocean?
Does it consist of separate seas, or is it really one, as the wastes
which wash from Arctic to Antarctic, through zones temperate and equatorial,
are yet one and indivisible?  If it have not this unity it is still
a stupendous accomplishment, but it is not a work of art.  And though art
is but the handmaiden of genius, what student of Comparative Literature
will deny that nothing has survived the ruining breath of Time --
not any intellectual greatness nor any spiritual beauty,
that is not clad in perfection, be it absolute or relative --
for relative perfection there is, despite the apparent paradox.

The mere bulk of "The Ring and the Book" is, in point of art, nothing.
One day, after the publication of this poem, Carlyle hailed the author
with enthusiastic praise in which lurked damning irony:
"What a wonderful fellow you are, Browning:  you have written
a whole series of `books' about what could be summed up
in a newspaper paragraph!"  Here, Carlyle was at once right and wrong.
The theme, looked at dispassionately, is unworthy of the monument
in which it is entombed for eternity.  But the poet looked upon
the central incident as the inventive mechanician regards
the tiny pivot remote amid the intricate maze of his machinery.
Here, as elsewhere, Browning's real subject is too often confounded
with the accidents of the subject.  His triumph is not that he has created
so huge a literary monument, but rather that, notwithstanding its bulk,
he has made it shapely and impressive.  Stress has frequently been laid
on the greatness of the achievement in the writing of twelve long poems
in the exposition of one theme.  Again, in point of art, what significance
has this?  None.  There is no reason why it should not have been
in nine or eleven parts; no reason why, having been demonstrated in twelve,
it should not have been expanded through fifteen or twenty.
Poetry ever looks askance at that gipsy-cousin of hers, "Tour-de-force".

Of the twelve parts -- occupying in all about twenty-one thousand lines --
the most notable as poetry are those which deal with the plea
of the implicated priest, Caponsacchi, with the meditation of the Pope,
and with the pathetic utterance of Pompilia.  It is not a dramatic poem
in the sense that "Pippa Passes" is, for its ten Books
(the first and twelfth are respectively introductory and appendical)
are monologues.  "The Ring and the Book", in a word,
consists, besides the two extraneous parts, of ten monodramas,
which are as ten huge facets to a poetic Koh-i-Noor.

The square little Italian volume, in its yellow parchment
and with its heavy type, which has now found a haven in Oxford,
was picked up by Browning for a `lira' (about eightpence),
on a second-hand bookstall in the Piazza San Lorenzo at Florence,
one June day, 1865.  Therein is set forth, in full detail, all the particulars
of the murder of his wife Pompilia, for her supposed adultery,
by a certain Count Guido Franceschini; and of that noble's trial,
sentence, and doom.  It is much the same subject matter
as underlies the dramas of Webster, Ford, and other Elizabethan poets,
but subtlety of insight rather than intensity of emotion and situation
distinguishes the Victorian dramatist from his predecessors.
The story fascinated Browning, who, having in this book and elsewhere mastered
all the details, conceived the idea of writing the history of the crime
in a series of monodramatic revelations on the part of the individuals
more or less directly concerned.  The more he considered the plan
the more it shaped itself to a great accomplishment, and early in 1866
he began the most ambitious work of his life.

An enthusiastic admirer has spoken of the poem as "one of the most
extraordinary feats of which we have any record in literature."
But poetry is not mental gymnastics.  All this insistence upon
"extraordinary feats" is to be deprecated:  it presents the poet as Hercules,
not as Apollo:  in a word, it is not criticism.  The story is one
of vulgar fraud and crime, romantic to us only because the incidents
occurred in Italy, in the picturesque Rome and Arezzo of two centuries ago.
The old bourgeois couple, Pietro and Violante Comparini,
manage to wed their thirteen-year-old putative daughter
to a middle-aged noble of Arezzo.  They expect the exquisite repute
of an aristocratic connection, and other tangible advantages.
He, impoverished as he is, looks for a splendid dowry.
No one thinks of the child-wife, Pompilia.  She becomes the scapegoat,
when the gross selfishness of the contracting parties stands revealed.
Count Guido has a genius for domestic tyranny.  Pompilia suffers.
When she is about to become a mother she determines to leave her husband,
whom she now dreads as well as dislikes.  Since the child is to be
the inheritor of her parents' wealth, she will not leave it
to the tender mercies of Count Guido.  A young priest, a canon of Arezzo,
Giuseppe Caponsacchi, helps her to escape.  In due course she gives birth
to a son.  She has scarce time to learn the full sweetness of her maternity
ere she is done to death like a trampled flower.  Guido, who has held himself
thrall to an imperative patience, till his hold upon the child's dowry
should be secure, hires four assassins, and in the darkness of night
betakes himself to Rome.  He and his accomplices enter the house
of Pietro Comparini and his wife, and, not content with slaying them,
also murders Pompilia.  But they are discovered, and Guido
is caught red-handed.  Pompilia's evidence alone is damnatory,
for she was not slain outright, and lingers long enough to tell her story.
Franceschini is not foiled yet, however.  His plea is that he simply avenged
the wrong done to him by his wife's adulterous connection
with the priest Caponsacchi.  But even in the Rome of that evil day
justice was not extinct.  Guido's motive is proved to be false;
he himself is condemned to death.  An appeal to the Pope is futile.
Finally, the wretched man pays the too merciful penalty of his villainy.

There is nothing grand, nothing noble here:  at most only a tragic pathos
in the fate of the innocent child-wife Pompilia.  It is clear, therefore,
that the greatness of "The Ring and the Book" must depend even less
upon its subject, its motive, than upon its being "an extraordinary feat"
in the gymnastics of verse.

In a sense, Browning's longest work is akin to that of his wife.
Both "The Ring and the Book" and "Aurora Leigh" are metrical novels.
The one is discursive in episodes and spiritual experiences:
the other in intricacies of evidence.  But there the parallel ends.
If "The Ring and the Book" were deflowered of its blooms of poetry
and rendered into a prose narrative, it might interest a barrister
"getting up" a criminal case, but it would be much inferior to,
say, "The Moonstone"; its author would be insignificant beside
the ingenious M. Gaboriau.  The extraordinariness of the feat
would then be but indifferently commented upon.

As neither its subject, nor its extraordinariness as a feat, nor its method,
will withstand a searching examination, we must endeavour to discern
if transcendent poetic merit be discoverable in the treatment.
To arrive at a just estimate it is needful to free the mind
not merely from preconceptions, but from that niggardliness of insight
which can perceive only the minor flaws and shortcomings almost inevitable
to any vast literary achievement, and be blind to the superb merits.
One must prepare oneself to listen to a new musician, with mind and body
alert to the novel harmonies, and oblivious of what other musicians
have done or refrained from doing.

"The Ring and the Book", as I have said, was not begun in the year
of its imagining.*  It is necessary to anticipate the biographical narrative,
and state that the finding of the parchment-booklet happened
in the fourth year of the poet's widowerhood, for his happy married period
of less than fifteen years came to a close in 1861.

--
* The title is explained as follows: --  "The story of the Franceschini case,
  as Mr. Browning relates it, forms a circle of evidence
  to its one central truth; and this circle was constructed
  in the manner in which the worker in Etruscan gold
  prepares the ornamental circlet which will be worn as a ring.
  The pure metal is too soft to bear hammer or file;
  it must be mixed with alloy to gain the necessary power of resistance.
  The ring once formed and embossed, the alloy is disengaged,
  and a pure gold ornament remains.  Mr. Browning's material
  was also inadequate to his purpose, though from a different cause.
  It was too HARD.  It was `pure crude fact', secreted from the fluid being
  of the men and women whose experience it had formed.  In its existing state
  it would have broken up under the artistic attempt to weld and round it.
  He supplied an alloy, the alloy of fancy, or -- as he also calls it --
  of one fact more:  this fact being the echo of those past existences
  awakened within his own.  He breathed into the dead record
  the breath of his own life; and when his ring of evidence had re-formed,
  first in elastic then in solid strength, here delicately incised,
  there broadly stamped with human thought and passion,
  he could cast fancy aside, and bid his readers recognise
  in what he set before them unadulterated human truth."  -- Mrs. Orr.
--

On the afternoon of the day on which he made his purchase
he read the book from end to end.  "A Spirit laughed and leapt
through every limb."  The midsummer heats had caused thunder-clouds
to congregate above Vallombrosa and the whole valley of Arno:
and the air in Florence was painfully sultry.  The poet stood by himself
on his terrace at Casa Guidi, and as he watched the fireflies
wandering from the enclosed gardens, and the sheet-lightnings
quivering through the heated atmosphere, his mind was busy
in refashioning the old tale of loveless marriage and crime.

                                       "Beneath
    I' the street, quick shown by openings of the sky
    When flame fell silently from cloud to cloud,
    Richer than that gold snow Jove rained on Rhodes,
    The townsmen walked by twos and threes, and talked,
    Drinking the blackness in default of air --
    A busy human sense beneath my feet:
    While in and out the terrace-plants, and round
    One branch of tall datura, waxed and waned
    The lamp-fly lured there, wanting the white flower."

Scene by scene was re-enacted, though of course only
in certain essential details.  The final food for the imagination
was found in a pamphlet of which he came into possession of in London,
where several important matters were given which had no place
in the volume he had picked up in Florence.

Much, far the greater part, of the first "book" is -- interesting!
It is mere verse.  As verse, even, it is often so involved,
so musicless occasionally, so banal now and again, so inartistic
in colour as well as in form, that one would, having apprehended
its explanatory interest, pass on without regret, were it not
for the noble close -- the passionate, out-welling lines to "the truest poet
I have ever known," the beautiful soul who had given her all to him,
whom, but four years before he wrote these words, he had laid to rest
among the cypresses and ilexes of the old Florentine garden of the dead.

    "O lyric Love, half angel and half bird
    And all a wonder and a wild desire, --
    Boldest of hearts that ever braved the sun,
    Took sanctuary within the holier blue,
    And sang a kindred soul out to his face, --
    Yet human at the red-ripe of the heart --
    When the first summons from the darkling earth
    Reached thee amid thy chambers, blanched their blue,
    And bared them of the glory -- to drop down,
    To toil for man, to suffer or to die, --
    This is the same voice:  can thy soul know change?
    Hail then, and hearken from the realms of help!
    Never may I commence my song, my due
    To God who best taught song by gift of thee,
    Except with bent head and beseeching hand --
    That still, despite the distance and the dark,
    What was, again may be; some interchange
    Of grace, some splendour once thy very thought,
    Some benediction anciently thy smile:
    -- Never conclude, but raising hand and head
    Thither where eyes, that cannot reach, yet yearn
    For all hope, all sustainment, all reward,
    Their utmost up and on, -- so blessing back
    In those thy realms of help, that heaven thy home,
    Some whiteness which, I judge, thy face makes proud,
    Some wanness where, I think, thy foot may fall!"
         .    .    .    .    .

Thereafter, for close upon five thousand words, the poem descends again
to the level of a versified tale.  It is saved from ruin
by subtlety of intellect, striking dramatic verisimilitude,
an extraordinary vigour, and occasional lines of real poetry.
Retrospectively, apart from the interest, often strained to the utmost,
most readers, I fancy, will recall with lingering pleasure
only the opening of "The Other Half Rome", the description of Pompilia,
"with the patient brow and lamentable smile," with flower-like body,
in white hospital array -- a child with eyes of infinite pathos,
"whether a flower or weed, ruined:  who did it shall account to Christ."

In these three introductory books we have the view of the matter
taken by those who side with Count Guido, of those who are all for Pompilia,
and of the "superior person", impartial because superciliously indifferent,
though sufficiently interested to "opine".

In the ensuing three books a much higher poetic level is reached.
In the first, Guido speaks; in the second, Caponsacchi; the third,
that lustrous opal set midway in the "Ring", is Pompilia's narrative.
Here the three protagonists live and move before our eyes.
The sixth book may be said to be the heart of the whole poem.
The extreme intellectual subtlety of Guido's plea stands quite unrivalled
in poetic literature.  In comparing it, for its poetic beauty,
with other sections, the reader must bear in mind that
in a poem of a dramatic nature the dramatic proprieties must be dominant.
It would be obviously inappropriate to make Count Guido Franceschini
speak with the dignity of the Pope, with the exquisite pathos of Pompilia,
with the ardour, like suppressed molten lava, of Caponsacchi.
The self-defence of the latter is a superb piece of dramatic writing.
Once or twice the flaming volcano of his heart bursts upward uncontrollably,
as when he cries --

    "No, sirs, I cannot have the lady dead!
    That erect form, flashing brow, fulgurant eye,
    That voice immortal (oh, that voice of hers!) --
    That vision of the pale electric sword
    Angels go armed with -- that was not the last
    O' the lady.  Come, I see through it, you find,
    Know the manoeuvre!  Also herself said
    I had saved her:  do you dare say she spoke false?
    Let me see for myself if it be so!"

Than the poignant pathos and beauty of "Pompilia", there is nothing
more exquisite in our literature.  It stands alone.  Here at last
we have the poet who is the Lancelot to Shakespeare's Arthur.
It takes a supreme effort of genius to be as simple as a child.
How marvellously, after the almost sublime hypocrisy of the end of
Guido's defence, after the beautiful dignity of Caponsacchi's closing words,
culminating abruptly in the heart-wrung cry, "O great, just, good God!
miserable me!" -- how marvellously comes upon the reader
the delicate, tearful tenderness of the innocent child-wife --

    "I am just seventeen years and five months old,
    And, if I lived one day more, three full weeks;
    'Tis writ so in the church's register,
    Lorenzo in Lucina, all my names
    At length, so many names for one poor child,
    -- Francesca Camilla Vittoria Angela
    Pompilia Comparini -- laughable!"

Only two writers of our age have depicted women with that imaginative insight
which is at once more comprehensive and more illuminative than
women's own invision of themselves -- Robert Browning and George Meredith,
but not even the latter, most subtle and delicate of all analysts
of the tragi-comedy of human life, has surpassed "Pompilia".
The meeting and the swift uprising of love between Lucy and Richard,
in "The Ordeal of Richard Feveral", is, it is true, within the highest reach
of prose romance:  but between even the loftiest height of prose romance
and the altitudes of poetry, there is an impassable gulf.

And as it is with simplicity so it is with tenderness.
Only the sternly strong can be supremely tender.  And infinitely tender
is the poetry of "Pompilia" --

    "Oh, how good God is that my babe was born,
    -- Better than born, baptised and hid away
    Before this happened, safe from being hurt!
    That had been sin God could not well forgive:
    HE WAS TOO YOUNG TO SMILE AND SAVE HIMSELF ----"

or the lines which tell how as a little girl she gave her roses
not to the spick and span Madonna of the Church, but to the poor,
dilapidated Virgin, "at our street-corner in a lonely niche,"
with the babe that had sat upon her knees broken off:
or that passage, with its exquisite naivete, where Pompilia relates
why she called her boy Gaetano, because she wished "no old name
for sorrow's sake," so chose the latest addition to the saints,
elected only twenty-five years before --

                        "So, carefuller, perhaps,
    To guard a namesake than those old saints grow,
    Tired out by this time, -- see my own five saints!"

or these --

                        "Thus, all my life,
    I touch a fairy thing that fades and fades.
    -- Even to my babe!  I thought, when he was born,
    Something began for once that would not end,
    Nor change into a laugh at me, but stay
    For evermore, eternally quite mine ----"

once more --

                        "One cannot judge
    Of what has been the ill or well of life
    The day that one is dying. . . .
    Now it is over, and no danger more . . .
    To me at least was never evening yet
    But seemed far beautifuller than its day,
    For past is past ----"

Lovely, again, are the lines in which she speaks of
the first "thrill of dawn's suffusion through her dark,"
the "light of the unborn face sent long before:"  or those unique lines
of the starved soul's Spring (ll. 1512-27):  or those,
of the birth of her little one --

    "A whole long fortnight; in a life like mine
    A fortnight filled with bliss is long and much.
    All women are not mothers of a boy. . . .
    I never realised God's birth before --
    How he grew likest God in being born.
    This time I felt like Mary, had my babe
    Lying a little on my breast like hers."

When she has weariedly, yet with surpassing triumph,
sighed out her last words --

    "God stooping shows sufficient of His light
    For us i' the dark to rise by.  And I rise ----"

who does not realise that to life's end he shall not forget
that plaintive voice, so poignantly sweet, that ineffable dying smile,
those wistful eyes with so much less of earth than heaven?

But the two succeeding "books" are more tiresome and more unnecessary
than the most inferior of the three opening sections -- the first of the two,
indeed, is intolerably wearisome, a desolate boulder-strewn gorge
after the sweet air and sunlit summits of "Caponsacchi" and "Pompilia".
In the next "book" Innocent XII. is revealed.  All this section
has a lofty serenity, unsurpassed in its kind.  It must be read
from first to last for its full effect, but I may excerpt one passage,
the high-water mark of modern blank-verse: --

    "For the main criminal I have no hope
    Except in such a suddenness of fate.
    I stood at Naples once, a night so dark
    I could have scarce conjectured there was earth
    Anywhere, sky or sea or world at all:
    But the night's black was burst through by a blaze ----
    Thunder struck blow on blow, earth groaned and bore,
    Through her whole length of mountain visible:
    There lay the city thick and plain with spires,
    And, like a ghost disshrouded, white the sea.
    So may the truth be flashed out by one blow,
    And Guido see, one instant, and be saved."

Finally comes that throbbing, terrible last "book" where the murderer
finds himself brought to bay and knows that all is lost.
Who can forget its unparalleled close, when the wolf-like Guido suddenly,
in his supreme agony, transcends his lost manhood in one despairing cry --

    "Abate, -- Cardinal, -- Christ, -- Maria, -- God, . . .
    Pompilia, will you let them murder me?"

Lastly, the Epilogue rounds off the tale.  But is this Epilogue necessary?
Surely the close should have come with the words just quoted?

It will not be after a first perusal that the reader will be able to arrive
at a definite conviction.  No individual or collective estimate of to-day
can be accepted as final.  Those who come after us, perhaps not
the next generation, nor the next again, will see "The Ring and the Book"
free of all the manifold and complex considerations
which confuse our judgment.  Meanwhile, each can only speak for himself.
To me it seems that "The Ring and the Book" is, regarded as an artistic whole,
the most magnificent failure in our literature.  It enshrines poetry
which no other than our greatest could have written;
it has depths to which many of far inferior power have not descended.
Surely the poem must be judged by the balance of its success and failure?
It is in no presumptuous spirit, but out of my profound admiration
of this long-loved and often-read, this superb poem, that I, for one,
wish it comprised but the Prologue, the Plea of Guido,
"Caponsacchi", "Pompilia", "The Pope", and Guido's last Defence.
I cannot help thinking that this is the form in which it will be read
in the years to come.  Thus circumscribed, it seems to me
to be rounded and complete, a great work of art void of the dross,
the mere debris which the true artist discards.  But as it is,
in all its lordly poetic strength and flagging impulse, is it not, after all,
the true climacteric of Browning's genius?

"The Inn Album", a dramatic poem of extraordinary power,
has so much more markedly the defects of his qualities that I take it to be,
at the utmost, the poise of the first gradual refluence.
This analogy of the tidal ebb and flow may be observed with singular aptness
in Browning's life-work -- the tide that first moved shoreward
in the loveliness of "Pauline", and, with "long withdrawing roar,"
ebbed in slow, just perceptible lapse to the poet's penultimate volume.
As for "Asolando", I would rather regard it as the gathering of a new wave --
nay, again rather, as the deep sound of ocean which the outward surge
has reached.

But for myself I do not accept "The Inn Album" as the first
hesitant swing of the tide.  I seem to hear the resilient undertone
all through the long slow poise of "The Ring and the Book".
Where then is the full splendour and rush of the tide,
where its culminating reach and power?

I should say in "Men and Women"; and by "Men and Women"
I mean not merely the poems comprised in the collection so entitled,
but all in the "Dramatic Romances", "Lyrics", and the "Dramatis Personae",
all the short pieces of a certain intensity of note and quality of power,
to be found in the later volumes, from "Pacchiarotto" to "Asolando".

And this because, in the words of the poet himself when speaking of Shelley,
I prefer to look for the highest attainment, not simply the high --
and, seeing it, to hold by it.  Yet I am not oblivious of the mass
of Browning's lofty achievement, "to be known enduringly among men," --
an achievement, even on its secondary level, so high, that around
its imperfect proportions, "the most elaborated productions of ordinary art
must arrange themselves as inferior illustrations."

How am I to convey concisely that which it would take a volume
to do adequately -- an idea of the richest efflorescence of Browning's genius
in these unfading blooms which we will agree to include in "Men and Women"?
How better -- certainly it would be impossible to be more succinct --
than by the enumeration of the contents of an imagined volume,
to be called, say "Transcripts from Life"?

It would be to some extent, but not rigidly, arranged chronologically.
It would begin with that masterpiece of poetic concision,
where a whole tragedy is burned in upon the brain in fifty-six lines,
"My Last Duchess".  Then would follow "In a Gondola",
that haunting lyrical drama `in petto', where the lover is stabbed to death
as his heart is beating against that of his mistress; "Cristina",
with its keen introspection; those delightfully stirring pieces,
the "Cavalier Tunes", "Through the Metidja to Abd-el-Kadr",
and "The Pied Piper of Hamelin"; "The Flower's Name";
"The Flight of the Duchess"; "The Tomb at St. Praxed's", the poem
which educed Ruskin's enthusiastic praise for its marvellous apprehension
of the spirit of the Middle Ages; "Pictor Ignotus", and "The Lost Leader".
But as there is not space for individual detail, and as many
of the more important are spoken of elsewhere in this volume,
I must take the reader's acquaintance with the poems for granted.
So, following those first mentioned, there would come
"Home Thoughts from Abroad"; "Home Thoughts from the Sea";
"The Confessional"; "The Heretic's Tragedy"; "Earth's Immortalities";
"Meeting at Night:  Parting at Morning"; "Saul"; "Karshish";
"A Death in the Desert"; "Rabbi Ben Ezra"; "A Grammarian's Funeral";
"Love Among the Ruins"; Song, "Nay but you"; "A Lover's Quarrel";
"Evelyn Hope"; "A Woman's Last Word"; "Fra Lippo Lippi";
"By the Fireside"; "Any Wife to Any Husband"; "A Serenade at the Villa";
"My Star"; "A Pretty Woman"; "A Light Woman"; "Love in a Life";
"Life in a Love"; "The Last Ride Together"; "A Toccata of Galuppi's";
"Master Hugues of Saxe Gotha"; "Abt Vogler"; "Memorabilia";
"Andrea Del Sarto"; "Before"; "After"; "In Three Days"; "In a Year";
"Old Pictures in Florence"; "De Gustibus"; "Women and Roses";
"The Guardian Angel"; "Cleon"; "Two in the Campagna"; "One Way of Love";
"Another Way of Love"; "Misconceptions"; "May and Death"; "James Lee's Wife";
"Dis Aliter Visum"; "Too Late"; "Confessions"; "Prospice"; "Youth and Art";
"A Face"; "A Likeness"; "Apparent Failure".  Epilogue to Part I. --
"O Lyric Voice", etc., from end of First Part of "The Ring and the Book".
