The Project Gutenberg eBook of Life of Robert Browning
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Life of Robert Browning

Author: William Sharp


        
Release date: September 1, 1996 [eBook #656]
                Most recently updated: April 1, 2015

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/656







Life of Browning by William Sharp





Please note:
  The Following Books relating to Robert Browning are now online:
  ---------------------------------------------------------------

Corson, Hiram.  An Introduction to the Study of Robert Browning's Poetry,
  3rd edition.
    This book is primarily concerned with Browning's poems.
    Advantages:  This book is an excellent introduction to Browning.

Orr, Mrs. Sutherland.  Life and Letters of Robert Browning, 2nd edition.
    This book is primarily concerned with Browning's life.
    Advantages:  As a close friend, the author has a good grasp of the facts,
      and is meticulous in her treatment of the material.
    Disadvantages:  As a close friend, the author is sometimes partisan.

Sharp, William.  Life of Robert Browning.
    Despite the title, this book is as much a critique of Browning's works
      as it is a biography of the poet.
    Advantages:  Further removed from poet, the author is willing to make
      some criticisms.  As an early and frequently quoted work on the subject,
      this book is a good resource.
    Disadvantages:  Due to carelessness on the part of the author
      and his publisher, a number of factual and other errors were made.
      Although this electronic text has corrected many of the obvious errors,
      they are frequent enough to leave misgivings.





[Note on text:  Italicized words or phrases are capitalised.
Some obvious errors may have been corrected.]





Life of Robert Browning

by William Sharp.





Contents.



Chapter 1.

London, Robert Browning's birthplace; his immediate predecessors
and contemporaries in literature, art, and music; born May 7th, 1812;
origin of the Browning family; assertions as to its Semitic connection
apparently groundless; the poet a putative descendant
of the Captain Micaiah Browning mentioned by Macaulay;
Robert Browning's mother of Scottish and German origin;
his father a man of exceptional powers, artist, poet, critic, student;
Mr. Browning's opinion of his son's writings; the home in Camberwell;
Robert Browning's childhood; concerning his optimism;
his fondness for Carravaggio's "Andromeda and Perseus"; his poetic precocity;
origin of "The Flight of the Duchess"; writes Byronic verse;
is sent to school at Peckham; his holiday afternoons; sees London by night,
from Herne Hill; the significance of the spectacle to him.


