XXIV

HUMBOLDT

AN ABSTRACT OF MR. EMERSON’S REMARKS MADE AT THE CELEBRATION OF THE
CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY OF THE BIRTH OF ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT, SEPTEMBER
14, 1869

    “If a life prolonged to an advanced period bring with
    it several inconveniences to the individual, there is a
    compensation in the delight of being able to compare older
    states of knowledge with that which now exists, and to see
    great advances in knowledge develop themselves under our eyes
    in departments which had long slept in inactivity.”

                                       HUMBOLDT, _Letter to Ritter_.


HUMBOLDT

Humboldt was one of those wonders of the world, like Aristotle, like
Julius Cæsar, like the Admirable Crichton, who appear from time to
time, as if to show us the possibilities of the human mind, the force
and the range of the faculties,—a universal man, not only possessed of
great particular talents, but they were symmetrical, his parts were well
put together. As we know, a man’s natural powers are often a sort of
committee that slowly, one at a time, give their attention and action;
but Humboldt’s were all united, one electric chain, so that a university,
a whole French Academy, travelled in his shoes. With great propriety, he
named his sketch of the results of science Cosmos. There is no other such
survey or surveyor. The wonderful Humboldt, with his solid centre and
expanded wings, marches like an army, gathering all things as he goes.
How he reaches from science to science, from law to law, folding away
moons and asteroids and solar systems in the clauses and parentheses of
his encyclopædic paragraphs! There is no book like it; none indicating
such a battalion of powers. You could not put him on any sea or shore
but his instant recollection of every other sea or shore illuminated this.

He was properly a man of the world; you could not lose him; you could
not detain him; you could not disappoint him, for at any point on land
or sea he found the objects of his researches. When he was stopped in
Spain and could not get away, he turned round and interpreted their
mountain system, explaining the past history of the continent of Europe.
He belonged to that wonderful German nation, the foremost scholars in
all history, who surpass all others in industry, space and endurance.
A German reads a literature whilst we are reading a book. One of their
writers warns his countrymen that it is not the Battle of Leipsic,
but the Leipsic Fair Catalogue, which raises them above the French.
I remember Cuvier tells us of fossil elephants; that Germany has
furnished the greatest number;—not because there are more elephants in
Germany,—oh no; but because in that empire there is no canton without
some well-informed person capable of making researches and publishing
interesting results. I know that we have been accustomed to think they
were too good scholars, that because they reflect, they never resolve,
that “in a crisis no plan-maker was to be found in the empire;” but we
have lived to see now, for the second time in the history of Prussia, a
statesman of the first class, with a clear head and an inflexible will.




XXV

WALTER SCOTT

REMARKS AT THE CELEBRATION BY THE MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF THE
CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY OF HIS BIRTH, AUGUST 15, 1871

SCOTT, the delight of generous boys.

    As far as Sir Walter Scott aspired to be known for a fine
    gentleman, so far our sympathies leave him.... Our concern is
    only with the residue, where the man Scott was warmed with a
    divine ray that clad with beauty every sheet of water, every
    bald hill in the country he looked upon, and so reanimated the
    well-nigh obsolete feudal history and illustrated every hidden
    corner of a barren and disagreeable territory.

                                  Lecture, “Being and Seeing,” 1838.


WALTER SCOTT

The memory of Sir Walter Scott is dear to this Society, of which he was
for ten years an honorary member. If only as an eminent antiquary who
has shed light on the history of Europe and of the English race, he
had high claims to our regard. But to the rare tribute of a centennial
anniversary of his birthday, which we gladly join with Scotland, and
indeed with Europe, to keep, he is not less entitled—perhaps he alone
among literary men of this century is entitled—by the exceptional debt
which all English-speaking men have gladly owed to his character and
genius. I think no modern writer has inspired his readers with such
affection to his own personality. I can well remember as far back as
when The Lord of the Isles was first republished in Boston, in 1815,—my
own and my school-fellows’ joy in the book.[214] Marmion and The Lay
had gone before, but we were then learning to spell. In the face of the
later novels, we still claim that his poetry is the delight of boys.
But this means that when we reopen these old books we all consent to be
boys again. We tread over our youthful grounds with joy. Critics have
found them to be only rhymed prose. But I believe that many of those
who read them in youth, when, later, they come to dismiss finally their
school-days’ library, will make some fond exception for Scott as for
Byron.

It is easy to see the origin of his poems. His own ear had been charmed
by old ballads crooned by Scottish dames at firesides, and written
down from their lips by antiquaries; and finding them now outgrown and
dishonored by the new culture, he attempted to dignify and adapt them to
the times in which he lived. Just so much thought, so much picturesque
detail in dialogue or description as the old ballad required, so much
suppression of details and leaping to the event, he would keep and use,
but without any ambition to write a high poem after a classic model.
He made no pretension to the lofty style of Spenser, or Milton, or
Wordsworth. Compared with their purified songs, purified of all ephemeral
color or material, his were _vers de société_. But he had the skill
proper to _vers de société_,—skill to fit his verse to his topic, and not
to write solemn pentameters alike on a hero or a spaniel. His good sense
probably elected the ballad to make his audience larger. He apprehended
in advance the immense enlargement of the reading public, which almost
dates from the era of his books,—which his books and Byron’s inaugurated;
and which, though until then unheard of, has become familiar to the
present time.

If the success of his poems, however large, was partial, that of his
novels was complete. The tone of strength in Waverley at once announced
the master, and was more than justified by the superior genius of the
following romances, up to the Bride of Lammermoor, which almost goes back
to Æschylus for a counterpart as a painting of Fate,—leaving on every
reader the impression of the highest and purest tragedy.[215]

His power on the public mind rests on the singular union of two
influences. By nature, by his reading and taste an aristocrat, in a
time and country which easily gave him that bias, he had the virtues
and graces of that class, and by his eminent humanity and his love of
labor escaped its harm. He saw in the English Church the symbol and seal
of all social order; in the historical aristocracy the benefits to the
state which Burke claimed for it; and in his own reading and research
such store of legend and renown as won his imagination to their cause.
Not less his eminent humanity delighted in the sense and virtue and
wit of the common people. In his own household and neighbors he found
characters and pets of humble class, with whom he established the best
relation,—small farmers and tradesmen, shepherds, fishermen, gypsies,
peasant-girls, crones,—and came with these into real ties of mutual help
and good will. From these originals he drew so genially his Jeanie Deans,
his Dinmonts and Edie Ochiltrees, Caleb Balderstones and Fairservices,
Cuddie Headriggs, Dominies, Meg Merrilies, and Jenny Rintherouts, full
of life and reality; making these, too, the pivots on which the plots
of his stories turn; and meantime without one word of brag of this
discernment,—nay, this extreme sympathy reaching down to every beggar
and beggar’s dog, and horse and cow. In the number and variety of his
characters he approaches Shakspeare. Other painters in verse or prose
have thrown into literature a few type-figures; as Cervantes, De Foe,
Richardson, Goldsmith, Sterne and Fielding; but Scott portrayed with
equal strength and success every figure in his crowded company.

His strong good sense saved him from the faults and foibles incident to
poets,—from nervous egotism, sham modesty or jealousy. He played ever a
manly part.[216] With such a fortune and such a genius, we should look to
see what heavy toll the Fates took of him, as of Rousseau or Voltaire, of
Swift or Byron. But no: he had no insanity, or vice, or blemish. He was a
thoroughly upright, wise and great-hearted man, equal to whatever event
or fortune should try him. Disasters only drove him to immense exertion.
What an ornament and safeguard is humor! Far better than wit for a poet
and writer. It is a genius itself, and so defends from the insanities.

Under what rare conjunction of stars was this man born, that, wherever he
lived, he found superior men, passed all his life in the best company,
and still found himself the best of the best! He was apprenticed at
Edinburgh to a Writer to the Signet, and became a Writer to the Signet,
and found himself in his youth and manhood and age in the society of
Mackintosh, Horner, Jeffrey, Playfair, Dugald Stewart, Sydney Smith,
Leslie, Sir William Hamilton, Wilson, Hogg, De Quincey,—to name only some
of his literary neighbors, and, as soon as he died, all this brilliant
circle was broken up.




