XXX

THE FORTUNE OF THE REPUBLIC

    “There is a mystery in the soul of state
    Which hath an operation more divine
    Than breath or pen can give expression to.”


THE FORTUNE OF THE REPUBLIC

It is a rule that holds in economy as well as in hydraulics that you must
have a source higher than your tap. The mills, the shops, the theatre and
the caucus, the college and the church, have all found out this secret.
The sailors sail by chronometers that do not lose two or three seconds
in a year, ever since Newton explained to Parliament that the way to
improve navigation was to get good watches, and to offer public premiums
for a better time-keeper than any then in use. The manufacturers rely on
turbines of hydraulic perfection; the carpet-mill, on mordants and dyes
which exhaust the skill of the chemist; the calico print, on designers
of genius who draw the wages of artists, not of artisans. Wedgwood,
the eminent potter, bravely took the sculptor Flaxman to counsel, who
said, “Send to Italy, search the museums for the forms of old Etruscan
vases, urns, water-pots, domestic and sacrificial vessels of all kinds.”
They built great works and called their manufacturing village Etruria.
Flaxman, with his Greek taste, selected and combined the loveliest
forms, which were executed in English clay; sent boxes of these as
gifts to every court of Europe, and formed the taste of the world. It
was a renaissance of the breakfast-table and china-closet. The brave
manufacturers made their fortune. The jewellers imitated the revived
models in silver and gold.

The theatre avails itself of the best talent of poet, of painter, and of
amateur of taste, to make the _ensemble_ of dramatic effect. The marine
insurance office has its mathematical counsellor to settle averages; the
life-assurance, its table of annuities. The wine-merchant has his analyst
and taster, the more exquisite the better. He has also, I fear, his debts
to the chemist as well as to the vineyard.

Our modern wealth stands on a few staples, and the interest nations took
in our war was exasperated by the importance of the cotton trade. And
what is cotton? One plant out of some two hundred thousand known to the
botanist, vastly the larger part of which are reckoned weeds. What is a
weed? A plant whose virtues have not yet been discovered,—every one of
the two hundred thousand probably yet to be of utility in the arts. As
Bacchus of the vine, Ceres of the wheat, as Arkwright and Whitney were
the demi-gods of cotton, so prolific Time will yet bring an inventor to
every plant. There is not a property in Nature but a mind is born to
seek and find it. For it is not the plants or the animals, innumerable
as they are, nor the whole magazine of material nature that can give
the sum of power, but the infinite applicability of these things in the
hands of thinking man, every new application being equivalent to a new
material.[228]

Our sleepy civilization, ever since Roger Bacon and Monk Schwartz
invented gunpowder, has built its whole art of war, all fortification by
land and sea, all drill and military education, on that one compound,—all
is an extension of a gun-barrel,—and is very scornful about bows and
arrows, and reckons Greeks and Romans and Middle Ages little better than
Indians and bow-and-arrow times. As if the earth, water, gases, lightning
and caloric had not a million energies, the discovery of any one of
which could change the art of war again, and put an end to war by the
exterminating forces man can apply.

Now, if this is true in all the useful and in the fine arts, that the
direction must be drawn from a superior source or there will be no good
work, does it hold less in our social and civil life?

In our popular politics you may note that each aspirant who rises above
the crowd, however at first making his obedient apprenticeship in party
tactics, if he have sagacity, soon learns that it is by no means by
obeying the vulgar weathercock of his party, the resentments, the fears
and whims of it, that real power is gained, but that he must often face
and resist the party, and abide by his resistance, and put them in
fear; that the only title to their permanent respect, and to a larger
following, is to see for himself what is the real public interest, and
to stand for that;—that is a principle, and all the cheering and hissing
of the crowd must by and by accommodate itself to it. Our times easily
afford you very good examples.

The law of water and all fluids is true of wit. Prince Metternich said,
“Revolutions begin in the best heads and run steadily down to the
populace.” It is a very old observation; not truer because Metternich
said it, and not less true.

There have been revolutions which were not in the interest of feudalism
and barbarism, but in that of society. And these are distinguished not
by the numbers of the combatants nor the numbers of the slain, but by
the motive. No interest now attaches to the wars of York and Lancaster,
to the wars of German, French and Spanish emperors, which were only
dynastic wars, but to those in which a principle was involved. These are
read with passionate interest and never lose their pathos by time. When
the cannon is aimed by ideas, when men with religious convictions are
behind it, when men die for what they live for, and the mainspring that
works daily urges them to hazard all, then the cannon articulates its
explosions with the voice of a man, then the rifle seconds the cannon and
the fowling-piece the rifle, and the women make the cartridges, and all
shoot at one mark; then gods join in the combat; then poets are born, and
the better code of laws at last records the victory.

Now the culmination of these triumphs of humanity—and which did virtually
include the extinction of slavery—is the planting of America.

At every moment some one country more than any other represents the
sentiment and the future of mankind. None will doubt that America
occupies this place in the opinion of nations, as is proved by the fact
of the vast immigration into this country from all the nations of Western
and Central Europe. And when the adventurers have planted themselves and
looked about, they send back all the money they can spare to bring their
friends.

Meantime they find this country just passing through a great crisis in
its history, as necessary as lactation or dentition or puberty to the
human individual. We are in these days settling for ourselves and our
descendants questions which, as they shall be determined in one way or
the other, will make the peace and prosperity or the calamity of the next
ages. The questions of Education, of Society, of Labor, the direction of
talent, of character, the nature and habits of the American, may well
occupy us, and more the question of Religion.

The new conditions of mankind in America are really favorable to
progress, the removal of absurd restrictions and antique inequalities.
The mind is always better the more it is used, and here it is kept
in practice. The humblest is daily challenged to give his opinion on
practical questions, and while civil and social freedom exists, nonsense
even has a favorable effect. Cant is good to provoke common sense....
The trance-mediums, the rebel paradoxes, exasperate the common sense. The
wilder the paradox, the more sure is Punch to put it in the pillory.

The lodging the power in the people, as in republican forms, has the
effect of holding things closer to common sense; for a court or an
aristocracy, which must always be a small minority, can more easily run
into follies than a republic, which has too many observers—each with a
vote in his hand—to allow its head to be turned by any kind of nonsense:
since hunger, thirst, cold, the cries of children and debt are always
holding the masses hard to the essential duties.

One hundred years ago the American people attempted to carry out the bill
of political rights to an almost ideal perfection. They have made great
strides in that direction since. They are now proceeding, instructed by
their success and by their many failures, to carry out, not the bill of
rights, but the bill of human duties.

And look what revolution that attempt involves. Hitherto government has
been that of the single person or of the aristocracy. In this country the
attempt to resist these elements, it is asserted, must throw us into the
government not quite of mobs, but in practice of an inferior class of
professional politicians, who by means of newspapers and caucuses really
thrust their unworthy minority into the place of the old aristocracy on
the one side, and of the good, industrious, well-taught but unambitious
population on the other, win the posts of power and give their direction
to affairs. Hence liberal congresses and legislatures ordain, to the
surprise of the people, equivocal, interested and vicious measures.
The men themselves are suspected and charged with lobbying and being
lobbied. No measure is attempted for itself, but the opinion of the
people is courted in the first place, and the measures are perfunctorily
carried through as secondary. We do not choose our own candidate, no, nor
any other man’s first choice,—but only the available candidate, whom,
perhaps, no man loves. We do not speak what we think, but grope after
the practicable and available. Instead of character, there is a studious
exclusion of character. The people are feared and flattered. They are
not reprimanded. The country is governed in bar-rooms, and in the mind
of bar-rooms. The low can best win the low, and each aspirant for power
vies with his rival which can stoop lowest, and depart widest from
himself.

The partisan on moral, even on religious questions, will choose a proven
rogue who can answer the tests, over an honest, affectionate, noble
gentleman; the partisan ceasing to be a man that he may be a sectarian.

The spirit of our political economy is low and degrading. The precious
metals are not so precious as they are esteemed. Man exists for his own
sake, and not to add a laborer to the state. The spirit of our political
action, for the most part, considers nothing less than the sacredness of
man. Party sacrifices man to the measure.[229]

We have seen the great party of property and education in the country
drivelling and huckstering away, for views of party fear or advantage,
every principle of humanity and the dearest hopes of mankind; the
trustees of power only energetic when mischief could be done, imbecile as
corpses when evil was to be prevented.

Our great men succumb so far to the forms of the day as to peril their
integrity for the sake of adding to the weight of their personal
character the authority of office, or making a real government titular.
Our politics are full of adventurers, who having by education and social
innocence a good repute in the state, break away from the law of honesty
and think they can afford to join the devil’s party. ’Tis odious, these
offenders in high life. You rally to the support of old charities and the
cause of literature, and there, to be sure, are these brazen faces. In
this innocence you are puzzled how to meet them; must shake hands with
them, under protest.[230] We feel toward them as the minister about the
Cape Cod farm,—in the old time when the minister was still invited, in
the spring, to make a prayer for the blessing of a piece of land,—the
good pastor being brought to the spot, stopped short: “No, this land does
not want a prayer, this land wants manure.”

    “’Tis virtue which they want, and wanting it,
    Honor no garment to their backs can fit.”[231]

Parties keep the old names, but exhibit a surprising fugacity in creeping
out of one snake-skin into another of equal ignominy and lubricity, and
the grasshopper on the turret of Faneuil Hall gives a proper hint of the
men below.

Everything yields. The very glaciers are viscous, or relegate into
conformity, and the stiffest patriots falter and compromise; so that
_will_ cannot be depended on to save us.

How rare are acts of will! We are all living according to custom; we do
as other people do, and shrink from an act of our own. Every such act
makes a man famous, and we can all count the few cases—half a dozen in
our time—when a public man ventured to act as he thought without waiting
for orders or for public opinion. John Quincy Adams was a man of an
audacious independence that always kept the public curiosity alive in
regard to what he might do. None could predict his word, and a whole
congress could not gainsay it when it was spoken. General Jackson was a
man of will, and his phrase on one memorable occasion, “I will take the
responsibility,” is a proverb ever since.[232]

The American marches with a careless swagger to the height of power,
very heedless of his own liberty or of other people’s, in his reckless
confidence that he can have all he wants, risking all the prized charters
of the human race, bought with battles and revolutions and religion,
gambling them all away for a paltry selfish gain.

He sits secure in the possession of his vast domain, rich beyond all
experience in resources, sees its inevitable force unlocking itself in
elemental order day by day, year by year; looks from his coal-fields, his
wheat-bearing prairie, his gold-mines, to his two oceans on either side,
and feels the security that there can be no famine in a country reaching
through so many latitudes, no want that cannot be supplied, no danger
from any excess of importation of art or learning into a country of such
native strength, such immense digestive power.

In proportion to the personal ability of each man, he feels the
invitation and career which the country opens to him. He is easily fed
with wheat and game, with Ohio wine, but his brain is also pampered by
finer draughts, by political power and by the power in the railroad
board, in the mills, or the banks. This elevates his spirits, and
gives, of course, an easy self-reliance that makes him self-willed and
unscrupulous.

I think this levity is a reaction on the people from the extraordinary
advantages and invitations of their condition. When we are most disturbed
by their rash and immoral voting, it is not malignity, but recklessness.
They are careless of politics, because they do not entertain the
possibility of being seriously caught in meshes of legislation. They
feel strong and irresistible. They believe that what they have enacted
they can repeal if they do not like it. But one may run a risk once
too often. They stay away from the polls, saying that one vote can do
no good! Or they take another step, and say ‘One vote can do no harm!’
and vote for something which they do not approve, because their party
or set votes for it. Of course this puts them in the power of any party
having a steady interest to promote which does not conflict manifestly
with the pecuniary interest of the voters. But if they should come to be
interested in themselves and in their career, they would no more stay
away from the election than from their own counting-room or the house of
their friend.

The people are right-minded enough on ethical questions, but they
must pay their debts, and must have the means of living well, and not
pinching. So it is useless to rely on them to go to a meeting, or to
give a vote, if any check from this must-have-the-money side arises.
If a customer looks grave at their newspaper, or damns their member of
Congress, they take another newspaper, and vote for another man. They
must have money, for a certain style of living fast becomes necessary;
they must take wine at the hotel, first, for the look of it, and second,
for the purpose of sending the bottle to two or three gentlemen at the
table; and presently because they have got the taste, and do not feel
that they have dined without it.

The record of the election now and then alarms people by the all but
unanimous choice of a rogue and a brawler. But how was it done? What
lawless mob burst into the polls and threw in these hundreds of ballots
in defiance of the magistrates? This was done by the very men you
know,—the mildest, most sensible, best-natured people. The only account
of this is, that they have been scared or warped into some association in
their mind of the candidate with the interest of their trade or of their
property.

Whilst each cabal urges its candidate, and at last brings, with cheers
and street demonstrations, men whose names are a knell to all hope of
progress, the good and wise are hidden in their active retirements, and
are quite out of question.

    “These we must join to wake, for these are of the strain
    That justice dare defend, and will the age maintain.”[233]

Yet we know, all over this country, men of integrity, capable of action
and of affairs, with the deepest sympathy in all that concerns the
public, mortified by the national disgrace, and quite capable of any
sacrifice except of their honor.

Faults in the working appear in our system, as in all, but they suggest
their own remedies. After every practical mistake out of which any
disaster grows, the people wake and correct it with energy. And any
disturbances in politics, in civil or foreign wars, sober them, and
instantly show more virtue and conviction in the popular vote. In each
new threat of faction the ballot has been, beyond expectation, right and
decisive.

It is ever an inspiration, God only knows whence; a sudden, undated
perception of eternal right coming into and correcting things that were
wrong; a perception that passes through thousands as readily as through
one.

The gracious lesson taught by science to this country is that the history
of Nature from first to last is incessant advance from less to more, from
rude to finer organization, the globe of matter thus conspiring with
the principle of undying hope in man. Nature works in immense time, and
spends individuals and races prodigally to prepare new individuals and
races. The lower kinds are one after one extinguished; the higher forms
come in.[234] The history of civilization, or the refining of certain
races to wonderful power of performance, is analogous; but the best
civilization yet is only valuable as a ground of hope.

Ours is the country of poor men. Here is practical democracy; here is
the human race poured out over the continent to do itself justice; all
mankind in its shirt-sleeves; not grimacing like poor rich men in cities,
pretending to be rich, but unmistakably taking off its coat to hard work,
when labor is sure to pay.[235] This through all the country. For really,
though you see wealth in the capitals, it is only a sprinkling of rich
men in the cities and at sparse points; the bulk of the population is
poor. In Maine, nearly every man is a lumberer. In Massachusetts, every
twelfth man is a shoemaker, and the rest, millers, farmers, sailors,
fishermen.

Well, the result is, instead of the doleful experience of the European
economist, who tells us, “In almost all countries the condition of the
great body of the people is poor and miserable,” here that same great
body has arrived at a sloven plenty,—ham and corn-cakes, tight roof and
coals enough have been attained; an unbuttoned comfort, not clean, not
thoughtful, far from polished, without dignity in his repose; the man
awkward and restless if he have not something to do, but honest and kind
for the most part, understanding his own rights and stiff to maintain
them, and disposed to give his children a better education than he
received.

The steady improvement of the public schools in the cities and the
country enables the farmer or laborer to secure a precious primary
education. It is rare to find a born American who cannot read and write.
The facility with which clubs are formed by young men for discussion of
social, political and intellectual topics secures the notoriety of the
questions.

Our institutions, of which the town is the unit, are all educational, for
responsibility educates fast. The town-meeting is, after the high-school,
a higher school.[236] The legislature, to which every good farmer goes
once on trial, is a superior academy.

The result appears in the power of invention, the freedom of thinking,
in the readiness for reforms, eagerness for novelty, even for all the
follies of false science; in the antipathy to secret societies, in the
predominance of the democratic party in the politics of the Union, and in
the voice of the public even when irregular and vicious,—the voice of
mobs, the voice of lynch law,—because it is thought to be, on the whole,
the verdict, though badly spoken, of the greatest number.

All this forwardness and self-reliance, cover self-government; proceed
on the belief that as the people have made a government they can make
another; that their union and law are not in their memory, but in their
blood and condition. If they unmake a law, they can easily make a new
one. In Mr. Webster’s imagination the American Union was a huge Prince
Rupert’s drop, which will snap into atoms if so much as the smallest end
be shivered off. Now the fact is quite different from this. The people
are loyal, law-abiding. They prefer order, and have no taste for misrule
and uproar.

America was opened after the feudal mischief was spent, and so the people
made a good start. We began well. No inquisition here, no kings, no
nobles, no dominant church. Here heresy has lost its terrors. We have
eight or ten religions in every large town, and the most that comes of it
is a degree or two on the thermometer of fashion; a pew in a particular
church gives an easier entrance to the subscription ball.

We began with freedom, and are defended from shocks now for a century
by the facility with which through popular assemblies every necessary
measure of reform can instantly be carried. A congress is a standing
insurrection, and escapes the violence of accumulated grievance. As the
globe keeps its identity by perpetual change, so our civil system, by
perpetual appeal to the people and acceptance of its reforms.

The government is acquainted with the opinions of all classes, knows the
leading men in the middle class, knows the leaders of the humblest class.
The President comes near enough to these; if he does not, the caucus
does, the primary ward and town-meeting, and what is important does reach
him.

The men, the women, all over this land shrill their exclamations of
impatience and indignation at what is short-coming or is unbecoming in
the government,—at the want of humanity, of morality,—ever on broad
grounds of general justice, and not on the class-feeling which narrows
the perception of English, French, German people at home.

In this fact, that we are a nation of individuals, that we have a highly
intellectual organization, that we can see and feel moral distinctions,
and that on such an organization sooner or later the moral laws must
tell, to such ears must speak,—in this is our hope. For if the prosperity
of this country has been merely the obedience of man to the guiding of
Nature,—of great rivers and prairies,—yet is there fate above fate, if we
choose to spread this language; or if there is fate in corn and cotton,
so is there fate in thought,—this, namely, that the largest thought and
the widest love are born to victory, and must prevail.

The revolution is the work of no man, but the eternal effervescence of
Nature. It never did not work. And we say that revolutions beat all the
insurgents, be they never so determined and politic; that the great
interests of mankind, being at every moment through ages in favor of
justice and the largest liberty, will always, from time to time, gain on
the adversary and at last win the day. Never country had such a fortune,
as men call fortune, as this, in its geography, its history, and in its
majestic possibilities.

We have much to learn, much to correct,—a great deal of lying vanity.
The spread eagle must fold his foolish wings and be less of a peacock;
must keep his wings to carry the thunderbolt when he is commanded. We
must realize our rhetoric and our rituals. Our national flag is not
affecting, as it should be, because it does not represent the population
of the United States, but some Baltimore or Chicago or Cincinnati or
Philadelphia caucus; not union or justice, but selfishness and cunning.
If we never put on the liberty-cap until we were freemen by love and
self-denial, the liberty-cap would mean something. I wish to see America
not like the old powers of the earth, grasping, exclusive and narrow,
but a benefactor such as no country ever was, hospitable to all nations,
legislating for all nationalities. Nations were made to help each other
as much as families were; and all advancement is by ideas, and not by
brute force or mechanic force.

In this country, with our practical understanding, there is, at present,
a great sensualism, a headlong devotion to trade and to the conquest of
the continent,—to each man as large a share of the same as he can carve
for himself,—an extravagant confidence in our talent and activity, which
becomes, whilst successful, a scornful materialism,—but with the fault,
of course, that it has no depth, no reserved force whereon to fall back
when a reverse comes.

That repose which is the ornament and ripeness of man is not American.
That repose which indicates a faith in the laws of the universe,—a faith
that they will fulfil themselves, and are not to be impeded, transgressed
or accelerated. Our people are too slight and vain. They are easily
elated and easily depressed. See how fast they extend the fleeting
fabric of their trade,—not at all considering the remote reaction and
bankruptcy, but with the same abandonment to the moment and the facts of
the hour as the Esquimau who sells his bed in the morning. Our people act
on the moment, and from external impulse. They all lean on some other,
and this superstitiously, and not from insight of his merit. They follow
a fact; they follow success, and not skill. Therefore, as soon as the
success stops and the admirable man blunders, they quit him; already they
remember that they long ago suspected his judgment, and they transfer
the repute of judgment to the next prosperous person who has not yet
blundered. Of course this levity makes them as easily despond. It seems
as if history gave no account of any society in which despondency came so
readily to heart as we see it and feel it in ours. Young men at thirty
and even earlier lose all spring and vivacity, and if they fail in their
first enterprise throw up the game.

The source of mischief is the extreme difficulty with which men are
roused from the torpor of every day. Blessed is all that agitates the
mass, breaks up this torpor, and begins motion. _Corpora non agunt
nisi soluta_; the chemical rule is true in mind. Contrast, change,
interruption, are necessary to new activity and new combinations.

If a temperate wise man should look over our American society, I think
the first danger that would excite his alarm would be the European
influences on this country. We buy much of Europe that does not make us
better men; and mainly the expensiveness which is ruining that country.
We import trifles, dancers, singers, laces, books of patterns, modes,
gloves and cologne, manuals of Gothic architecture, steam-made ornaments.
America is provincial. It is an immense Halifax. See the secondariness
and aping of foreign and English life, that runs through this country, in
building, in dress, in eating, in books. Every village, every city, has
its architecture, its costume, its hotel, its private house, its church,
from England.

Our politics threaten her. Her manners threaten us. Life is grown and
growing so costly that it threatens to kill us. A man is coming, here
as there, to value himself on what he can buy. Worst of all, his expense
is not his own, but a far-off copy of Osborne House or the Elysée. The
tendency of this is to make all men alike; to extinguish individualism
and choke up all the channels of inspiration from God in man. We lose our
invention and descend into imitation. A man no longer conducts his own
life. It is manufactured for him. The tailor makes your dress; the baker
your bread; the upholsterer, from an imported book of patterns, your
furniture; the Bishop of London your faith.

In the planters of this country, in the seventeenth century, the
conditions of the country, combined with the impatience of arbitrary
power which they brought from England, forced them to a wonderful
personal independence and to a certain heroic planting and trading. Later
this strength appeared in the solitudes of the West, where a man is made
a hero by the varied emergencies of his lonely farm, and neighborhoods
must combine against the Indians, or the horse-thieves, or the river
rowdies, by organizing themselves into committees of vigilance. Thus
the land and sea educate the people, and bring out presence of mind,
self-reliance, and hundred-handed activity. These are the people for
an emergency. They are not to be surprised, and can find a way out of
any peril. This rough and ready force becomes them, and makes them
fit citizens and civilizers. But if we found them clinging to English
traditions, which are graceful enough at home, as the English Church, and
entailed estates, and distrust of popular election, we should feel this
reactionary, and absurdly out of place.

Let the passion for America cast out the passion for Europe. Here
let there be what the earth waits for,—exalted manhood. What this
country longs for is personalities, grand persons, to counteract its
materialities. For it is the rule of the universe that corn shall serve
man, and not man corn.

They who find America insipid—they for whom London and Paris have spoiled
their own homes—can be spared to return to those cities. I not only see a
career at home for more genius than we have, but for more than there is
in the world.

The class of which I speak make themselves merry without duties. They sit
in decorated club-houses in the cities, and burn tobacco and play whist;
in the country they sit idle in stores and bar-rooms, and burn tobacco,
and gossip and sleep. They complain of the flatness of American life;
“America has no illusions, no romance.” They have no perception of its
destiny. They are not Americans.

The felon is the logical extreme of the epicure and coxcomb. Selfish
luxury is the end of both, though in one it is decorated with
refinements, and in the other brutal. But my point now is, that this
spirit is not American.

Our young men lack idealism. A man for success must not be pure idealist,
then he will practically fail; but he must have ideas, must obey ideas,
or he might as well be the horse he rides on. A man does not want to be
sun-dazzled, sun-blind; but every man must have glimmer enough to keep
him from knocking his head against the walls. And it is in the interest
of civilization and good society and friendship, that I dread to hear
of well-born, gifted and amiable men, that they have this indifference,
disposing them to this despair.

Of no use are the men who study to do exactly as was done before, who
can never understand that to-day is a new day. There never was such
a combination as this of ours, and the rules to meet it are not set
down in any history. We want men of original perception and original
action, who can open their eyes wider than to a nationality,—namely, to
considerations of benefit to the human race,—can act in the interest of
civilization; men of elastic, men of moral mind, who can live in the
moment and take a step forward. Columbus was no backward-creeping crab,
nor was Martin Luther, nor John Adams, nor Patrick Henry, nor Thomas
Jefferson; and the Genius or Destiny of America is no log or sluggard,
but a man incessantly advancing, as the shadow on the dial’s face, or the
heavenly body by whose light it is marked.

The flowering of civilization is the finished man, the man of sense, of
grace, of accomplishment, of social power,—the gentleman. What hinders
that he be born here? The new times need a new man, the complemental man,
whom plainly this country must furnish. Freer swing his arms; farther
pierce his eyes; more forward and forthright his whole build and rig than
the Englishman’s, who, we see, is much imprisoned in his backbone.

’Tis certain that our civilization is yet incomplete, it has not
ended nor given sign of ending in a hero. ’Tis a wild democracy; the
riot of mediocrities and dishonesties and fudges. Ours is the age of
the omnibus, of the third person plural, of Tammany Hall. Is it that
Nature has only so much vital force, and must dilute it if it is to be
multiplied into millions? The beautiful is never plentiful. Then Illinois
and Indiana, with their spawning loins, must needs be ordinary.

It is not a question whether we shall be a multitude of people. No, that
has been conspicuously decided already; but whether we shall be the new
nation, the guide and lawgiver of all nations, as having clearly chosen
and firmly held the simplest and best rule of political society.

Now, if the spirit which years ago armed this country against rebellion,
and put forth such gigantic energy in the charity of the Sanitary
Commission, could be waked to the conserving and creating duty of making
the laws just and humane, it were to enroll a great constituency of
religious, self-respecting, brave, tender, faithful obeyers of duty,
lovers of men, filled with loyalty to each other, and with the simple
and sublime purpose of carrying out in private and in public action the
desire and need of mankind.

Here is the post where the patriot should plant himself; here the altar
where virtuous young men, those to whom friendship is the dearest
covenant, should bind each other to loyalty; where genius should kindle
its fires and bring forgotten truth to the eyes of men.

It is not possible to extricate yourself from the questions in which your
age is involved. Let the good citizen perform the duties put on him here
and now. It is not by heads reverted to the dying Demosthenes, or to
Luther, or to Wallace, or to George Fox, or to George Washington, that
you can combat the dangers and dragons that beset the United States at
this time. I believe this cannot be accomplished by dunces or idlers,
but requires docility, sympathy, and religious receiving from higher
principles; for liberty, like religion, is a short and hasty fruit,
and like all power subsists only by new rallyings on the source of
inspiration.

Power can be generous. The very grandeur of the means which offer
themselves to us should suggest grandeur in the direction of our
expenditure. If our mechanic arts are unsurpassed in usefulness, if we
have taught the river to make shoes and nails and carpets, and the bolt
of heaven to write our letters like a Gillot pen, let these wonders work
for honest humanity, for the poor, for justice, genius and the public
good.[237] Let us realize that this country, the last found, is the great
charity of God to the human race.

America should affirm and establish that in no instance shall the guns
go in advance of the present right. We shall not make _coups d’état_
and afterwards explain and pay, but shall proceed like William Penn, or
whatever other Christian or humane person who treats with the Indian or
the foreigner, on principles of honest trade and mutual advantage. We
can see that the Constitution and the law in America must be written
on ethical principles, so that the entire power of the spiritual world
shall hold the citizen loyal, and repel the enemy as by force of nature.
It should be mankind’s bill of rights, or Royal Proclamation of the
Intellect ascending the throne, announcing its good pleasure that now,
once for all, the world shall be governed by common sense and law of
morals.

The end of all political struggle is to establish morality as the basis
of all legislation. ’Tis not free institutions, ’tis not a democracy
that is the end,—no, but only the means. Morality is the object of
government. We want a state of things in which crime will not pay; a
state of things which allows every man the largest liberty compatible
with the liberty of every other man.

Humanity asks that government shall not be ashamed to be tender and
paternal, but that democratic institutions shall be more thoughtful for
the interests of women, for the training of children, and for the welfare
of sick and unable persons, and serious care of criminals, than was ever
any the best government of the Old World.

The genius of the country has marked out our true policy,—opportunity.
Opportunity of civil rights, of education, of personal power, and not
less of wealth; doors wide open. If I could have it,—free trade with all
the world without toll or custom-houses, invitation as we now make to
every nation, to every race and skin, white men, red men, yellow men,
black men; hospitality of fair field and equal laws to all.[238] Let them
compete, and success to the strongest, the wisest and the best. The land
is wide enough, the soil has bread for all.

I hope America will come to have its pride in being a nation of servants,
and not of the served. How can men have any other ambition where the
reason has not suffered a disastrous eclipse? Whilst every man can say I
serve,—to the whole extent of my being I apply my faculty to the service
of mankind in my especial place,—he therein sees and shows a reason for
his being in the world, and is not a moth or incumbrance in it.

The distinction and end of a soundly constituted man is his labor. Use
is inscribed on all his faculties. Use is the end to which he exists. As
the tree exists for its fruit, so a man for his work. A fruitless plant,
an idle animal, does not stand in the universe. They are all toiling,
however secretly or slowly, in the province assigned them, and to a use
in the economy of the world; the higher and more complex organizations to
higher and more catholic service. And man seems to play, by his instincts
and activity, a certain part that even tells on the general face of
the planet, drains swamps, leads rivers into dry countries for their
irrigation, perforates forests and stony mountain chains with roads,
hinders the inroads of the sea on the continent, as if dressing the globe
for happier races.

On the whole, I know that the cosmic results will be the same, whatever
the daily events may be. Happily we are under better guidance than
of statesmen. Pennsylvania coal-mines and New York shipping and free
labor, though not idealists, gravitate in the ideal direction. Nothing
less large than justice can keep them in good temper. Justice satisfies
everybody, and justice alone. No monopoly must be foisted in, no weak
party or nationality sacrificed, no coward compromise conceded to a
strong partner. Every one of these is the seed of vice, war and national
disorganization. It is our part to carry out to the last the ends of
liberty and justice. We shall stand, then, for vast interests; north
and south, east and west will be present to our minds, and our vote
will be as if they voted, and we shall know that our vote secures the
foundations of the state, good will, liberty and security of traffic and
of production, and mutual increase of good will in the great interests.

Our helm is given up to a better guidance than our own; the course of
events is quite too strong for any helmsman, and our little wherry is
taken in tow by the ship of the great Admiral which knows the way, and
has the force to draw men and states and planets to their good.

Such and so potent is this high method by which the Divine Providence
sends the chiefest benefits under the mask of calamities, that I do not
think we shall by any perverse ingenuity prevent the blessing.

In seeing this guidance of events, in seeing this felicity without
example that has rested on the Union thus far, I find new confidence for
the future.

I could heartily wish that our will and endeavor were more active parties
to the work. But I see in all directions the light breaking. Trade and
government will not alone be the favored aims of mankind, but every
useful, every elegant art, every exercise of the imagination, the height
of reason, the noblest affection, the purest religion will find their
home in our institutions, and write our laws for the benefit of men.[239]




NOTES


THE LORD’S SUPPER

Mr. Emerson did not wish to have his sermons published. All that was
worth saving in them, he said, would be found in the Essays. Yet it
seemed best, to Mr. Cabot and to Mr. Emerson’s family, that this one
sermon should be preserved. A record of a turning-point in his life, it
showed at once his thought and his character; for he not only gives the
reasons why he believes the rite not authoritatively enjoined, and hence
recommends its modification or discontinuance, but with serenity and
sweetness renders back his trust into his people’s hands, since he cannot
see his way longer to exercise it as most of them desire.

In the month of June, 1832, Mr. Emerson had proposed to the church,
apparently with hope of their approval, that the Communion be observed
only as a festival of commemoration, without the use of the elements.
The committee to whom the proposal was referred made a report expressing
confidence in him, but declining to advise the change, as the matter was
one which they could not properly be called upon to decide.

The question then came back to the pastor, whether he was willing to
remain in his place and administer the rite in the usual form.

He went alone to the White Mountains, then seldom visited, to consider
the grave question whether he was prepared, rather than to continue the
performance of a part of his priestly office from which his instincts and
beliefs recoiled, to sacrifice a position of advantage for usefulness
to his people to whom he was bound by many ties, and in preparation for
which he had spent long years. He wrote, at Conway, New Hampshire: “Here
among the mountains the pinions of thought should be strong, and one
should see the errors of men from a calmer height of love and wisdom.”
His diary at Ethan Allan Crawford’s contains his doubts and questionings,
which Mr. Cabot has given in his Memoir. Yet there was but one answer for
him, and after a fortnight, he came back clear in his mind to give his
decision, embodied in this sermon, to his people. On the same day that it
was preached, he formally resigned his pastorate. The church was loth to
part with him. It was hoped that some other arrangement might be made.
Mr. Cabot learned that “several meetings were held and the proprietors of
pews were called in, as having ‘an undoubted right to retain Mr. Emerson
as their pastor, without reference to the opposition of the church.’ At
length, after two adjournments and much discussion, it was decided by
thirty votes against twenty-four to accept his resignation. It was voted
at the same time to continue his salary for the present.”

Thus Mr. Emerson and his people parted in all kindness, but, as Mr. Cabot
truly said, their difference of views on this rite “was in truth only the
symptom of a deeper difference which would in any case sooner or later
have made it impossible for him to retain his office; a disagreement
not so much about particular doctrines or observances as about their
sanction, the authority on which all doctrines and observances rest.”

In the farewell letter which Mr. Emerson wrote to the people of his
church, he said:—

“I rejoice to believe that my ceasing to exercise the pastoral office
among you does not make any real change in our spiritual relation to each
other. Whatever is most desirable and excellent therein remains to us.
For, truly speaking, whoever provokes me to a good act or thought has
given me a pledge of his fidelity to virtue,—he has come under bonds to
adhere to that cause to which we are jointly attached. And so I say to
all you who have been my counsellors and coöperators in our Christian
walk, that I am wont to see in your faces the seals and certificates
of our mutual obligations. If we have conspired from week to week in
the sympathy and expression of devout sentiments; if we have received
together the unspeakable gift of God’s truth; if we have studied together
the sense of any divine word; or striven together in any charity; or
conferred together for the relief or instruction of any brother; if
together we have laid down the dead in a pious hope; or held up the babe
into the baptism of Christianity; above all, if we have shared in any
habitual acknowledgment of the benignant God, whose omnipresence raises
and glorifies the meanest offices and the lowest ability, and opens
heaven in every heart that worships him,—then indeed we are united, we
are mutually debtors to each other of faith and hope, engaged to persist
and confirm each other’s hearts in obedience to the Gospel. We shall not
feel that the nominal changes and little separations of this world can
release us from the strong cordage of this spiritual bond. And I entreat
you to consider how truly blessed will have been our connection if, in
this manner, the memory of it shall serve to bind each one of us more
strictly to the practice of our several duties.”

[1] _Page 18, note 1._ The doctrine of the offices of Jesus, even in
the Unitarianism of Dr. Channing, was never congenial to Mr. Emerson’s
mind. He notes the same with regard to his father, and even to his Aunt
Mary, in spite of her Calvinism. Any interposed personality between the
Creator and the created was repugnant to him. Even in March, 1831, he is
considering in his journal that his hearers will say, “To what purpose
is this attempt to explain away so safe and holy a doctrine as that of
the Holy Spirit? Why unsettle or disturb a faith which presents to many
minds a helpful medium by which they approach the idea of God?” and
he answers, “And this question I will meet. It is because I think the
popular views of this principle are pernicious, because it does put a
medium, because it removes the idea of God from the mind. It leaves some
events, some things, some thoughts, out of the power of Him who causes
every event, every flower, every thought. The tremendous idea, as I may
well call it, of God is screened from the soul.... And least of all can
we believe—Reason will not let us—that the presiding Creator commands all
matter and never descends into the secret chambers of the Soul. There he
is most present. The Soul rules over matter. Matter may pass away like a
mote in the sunbeam, may be absorbed into the immensity of God, as a mist
is absorbed into the heat of the Sun—but the soul is the kingdom of God,
the abode of love, of truth, of virtue.”

[2] _Page 19, note 1._ In the hope of satisfying those of his people who
held to the letter of the Scriptural Law, Mr. Emerson made the foregoing
clear statement with regard to the authority for the rite, from the
professional point of view. It seems quite unlike his usual method, and
there is little doubt that in it appears the influence of his elder
brother, William, whose honest doubts had led him to abandon even earlier
the profession of his fathers. In the introductory note to the chapter on
Goethe, in _Representative Men_, is given an account of his unsuccessful
pilgrimage to Weimar, in hopes that the great mind of Germany could solve
these doubts. There is a letter still preserved, written by William, soon
after his return, to his venerable kinsman at Concord, Dr. Ripley, in
which he explains with great clearness his own reasons for not believing
that the Communion rite was enjoined by Jesus for perpetual observance.
The argument on scriptural grounds there clearly stated is substantially
the same as that which his younger brother makes use of in the beginning
of this sermon. Thus far he has spoken of outward authority; from this
point onward he speaks from within—the way native to him.

[3] _Page 25, note 1._ Mr. Emerson left the struggles of the Past behind,
and did not care to recall them. Thus, writing of Lucretia Mott, whom he
met when giving a course of lectures in Philadelphia, in January, 1843,
he said:—

“Me she taxed with living out of the world, and I was not much flattered
that her interest in me respected my rejection of an ordinance, sometime,
somewhere. Also yesterday—for Philadelphian ideas, like love, do creep
where they cannot go—I was challenged on the subject of the Lord’s
Supper, and with great slowness and pain was forced to recollect the
grounds of my dissent in that particular. You may be sure I was very
tardy with my texts.”

Mr. Emerson’s journal during the period of trial and decision, in the
mountains, shows that he was reading with great interest the life of
George Fox. The simplicity of the Society of Friends, their aversion to
forms and trust in the inward light, always appealed to him.

In his essay on The Preacher he says:—

“The supposed embarrassments to young clergymen exist only to feeble
wills.... That gray deacon, or respectable matron with Calvinistic
antecedents, you can readily see, would not have presented any obstacle
to the march of St. Bernard or of George Fox, of Luther or of Theodore
Parker.” This hints at the help he had found in the Quaker’s history in
his time of need.


HISTORICAL DISCOURSE AT CONCORD

Mr. Emerson’s Discourse was printed soon after its delivery, and with it,
in an Appendix, the following notice of the celebration of the second
centennial anniversary of the incorporation of the town, sent to him by
“a friend who thought it desirable to preserve the remembrance of some
particulars of this historical festival.”

    “At a meeting of the town of Concord, in April last, it was
    voted to celebrate the Second Centennial Anniversary of the
    settlement of the town, on the 12th September following. A
    committee of fifteen were chosen to make the arrangements. This
    committee appointed Ralph Waldo Emerson, Orator, and Rev. Dr.
    Ripley and Rev. Mr. Wilder, Chaplains of the Day. Hon. John
    Keyes was chosen President of the Day.

    “On the morning of the 12th September, at half past 10 o’clock,
    the children of the town, to the number of about 500, moved
    in procession to the Common in front of the old church and
    court-house and there opened to the right and left, awaiting
    the procession of citizens. At 11 o’clock, the Concord Light
    Infantry, under Captain Moore, and the Artillery under Captain
    Buttrick, escorted the civic procession, under the direction of
    Moses Prichard as Chief Marshal, from Shepherd’s hotel through
    the lines of children to the Meeting-house. The South gallery
    had been reserved for ladies, and the North gallery for the
    children; but (it was a good omen) the children overran the
    space assigned for their accommodation, and were sprinkled
    throughout the house, and ranged on seats along the aisles. The
    old Meeting-house, which was propped to sustain the unwonted
    weight of the multitude within its walls, was built in 1712,
    thus having stood for more than half the period to which our
    history goes back. Prayers were offered and the Scriptures read
    by the aged minister of the town, Rev. Ezra Ripley, now in the
    85th year of his age;—another interesting feature in this scene
    of reminiscences. A very pleasant and impressive part of the
    services in the church was the singing of the 107th psalm, from
    the New England version of the psalms made by Eliot, Mather,
    and others, in 1639, and used in the church in this town in the
    days of Peter Bulkeley. The psalm was read a line at a time,
    after the ancient fashion, from the Deacons’ seat, and so sung
    to the tune of St. Martin’s by the whole congregation standing.

    “Ten of the surviving veterans who were in arms at the Bridge,
    on the 19th April, 1775, honored the festival with their
    presence. Their names are Abel Davis, Thaddeus Blood, Tilly
    Buttrick, John Hosmer, of _Concord_; Thomas Thorp, Solomon
    Smith, John Oliver, Aaron Jones, of _Acton_; David Lane, of
    _Bedford_; Amos Baker, of _Lincoln_.

    “On leaving the church, the procession again formed, and moved
    to a large tent nearly opposite Shepherd’s hotel, under which
    dinner was prepared, and the company sat down to the tables, to
    the number of four hundred. We were honored with the presence
    of distinguished guests, among whom were Lieutenant-Governor
    Armstrong, Judge Davis, Alden Bradford (descended from the 2d
    governor of Plymouth Colony), Hon. Edward Everett, Hon. Stephen
    C. Phillips of Salem, Philip Hone, Esq., of New York, General
    Dearborn, and Lieutenant-Colonel R. C. Winthrop (descended from
    the 1st governor of Massachusetts). Letters were read from
    several gentlemen expressing their regret at being deprived of
    the pleasure of being present on the occasion. The character
    of the speeches and sentiments at the dinner were manly and
    affectionate, in keeping with the whole temper of the day.

    “On leaving the dinner-table, the invited guests, with many of
    the citizens, repaired to the court-house to pay their respects
    to the ladies of Concord, who had there, with their friends,
    partaken of an elegant collation, and now politely offered
    coffee to the gentlemen. The hall, in which the collation
    was spread, had been decorated by fair hands with festoons
    of flowers, and wreaths of evergreen, and hung with pictures
    of the Fathers of the Town. Crowded as it was with graceful
    forms and happy faces, and resounding with the hum of animated
    conversation, it was itself a beautiful living picture.
    Compared with the poverty and savageness of the scene which the
    same spot presented two hundred years ago, it was a brilliant
    reverse of the medal; and could scarcely fail, like all the
    parts of the holiday, to lead the reflecting mind to thoughts
    of that Divine Providence, which, in every generation, has been
    our tower of defence and horn of blessing.

    “At sunset the company separated and retired to their homes;
    and the evening of this day of excitement was as quiet as a
    Sabbath throughout the village.”

Within the year, Mr. Emerson had come to make his home for life in
the ancestral town, and had become a householder. Two days after the
festival, he drove to Plymouth in a chaise, and was there married to
Lidian Jackson, and immediately brought his bride to her Concord home.

His aged step-grandfather was the senior chaplain at the Celebration, and
his brother Charles, who was to live with him in the new home, was one of
the marshals.

In preparation for this address Mr. Emerson made diligent examination of
the old town records, and spent a fortnight in Cambridge consulting the
works on early New England in the College Library. I reproduce most of
his references to his authorities exactly, although there are, no doubt,
newer editions of some of the works.

[4] _Page 30, note 1._ This story is from Bede’s _Ecclesiastical History_
(chapter xiii., Bohn’s _Antiquarian Library_). Mr. Emerson used it in
full as the exordium of his essay on Immortality, in _Letters and Social
Aims_.

[5] _Page 30, note 2._ The poem “Hamatreya,” wherein appear the names of
many of these first settlers, might well be read in connection with the
opening passages of this address.

Mr. Emerson’s right of descent to speak as representative of Peter
Bulkeley, who was the spiritual arm of the settlement, as Simon Willard
was its sword-arm, may here be shown: Rev. Joseph Emerson of Mendon (son
of Thomas of Ipswich, the first of the name in this country) married
Elizabeth, daughter of Rev. Edward Bulkeley, who succeeded his father,
the Rev. Peter Bulkeley, as minister of Concord. Edward, the son of
Joseph of Mendon and Elizabeth Bulkeley, was father of Rev. Joseph
Emerson of Malden, who was father of Rev. William Emerson of Concord, who
was father of Rev. William Emerson of Harvard and Boston, the father of
Ralph Waldo Emerson.

[6] _Page 31, note 1._ Neal’s _History of New England_, vol. i., p. 132.

[7] _Page 31, note 2._ Neal, vol. i., p. 321.

[8] _Page 31, note 3._ Shattuck’s _History of Concord_, p. 158.

[9] _Page 32, note 1._ On September 2, 1635, the General Court passed
this order:—

“It is ordered that there shalbe a plantac̃on att Musketequid & that
there shalbe 6 myles of land square to belong to it, & that the
inhabitants thereof shall have three yeares im̃unities from all publ[ic]
charges except traineings; Further, that when any that plant there shall
have occac̃on of carryeing of goods thither, they shall repaire to two
of the nexte magistrates where the teames are, whoe shall have the power
for a yeare to presse draughts, att reasonable rates, to be payed by the
owners of the goods, to transport their goods thither att seasonable
tymes: & the name of the place is changed & here after to be called
Concord.”

[10] _Page 32, note 2._ Shattuck, p. 5.

[11] _Page 33, note 1._ In his lecture on Boston (published in the volume
_Natural History of Intellect_) Mr. Emerson gives an amusing enumeration
of some troubles which seemed so great to the newcomers from the Old
World: he mentions their fear of lions, the accident to John Smith from
“the most poisonous tail of a fish called a sting-ray,” the circumstance
of the overpowering effect of the sweet fern upon the Concord party, and
the intoxicating effect of wild grapes eaten by the Norse explorers, and
adds: “Nature has never again indulged in these exasperations. It seems
to have been the last outrage ever committed by the sting-rays, or by the
sweet fern, or by the fox-grapes. They have been of peaceable behavior
ever since.”

[12] _Page 34, note 1._ Johnson’s _Wonder-Working Providence_, chap.
xxxv. Mr. Emerson abridged and slightly altered some sentences.

[13] _Page 35, note 1._ Mourt, _Beginning of Plymouth_, 1621, p. 60.

[14] _Page 35, note 2._ Johnson, p. 56. Josselyn, in his _New England’s
Rarities Discovered_, speaks with respect of “Squashes, but more truly
squontersquashes; a kind of mellon, or rather gourd; ... some of these
are green; some yellow; some longish like a gourd; others round, like an
apple: all of them pleasant food, boyled and buttered, and seasoned with
spice. But the yellow squash—called an apple-squash (because like an
apple) and about the bigness of a pome-water is the best kind.” Wood, in
his _New England Prospect_, says: “In summer, when their corn is spent,
isquotersquashes is their best bread, a fruit much like a pumpion.”

[15] _Page 36, note 1._ Nashawtuck, a small and shapely hill between
the Musketaquid and the Assabet streams, at their point of union, was a
pleasant and convenient headquarters for a sagamore of a race whose best
roadway for travel and transportation was a deep, quiet stream, the fish
of which they ate, and also used for manure for their cornfields along
the bluffs. Indian graves have been found on this hill.

[16] _Page 36, note 2._ Josselyn’s _Voyages to New England_, 1638.

[17] _Page 36, note 3._ Hutchinson’s _History of Massachusetts_, vol. i.,
chap. 6.

[18] _Page 36, note 4._ Thomas Morton, _New England Canaan_, p. 47.

[19] _Page 37, note 1._ Shattuck, p. 6.

The old Middlesex Hotel, which stood during the greater part of the
nineteenth century on the southwest side of the Common, opposite the
court- and town-houses, had fallen into decay in 1900, and was bought
and taken down by the town as an improvement to the public square to
commemorate the one hundred and twenty-fifth anniversary of Concord
Fight. It is probable that Jethro’s Oak, under which the treaty was made,
stood a little nearer the house of Rev. Peter Bulkeley, the site of
which, about one hundred paces distant on the Lowell road, is now marked
by a stone and bronze tablet.

[20] _Page 38, note 1._ Depositions taken in 1684, and copied in the
first volume of the Town Records.

[21] _Page 39, note 1._ Johnson’s _Wonder-Working Providence_.

[22] _Page 39, note 2._ _New England’s Plantation._

[23] _Page 39, note 3._ E. W.’s Letter in Mourt, 1621.

[24] _Page 40, note 1._ Peter Bulkeley’s _Gospel Covenant_; preached at
Concord in New England. 2d edition, London, 1651, p. 432.

[25] _Page 41, note 1._ See petition in Shattuck’s _History_, p. 14.

[26] _Page 41, note 2._ Shattuck, p. 14. This was the meadow and upland
on the Lowell road, one mile north of Concord, just beyond the river. On
the farm stands the unpainted “lean-to” house, now owned by the daughters
of the late Edmund Hosmer.

[27] _Page 42, note 1._ Concord Town Records.

[28] _Page 43, note 1._ Bancroft, _History of the United States_, vol.
i., p. 389.

[29] _Page 44, note 1._ Savage’s _Winthrop_, vol. i., p. 114.

[30] _Page 44, note 2._ Colony Records, vol. i.

[31] _Page 44, note 3._ See Hutchinson’s _Collection_, p. 287.

[32] _Page 46, note 1._ Winthrop’s _Journal_, vol. i., pp. 128, 129, and
the editor’s note.

[33] _Page 46, note 2._ Winthrop’s _Journal_, vol. ii., p. 160.

[34] _Page 48, note 1._ Town Records.

With the exception of the anecdotes in this and the following sentence,
almost the whole of this account of the theory and practice of the New
England town-meeting was used by Mr. Emerson in his oration, given in
December, 1870, before the New England Society in New York. The greater
part of the matter used in that address is included in the lecture on
Boston, in the volume _Natural History of Intellect_.

The New England Society of New York recently published the Orations
delivered before it previous to 1871, including Mr. Emerson’s, as far as
it could be recovered from the scattered manuscript, and the newspaper
reports of the time.

[35] _Page 50, note 1._ Hutchinson’s _Collection_, p. 27.

[36] _Page 51, note 1._ Shattuck, p. 20. “The Government, 13 Nov., 1644,
ordered the county courts to take care of the Indians residing within
their several shires, to have them civilized, and to take order, from
time to time, to have them instructed in the knowledge of God.”

[37] _Page 52, note 1._ Shepard’s _Clear Sunshine of the Gospel_, London,
1648.

[38] _Page 52, note 2._ These rules are given in Shattuck’s _History_,
pp. 22-24, and were called “Conclusions and orders made and agreed upon
by divers Sachems and other principal men amongst the Indians at Concord
in the end of the eleventh Month (called January) An. 1646.”

The following are interesting specimens of these:—

Rule 2. “That there shall be no more Powwawing amongst the Indians. And
if any shall hereafter powwaw, both he that shall powwaw, and he that
shall procure him to powwaw, shall pay twenty shillings apiece.”

Rule 4. “They desire they may understand the wiles of Satan, and grow out
of love with his suggestions and temtations.”

Rule 5. “That they may fall upon some better course to improve their time
than formerly.”

Rule 15. “They will wear their haire comely, as the English do, and
whosoever shall offend herein shall pay four shillings.”

Rule 23. “They shall not disguise themselves in their mournings as
formerly, nor shall they keep a great noyse by howling.”

Rule 24. “The old ceremony of a maide walking alone and living apart so
many days, [fine] twenty shillings.”

[39] _Page 53, note 1._ Shepard, p. 9.

[40] _Page 54, note 1._ Wilson’s _Letter_, 1651.

[41] _Page 54, note 2._ _News from America_, p. 22.

[42] _Page 54, note 3._ Winthrop, vol. ii., p. 2.

[43] _Page 55, note 1._ Hutchinson, vol. i., p. 90.

[44] _Page 55, note 2._ Hutchinson, vol. i., p. 112.

[45] _Page 55, note 3._ Winthrop, vol. ii., p. 21.

[46] _Page 55, note 4._ Hutchinson, vol. i., p. 94.

[47] _Page 55, note 5._ Bulkeley’s _Gospel Covenant_, p. 209.

[48] _Page 55, note 6._ Winthrop, vol. ii., p. 94.

[49] _Page 56, note 1._ _Gospel Covenant_, p. 301.

[50] _Page 57, note 1._ Shattuck, p. 45.

[51] _Page 57, note 2._ Hutchinson, vol. i., p. 172.

[52] _Page 57, note 3._ See his instructions from the Commissioners,
his narrative, and the Commissioners’ letter to him, in Hutchinson’s
_Collection_, pp. 261-270.

[53] _Page 58, note 1._ Hutchinson’s _History_, vol. i., p. 254.

[54] _Page 58, note 2._ Hubbard’s _Indian Wars_, p. 119, ed. 1801.

Mr. Charles H. Walcott, in his _Concord in the Colonial Period_ (Estes
& Lauriat, Boston, 1884), gives a very interesting account of the
Brookfield fight.

[55] _Page 58, note 3._ Hubbard, p. 201.

[56] _Page 59, note 1._ Hubbard, p. 185.

[57] _Page 59, note 2._ Hubbard, p. 245.

[58] _Page 60, note 1._ Shattuck, p. 55.

[59] _Page 60, note 2._ Hubbard, p. 260.

[60] _Page 61, note 1._ Neal’s _History of New England_, vol. i., p. 321.

[61] _Page 61, note 2._ Mather, _Magnalia Christi_, vol. i., p. 363.

[62] _Page 61, note 3._ “Tradition has handed down the following
anecdote. A consultation among the Indian chiefs took place about this
time on the high lands in Stow, and, as they cast their eyes towards
Sudbury and Concord, a question arose which they should attack first. The
decision was made to attack the former. One of the principal chiefs said:
‘We no prosper if we go to Concord—the Great Spirit love that people—the
evil spirit tell us not to go—they have a great man there—he _great
pray_.’ The Rev. Edward Bulkeley was then minister of the town, and his
name and distinguished character were known even to the red men of the
forest.”—Shattuck’s _History_, p. 59, note.

[63] _Page 61, note 4._ On this occasion the name of Hoar, since honored
in Concord through several generations, came to the front. John Hoar,
the first practitioner of law in Concord, an outspoken man of sturdy
independence, who, for uttering complaints that justice was denied him in
the courts, had been made to give bonds for good behavior and “disabled
to plead any cases but his oune in this jurisdiction,” who had been fined
£10 for saying that “the Blessing which his Master Bulkeley pronounced
in dismissing the publique Assembly was no more than vane babling,” and
was twice fined for non-attendance at public worship, proved to be the
only man in town who was willing to take charge of the Praying Indians of
Nashobah, whom the General Court ordered moved to Concord during Philip’s
War. The magistrates who had persecuted him had to turn to him, and he
made good provision on his own place for the comfort and safe-keeping
of these unfortunates, and their employment, when public opinion was
directed against them with the cruelty of fear. Soon, however, Captain
Mosley, who had been secretly sent for by some citizens, came with
soldiers into the meeting-house, announced to the congregation that he
had heard that “there were some heathen in town committed to one Hoar,
who, he was informed, were a trouble and disquiet to them;” therefore,
if the people desired it, he would remove them to Boston. No one made
objection, so he went to Mr. Hoar’s house, counted the Indians and set a
guard, Hoar vigorously protesting. He came next day; Hoar bravely refused
to give them up, so Mosley removed them by violence and carried the
Indians to Deer Island, where they suffered much during the winter. See
Walcott’s _Concord in the Colonial Period_.

[64] _Page 62, note 1._ Sprague’s _Centennial Ode_.

[65] _Page 62, note 2._ Shattuck, chap. iii. Walcott, chap. iii.

[66] _Page 63, note 1._ Hutchinson’s _Collection_, p. 484.

[67] _Page 63, note 2._ Hutchinson’s _Collection_, pp. 543, 548, 557, 566.

[68] _Page 63, note 3._ Hutchinson’s _History_, vol. i., p. 336.

The month of April has been fateful for Concord, especially its
nineteenth day. On that day the military company under Lieutenant Heald
marched to Boston to take part in the uprising of the freemen of the
colony against Andros. On that same day, in 1775, the minute-men and
militia of Concord, promptly reinforced by the soldiers of her daughter
and sister towns, marched down to the guarded North Bridge and returned
the fire of the Royal troops in the opening battle of the Revolution.
Again on the nineteenth of April, 1861, the “Concord Artillery”
(so-called, although then a company of the Fifth Infantry, M. V. M.) left
the village for the front in the War of the Rebellion; and yet again in
the last days of April, 1898, the same company, then, as now, attached to
the Sixth Regiment, M. V. M., marched from the village green to bear its
part in the Spanish War.

[69] _Page 64, note 1._ Town Records.

[70] _Page 64, note 2._ The following minutes from the Town Records in
1692 may serve as an example:—

“John Craggin, aged about 63 years, and Sarah his wife, aet. about 63
years, do both testify upon oath that about 2 years ago John Shepard,
sen. of Concord, came to our house in Obourne, to treat with us, and give
us a visit, and carried the said Sary Craggin to Concord with him, and
there discoursed us in order to a marriage between his son, John Shepard,
jun. and our daughter, Eliz. Craggin, and, for our incouragement, and
before us, did promise that, upon the consummation of the said marriage,
he, the said John Shepard, sen. would give to his son, John Shepard, jun.
the one half of his dwelling house, and the old barn, and the pasture
before the barn; the old plow-land, and the old horse, when his colt was
fit to ride, and his old oxen, when his steers were fit to work. All this
he promised upon marriage as above said, which marriage was consummated
upon March following, which is two years ago, come next March. Dated Feb.
25, 1692. Taken on oath before me. Wm. Johnson.”

[71] _Page 64, note 3._ Town Records, July, 1698.

[72] _Page 64, note 4._ Records, Nov. 1711.

[73] _Page 65, note 1._ Records, May, 1712.

[74] _Page 66, note 1._ Records, 1735.

[75] _Page 66, note 2._ Whitfield in his journal wrote: “About noon I
reached Concord. Here I preached to some thousands in the open air; and
comfortable preaching it was. The hearers were sweetly melted down....
The minister of the town being, I believe, a true child of God, I chose
to stay all night at his house that we might rejoice together. The
Lord was with us. The Spirit of the Lord came upon me and God gave me
to wrestle with him for my friends, especially those then with me....
Brother B—s, the minister, broke into floods of tears, and we had reason
to cry out it was good for us to be here.”

[76] _Page 67, note 1._ Church Records, July, 1792.

[77] _Page 67, note 2._ The Rev. Daniel Bliss has left the name of
having been an earnest, good man, evidently emotional. His zealous
and impassioned preaching gave offence to some of the cooler and more
conservative clergy, and indeed bred discord in the church of Concord.
The “aggrieved brethren” withdrew, and, for want of a church, held
public worship at a tavern where was the sign of a black horse, hence
were called “the Black Horse Church.” Their complaints preferred against
Mr. Bliss resulted in councils which drew in most of the churches of
Middlesex into their widening vortex. Yet he remained the honored pastor
of the town until his death. His daughter Phebe married the young William
Emerson, his successor; he was therefore Mr. Emerson’s great-grandfather.

[78] _Page 67, note 3._ Town Records.

[79] _Page 70, note 1._ Town Records.

[80] _Page 71, note 1._ Town Records.

[81] _Page 71, note 2._ The spirited protest of this County Convention,
presided over by Hon. James Prescott of Groton, is given in full in
Shattuck’s _History_, pp. 82-87.

[82] _Page 72, note 1._ General Gage, the Governor, having refused to
convene the General Court at Salem, the Provincial Congress of delegates
from the towns of Massachusetts was called by conventions of the various
counties to meet at Concord, October 11, 1774. The delegates assembled
in the meeting-house, and organized, with John Hancock as President, and
Benjamin Lincoln as Secretary. Called together to maintain the rights of
the people, this Congress assumed the government of the province, and by
its measures prepared the way for the Revolution.

[83] _Page 72, note 2._ This eloquent sermon to the volunteers of 1775,
still preserved in MS., is very interesting. The young minister shows
them the dignity of their calling, warns them of the besetting sins of
New England soldiery, explains to them the invasion of their rights and
that they are not rebels, tells them that he believes their fathers
foresaw the evil day and did all in their power to guard the infant state
from encroachments of unconstitutional power, and implores the sons to be
true to their duty to their posterity. He fully admits the utter gloom
of the prospect, humanly considered: would Heaven hold him innocent, he
would counsel submission, but as an honest man and servant of Heaven
he dare not do so, and with great spirit bids his injured countrymen
“Arise! and plead even with the sword, the firelock and the bayonet, the
birthright of Englishmen ... and if God does not help, it will be because
your sins testify against you, otherwise _you may be assured_.”

[84] _Page 74, note 1._ Journal, July, 1835. “It is affecting to see the
old man’s [Thaddeus Blood] memory taxed for facts occurring 60 years
ago at Concord fight. ‘It is hard to bring them up;’ he says, ‘the
truth never will be known.’ The Doctor [Ripley], like a keen hunter,
unrelenting, follows him up and down, barricading him with questions.
Yet cares little for the facts the man can tell, but much for the
confirmation of the printed History. ‘Leave me, leave me to repose.’”

Thaddeus Blood, who was only twenty years old at the time of Concord
fight, later became a schoolmaster, hence was always known as “Master
Blood.” He was one of the Concord company stationed at Hull, in 1776,
which took part in the capture of Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell and
his battalion of the 71st (Frazer) Highlanders as they sailed into
Boston Harbor, not being aware of the evacuation of the town. They
were confined at Concord until their exchange. See _Sir Archibald
Campbell of Inverneill, sometime Prisoner of War in the Jail at Concord,
Massachusetts_. By Charles H. Walcott, Boston, 1898.

[85] _Page 74, note 2._ In his poem in memory of his brother Edward,
written by the riverside near the battle-ground, Mr. Emerson alluded to

                Yon stern headstone,
    Which more of pride than pity gave
    To mark the Briton’s friendless grave.
    Yet it is a stately tomb;
    The grand return
    Of eve and morn,
    The year’s fresh bloom,
    The silver cloud,
    Might grace the dust that is most proud.

[86] _Page 76, note 1._ Captain Miles commanded the Concord company that
joined the Northern Army at Ticonderoga in August, 1776, as part of
Colonel Reed’s regiment.

[87] _Page 77, note 1._ Judge John S. Keyes, who clearly remembers the
incidents of this celebration, seen from a boy’s coign of vantage, the
top of one of the inner doors of the church, tells me that the ten
aged survivors of the battle, who sat in front of the pulpit, bowed in
recognition of this compliment by the orator, and then the audience all
bowed to them. The sanctity of the church forbade in those days cheering
or applause even at a civic festival.

[88] _Page 77, note 2._ The following was Mr. Emerson’s note concerning
his authorities:—

“The importance which the skirmish at Concord Bridge derived from
subsequent events, has, of late years, attracted much notice to
the incidents of the day. There are, as might be expected, some
discrepancies in the different narratives of the fight. In the brief
summary in the text, I have relied mainly on the depositions taken by
order of the Provincial Congress within a few days after the action,
and on the other contemporary evidence. I have consulted the English
narrative in the Massachusetts Historical Collections, and in the trial
of Horne (_Cases adjudged in King’s Bench_; London, 1800, vol. ii., p.
677); the inscription made by order of the legislature of Massachusetts
on the two field-pieces presented to the Concord Artillery; Mr. Phinney’s
_History of the Battle at Lexington_; Dr. Ripley’s _History of Concord
Fight_; Mr. Shattuck’s narrative in his _History_, besides some oral
and some manuscript evidence of eye-witnesses. The following narrative,
written by Rev. William Emerson, a spectator of the action, has never
been published. A part of it has been in my possession for years: a part
of it I discovered, only a few days since, in a trunk of family papers:—

    “‘1775, 19 April. This morning, between 1 and 2 o’clock, we
    were alarmed by the ringing of the bell, and upon examination
    found that the troops, to the number of 800, had stole their
    march from Boston, in boats and barges, from the bottom of the
    Common over to a point in Cambridge, near to Inman’s Farm,
    and were at Lexington Meeting-house, half an hour before
    sunrise, where they had fired upon a body of our men, and (as
    we afterward heard) had killed several. This intelligence
    was brought us at first by Dr. Samuel Prescott, who narrowly
    escaped the guard that were sent before on horses, purposely
    to prevent all posts and messengers from giving us timely
    information. He, by the help of a very fleet horse, crossing
    several walls and fences, arrived at Concord at the time above
    mentioned; when several posts were immediately despatched,
    that returning confirmed the account of the regulars’ arrival
    at Lexington, and that they were on their way to Concord.
    Upon this, a number of our minute-men belonging to this town,
    and Acton, and Lyncoln, with several others that were in
    readiness, marched out to meet them; while the alarm company
    were preparing to receive them in the town. Captain Minot,
    who commanded them, thought it proper to take possession of
    the hill above the meeting-house, as the most advantageous
    situation. No sooner had our men gained it, than we were met
    by the companies that were sent out to meet the troops, who
    informed us, that they were just upon us, and that we must
    retreat, as their number was more than treble ours. We then
    retreated from the hill near the Liberty Pole, and took a new
    post back of the town upon an eminence, where we formed into
    two battalions, and waited the arrival of the enemy. Scarcely
    had we formed, before we saw the British troops at the distance
    of a quarter of a mile, glittering in arms, advancing towards
    us with the greatest celerity. Some were for making a stand,
    notwithstanding the superiority of their number; but others
    more prudent thought best to retreat till our strength should
    be equal to the enemy’s by recruits from neighboring towns that
    were continually coming in to our assistance. Accordingly we
    retreated over the bridge, when the troops came into the town,
    set fire to several carriages for the artillery, destroyed 60
    bbls. flour, rifled several houses, took possession of the
    town-house, destroyed 500 lb. of balls, set a guard of 100
    men at the North Bridge, and sent up a party to the house of
    Colonel Barrett, where they were in expectation of finding a
    quantity of warlike stores. But these were happily secured,
    just before their arrival, by transportation into the woods
    and other by-places. In the mean time, the guard set by the
    enemy to secure the pass at the North Bridge were alarmed by
    the approach of our people, who had retreated, as mentioned
    before, and were now advancing with special orders not to
    fire upon the troops unless fired upon. These orders were so
    punctually observed that we received the fire of the enemy in
    three several and separate discharges of their pieces before
    it was returned by our commanding officer; the firing then
    soon became general for several minutes, in which skirmish two
    were killed on each side, and several of the enemy wounded.
    It may here be observed, by the way, that we were the more
    cautious to prevent beginning a rupture with the King’s troops,
    as we were then uncertain what had happened at Lexington, and
    knew [not][A] that they had began the quarrel there by first
    firing upon our people, and killing eight men upon the spot.
    The three companies of troops soon quitted their post at the
    bridge, and retreated in the greatest disorder and confusion to
    the main body, who were soon upon the march to meet them. For
    half an hour, the enemy, by their marches and counter-marches,
    discovered great fickleness and inconstancy of mind, sometimes
    advancing, sometimes returning to their former posts; till, at
    length they quitted the town, and retreated by the way they
    came. In the mean time, a party of our men (150) took the back
    way through the Great Fields into the east quarter, and had
    placed themselves to advantage, lying in ambush behind walls,
    fences and buildings, ready to fire upon the enemy on their
    retreat.’”

[89] _Page 78, note 1._ Fifty years after his death the town erected a
cenotaph to the memory of its brave young minister, whose body lies by
the shore of Otter Creek, near Rutland, Vermont. On it they wrote:—

“Enthusiastic, eloquent, affectionate and pious, he loved his family, his
people, his God and his Country, and to this last he yielded the cheerful
sacrifice of his life.”

[90] _Page 78, note 2._ Town Records, Dec. 1775.

[91] _Page 79, note 1._ These facts are recorded by Shattuck in his
_History_.

[92] _Page 79, note 2._ Bradford’s _History of Massachusetts_, vol. ii.,
p. 113.

[93] _Page 79, note 3._ Shattuck.

[94] _Page 80, note 1._ Town Records, May 3, 1782.

[95] _Page 81, note 1._ Town Records, Sept. 9, and Bradford’s _History_,
vol. i., p. 266.

[96] _Page 81, note 2._ The Rev. Grindall Reynolds, late pastor of
the First Church in Concord, wrote an interesting account of Shays’s
Rebellion, and various papers concerning his adopted town which are
included in his _Historical and Other Papers_, published by his daughter
in 1895.

[97] _Page 81, note 3._ Town Records, Oct. 21.

[98] _Page 82, note 1._ Town Records, May 7.

[99] _Page 82, note 2._ Town Records, 1834 and 1835. In 1903-4 the
town, with a population of about 5000, appropriated for public purposes
$65,752, the amount for school purposes being $28,000.

[100] _Page 82, note 3._ The Unitarian and the “Orthodox” (as the
Trinitarian Congregationalist society has always been called in Concord)
churches have for a century been good neighbors, and for many years have
held union meetings on Thanksgiving Day. At the time of Mr. Emerson’s
discourse it is doubtful if Concord contained a single Catholic or
Episcopalian believer. The beginning of the twentieth century finds
a larger body of Catholic worshippers than the four other societies
contain. Yet all live in charity with one another.

[101] _Page 83, note 1._ Mr. Emerson’s honored kinsman, Rev. Ezra Ripley,
who sat in the pulpit that day, was eighty-four years old, and when,
six years later, he died, he had been pastor of the Concord church for
sixty-three years.

[102] _Page 83, note 2._ Lemuel Shattuck, author of the excellent
_History of Concord_, which was published before the end of the year.

[103] _Page 85, note 1._ In Mr. Emerson’s lecturing excursions during the
following thirty-five years, he found with pleasure and pride the sons of
his Concord neighbors important men in the building up the prairie and
river towns, or the making and operating the great highways of emigration
and trade.


LETTER TO PRESIDENT VAN BUREN

April 19, 1838, Mr. Emerson made this entry in his Journal:—

“This disaster of the Cherokees, brought to me by a sad friend to blacken
my days and nights! I can do nothing; why shriek? why strike ineffectual
blows? I stir in it for the sad reason that no other mortal will move,
and if I do not, why, it is left undone. The amount of it, to be sure, is
merely a scream; but sometimes a scream is better than a thesis....

“Yesterday wrote the letter to Van Buren,—a letter hated of me, a
deliverance that does not deliver the soul. I write my journal, I read
my lecture with joy; but this stirring in the philanthropic mud gives me
no peace. I will let the republic alone until the republic comes to me.
I fully sympathize, be sure, with the sentiments I write; but I accept
it rather from my friends than dictate it. It is not my impulse to say
it, and therefore my genius deserts me; no muse befriends; no music of
thought or word accompanies.”

Yet his conscience then, and many a time later, brought him to do the
brave, distasteful duty.


ADDRESS ON EMANCIPATION IN THE BRITISH WEST INDIES

The tenth anniversary of the emancipation by Act of Parliament of all
slaves in the insular possessions of Great Britain in the West Indies
was celebrated in Concord, in the year 1844, by citizens of thirteen
Massachusetts towns, and they invited Mr. Emerson to make the Address.
The Rev. Dr. Channing, on whose mind the wrongs of the slave had weighed
ever since he had seen them in Santa Cruz, had spoken on Slavery in
Faneuil Hall in 1837, had written on the subject, and his last public
work had been a speech on the anniversary of the West Indian Emancipation
in 1842, in the village of Lenox. The public conscience was slowly
becoming aroused, especially among the country people, who had not the
mercantile and social relations with the Southerner which hampered the
action of many people in the cities. Yet even in Concord the religious
societies appear to have closed their doors against the philanthropists
who gathered to celebrate this anniversary in 1844, but the energy of
the young Thoreau, always a champion of Freedom, secured the use of the
Court-House, and he himself rang the bell to call the people together.

It is said that Mr. Emerson, while minister of the Second Church in
Boston, had held his pulpit open to speakers on behalf of liberty,
and to his attitude in 1835 Harriet Martineau bears witness in her
Autobiography. After speaking of the temperamental unfitness of these
brother scholars, Charles and Waldo, to become active workers in an
Abolitionist organization, she says: “Yet they did that which made me
feel that I knew them through the very cause in which they did not
implicate themselves. At the time of the hubbub against me in Boston,
Charles Emerson stood alone in a large company and declared that he would
rather see Boston in ashes than that I or anybody should be debarred in
any way from perfectly free speech. His brother Waldo invited me to be
his guest in the midst of my unpopularity, and during my visit told me
his course about this matter of slavery. He did not see that there was
any particular thing for him to do in it then; but when, in coaches or
steamboats or anywhere else, he saw people of color ill treated, or heard
bad doctrine or sentiment propounded, he did what he could, and said what
he thought. Since that date he has spoken more abundantly and boldly,
the more critical the times became; and he is now, and has long been,
identified with the Abolitionists in conviction and sentiment, though it
is out of his way to join himself to their organization.”

Mr. Cabot in his Memoir[B] gives several pages of extracts from Mr.
Emerson’s journal showing his feelings at this time, before the slave
power, aggressive and advancing, left him, as a lover of Freedom, no
choice but to fight for her as he could, by tongue and pen, in seasons of
peril.

This Address was printed in England, as well as in America, the autumn
after its delivery here. In a letter to Carlyle written September 1, Mr.
Emerson says he is sending proof to the London publisher.

“Chapman wrote to me by the last steamer, urging me to send him some
manuscript that had not yet been published in America [hoping for
copyright, and promising half profits].... The request was so timely,
since I was not only printing a book, but also a pamphlet, that I came to
town yesterday and hastened the printers, and have now sent him proofs
of all the Address, and of more than half of the book.” He requests
Carlyle to have an eye to its correct reproduction, to which his friend
faithfully attended.

[104] _Page 100, note 1._ It was characteristic of Mr. Emerson that, as a
corrective to the flush of righteous wrath that man should be capable of

            laying hands on another
    To coin his labor and sweat,

came his sense of justice, and the power of seeing the planter’s side,
born into such a social and political condition, by breeding and climatic
conditions unable to toil, and with his whole inheritance vested in
slaves. In a speech in New York in 1855, Mr. Emerson urged emancipation
with compensation to the owners, by general sacrifices to this great end
by old and young throughout the North, not as the planters’ due, but as
recognizing their need and losses. Yet with all due consideration for the
planters’ misfortune of condition, he said, on the main question, “It is
impossible to be a gentleman and not be an abolitionist.”

[105] _Page 103, note 1._

    Sole estate his sire bequeathed,—
    Hapless sire to hapless son,—
    Was the wailing song he breathed,
    And his chain when life was done.

These lines from “Voluntaries” in the _Poems_, and the stanza which there
follows them, are recalled by this passage.

[106] _Page 106, note 1._ Granville Sharp (1734-1813) was a broad-minded
scholar and determined philanthropist. He left the study of law to go
into the ordnance office, which he left, when the American Revolution
came on, disapproving of the course of the government. In the case of one
of the slaves whom he defended, the Lord Mayor discharged the negro, but
his master would not give him up. The case then went before the Court
of Kings Bench, and the twelve judges decided in 1772 that a man could
not be held in, or transported from, England. In June, 1787, Sharp with
Clarkson and ten others, nine of whom were Quakers, formed a committee
“for effecting the abolition of the slave trade;” Sharp was chairman.
Defeated in Parliament in 1788 and 1789, they were joined by Pitt and Fox
in 1790. In 1793 the Commons passed an act for gradual abolition of the
trade, which was rejected by the Peers. This occurred again in 1795 and
1804. In 1806, the Fox and Grenville Ministry brought forward abolition
of the trade as a government measure. It was carried in 1807. Then the
enemies of slavery began to strive for its gradual abolition throughout
the British dominions, Clarkson, Wilberforce and Buxton being the
principal leaders. The course of events, however, showed that immediate
emancipation would be a better measure. The government brought this
forward in 1823, modified by an apprenticeship system. The bill with this
feature and some compensation to owners was passed in 1833.

[107] _Page 108, note 1._ In the essay on Self-Reliance Mr. Emerson said:
“An institution is the lengthened shadow of one man; as Monachism, of the
Hermit Antony; the Reformation, of Luther; Quakerism, of Fox; Methodism,
of Wesley; Abolition, of Clarkson.”

[108] _Page 112, note 1._ The “prædials” seem to have been the slaves
born into captivity, as distinguished from imported slaves.

[109] _Page 115, note 1._ _Emancipation in the West Indies: A Six Months’
Tour in Antigua, Barbadoes and Jamaica, in the year 1837._ J. A. Thome
and J. H. Kimball, New York, 1838.

[110] _Page 120, note 1._ This was very soon after the coronation of the
young Queen Victoria, which occurred in the previous year.

[111] _Page 125, note 1._ “All things are moral, and in their boundless
changes have an unceasing reference to spiritual nature. Therefore is
nature glorious with form, color and motion; that every globe in the
remotest heaven, every chemical change from the rudest crystal up to the
laws of life ... every animal function from the sponge up to Hercules,
shall hint or thunder to man the laws of right and wrong, and echo the
Ten Commandments.”—_Nature, Addresses and Lectures_, p. 40. See also the
last sentence in “Prudence,” _Essays, First Series_.

[112] _Page 131, note 1._ “For he [a ruler] is the minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.” _Epistle to the Romans_,
xiii. 4.

[113] _Page 132, note 1._ The cause for Mr. Emerson’s indignation was
great and recent. His honored townsman, Samuel Hoar, Esq., sent by
the State of Massachusetts as her commissioner to South Carolina to
investigate the seizures, imprisonments, punishments, and even sale of
colored citizens of Massachusetts who had committed no crime, had been
expelled with threats of violence from the city of Charleston. (See
“Samuel Hoar,” in _Lectures and Biographical Sketches_.)

[114] _Page 133, note 1._

    A union then of honest men,
    Or union never more again.

             “Boston,” _Poems_.

[115] _Page 134, note 1._ John Quincy Adams, who, though disapproving,
as untimely, the legislation urged on Congress by the abolitionists, yet
fought strongly and persistently against the rules framed to check their
importunity, as inconsistent with the right of petition itself.

[116] _Page 144, note 1._ Here comes in the doctrine of the Survival of
the Fittest that appears in the “Ode inscribed to W. H. Channing,” but,
even more than there, tempered by faith in the strength of humanity.
See the “Lecture on the Times,” given in 1841 (_Nature, Addresses
and Lectures_, p. 220), for considerations on slavery more coolly
philosophical than Mr. Emerson’s warm blood often admitted of, during the
strife for liberty in the period between the Mexican and Civil Wars.

[117] _Page 145, note 1._

    To-day unbind the captive,
    So only are ye unbound;
    Lift up a people from the dust,
    Trump of their rescue, sound!

             “Boston Hymn,” _Poems_.

[118] _Page 146, note 1._ In the early version of the “Boston” poem were
these lines:—

    O pity that I pause!
      The song disdaining shuns
    To name the noble sires, because
      Of the unworthy sons.
    ...
    Your town is full of gentle names,
      By patriots once were watchwords made;
    Those war-cry names are muffled shames
      On recreant sons mislaid.


WAR

In the winter and early spring of 1838, the American Peace Society held a
course of lectures in Boston. This lecture was the seventh in the course.
Mr. Alcott wrote in his diary at that time:—

“I heard Emerson’s lecture on _Peace_, as the closing discourse of a
series delivered at the Odeon before the American Peace Society.... After
the lecture I saw Mr. Garrison, who is at this time deeply interested
in the question of Peace, as are many of the meekest and noblest souls
amongst us. He expressed his great pleasure in the stand taken by Mr.
Emerson and his hopes in him as a man of the new age. This great topic
has been brought before the general mind as a direct consequence of the
agitation of the abolition of slavery.”

The lecture was printed in 1849 _Æsthetic Papers_, edited by Miss
Elizabeth P. Peabody.

Although the chronicles of the campaigns and acts of prowess of the
masterly soldiers were always attractive reading to Mr. Emerson,—much
more acts of patriotic devotion in the field,—and he was by no means
committed as a non-resistant, he saw that war had been a part of
evolution, and that its evils might pave the way for good, as flowers
spring up next year on a field of carnage. He knew that evolution
required an almost divine patience, yet his good hope was strengthened
by the signs of the times, and he desired to hasten the great upward step
in civilization.

It is evident from his words and course of action during the outrages
upon the peaceful settlers of Kansas, and when Sumter was fired upon
and Washington threatened, that he recognized that the hour had not yet
come. He subscribed lavishly from his limited means for the furnishing
Sharp’s rifles to the “Free State men.” In the early days of the War of
the Rebellion he visited Charlestown Navy-Yard to see the preparations,
and said, “Ah! sometimes gunpowder smells good.” In the opening of his
address at Tufts College, in July, 1861, he said, “The brute noise of
cannon has a most poetic echo in these days, as instrument of the primal
sentiments of humanity.” Several speeches included in this volume show
that at that crisis his feeling was, as he had said of the forefathers’
“deed of blood” at Concord Bridge,—

    Even the serene Reason says
    It was well done.

But all this was only a postponement of hope.

[119] _Page 152, note 1._ With regard to schooling a man’s courage for
whatever may befall, Mr. Emerson said: “Our culture therefore must not
omit the arming of the man. Let him hear in season that he is born into
the state of war, and that the commonwealth and his own well-being
require that he should not go dancing in the weeds of peace, but warned,
self-collected and neither defying nor dreading the thunder, let him take
both reputation and life in his hand, and with perfect urbanity dare the
gibbet and the mob by the absolute truth of his speech and the rectitude
of his behavior.”—“Heroism,” _Essays, First Series_.

“A state of war or anarchy, in which law has little force, is so far
valuable that it puts every man on trial.”—“The Conservative,” _Nature,
Addresses and Lectures_.

[120] _Page 156, note 1._ Mr. Emerson used to take pleasure in a story
illustrating this common foible of mankind. A returned Arctic explorer,
in a lecture, said, “In this wilderness among the ice-floes, I had the
fortune to see a terrible conflict between two Polar bears—” “Which
beat?” cried an excited voice from the audience.

[121] _Page 160, note 1._ In his description of the Tower of London in
the journal of 1834, it appears that the suits of armor there set up
affected Mr. Emerson unpleasantly, suggesting half-human destructive
lobsters and crabs. It is, I believe, said that Benvenuto Cellini learned
to make the cunning joints in armor for men from those of these marine
warriors.

In the opening paragraphs of the essay on Inspiration Mr. Emerson
congratulates himself that the doleful experiences of the aboriginal
man were got through with long ago. “They combed his mane, they pared
his nails, cut off his tail, set him on end, sent him to school and
made him pay taxes, before he could begin to write his sad story for
the compassion or the repudiation of his descendants, who are all but
unanimous to disown him. We must take him as we find him,” etc.

[122] _Page 162, note 1._ In _English Traits_, at the end of the chapter
on Stonehenge, Mr. Emerson gave a humorous account of his setting forth
the faith or hope of the non-resistants and idealists in New England, to
the amazed and shocked ears of Carlyle and Arthur Helps.

[123] _Page 164, note 1._ “As the solidest rocks are made up of invisible
gases, as the world is made of thickened light and arrested electricity,
so men know that ideas are the parents of men and things; there was never
anything that did not proceed from a thought.”—“The Scholar,” _Lectures
and Biographical Sketches_.

[124] _Page 164, note 2._ In “The Problem” he says of the Parthenon and
England’s abbeys that

        out of Thought’s interior sphere
    These wonders rose to upper air.

[125] _Page 167, note 1._ Mr. Emerson in his conversation frankly showed
that he was not yet quite prepared to be a non-resistant. He would have
surely followed his own counsel where he says, “Go face the burglar in
your own house,” and he seemed to feel instinctive sympathy with what Mr.
Dexter, the counsel, said in the speech which he used to read me from the
Selfridge trial:—

“And may my arm drop powerless when it fails to defend my honor!”

He exactly stated his own position in a later passage, where he says that
“in a given extreme event Nature and God will instruct him in that hour.”

[126] _Page 172, note 1._ Thoreau lived frankly and fearlessly up to this
standard.

[127] _Page 173, note 1._ This same view is even more attractively set
forth in “Aristocracy” (_Lectures and Biographical Sketches_, pp. 36-40).

Rev. Dr. Cyrus A. Bartol, in an interesting paper on “Emerson’s
Religion,”[C] gives, among other reminiscences, the following: “I asked
him if he approved of war. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘in one born to fight.’”


THE FUGITIVE SLAVE LAW, CONCORD, 1851

The opening passages of this speech to his friends and neighbors show
how deeply Mr. Emerson was moved. He could no longer be philosophical,
as in the “Ode” inscribed to his friend William Channing, and in earlier
addresses. The time had come when he might at any moment be summoned to
help the marshal’s men seize and return to bondage the poor fugitive who
had almost reached the safety of England’s protection. Such men were
frequently passing through Concord, concealed and helped by the good
Bigelow, the blacksmith, and his wife, the Thoreaus, Mrs. Brooks, and
even once at a critical moment by her husband, the law-abiding “’Squire”
himself.

Mr. Emerson instantly took his stand, and did not hesitate to run atilt
against the dark giant, once so honored. The question of secession for
conscience’ sake had come up among the Abolitionists. Mr. Emerson had
stood for Union, yet felt that there could be nothing but shame in Union
until the humiliating statute was repealed. Meanwhile he fell back on
the reserve-right of individual revolution as the duty of honest men.
The Free-Soilers soon after renominated Dr. John Gorham Palfrey for a
seat in Congress, and in his campaign Mr. Emerson delivered this speech
in several Middlesex towns. In Cambridge he was interrupted by young
men from the college, Southerners, it was said, but it appears that the
disturbance was quite as much due to “Northern men who were eager to
keep up a show of fidelity to the interest of the South,” as a Southern
student said in a dignified disclaimer. Mr. Cabot in his Memoir gives an
interesting account by Professor James B. Thayer of Mr. Emerson’s calm
ignoring of the rude and hostile demonstration.

Writing to Carlyle, in the end of July, 1857, Mr. Emerson said: “In the
spring, the abomination of our Fugitive Slave Bill drove me to some
writing and speech-making, without hope of effect, but to clear my own
skirts.”

This was the reaction which could not but be felt by him where he had
been forced to descend into the dust and conflict of the arena from the
serene heights. He wrote in his journal next year:—

“Philip Randolph [a valued friend] was surprised to find me speaking
to the politics of anti-slavery in Philadelphia. I suppose because he
thought me a believer in general laws and that it was a kind of distrust
of my own general teachings to appear in active sympathy with these
temporary heats. He is right so far as it is becoming in the scholar to
insist on central soundness rather than on superficial applications. I am
to give a wise and just ballot, though no man else in the republic doth.
I am to demand the absolute right, affirm that, and do that; but not push
Boston into a showy and theatrical attitude, endeavoring to persuade her
she is more virtuous than she is. Thereby I am robbing myself more than
I am enriching the public. After twenty, fifty, a hundred years, it will
be quite easy to discriminate who stood for the right, and who for the
expedient.”

Yet however hard the duty of the hour might be, Mr. Emerson never failed
in his duty as a good citizen to come to the front in dark days.

“In spite of all his gracefulness and reserve and love of the unbroken
tranquillity of serene thought, he was by the right of heredity a
belligerent in the cause of Freedom.”

[128] _Page 181, note 1._ Shadrach was hurried to Concord after his
rescue, and by curious coincidence Edwin Bigelow, the good village
blacksmith who there harbored him and drove him to the New Hampshire
line, was one of the jurors in the trial of another rescue case.

[129] _Page 183, note 1._ Mr. Emerson wrote in his journal, after Mr.
Hoar’s return:—

“The position of Massachusetts seems to me to be better for Mr.
Hoar’s visit to South Carolina in this point, that one illusion is
dispelled. Massachusetts was dishonored before, but she was credulous
in the protection of the Constitution, and either did not believe,
or affected not to believe in that she was dishonored. Now all doubt
on that subject is removed, and every Carolina boy will not fail to
tell every Massachusetts boy whenever they meet how the fact stands.
The Boston merchants would willingly salve the matter over, but they
cannot hereafter receive Southern gentlemen at their tables without a
consciousness of shame.”

[130] _Page 192, note 1._ Apparently from Vattel, book i., ch. i., p. 79.

[131] _Page 201, note 1._

    But there was chaff within the flour,
      And one was false in ten,
    And reckless clerks in lust of power
      Forgot the rights of men;
    Cruel and blind did file their mind,
    And sell the blood of human kind.

    Your town is full of gentle names
      By patriots once were watchwords made;
    Those war-cry names are muffled shames
      On recreant sons mislaid.
    What slave shall dare a name to wear
    Once Freedom’s passport everywhere?

See note to poem “Boston.”

Mr. Charles Francis Adams’s _Life of Richard H. Dana_ gives light on the
phrase used in the first of these verses. The following passage is from
Mr. Dana’s journal during the trial of Anthony Burns, the fugitive:—

“Choate, I had an amusing interview with. I asked him to make one effort
in favor of freedom, and told him that the 1850 delusion was dispelled
and all men were coming round, the Board of Brokers and Board of Aldermen
were talking treason, and that he must come and act. He said he should
be glad to make an effort on our side, but that he had given written
opinions against us in the Sims case on every point, and that he could
not go against them.

    “‘You corrupted your mind in 1850.’

    “‘Yes. Filed my mind.’

    “‘I wish you would file it in court for our benefit.’”

Shakspeare said,—

    “For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind.”

[132] _Page 202, note 1._ Mr. F. B. Sanborn, in his _Life of Thoreau_,
says that Webster gave, as a reason for not visiting Concord in his later
years, that “Many of those whom I so highly esteemed in your beautiful
and quiet village have become a good deal estranged, to my great grief,
by abolitionism, free-soilism, transcendentalism and other notions which
I cannot but regard as so many vagaries of the imagination.”

[133] _Page 204, note 1._

    Or who, with accent bolder,
    Dare praise the freedom-loving mountaineer?
    I found by thee, O rushing Contoocook!
    And in thy valleys, Agiochook!
    The jackals of the negro-holder.
    ...
    Virtue palters; Right is hence;
    Freedom praised, but hid;
    Funeral eloquence
    Rattles the coffin-lid.

                   _Poems_, “Ode,”
                   inscribed to W. H. Channing.

See also what is said of “the treachery of scholars” in the last pages of
“The Man of Letters,” _Lectures and Biographical Sketches_.

[134] _Page 209, note 1._ This appeal for a general movement in the free
states to free the slaves and to recompense the planters, unhappily
brought up to the institution, for their loss, was so much better in an
anti-slavery address in New York, in 1855, than in the Concord speech
four years earlier, that I have substituted the later version here.
In Mr. Cabot’s Memoir, pp. 558-593, a portion of the New York speech,
including this paragraph, is given.


THE FUGITIVE SLAVE LAW, NEW YORK, 1854

Writing to his friend Carlyle on March 11, 1854, Mr. Emerson said:—

“One good word closed your letter in September ... namely, that you
might come westward when Frederic was disposed of. Speed Frederic,
then, for all reasons and for this! America is growing furiously, town
and state; new Kansas, new Nebraska looming up in these days, vicious
politicians seething a wretched destiny for them already at Washington.
The politicians shall be sodden, the States escape, please God! The fight
of slave and freeman drawing nearer, the question is sharply, whether
slavery or whether freedom shall be abolished. Come and see.”

Four days before thus writing, he had given this address, to a fairly
large audience, in the “Tabernacle” in New York City, for, however dark
the horizon looked, the very success of the slave power was working
its ruin. Encouraged by the submission of the North to the passage of
the evil law to pacify them, they had resolved to repeal the Missouri
Compromise, which confined slavery to a certain latitude. It was repealed
within a few days of the time Mr. Emerson made this address. During the
debate, Charles Sumner said to Douglas, “Sir, the bill you are about
to pass is at once the worst and the best on which Congress has ever
acted.... It is the worst bill because it is a present victory for
slavery.... Sir, it is the best bill on which Congress has ever acted,
_for it annuls all past compromises with slavery and makes any future
compromises impossible_. Thus it puts Freedom and Slavery face to face
and bids them grapple. Who can doubt the result?” The rendition to
slavery of Anthony Burns from Boston in May wrought a great change in
public feeling there. Even the commercial element in the North felt the
shame.

Though not a worker in the anti-slavery organization, Mr. Emerson had
always been the outspoken friend of freedom for the negroes. Witness
his tribute in 1837 to Elijah Lovejoy, the martyr in their cause (see
“Heroism,” _Essays, First Series_, p. 262, and note). But the narrow
and uncharitable speech and demeanor of many “philanthropists” led him
to such reproofs as the one quoted by Dr. Bartol, “Let them first be
anthropic,” or that in “Self-Reliance” to the angry bigot: “Go love thy
infant; love thy wood-chopper; be good-natured and modest; have that
grace; and never varnish your hard, uncharitable ambition with this
incredible tenderness for black folk a thousand miles off.”

But now the foe was at the very gate. The duty to resist was instant and
commanding. Mr. Emerson wrote in his journal, soon after:—

“Why do we not say, We are abolitionists of the most absolute abolition,
as every man that is a man must be?... We do not try to alter your
laws in Alabama, nor yours in Japan, or in the Feejee Islands; but we
do not admit them, or permit a trace of them here. Nor shall we suffer
you to carry your Thuggism, north, south, east or west into a single
rod of territory which we control. We intend to set and keep a _cordon
sanitaire_ all around the infected district, and by no means suffer the
pestilence to spread.

“It is impossible to be a gentleman, and not be an abolitionist, for a
gentleman is one who is fulfilled with all nobleness, and imparts it; is
the natural defender and raiser of the weak and oppressed.”

With Mr. Emerson’s indignation at Webster’s fall was mingled great
sorrow. From his youth he had admired and revered him. The verses about
him printed in the Appendix to the _Poems_ show the change of feeling. He
used to quote Browning’s “Lost Leader” as applying to him, and admired
Whittier’s fine poem “Ichabod” (“The glory is departed,” I. Samuel, iv.,
21, 22) on his apostasy.

Mr. Emerson’s faithfulness to his sense of duty, leading him, against
his native instincts, into the turmoil of politics, striving to undo
the mischief that a leader once revered had wrought in the minds of
Americans, is shown in the extract from his journal with regard to this
lecture:—

“At New York Tabernacle, on the 7th March, I saw the great audience with
dismay, and told the bragging secretary that I was most thankful to those
that staid at home; every auditor was a new affliction, and if all had
staid away, by rain or preoccupation, I had been best pleased.”

[135] _Page 217, note 1._ In _Lectures and Biographical Sketches_, in the
essay on Aristocracy, and also in that on The Man of Letters, the duty of
loyalty to his thought and his order is urged as a trait of the gentleman
and the scholar, and in the latter essay, the scholar’s duty to stand for
what is generous and free.

[136] _Page 219, note 1._ Mr. Emerson in his early youth did come near
slavery for a short time. His diary at St. Augustine, quoted by Mr. Cabot
in his Memoir, mentions that, while he was attending a meeting of the
Bible Society, a slave-auction was going on outside, but it does not
appear that he actually saw it.

[137] _Page 221, note 1._ Carlyle described Webster as “a magnificent
specimen.... As a Logic-fencer, Advocate, or Parliamentary Hercules,
one would incline to back him at first sight against all the extant
world. The tanned complexion, that amorphous, crag-like face, the dull
black eyes under their precipice of brows, like dull anthracite furnaces
needing only to be blown, the mastiff-mouth, accurately closed:—I have
not traced as much of _silent Berserkir-rage_, that I remember of, in any
other man.”[D]

[138] _Page 225, note 1._ Mr. James S. Gibbons (of the _New York
Tribune_) in a letter written to his son two days after this speech was
delivered, says, referring evidently to this passage:—

“Emerson gave us a fine lecture on Webster. He made him stand before
us in the proportions of a giant; and then with one word crushed him to
powder.”

[139] _Page 226, note 1._ Professor John H. Wright of Harvard University
has kindly furnished me with the passage from Dio Cassius, xlvii. 49,
where it is said of Brutus:—

    Καὶ ἀναβοήσας τοῦτο δὴ Ἡράκλειον
      ὦ τλῆμον ἀρετή, λόγος ἄρ’ ἦσθ’, ἐγὼ δέ σε
      ὡς ἔργον ἤσκουν· σὺ δ’ ἄρ’ ἐδούλευες τύχῃ,—
    παρακάλεσέ τινα τῶν συνόντων, ἵν’ αὐτὸν ἀποκτείνῃ,—

which he renders, “He cried out this sentiment of Heracles, ‘O wretched
Virtue, after all, thou art a name, but I cherished thee as a fact.
Fortune’s slave wast thou;’ and called upon one of those with him to slay
him.”

Professor Wright adds that Theodorus Prodromus, a Byzantine poet of the
twelfth century, said, “What Brutus says (O Virtue, etc.) I pronounce to
be ignoble and unworthy of Brutus’s soul.” It seems very doubtful whence
the Greek verses came.

[140] _Page 233, note 1._ Just ten years earlier, Hon. Samuel Hoar, the
Commissioner of Massachusetts, sent to Charleston, South Carolina, in
the interests of our colored citizens there constantly imprisoned and
ill used, had been expelled from that state with a show of force. See
_Lectures and Biographical Sketches_.

[141] _Page 234, note 1._ The sending back of Onesimus by Paul was a
precedent precious in the eyes of pro-slavery preachers, North and South,
in those days, ignoring, however, Paul’s message, “Not now as a servant,
but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much
more unto thee, both in the flesh and in the Lord. If thou count me
therefore a partner, receive him as myself.”[E]

[142] _Page 235, note 1._ The hydrostatic paradox has been before alluded
to as one of Mr. Emerson’s favorite symbols, the balancing of the ocean
by a few drops of water. In many places he dwells on the power of
minorities—a minority of one. In “Character” (_Lectures and Biographical
Sketches_) he says, “There was a time when Christianity existed in one
child.” For the value and duty of minorities, see _Conduct of Life_, pp.
249 ff., _Letters and Social Aims_, pp. 219, 220.

[143] _Page 236, note 1._ This was a saying of Mahomet. What follows,
with regard to the divine sentiments always soliciting us, is thus
rendered in “My Garden:”

    Ever the words of the gods resound;
    But the porches of man’s ear
    Seldom in this low life’s round
    Are unsealed, that he may hear.

[144] _Page 236, note 2._ This is the important key to the essay on
Self-Reliance.

[145] _Page 238, note 1._ In the “Sovereignty of Ethics” Mr. Emerson
quotes an Oriental poet describing the Golden Age as saying that God had
made justice so dear to the heart of Nature that, if any injustice lurked
anywhere under the sky, the blue vault would shrivel to a snake-skin, and
cast it out by spasms.

[146] _Page 240, note 1._ There seems to be some break in the
construction here probably due to the imperfect adjustment of
lecture-sheets. It would seem that the passage should read: “Liberty is
never cheap. It is made difficult because freedom is the accomplishment
and perfectness of man—the finished man; earning and bestowing good;” etc.

[147] _Page 241, note 1._ See _Lectures and Biographical Sketches_, pp.
246 and 251.

[148] _Page 242, note 1._ The occasion alluded to was Hon. Robert C.
Winthrop’s speech to the alumni of Harvard College on Commencement Day in
1852. What follows is not an abstract, but Mr. Emerson’s rendering of the
spirit of his address.


THE ASSAULT UPON MR. SUMNER

One evening in May, Judge Hoar came to Mr. Emerson’s house, evidently
deeply stirred, and told in a few words the startling news that the
great Senator from Massachusetts had been struck down at his desk by a
Representative from South Carolina, and was dangerously hurt. The news
was heard with indignant grief in Concord, and a public meeting was held
four days later in which Mr. Emerson and others gave vent to this feeling.

Among Mr. Emerson’s papers are the fragmentary notes on Sumner, given
below, without indication as to when they were used.

                             CHARLES SUMNER

    Clean, self-poised, great-hearted man, noble in person,
    incorruptible in life, the friend of the poor, the champion of
    the oppressed.

    Of course Congress must draw from every part of the country
    swarms of individuals eager only for private interests, who
    could not love his stern justice. But if they gave him no
    high employment, he made low work high by the dignity of
    honesty and truth. But men cannot long do without faculty and
    perseverance, and he rose, step by step, to the mastery of all
    affairs intrusted to him, and by those lights and upliftings
    with which the spirit that makes the Universe rewards labor and
    brave truth. He became learned, and adequate to the highest
    questions, and the counsellor of every correction of old
    errors, and of every noble reform. How nobly he bore himself
    in disastrous times. Every reform he led or assisted. In the
    shock of the war his patriotism never failed. A man of varied
    learning and accomplishments.

    He held that every man is to be judged by the horizon of his
    mind, and Fame he defined as the shadow of excellence, but that
    which follows him, not which he follows after.

    Tragic character, like Algernon Sydney, man of conscience and
    courage, but without humor. Fear did not exist for him. In
    his mind the American idea is no crab, but a man incessantly
    advancing, as the shadow of the dial or the heavenly body
    that casts it. The American idea is emancipation, to abolish
    kingcraft, feudalism, black-letter monopoly, it pulls down the
    gallows, explodes priestcraft, opens the doors of the sea to
    all emigrants, extemporizes government in new country.

    Sumner has been collecting his works. They will be the history
    of the Republic for the last twenty-five years, as told by a
    brave, perfectly honest and well instructed man, with social
    culture and relation to all eminent persons. Diligent and able
    workman, with rare ability, without genius, without humor, but
    with persevering study, wide reading, excellent memory, high
    stand of honor (and pure devotion to his country), disdaining
    any bribe, any compliances, and incapable of falsehood. His
    singular advantages of person, of manners, and a statesman’s
    conversation impress every one favorably. He has the foible of
    most public men, the egotism which seems almost unavoidable
    at Washington. I sat in his room once at Washington whilst he
    wrote a weary procession of letters,—he writing without pause
    as fast as if he were copying. He outshines all his mates in
    historical conversation, and is so public in his regards that
    he cannot be relied on to push an office-seeker, so that he is
    no favorite with politicians. But wherever I have met with a
    dear lover of the country and its moral interests, he is sure
    to be a supporter of Sumner.

    It characterizes a man for me that he hates Charles Sumner:
    for it shows that he cannot discriminate between a foible
    and a vice. Sumner’s moral instinct and character are so
    exceptionally pure that he must have perpetual magnetism for
    honest men; his ability and working energy such, that every
    good friend of the Republic must stand by him. Those who come
    near him and are offended by his egotism, or his foible (if
    you please) of using classic quotations, or other bad tastes,
    easily forgive these whims, if themselves are good, or magnify
    them into disgust, if they themselves are incapable of his
    virtue.

    And when he read one night in Concord a lecture on Lafayette
    we felt that of all Americans he was best entitled by his own
    character and fortunes to read that eulogy.

    Every Pericles must have his Cleon: Sumner had his adversaries,
    his wasps and back-biters. We almost wished that he had not
    stooped to answer them. But he condescended to give them truth
    and patriotism, without asking whether they could appreciate
    the instruction or not.

    A man of such truth that he can be truly described: he needs
    no exaggerated praise. Not a man of extraordinary genius, but
    a man of great heart, of a perpetual youth, with the highest
    sense of honor, incapable of any fraud, little or large; loving
    his friend and loving his country, with perfect steadiness to
    his purpose, shunning no labor that his aim required, and his
    works justified him by their scope and thoroughness.

    He had good masters, who quickly found that they had a good
    scholar. He read law with Judge Story, who was at the head
    of the Law School at Harvard University, and who speedily
    discovered the value of his pupil, and called him to his
    assistance in the Law School. He had a great talent for labor,
    and spared no time and no research to make himself master of
    his subject. His treatment of every question was faithful and
    exhaustive, and marked always by the noble sentiment.

[149] _Page 252, note 1._ With this message of comfort to Sumner, struck
down for his defence of Liberty, may be contrasted what is said of
Webster when he abandoned her cause:—

“Those to whom his name was once dear and honored, as the manly statesman
to whom the choicest gifts of Nature had been accorded, disown him: ...
he who was their pride in the woods and mountains of New England is now
their mortification,—they have torn his picture from the wall, they have
thrust his speeches into the chimney,” etc.—“Address on the Fugitive
Slave Law,” at Concord, 1851.


SPEECH ON AFFAIRS IN KANSAS

By an act of Congress, passed in May, 1854, the territories of Kansas and
Nebraska were organized, and in a section of that act it was declared
that the Constitution and all the laws of the United States should be
in force in these territories, except the Missouri Compromise Act of
1820, which was declared inoperative and void. The act thereby repealed
had confined slavery to the region of the Louisiana Purchase south of
latitude 36°, 30´ North. Foreseeing the probable success of this measure
to increase the area of slavery, Emigrant Aid Societies had been formed
in Massachusetts first, and later, in Connecticut, which assisted
Northern emigrants to the settlement of this fertile region. Settlers
from the Northwestern States also poured in, and also from Missouri,
the latter bringing slaves with them. A fierce struggle, lasting for
some years and attended with bloodshed and barbarities, began at once,
hordes of armed men from the border state of Missouri constantly voting
at Kansas elections and intimidating the free state settlers, and even
driving parties of immigrants out of the state. Franklin Pierce was
then President, and threw the influence and power of the administration
on the side of the pro-slavery party in Kansas. Despairing of redress
from Washington, the settlers from the free states appealed in their
distress to their friends at home, and sent Mr. Whitman, Rev. Mr. Nute,
and later, John Brown, to make known to them their wrongs, and ask
moral and material aid, especially arms to defend their rights, and
reinforcements of brave settlers. Meetings were held, not only in the
cities, but in the country towns, and, certainly in the latter, were well
attended by earnest people who gave, a few from their wealth, but many
from their poverty, large sums to help “bleeding Kansas.” In response to
the petitions of the friends of Freedom, who urged the Legislature of
Massachusetts to come to the rescue, a joint committee was appointed by
the General Court to consider the petitions for a state appropriation of
ten thousand dollars to protect the interests of the North and the rights
of her citizens in Kansas, should they be again invaded by Southern
marauders. John Brown addressed this committee in February, 1856. He
made a clear and startling statement of the outrages he had witnessed
and the brave struggles of the settlers, and told of the murder and
imprisonment and maltreatment of his sons, seven of whom were in Kansas
with him during the struggle.[F]

Mr. Emerson always attended the meetings in aid of Kansas in Concord,
gave liberally to the cause, and spoke there and elsewhere when called
upon.

[150] _Page 263, note 1._ George Bancroft, the historian, said of the
conclusion of this speech:—

“Emerson as clearly as any one, perhaps more clearly than any one
at the time, saw the enormous dangers that were gathering over the
Constitution.... It would certainly be difficult, perhaps impossible,
to find any speech made in the same year that is marked with so much
courage and foresight as this of Emerson.... Even after the inauguration
of Lincoln several months passed away before his Secretary of State or
he himself saw the future so clearly as Emerson had foreshadowed it in
1856.”[G]


JOHN BROWN: SPEECH AT BOSTON

Mr. F. B. Sanborn, in his _Familiar Letters of Thoreau_, says that he
introduced John Brown to Thoreau in March, 1857, and Thoreau introduced
him to Emerson. This was at the time when Brown came on to awaken the
people of Massachusetts to the outrages which the settlers and their
families were suffering, and procure aid for them. His clear-cut face,
smooth-shaven and bronzed, his firmly shut mouth and mild but steady
blue eyes, gave him the appearance of the best type of old New England
farmers; indeed he might well have passed for a rustic brother of Squire
Hoar. Mr. Emerson was at once interested in him and the story of the
gallant fight that the Free-State men in Kansas were making, though Brown
was very modest about his own part and leadership. Indeed he claimed only
to be a fellow worker and adviser. I think that soon after this time, on
one of his visits to Concord, he stayed at Mr. Emerson’s house; certainly
he spent the evening there. The last time he came to Concord he was a
changed man; all the pleasant look was gone. His gray hair, longer and
brushed upright, his great gray beard and the sharpening of his features
by exposure and rude experiences gave him a wild, fierce expression. His
speech in the Town Hall was excited, and when he drew a huge sheath-knife
from under his coat and showed it as a symbol of Missouri civilization,
and last drew from his bosom a horse-chain and clanked it in air,
telling that his son had been bound with this and led bareheaded under
a burning sun beside their horses, by United States dragoons, and in
the mania brought on by this inhuman treatment had worn the rusty chain
bright,—the old man recalled the fierce Balfour of Burley in Scott’s
_Old Mortality_. It was a startling sight and sent a thrill through
his hearers. Yet on earlier occasions his speech had been really more
effective, when a quiet farmer of mature years, evidently self-contained,
intelligent, truthful and humane, simply told in New England towns what
was going on in Kansas, the outrages committed upon the settlers, the
violation of their elementary rights under the Constitution,—and all this
connived at by the general government. He opened the eyes of his hearers,
even against their wills, to the alarming pass into which the slave power
had brought the affairs of the country.

But now wrong and outrage, not only on others but terribly suffered in
his own family, had made Brown feel that not he but “Slavery was an
outlaw” against which he “held a commission direct from God Almighty” to
act. A friend quoted him as having said, “The loss of my family and the
troubles in Kansas have shattered my constitution, and I am nothing to
the world but to defend the right, and that, by God’s help, I have done
and will do.”

The people were not ready to follow him in revolutionary measures,
but when on his own responsibility he had precipitated the inevitable
conflict by breaking with a government, then so unrighteous, and offered
his life as a sacrifice for humanity, they could not but do homage to him
as a hero, who was technically a traitor. He had cut the Gordian knot
which they had suffered to be tied tighter.

Of course Mr. Emerson had known nothing of John Brown’s plan for a raid
into the slave states. It was the motive and courage he honored, not the
means. He wrote: “I wish we should have health enough to know virtue when
we see it, and not cry with the fools and the newspapers, ‘Madman!’ when
a hero passes.”

On the first day of November, John Brown had been sentenced to death.
This meeting in Boston, to give aid to his family, was held on the
eighteenth, just two weeks before his execution.

The verses which serve as motto are from Mr. Edmund Clarence Stedman’s
poem written at the time, which Mr. Emerson used to read aloud to his
family and friends with much pleasure.

[151] _Page 269, note 1._ “This court acknowledges, I suppose, the
validity of the Law of God. I see a book kissed here which I suppose to
be the Bible, or, at least, the New Testament. That teaches me that all
things ‘whatsoever I would that men should do unto me, I should do even
so to them.’ It teaches me further to ‘remember them which are in bonds
as bound with them.’ I endeavored to act up to that instruction. I say I
am yet too young to understand that God is any respecter of persons. I
believe that to have interfered as I have done, as I have always freely
admitted that I have done, in behalf of His despised poor, was not wrong,
but right. Now, if it is deemed necessary that I should forfeit my life
for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle my blood further
with the blood of my children, and with the blood of millions in this
slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel and unjust
enactments—I submit: so let it be done.” From the Speech of John Brown to
the Court.

[152] _Page 270, note 1._ Among the sheets of the lecture “Courage” is
one which seems to have been used at that time:—

“Governor Wise and Mr. Mason no doubt have some right to their places.
It is some superiority of working brain that put them there, and the
aristocrats in every society. But when they come to deal with Brown,
they find that he speaks their own speech,—has whatever courage and
directness they have, and a great deal more of the same; so that they
feel themselves timorous little fellows in his hand; he outsees,
outthinks, outacts them, and they are forced to shuffle and stammer in
their turn.

“They painfully feel this, that he is their governor and superior, and
the only alternative is to kneel to him if they are truly noble, or else
(if they wish to keep their places), to put this fact which they know,
out of sight of other people, as fast as they can. Quick, drums and
trumpets strike up! Quick, judges and juries, silence him, by sentence
and execution of sentence, and hide in the ground this alarming fact.
For, if everything comes to its right place, he goes up, and we down.”

[153] _Page 271, note 1._ Commodore Hiram Paulding, in 1857, had broken
up Walker’s filibustering expedition at Nicaragua. The arrest of Walker
on foreign soil the government did not think it wise wholly to approve.

[154] _Page 272, note 1._ The allusion is to the trials of the fugitives
Shadrach, Sims and Burns in Boston. The story of these humiliations is
told in full and in a most interesting manner in the diary of Richard H.
Dana,[H] whose zeal in the cause of these poor men did him great honor.

During the trial of Sims, a chain was put up, as a barrier against the
crowd, around the United States Court-House, and the stooping of the
judges to creep under this chain in order to enter the court-house was
considered symbolic of their abject attitude towards the aggressive slave
power.


JOHN BROWN: SPEECH AT SALEM

The second of December, on which day John Brown was executed at
Charlestown, Virginia, was bright in that State, but in New England was
of a strange sultriness with a wind from the south and a lowering sky.
At noon, the hour appointed for his death, in Concord (as in many New
England towns) the men and women who honored his character and motives
gathered and made solemn observance of a day and event which seemed laden
with omens. There was a prayer, I think offered by the Rev. Edmund Sears
of Wayland,[I] Mr. Emerson read William Allingham’s beautiful poem “The
Touchstone” which is used as the motto to this speech, Thoreau read with
sad bitterness Sir Walter Raleigh’s “The Soule’s Errand.” Hon. John S.
Keyes read some appropriate verses from Aytoun’s “Execution of Montrose”
and Mr. Sanborn a poem which he had written for the occasion.

[155] _Page 279, note 1._ Here, as often in Mr. Emerson’s speech and
writing, is shown his respect for the old religion of New England and its
effect on the thought and character of her people. As Lowell said of them
in his Concord Ode in 1875:—

    “And yet the enduring half they chose,
    Whose choice decides a man life’s slave or king,
    The invisible things of God before the seen and known.”

[156] _Page 279, note 2._ I well remember the evening, in my school-boy
days, when John Brown, in my father’s house, told of his experiences as
a sheep-farmer, and his eye for animals and power over them. He said he
knew at once a strange sheep in his flock of many hundred, and that he
could always make a dog or cat so uncomfortable as to wish to leave the
room, simply by fixing his eyes on it.

[157] _Page 281, note 1._ “Heroism feels and never reasons, and
therefore is always right; and although a different breeding, different
religion and greater intellectual activity would have modified or even
reversed the particular action, yet, for the hero, that thing he does
is the highest deed, and is not open to the censure of philosophers and
divines.”—“Heroism,” _Essays, First Series_.

“I can leave to God the time and means of my death, for I believe now
that the sealing of my testimony before God and man with my blood will do
far more to further the cause to which I have earnestly devoted myself
than anything else I have done in my life.”—Letter of John Brown to a
friend.


THEODORE PARKER

Theodore Parker, worn by his great work in defence of liberal religion
and in every cause of suffering humanity, had succumbed to disease and
died in Florence in May, 1860, not quite fifty years of age. Born in
the neighbor town of Lexington when Emerson was seven years old, they
had been friends probably from the time when the latter, soon after
settling in Concord, preached for the society at East Lexington, from
1836 for two years. Parker was, during this period, studying divinity,
and was settled as pastor of the West Roxbury church in 1837. In that
year he is mentioned by Mr. Alcott as a member of the Transcendental Club
and attending its meetings in Boston. When, in June, 1838, Mr. Emerson
fluttered the conservative and the timid by his Divinity School Address,
the young Parker went home and wrote, “It was the most inspiring strain I
ever listened to.... My soul is roused, and this week I shall write the
long-meditated sermons on the state of the church and the duties of these
times.”

Mr. Parker was one of those who attended the gathering in Boston which
gave birth to the _Dial_, to which he was a strong contributor. Three
years after its death, he, with the help of Mr. James Elliot Cabot and
Mr. Emerson, founded the _Massachusetts Quarterly Review_, vigorous
though short-lived, of which he was the editor. Parker frequently visited
Emerson, and the two, unlike in their method, worked best apart in the
same great causes. Rev. William Gannett says, “What Emerson uttered
without plot or plan, Theodore Parker elaborated to a system. Parker was
the Paul of transcendentalism.”

Mr. Edwin D. Mead, in his chapter on Emerson and Theodore Parker,[J]
gives the following pleasant anecdote:—

“At one of Emerson’s lectures in Boston, when the storm against Parker
was fiercest, a lecture at which a score of the religious and literary
leaders of the city were present, Emerson, as he laid his manuscript
upon the desk and looked over the audience, after his wont, observed
Parker; and immediately he stepped from the platform to the seat near the
front where Parker sat, grasping his hand and standing for a moment’s
conversation with him. It was not ostentation, and it was not patronage:
it was admiring friendship,—and that fortification and stimulus Parker
in those times never failed to feel. It was Emerson who fed his lamp, he
said; and Emerson said that, be the lamp fed as it might, it was Parker
whom the time to come would have to thank for finding the light burning.”

Parker dedicated to Emerson his _Ten Sermons on Religion_. In
acknowledging this tribute, Mr. Emerson thus paid tribute to Parker’s
brave service:—

“We shall all thank the right soldier whom God gave strength to fight for
him the battle of the day.”

When Mr. Parker’s failing forces made it necessary for him to drop his
arduous work and go abroad for rest, Mr. Emerson was frequently called to
take his place in the Music Hall on Sundays. I think that this was the
only pulpit he went into to conduct Sunday services after 1838.

It is told that Parker, sitting, on Sunday morning, on the deck of the
vessel that was bearing him away, never to return, smiled and said:
“Emerson is preaching at Music Hall to-day.”

[158] _Page 286, note 1._ Mr. Emerson wrote in his journal:—

“The Duc de Brancas said, ‘Why need I read the Encyclopédie? Rivarol
visits me.’ I may well say it of Theodore Parker.”

[159] _Page 290, note 1._ Richard H. Dana wrote in his diary, November 3,
1853:—

“It is now ten days since Webster’s death.... Strange that the best
commendation that has appeared yet, the most touching, elevated, meaning
eulogy, with all its censure, should have come from Theodore Parker! Were
I Daniel Webster, I would not have that sermon destroyed for all that had
been said in my favor as yet.”

[160] _Page 293, note 1._ I copy from Mr. Emerson’s journal at the
time of Mr. Parker’s death these sentences which precede some of those
included in this address:—

“Theodore Parker has filled up all his years and days and hours. A son
of the energy of New England; restless, eager, manly, brave, early old,
contumacious, clever. I can well praise him at a spectator’s distance,
for our minds and methods were unlike,—few people more unlike. All the
virtues are solitaires. Each man is related to persons who are not
related to each other, and I saw with pleasure that men whom I could
not approach, were drawn through him to the admiration of that which I
admire.”


AMERICAN CIVILIZATION

On January 31, 1862, Mr. Emerson lectured at the Smithsonian Institution
in Washington on American Civilization. Just after the outbreak of war
in the April preceding, he had given a lecture, in a course in Boston on
Life and Literature, which he called “Civilization at a Pinch,” the title
suggesting how it had been modified by the crisis which had suddenly come
to pass. In the course of the year the flocking of slaves to the Union
camps, and the opening vista of a long and bitter struggle, with slavery
now acknowledged as its root, had brought the question of Emancipation
as a war-measure to the front. Of course Mr. Emerson saw hope in this
situation of affairs, and when he went to Washington with the chance
of being heard by men in power there, he prepared himself to urge the
measure, as well on grounds of policy as of right. So the Boston lecture
was much expanded to deal with the need of the hour. There is no evidence
that President Lincoln heard it; it is probable that he did not; nor is
it true that Mr. Emerson had a long and earnest conversation with him on
the subject next day, both of which assertions have been made in print.
Mr. Emerson made an unusual record in his journal of the incidents of
his stay in Washington, and though he tells of his introduction to Mr.
Lincoln and a short chat with him, evidently there was little opportunity
for serious conversation. The President’s secretaries had, in 1886, no
memory of his having attended the lecture, and the Washington papers do
not mention his presence there. The following notice of the lecture,
however, appeared in one of the local papers: “The audience received
it, as they have the other anti-slavery lectures of the course, with
unbounded enthusiasm. It was in many respects a wonderful lecture, and
those who have often heard Mr. Emerson said that he seemed inspired
through nearly the whole of it, especially the part referring to slavery
and the war.”

A gentleman in Washington, who took the trouble to look up the question
as to whether Mr. Lincoln and other high officials heard it, says that
Mr. Lincoln could hardly have attended lectures then:—

“He was very busy at the time, Stanton the new war secretary having just
come in, and storming like a fury at the business of his department.
The great operations of the war for the time overshadowed all the other
events.... It is worth remarking that Mr. Emerson in this lecture clearly
foreshadowed the policy of Emancipation some six or eight months in
advance of Mr. Lincoln. He saw the logic of events leading up to a crisis
in our affairs, to ‘emancipation as a platform with compensation to the
loyal owners’ (his words as reported in the _Star_). The notice states
that the lecture was very fully attended.”

Very possibly it may be with regard to this address that we have the
interesting account given of the effect of Mr. Emerson’s speaking on a
well-known English author. Dr. Garnett, in his _Life of Emerson_, says:—

“A shrewd judge, Anthony Trollope, was particularly struck with the note
of sincerity in Emerson when he heard him address a large meeting during
the Civil War. Not only was the speaker terse, perspicuous, and practical
to a degree amazing to Mr. Trollope’s preconceived notions, but he
commanded his hearers’ respect by the frankness of his dealing with them.
‘You make much of the American eagle,’ he said, ‘you do well. But beware
of the American peacock.’ When shortly afterwards Mr. Trollope heard the
consummate rhetorician, ⸺ ⸺ he discerned at once that oratory was an end
with him, instead of, as with Emerson, a means. He was neither bold nor
honest, as Emerson had been, and the people knew that while pretending to
lead them he was led by them.”

Mr. Emerson revised the lecture and printed it in the _Atlantic
Monthly_ for April, 1862. It was afterwards separated into the essay
“Civilization,” treating of the general and permanent aspects of the
subject (printed in _Society and Solitude_), and this urgent appeal for
the instant need.

The few lines inspired by the Flag are from one of the verse-books.

[161] _Page 298, note 1._ Mr. Emerson himself was by no means free from
pecuniary anxieties and cares in those days.

Journal, 1862. “Poverty, sickness, a lawsuit, even bad, dark weather,
spoil a great many days of the scholar’s year, hinder him of the frolic
freedom necessary to spontaneous flow of thought.”

[162] _Page 300, note 1._ This was during the days of apparent inaction
when, after the first reverses or minor successes of the raw Northern
armies, the magnitude of the task before them and the energy of their
opponents was realized, and recruiting, fortification, organization was
going on in earnest in preparation for the spring campaign. General Scott
had resigned; General McClellan was doing his admirable work of creating
a fit army, and Secretary Cameron had been succeeded by the energetic and
impatient Stanton. But the government was still very shy of meddling with
slavery for fear of disaffecting the War Democrats and especially the
Border States.

[163] _Page 307, note 1._ A short time before this address was delivered
Mr. Moncure D. Conway (a young Virginian, who, for conscience’ sake, had
left his charge as a Methodist preacher and had abandoned his inheritance
in slaves, losing in so doing the good will of his parents, and become a
Unitarian minister and an abolitionist) had read in Concord an admirable
and eloquent lecture called “The Rejected Stone.” This stone, slighted
by the founders, although they knew it to be a source of danger, had now
“become the head of the corner,” and its continuance in the national
structure threatened its stability. Mr. Emerson had been much struck
with the excellence and cogency of Mr. Conway’s arguments, based on his
knowledge of Southern economics and character, and in this lecture made
free use of them.

[164] _Page 308, note 1._ Mason and Slidell, the emissaries sent by the
Confederacy to excite sympathy in its cause in Europe, had been taken
off an English vessel at the Bermudas by Commodore Wilkes, and were
confined in Fort Warren in Boston Harbor. President Lincoln’s action in
surrendering them at England’s demand had been a surprise to the country,
but was well received.

[165] _Page 309, note 1._ From the Veeshnoo Sarma.

[166] _Page 309, note 2._ See in the address on Theodore Parker the
passage commending him for insisting “that the essence of Christianity is
its practical morals; it is there for use or nothing,” etc.

[167] _Page 311, note 1._ In the agitation concerning the abolition
of slavery in the British colonies, gradual emancipation was at first
planned, as more reasonable and politic, but, in the end, not only the
reformers but the planters came in most cases to see that immediate
emancipation was wiser.


THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION

On the 22d of September, President Lincoln at last spoke the word so long
earnestly desired by the friends of Freedom and the victims of slavery,
abolishing slavery on the first day of the coming year in those states
which should then be in rebellion against the United States.

At a meeting held in Boston in honor of this auspicious utterance, Mr.
Emerson spoke, with others.

The address was printed in its present form in the _Atlantic Monthly_ for
November, 1862.

[168] _Page 316, note 1._ It may be interesting in this connection to
recall the quiet joy with which Mr. Emerson in his poem “The Adirondacs”
celebrates man’s victory over matter, and its promise to human
brotherhood, when the Atlantic Cable was supposed to be a success in 1858.

[169] _Page 320, note 1._ Milton, “Comus.”

[170] _Page 321, note 1._ It is pleasant to contrast this passage with
the tone of sad humiliation which prevails in the address on the Fugitive
Slave Law given in Concord in 1851.

[171] _Page 324, note 1._ See the insulting recognition of this
disgraceful attitude of the North by John Randolph, quoted by Mr. Emerson
in his speech on the Fugitive Slave Law in Concord in 1851.

[172] _Page 326, note 1._ Shakspeare, Sonnet cvii.

[173] _Page 326, note 2._ The tragedy of the negro is tenderly told in
the poem “Voluntaries,” which was written just after they had gallantly
stood the test of battle in the desperate attack on Fort Wagner.

On the first day of the year 1863, when Emancipation became a fact
throughout the United States, a joyful meeting was held in Boston, and
there Mr. Emerson read his “Boston Hymn.”


ABRAHAM LINCOLN

In the year 1865, the people of Concord gathered on the Nineteenth of
April, as had been their wont for ninety years, but this time not to
celebrate the grasping by the town of its great opportunity for freedom
and fame. The people came together in the old meeting-house to mourn for
their wise and good Chief Magistrate, murdered when he had triumphantly
finished the great work which fell to his lot. Mr. Emerson, with others
of his townsmen, spoke.

[174] _Page 331, note 1._ On the occasion of his visit to Washington
in January, 1862, Mr. Emerson had been taken to the White House by Mr.
Sumner and introduced to the President. Mr. Lincoln’s first remark was,
“Mr. Emerson, I once heard you say in a lecture that a Kentuckian seems
to say by his air and manners, ‘Here am I; if you don’t like me, the
worse for you.’”

The interview with Mr. Lincoln was necessarily short, but he left an
agreeable impression on Mr. Emerson’s mind. The full account of this
visit is printed in the _Atlantic Monthly_ for July, 1904, and will be
included among the selections from the journals which will be later
published.

[175] _Page 332, note 1._ Mr. Emerson’s poem, “The Visit,” shows how
terrible the devastation of the day of a public man would have seemed to
him.

[176] _Page 336, note 1._ The brave retraction by Thomas Taylor of the
hostile ridicule which _Punch_ had poured on Lincoln in earlier days
contained these verses:—

    “Beside this corpse, that bears for winding-sheet
      The Stars and Stripes he lived to rear anew,
    Between the mourners at his head and feet,
      Say, scurrile jester, is there room for _you_?

    “Yes, he had lived to shame me from my sneer,
      To lame my pencil, and confute my pen;—
    To make me own this kind of princes peer,
      This rail-splitter a true-born king of men.”

The whole poem is included in Mr. Emerson’s collection _Parnassus_.

[177] _Page 337, note 1._ This thought is rendered more fully in the poem
“Spiritual Laws,” and in the lines in “Worship,”—

    This is he men miscall Fate,
    Threading dark ways, arriving late,
    But ever coming in time to crown
    The truth, and hurl wrong-doers down.

[178] _Page 338, note 1._ The following letter was written by Mr. Emerson
in November, 1863, to his friend, Mr. George P. Bradford, who, as Mr.
Cabot says, came nearer to being a “crony” than any of the others:—

                                                            CONCORD.

    DEAR GEORGE,—I hope you do not need to be reminded that we
    rely on you at 2 o’clock on Thanksgiving Day. Bring all the
    climate and all the memories of Newport with you. Mr. Lincoln
    in fixing this day has in some sort bound himself to furnish
    good news and victories for it. If not, we must comfort each
    other with the good which already is, and with that which must
    be.

                         Yours affectionately,

                                                      R. W. EMERSON.

A year later, he wrote to the same friend:—

“I give you joy of the Election. Seldom in history was so much staked on
a popular vote—I suppose never in history.

“One hears everywhere anecdotes of late, very late, remorse overtaking
the hardened sinners and just saving them from final reprobation.”

Journal, 1864-65. “Why talk of President Lincoln’s equality of manners
to the elegant or titled men with whom Everett or others saw him? A
sincerely upright and intelligent man as he was, placed in the chair,
has no need to think of his manners or appearance. His work day by day
educates him rapidly and to the best. He exerts the enormous power of
this continent in every hour, in every conversation, in every act;—thinks
and decides under this pressure, forced to see the vast and various
bearings of the measures he adopts: _he_ cannot palter, he cannot but
carry a grace beyond his own, a dignity, by means of what he drops, e.
g., all pretension and trick, and arrives, of course, at a simplicity,
which is the perfection of manners.”


HARVARD COMMEMORATION SPEECH

It was a proud and sad, and yet a joyful day, when Harvard welcomed back
those of her sons who had survived the war. All who could come were
there, from boys to middle-aged men, from private soldier to general,
some strong and brown, and others worn and sick and maimed, but all on
that day proud and happy. The names of the ninety-three of Harvard’s sons
who had fallen in the war were inscribed on six tablets and placed where
all could see.

In the church, where then the college exercises were held, the venerable
ex-president, Dr. Walker, read the Scriptures, Rev. Phillips Brooks
offered prayer, a hymn by Robert Lowell was sung, and the address was
made by the Rev. George Putnam. In the afternoon the alumni, civic and
military, with their guests, were marshalled by Colonel Henry Lee into
a great pavilion behind Harvard Hall, where they dined. Hon. Charles
G. Loring presided; Governor Andrew, General Meade, General Devens and
other distinguished soldiers spoke, and poems by Dr. Holmes and Mrs.
Julia Ward Howe were read. The president of the day called on Mr. Emerson
as representative of the poets and scholars whose thoughts had been an
inspiration to Harvard’s sons in the field.

[179] _Page 344, note 1._ This was the mother of Robert Gould Shaw, who
lost his life a few months later, leading his dusky soldiers up the
slopes of Fort Wagner. It was in his honor that Mr. Emerson wrote in the
“Voluntaries,”—

      Stainless soldier on the walls.
    Knowing this,—and knows no more,—
    Whoever fights, whoever falls,
    Justice conquers evermore,
    Justice after as before,—
    And he who battles on her side,
    God, though he were ten times slain,
    Crowns him victor glorified,
    Victor over death and pain.

[180] _Page 345, note 1._

    “O Beautiful! my Country! ours once more!
    ...
    What words divine of lover or of poet
    Could tell our love and make thee know it,
    Among the Nations bright beyond compare?
        What were our lives without thee?
        What all our lives to save thee?
        We reck not what we gave thee;
        We will not dare to doubt thee,
    But ask whatever else, and we will dare!”

                 Lowell, “Commemoration Ode.”


ADDRESS AT THE DEDICATION OF THE SOLDIERS’ MONUMENT IN CONCORD

In 1836, the “Battle Monument” to commemorate “the First organized
Resistance to British Aggression” had been erected “in Gratitude to God
and Love of Freedom” on “the spot where the first of the Enemy fell in
the War which gave Independence to the United States.” Thirty-three years
later, on the Nineteenth day of April, with its threefold patriotic
memories for Concord,[K] the people gathered on the village common to see
their new memorial to valor. The inscription on one of its bronze tablets
declared that

                           THE TOWN OF CONCORD
                           BUILDS THIS MONUMENT
                               IN HONOR OF
                              THE BRAVE MEN
                          WHOSE NAMES IT BEARS:
                               AND RECORDS
                           WITH GRATEFUL PRIDE
                           THAT THEY FOUND HERE
                       A BIRTHPLACE, HOME OR GRAVE.

The inscription on the other tablet is the single sentence,—

                       THEY DIED FOR THEIR COUNTRY
                       IN THE WAR OF THE REBELLION

with the forty-four names.

Hon. John S. Keyes as President of the Day opened the ceremonies with a
short address. The Rev. Grindall Reynolds made the prayer. An Ode written
by Mr. George B. Bartlett was sung to the tune of _Auld Lang Syne_. Hon.
Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar, the Chairman of the Monument Committee, read the
Report, in itself an eloquent and moving speech. This was followed by Mr.
Emerson’s Address. Mr. F. B. Sanborn contributed a Poem, and afterwards
short speeches were made by Senator George S. Boutwell, William Schouler,
the efficient Adjutant-General of the State, and by Colonels Parker and
Marsh respectively of the Thirty-second and Forty-seventh regiments of
Massachusetts Volunteers, in which the Concord companies had served. The
exercises were concluded by the reading of a poem by Mr. Sampson Mason,
an aged citizen of the town.

It was a beautiful spring day. The throng was too large for the town
hall, so, partly sheltered from the afternoon sun by the town elm,
thickening with its brown buds, they gathered around the town-house
steps, which served as platform for the speakers.

[181] _Page 351, note 1._ Compare, in the _Poems_, the lines in “The
Problem” on the adoption by Nature of man’s devotional structures.

[182] _Page 352, note 1._

    Great men in the Senate sate,
    Sage and hero, side by side,
    Building for their sons the State,
    Which they shall rule with pride.
    They forbore to break the chain
    Which bound the dusky tribe,
    Checked by the owners’ fierce disdain,
    Lured by “Union” as the bribe.
    Destiny sat by, and said,
    ‘Pang for pang your seed shall pay,
    Hide in false peace your coward head,
    I bring round the harvest day.’

[183] _Page 353, note 1._ Wordsworth’s Sonnet, No. xiv., in “Poems
dedicated to National Independence,” part ii.

[184] _Page 355, note 1._ Mr. Emerson had in mind the astonishing
fertility of resource in difficulties shown by the Eighth Massachusetts
Regiment in the march from Annapolis to Washington, as told by Major
Theodore Winthrop in “New York Seventh Regiment. Our march to Washington”
(_Atlantic Monthly_ June, 1861). See “Resources,” _Letters and Social
Aims_, p. 143.

Judge Hoar in his report on this occasion said, “Two names [on the
tablet] recall the unutterable horrors of Andersonville, and will never
suffer us to forget that our armies conquered barbarism as well as
treason.”

[185] _Page 356, note 1._ Between 1856 and 1859 John Brown and other
Free-State men, Mr. Whitman, Mr. Nute and Preacher Stewart, had told the
sad story of Kansas to the Concord people and received important aid.

[186] _Page 358, note 1._ This was Captain Charles E. Bowers, a
shoemaker, and Mr. Emerson’s next neighbor, much respected by him, whose
forcible speaking at anti-slavery and Kansas aid meetings he often
praised. When the war came, Mr. Bowers, though father of a large family,
and near the age-limit of service, volunteered as a private in the first
company, went again as an officer in the Thirty-second Massachusetts
Regiment, and served with credit in the Army of the Potomac until
discharged for disability.

[187] _Page 358, note 2._ George L. Prescott, a lumber dealer and
farmer, later Colonel of the Thirty-second Regiment, U. S. V. He was of
the same stock as Colonel William Prescott, the hero of Bunker Hill.

Judge Hoar said of him, “An only son, an only brother, a husband and a
father, with no sufficient provision made for his wife and children, he
had everything to make life dear and desirable, and to require others to
hesitate for him, but he did not hesitate himself.”

[188] _Page 361, note 1._ Blaise de Montluc, a Gascon officer of
remarkable valor, skill and fidelity, under Francis I. and several
succeeding kings of France.

[189] _Page 365, note 1._ It was well said by Judge Hoar: “His
instinctive sympathies taught him from the outset, what many higher in
command were so slow and so late to learn, that it is the first duty of
an officer to take care of his men as much as to lead them. His character
developed new and larger proportions, with new duties and larger
responsibilities.”

[190] _Page 366, note 1._ The Buttricks were among the original settlers
of Concord, and the family has given good account of itself for nearly
two hundred and seventy years, and still owns the farm on the hill
whence Major John led the yeomen of Middlesex down to force the passage
of the North Bridge. Seven representatives of that family of sturdy
democrats volunteered at the beginning of the War of the Rebellion. Two
were discharged as physically unfit, but the others served in army or
navy with credit, and two of them lost their lives in the service. Alden
Buttrick had fought the Border Ruffians in Kansas. Humphrey, a mason by
trade, but a mighty hunter, left his wife and little children at the
first call, and was first sergeant of Prescott’s company. Mr. Emerson
omits to state that he was commissioned lieutenant in the Forty-seventh
Regiment the following year. His service, especially as captain in the
Fifty-ninth Regiment, was arduous and highly creditable.

[191] _Page 368, note 1._ Edward O. Shepard, who had been master of the
Concord High School, afterwards a successful lawyer, had an excellent war
record, and rose to be lieutenant-colonel of the Thirty-second Regiment.

George Lauriat left the gold-beater’s shop of Ephraim W. Bull (the
producer of the Concord Grape) to go to the war in Concord’s first
company. Modest and brave, he became an excellent officer and returned
captain and brevet-major of the Thirty-second Regiment.

[192] _Page 368, note 2._ Francis Buttrick, younger brother of Humphrey,
a handsome and attractive youth, had lived at Mr. Emerson’s home to carry
on the farm for him.

[193] _Page 375, note 1._ These three were Asa, John and Samuel Melvin.
Asa died of wounds received before Petersburg; both his brothers of
sickness, Samuel after long suffering in the prison-pen at Andersonville.
They came of an old family of hunter-farmers in Concord. Close by the
wall next the street of the Old Hill Burying Ground is the stone in
memory of one of their race, whose “Martial Genius early engaged him in
his Country’s cause under command of the valiant Captain Lovel in that
hazardous Enterprise where our hero, his Commander, with many brave and
valiant Men bled and died.”

[194] _Page 379, note 1._ The writer of this letter, a quiet, handsome
school-boy the year before the war broke out, lived just across the
brook behind Mr. Emerson’s house. He was an excellent soldier in the
Thirty-second Regiment, and reënlisted as a veteran in 1864.


EDITORS’ ADDRESS, MASSACHUSETTS QUARTERLY REVIEW

Mr. Cabot, in his Memoir, says that just before Mr. Emerson sailed for
Europe in 1847, Theodore Parker, Dr. S. G. Howe and others (Mr. Cabot was
one of these) met to consider whether there could not be “a new quarterly
review which should be more alive than was the _North American_ to the
questions of the day.” Charles Sumner and Thoreau are mentioned as having
been present. Colonel Higginson says that Mr. Parker wished it to be “the
_Dial_ with a beard.” It was decided that the undertaking should be made.
Mr. Parker wished Mr. Emerson to be editor, but he declined. A committee
was chosen—Emerson, Parker and Howe—to draft a manifesto to the public.
Mr. Emerson wrote the paper here printed, but when the first number of
the Review came to him in England, was annoyed at finding his name set
down as one of the editors. I think that the only paper he ever wrote
for it, beyond the “Address to the Public,” was a notice of “Some Oxford
Poetry,”—the recently published poems of John Sterling and Arthur Hugh
Clough.

Theodore Parker was the real editor. During its three years of life the
_Massachusetts Quarterly_—now hard to obtain—was a brave, independent and
patriotic magazine, and, like the _Dial_, gives the advancing thought
of the time in literary and social matters, and also in religion and
politics.

[195] _Page 384, note 1._ Plutarch tells that Cineas, the wise counsellor
of Pyrrhus, king of the Epirots, asked his monarch when he set forth
to conquer Rome what he should do afterwards. Pyrrhus said he could
then become master of Sicily. “And then?” asked Cineas. The king told
of further dreams of conquest of Carthage and Libya. “But when we have
conquered all that, what are we to do then?” “Why then, my friend,” said
Pyrrhus, laughing, “we will take our ease, and drink and be merry.”
Cineas, having brought him thus far, replied, “And what hinders us from
drinking and taking our ease now, when we have already those things in
our hands at which we propose to arrive through seas of blood, through
infinite toils and dangers, innumerable calamities which we must both
cause and suffer?”

[196] _Page 386, note 1._ “To live without duties is
obscene.”—“Aristocracy,” _Lectures and Biographical Sketches_.

[197] _Page 389, note 1._ This was shortly after the annexation
of Texas, and during the successful progress of the Mexican War. The
slave power, although awakening opposition by its insatiable demands, was
still on the increase. Charles Sumner, though a rising statesman, had not
yet entered Congress.

[198] _Page 389, note 2._

    For Destiny never swerves,
      Nor yields to men the helm.

        “The World-Soul,” _Poems_.


ADDRESS TO KOSSUTH

On a beautiful day in May, 1852, Louis Kossuth, the exiled governor of
Hungary, who had come to this country to solicit her to interfere in
European politics on behalf of his oppressed people, visited the towns of
Lexington and Concord, and spoke to a large assemblage in each place.

Kossuth was met at the Lexington line by a cavalcade from Concord, who
escorted him to the village, where he received a cordial welcome. The
town hall was crowded with people. The Hon. John S. Keyes presided, and
Mr. Emerson made the address of welcome.

Kossuth, in his earnest appeal for American help, addressed Mr. Emerson
personally in the following passages, after alluding to Concord’s part in
the struggle for Freedom in 1775:—

“It is strange, indeed, how every incident of the present bears the mark
of a deeper meaning around me. There is meaning in the very fact that it
is you, sir, by whom the representative of Hungary’s ill-fated struggle
is so generously welcomed ... to the shrine of martyrs illumined by
victory. You are wont to dive into the mysteries of truth and disclose
mysteries of right to the eyes of men. Your honored name is Emerson;
and Emerson was the name of a man who, a minister of the gospel, turned
out with his people, on the 19th of April of eternal memory, when the
alarm-bell first was rung.... I take hold of that augury, sir. Religion
and Philosophy, you blessed twins,—upon you I rely with my hopes to
America. Religion, the philosophy of the heart, will make the Americans
generous; and philosophy, the religion of the mind, will make the
Americans wise; and all that I claim is a generous wisdom and a wise
generosity.”

[199] _Page 398, note 1._ I am unable to find the source of these lines.

[200] _Page 399, note 1._ For the power of minorities, see “Progress of
Culture,” _Letters and Social Aims_, pp. 216-219, and “Considerations by
the Way,” _Conduct of Life_, pp. 248, 249.


WOMAN

Perhaps the pleasantest word Mr. Emerson ever spoke about women was what
he said at the end of the war: “Everybody has been wrong in his guess
except good women, who never despair of an ideal right.”

Mr. Emerson’s habitual treatment of women showed his real feeling towards
them. He held them to their ideal selves by his courtesy and honor. When
they called him to come to their aid, he came. Men must not deny them any
right that they desired; though he never felt that the finest women would
care to assume political functions in the same way that men did.

Mr. Cabot gives in his Memoir (p. 455) a letter which Mr. Emerson wrote,
five years before this speech was made, to a lady who asked him to join
in a call for a Woman’s Suffrage Convention. His distaste for the scheme
clearly appears, and though perhaps felt in a less degree as time went
on, never quite disappeared. At the end of the notes on this address is
given the greater part of a short speech which he wrote many years later,
but which he seems never to have delivered. Colonel Thomas Wentworth
Higginson is reported in the _Woman’s Journal_ as having said at the New
England Women’s Club, May 16, 1903, that Mr. Cabot put into his Memoir
what Mr. Emerson said in his early days, when he was opposed to woman’s
suffrage (the letter above alluded to), and “left out all those warm and
cordial sentences that he wrote later in regard to it, culminating in his
assertion that, whatever might be said of it as an abstract question,
all his measures would be carried sooner if women could vote.” This
last assertion, though not in the Memoir, Mr. Cabot printed in its place
in the present address, and the only other address on the subject which
is known to exist, Mr. Cabot did not print probably because Mr. Emerson
never delivered it.

[201] _Page 406, note 1._ This passage from the original is omitted:—

“A woman of genius said, ‘I will forgive you that you do so much, and you
me that I do nothing.’”

[202] _Page 411, note 1._ This sentence originally ended, “And their
convention should be holden in a sculpture-gallery.”

[203] _Page 412, note 1._ From _The Angel in the House_, by Coventry
Patmore.

[204] _Page 413, note 1._ Milton, _Paradise Lost_.

Because of the high triumph of Humility, his favorite virtue, Mr.
Emerson, though commonly impatient of sad stories, had always a love for
the story of Griselda, as told by Chaucer, alluded to below. In spite
of its great length, he would not deny it a place in his collection
_Parnassus_.

[205] _Page 413, note 2._ From “Love and Humility,” by Henry More
(1614-87).

[206] _Page 414, note 1._ These anecdotes followed in the original
speech:—

“‘I use the Lord of the Kaaba; what is the Kaaba to me?’ said Rabia. ‘I
am so near to God that his word, “Whoso nears me by a span, to him come
I a mile,” is true for me.’ A famed Mahometan theologian asked her, ‘How
she had lifted herself to this degree of the love of God?’ She replied,
‘Hereby, that all things which I had found, I have lost in him.’ The
other said, ‘In what way or method hast thou known him?’ She replied, ‘O
Hassan! thou knowest him after a certain art and way, but I without art
and way.’ When once she was sick, three famed theologians came to her,
Hassan Vasri, Malek and Balchi. Hassan said, ‘He is not upright in his
prayer who does not endure the blows of his Lord.’ Balchi said, ‘He is
not upright in his prayer who does not rejoice in the blows of his Lord.’
But Rabia, who in these words detected some trace of egoism, said, ‘He
is not upright in his prayer, who, when he beholds his Lord, forgets not
that he is stricken.’”

[207] _Page 415, note 1._ See “Clubs,” in _Society and Solitude_, p. 243.

[208] _Page 417, note 1._ “The Princess” is the poem alluded to. Mr.
Emerson liked it, but used to say it was sad to hear it end with, _Go
home and mind your mending_.

[209] _Page 426, note 1._ The internal evidence shows that the short
speech given below was written after the war. All that is important is
here given. There were one or two paragraphs that essentially were the
same as those of the 1855 address.

On the manuscript is written, apparently in Mr. Emerson’s hand, in
pencil, “Never read,” and evidently in his hand, the title, thus:—

                            _Discours Manqué_

                                  WOMAN

I consider that the movement which unites us to-day is no whim, but an
organic impulse,—a right and proper inquiry,—honoring to the age. And
among the good signs of the times, this is of the best.

The distinctions of the mind of Woman we all recognize; their
affectionate, sympathetic, religious, oracular nature; their swifter and
finer perception; their taste, or love of order and beauty, influencing
or creating manners. We commonly say, Man represents Intellect; and
Woman, Love. Man looks for hard truth. Woman, with her affection for
goodness, benefit. Hence they are religious. In all countries and creeds
the temples are filled by women, and they hold men to religious rites
and moral duties. And in all countries the man—no matter how hardened a
reprobate he is—likes well to have his wife a saint. It was no historic
chance, but an instinct, which softened in the Middle Ages the terror
of the superstitious, by gradually lifting their prayers to the Virgin
Mary and so adopting the Mother of God as the efficient Intercessor. And
now, when our religious traditions are so far outgrown as to require
correction and reform, ’tis certain that nothing can be fixed and
accepted which does not commend itself to Woman.

I suppose women feel in relation to men as ’tis said geniuses feel among
energetic workers, that, though overlooked and thrust aside in the press,
they outsee all these noisy masters: and we, in the presence of sensible
women, feel overlooked, judged,—and sentenced.

They are better scholars than we at school, and the reason why they are
not better than we twenty years later may be because men can turn their
reading to account in the professions, and women are excluded from the
professions.

These traits have always characterized women. We are a little vain of our
women, as if we had invented them. I think we exaggerate the effect of
Greek, Roman and even Oriental institutions on the character of woman.
Superior women are rare anywhere, as superior men are. But the anecdotes
of every country give like portraits of womanhood, and every country in
its Roll of Honor has as many women as men. The high sentiment of women
appears in the Hebrew, the Hindoo; in Greek women in Homer, in the
tragedies, and Roman women in the histories. Their distinctive traits,
grace, vivacity, and surer moral sentiment, their self-sacrifice, their
courage and endurance, have in every nation found respect and admiration.

Her gifts make woman the refiner and civilizer of her mate. Civilization
is her work. Man is rude and bearish in colleges, in mines, in ships,
because there is no woman. Let good women go passengers in the ship, and
the manners at once are mended; in schools, in hospitals, in the prairie,
in California, she brings the same reform....

Her activity in putting an end to Slavery; and in serving the hospitals
of the Sanitary Commission in the war, and in the labors of the
Freedman’s Bureau, have opened her eyes to larger rights and duties. She
claims now her full rights of all kinds,—to education, to employment, to
equal laws of property. Well, now in this country we are suffering much
and fearing more from the abuse of the ballot and from fraudulent and
purchased votes. And now, at the moment when committees are investigating
and reporting the election frauds, woman asks for her vote. It is the
remedy at the hour of need. She is to purify and civilize the voting, as
she has the schools, the hospitals and the drawing-rooms. For, to grant
her request, you must remove the polls from the tavern and rum-shop, and
build noble edifices worthy of the State, whose halls shall afford her
every security for deliberate and sovereign action.

’Tis certainly no new thing to see women interest themselves in politics.
In England, in France, in Germany, Italy, we find women of influence and
administrative capacity,—some Duchess of Marlborough, some Madame de
Longueville, Madame Roland,—centres of political power and intrigue....
But we have ourselves seen the great political enterprise of our times,
the abolition of Slavery in America, undertaken by a society whose
executive committee was composed of men and women, and which held
together until this object was attained. And she may well exhibit the
history of that as her voucher that she is entitled to demand power which
she has shown she can use so well.

’Tis idle to refuse them a vote on the ground of incompetency. I wish our
masculine voting were so good that we had any right to doubt their equal
discretion. They could not easily give worse votes, I think, than we do.


CONSECRATION OF SLEEPY HOLLOW CEMETERY

Within a quarter of a mile of Concord Common was a natural amphitheatre,
carpeted in late summer with a purple bloom of wild grass, and girt by a
horseshoe-shaped glacial moraine clothed with noble pines and oaks. It
was part of Deacon Brown’s farm, and reached by a lane, with a few houses
on it, cut through a low part of the ridge of hills which sheltered
the old town. When the Deacon died, the town laid out a new road to
Bedford, cutting off this “Sleepy Hollow” (as the townspeople who enjoyed
strolling there had named it) from the rest of the farm. Mr. John S.
Keyes saw the fitness of the ground for a beautiful cemetery, and induced
the town to buy it for that purpose; and as chairman of the committee,
laid out the land. The people of the village—for Concord had nothing
suburban about it then—gathered there one beautiful September afternoon
to choose their resting-places and consecrate the ground. Mr. Emerson
made the address on the slope just below the place where, beneath a
great pine, the tree he loved best, he had chosen the spot for his own
grave.

Much of his essay on Immortality was originally a part of this discourse,
and therefore that portion is omitted here, its place in the essay being
indicated.


ROBERT BURNS

It is pleasant to be able to let Dr. Holmes, who was present at the Burns
Festival, speak for himself and Lowell and Judge Hoar of Mr. Emerson’s
speech on that day. I have heard the Judge tell the story of his friend’s
success with the same delight.

“On the 25th of January, 1859, Emerson attended the Burns Festival, held
at the Parker House in Boston, on the Centennial Anniversary of the
poet’s birth. He spoke, after the dinner, to the great audience with
such beauty and eloquence that all who listened to him have remembered
it as one of the most delightful addresses they ever heard. Among his
hearers was Mr. Lowell, who says of it that ‘every word seemed to have
just dropped down to him from the clouds.’ Judge Hoar, who was another
of his hearers, says that, though he has heard many of the chief orators
of his time, he never witnessed such an effect of speech upon men. I was
myself present on that occasion, and underwent the same fascination that
these gentlemen and the varied audience before the speaker experienced.
His words had a passion in them not usual in the calm, pure flow most
natural to his uttered thoughts; white-hot iron we are familiar with, but
white-hot silver is what we do not often look upon, and his inspiring
address glowed like silver fresh from the cupel.”

The strange part of all the accounts given by the hearers is that Mr.
Emerson seemed to speak _extempore_, which can hardly have been so.

No account of the Festival, or Mr. Emerson’s part therein, appears in
the journals, except a short page of praise of the felicitous anecdotes
introduced by other after-dinner speakers.

[210] _Page 440, note 1._ Here comes out that respect for labor which
affected all Mr. Emerson’s relations to the humblest people he met. In
the Appendix to the _Poems_ it appears in the verses beginning,—

    Said Saadi, When I stood before
    Hassan the camel-driver’s door.

[211] _Page 441, note 1._ Thomas Carlyle.

[212] _Page 441, note 2._ Mr. Emerson here recalls his childhood and that
of his brothers, as in the passage in “Domestic Life,” in _Society and
Solitude_, that has been often referred to in these notes.

[213] _Page 443, note 1._ Among some stray lecture-sheets was the
following on the scholar or poet:—

“Given the insight, and he will find as many beauties and heroes and
strokes of genius close by him as Dante or Shakspeare beheld. It was in
a cold moor farm, in a dingy country inn, that Burns found his fancy so
sprightly. You find the times and places mean. Stretch a few threads over
an Æolian harp, and put it in the window and listen to what it says of
the times and of the heart of Nature. You shall not believe the miracle
of Nature is less, the chemical power worn out. Watch the breaking
morning, or the enchantments of the sunset.”


SHAKSPEARE

The following notes on Shakspeare were written by Mr. Emerson for
the celebration in Boston by the Saturday Club of the Three Hundredth
Anniversary of the poet’s birth.

In Mr. Cabot’s _Memoir of Emerson_, vol. ii., page 621, apropos of Mr.
Emerson’s avoidance of impromptu speech on public occasions, is this
statement:—

“I remember his getting up at a dinner of the Saturday Club on the
Shakspeare anniversary in 1864, to which some guests had been invited,
looking about him tranquilly for a minute or two, and then sitting down;
serene and unabashed, but unable to say a word upon a subject so familiar
to his thoughts from boyhood.”

Yet on the manuscript of this address Mr. Emerson noted that it was read
at the Club’s celebration on that occasion, and at the Revere House.
(“Parker’s” was the usual gathering-place of the Club.) The handwriting
of this note shows that Mr. Emerson wrote it in his later years, so it
is very possible that Mr. Cabot was right. Mr. Emerson perhaps forgot to
bring his notes with him to the dinner, and so did not venture to speak.
And the dinner may have been at “Parker’s.”


ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT

The Boston Society of Natural History celebrated the One Hundredth
Anniversary of the birth of Humboldt. Dr. Robert C. Waterston presided
at the Music Hall, where Agassiz made the address. In the evening there
was a reception in Horticultural Hall. The occasion was made memorable by
the Society by the founding of a Humboldt and Agassiz scholarship in the
Museum of Comparative Zoölogy in Cambridge.

Poems by Dr. Holmes and Mrs. Howe were read. Professor E. J. Young and
Dr. Charles T. Jackson gave reminiscences of Humboldt; Colonel Higginson,
the Rev. Dr. Hedge and others spoke. Mr. Emerson’s remarks are taken from
an abstract given in the account of the celebration published by the
Society.


WALTER SCOTT

Although Mr. Emerson, in the period between 1838 and 1848 especially,
when considering the higher powers of poetry, spoke slightingly of
Scott,—in the _Dial_ papers as “objective” and “the poet of society, of
patrician and conventional Europe,” or in _English Traits_ as a writer
of “a rhymed travellers’ guide to Scotland,”—he had always honor for
the noble man, and affectionate remembrance for the poems as well as
the novels. In the poem “The Harp,” when enumerating poets, he calls
Scott “the delight of generous boys,” but the _generosus puer_ was his
own delight; the hope of the generation lay in him, and his own best
audience was made up of such. In the essay “Illusions,” he says that the
boy “has no better friend than Scott, Shakspeare, Plutarch and Homer. The
man lives to other objects, but who dare affirm that they are more real?”
In the essay “Aristocracy,” he names among the claims of a superior
class, “Genius, the power to affect the Imagination,” and presently
speaks of “those who think and paint and laugh and weep in their eloquent
closets, and then convert the world into a huge whispering-gallery,
to report the tale to all men and win smiles and tears from many
generations,” and gives Scott and Burns among the high company whom he
instances.

Mr. Emerson’s children can testify how with regard to Scott he always was
ready to become a boy again. As we walked in the woods, he would show us
the cellar-holes of the Irish colony that came to Concord to build the
railroad, and he named these deserted villages Derncleugh and Ellangowan.
The sight recalled Meg Merrilies’ pathetic lament to the laird at the
eviction of the gypsies, which he would then recite. “Alice Brand,” the
“Sair Field o’ Harlaw,” which old Elspeth sings to the children in _The
Antiquary_, and “Helvellyn” were again and again repeated to us with
pleasure on both sides. With special affection in later years when we
walked in Walden woods he would croon the lines from “The Dying Bard,”—

    “Dinas Emlinn, lament, for the moment is nigh,
    When mute in the woodlands thine echoes shall die.”

Perhaps he had foreboding for his loved woods, beginning to be desecrated
with rude city picnics, and since burned over repeatedly by the fires
from the railroad,—

    “When half of their charms with Cadwallon shall die.”

Of this poem he wrote in the journal of 1845:—

“‘Dinas Emlinn’ of Scott, like his ‘Helvellyn,’ shows how near to a poet
he was. All the Birmingham part he had, and what taste and sense! Yet
never rose into the creative region. As a practitioner or professional
poet he is unrivalled in modern times.” Yet he immediately adds, “In
lectures on Poetry almost all Scott would be to be produced.”

[214] _Page 463, note 1._ Mr. Emerson took especial pleasure in the
passage in the _Lord of the Isles_ where the old abbot, rising to
denounce excommunicated Bruce to his foes, is inspired against his will
to bless him and prophesy his triumph as Scotland’s deliverer.

Mr. Emerson, writing in his journal in 1842 of his impatience of
superficial city life, during a visit to New York, alludes to the renewed
comfort he had in the _Lord of the Isles_:

“Life goes headlong. Each of us is always to be found hurrying headlong
in the chase of some fact, hunted by some fear or command behind us.
Suddenly we meet a friend. We pause. Our hurry and _empressement_ look
ridiculous.... When I read the _Lord of the Isles_ last week at Staten
Island, and when I meet my friend, I have the same feeling of shame at
having allowed myself to be a mere huntsman and follower.”

His boyish love for the _Lay of the Last Minstrel_ remained through life.
As we walked on Sunday afternoons he recited to his children the stanzas
about “the custom of Branksome Hall,” and the passage where the Ladye of
Branksome defies the spirits of the flood and fell; and the bleak mile of
road between Walden woods and home would often call out from him

    “The way was long, the wind was cold,
    The Minstrel was infirm and old,” etc.

[215] _Page 465, note 1._ The _Bride of Lammermoor_ was the only dreary
tale that Mr. Emerson could abide, except _Griselda_.

Journal, 1856. “Eugène Sue, Dumas, etc., when they begin a story, do
not know how it will end, but Walter Scott, when he began the _Bride of
Lammermoor_, had no choice; nor Shakspeare, nor Macbeth.”

[216] _Page 467, note 1._ Journal. “We talked of Scott. There is some
greatness in defying posterity and writing for the hour.”


SPEECH AT THE BANQUET IN HONOR OF THE CHINESE EMBASSY

When the Chinese Embassy visited Boston in the summer of 1868 a banquet
was given them at the St. James Hotel, on August 21. The young Emerson,
sounding an early note of independence of the past, had written in 1824:—

    I laugh at those who, while they gape and gaze,
    The bald antiquity of China praise;—

but later he learned to revere the wisdom of Asia. About the time when
the _Dial_ appeared, many sentences of Chinese wisdom are found in his
journal, and also in the magazine among the “Ethnical Scriptures.”


REMARKS AT THE ORGANIZATION OF THE FREE RELIGIOUS ASSOCIATION

In the spring of 1867, a call for a public meeting was issued by
Octavius B. Frothingham, William J. Potter and Rowland Connor “to
consider the conditions, wants and progress of Free Religion in America.”
The response was so large as to surprise the committee, and Horticultural
Hall was completely filled on May 30. Rev. Octavius B. Frothingham
presided. The committee had invited as speakers the Rev. H. Blanchard
of Brooklyn from the Universalists, Lucretia Mott from the Society of
Friends, Robert Dale Owen from the Spiritualists, the Rev. John Weiss
from the Left Wing of the Unitarians, Oliver Johnson from the Progressive
Friends, Francis E. Abbot, editor of the _Index_; and also David A.
Wasson, Colonel T. W. Higginson and Mr. Emerson. The meeting was very
successful and the Free Religious Association was founded.

Mr. Emerson’s genial and affirmative attitude at this meeting was helpful
and important. He wished the new movement to be neither aggressive
towards the beliefs of others, nor merely a religion of works, purely
beneficently utilitarian. Doubtless there were many young and active
radicals strong for destructive criticism. Mr. Emerson wished to see that
in their zeal to destroy the dry husk of religion they should not bruise
the white flower within. His counsel to young men was, “Omit all negative
propositions. It will save ninety-nine one hundredths of your labor, and
increase the value of your work in the same measure.”

[217] _Page 479, note 1._ In the journal of 1837 he said, “Why rake
up old manuscripts to find therein a man’s soul? You do not look for
conversation in a corpse.” And elsewhere, “In religion the sentiment is
all, the ritual or ceremony indifferent.”


SPEECH AT THE SECOND ANNUAL MEETING OF THE FREE RELIGIOUS ASSOCIATION

[218] _Page 486, note 1._ Mrs. Julia Ward Howe writes of Mr. Emerson,—

“He knew from the first the victory of good over evil; and when he told
me, to my childish amazement, that the angel must always be stronger than
the demon, he gave utterance to a thought most familiar to him, though at
the time new to me.”[L]

[219] _Page 488, note 1._ In the essay on Character (_Lectures and
Biographical Sketches_), he says, “The establishment of Christianity
in the world does not rest on any miracle but the miracle of being the
broadest and most humane doctrine.”

“The word Miracle, as pronounced by Christian churches, gives a false
impression; it is Monster. It is not one with the blowing clover and the
falling rain.”—“Address in Divinity College,” _Nature, Addresses and
Lectures_.

[220] _Page 490, note 1._ Mr. Emerson’s doctrine was not to attack
beliefs, but give better: “True genius will not impoverish, but will
liberate.” In a letter to one of his best friends who had joined the
Church of Rome he said, perhaps in 1858: “To old eyes how supremely
unimportant the form under which we celebrate the justice, love and
truth, the attributes of the deity and the soul!”

[221] _Page 491, note 1._ Dr. Holmes, in his tribute to his friend, after
his death, read before the Massachusetts Historical Society, said:—

“What could we do with this unexpected, unprovided for, unclassified,
half unwelcome newcomer, who had been for a while potted, as it were, in
our Unitarian cold greenhouse, but had taken to growing so fast that he
was lifting off its glass roof and letting in the hail-storms? Here was a
protest that outflanked the extreme left of liberalism, yet so calm and
serene that its radicalism had the accents of the gospel of peace. Here
was an iconoclast without a hammer, who took down our idols from their
pedestals so tenderly that it seemed like an act of worship.”


ADDRESS AT THE OPENING OF THE CONCORD FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY

The Town of Concord, in the year 1782, chose a committee of ten leading
citizens to give instructions to its selectmen. The third of the
seventeen articles proposed by them read thus: “That care be taken
of the Books of Marters and other bookes, and that they be kept from
abusive usage, and not lent to persons more than one month at one
time.” This indicates the root of a town library. A constitution of a
Library Company, dated 1784, is extant. In 1806 a Social Library was
incorporated, which was merged in the Town Library in 1851. The books
were kept in a room in the Town House which was open for borrowers on
Saturdays.

William Munroe, son of a Concord tradesman who vied with the Thoreaus in
the manufacture of lead pencils, after leaving the Concord schools went
into business, and later into the manufacture of silk. His intelligence
and force of character secured prosperity. He loved Concord, and, to use
his own words, “desired to testify my regard to my native town by doing
something to promote the education and intelligence, and thus the welfare
and prosperity of its people.” He gave to Concord a lot of land in the
heart of the town and a building for a Free Public Library, which, with
great care and thoroughness, he had built thereon and duly furnished;
and made handsome provision for care of the land and the extension of
the building later. He added a generous gift for books of reference and
standard works. The town thankfully accepted the gift, placed their books
in it, and chose their library committee. On a fine autumn day in 1873,
the library was opened with public ceremonies. Mr. Munroe in a short
and modest speech explained his purpose; Mr. H. F. Smith, on behalf of
the new library committee, reported its action and the gifts which had
poured in; Judge Hoar received the property on behalf of the Board of
Corporation, and Mr. Emerson, but lately returned with improved health
from his journey to the Nile, made the short address. Writing was now
very difficult for him, but the occasion pleased and moved him, and his
