XXVI

SPEECH

AT BANQUET IN HONOR OF THE CHINESE EMBASSY BOSTON, 1860

    Nature creates in the East the uncontrollable yearning to
    escape from limitation into the vast and boundless, to use a
    freedom of fancy which plays with all works of Nature, great
    or minute, galaxy or grain of dust, as toys and words of
    the mind; inculcates a beatitude to be found in escape from
    all organization and all personality, and makes ecstasy an
    institution.


SPEECH

AT THE BANQUET IN HONOR OF THE CHINESE EMBASSY

MR. MAYOR: I suppose we are all of one opinion on this remarkable
occasion of meeting the embassy sent from the oldest Empire in the world
to the youngest Republic. All share the surprise and pleasure when
the venerable Oriental dynasty—hitherto a romantic legend to most of
us—suddenly steps into the fellowship of nations. This auspicious event,
considered in connection with the late innovations in Japan, marks a new
era, and is an irresistible result of the science which has given us the
power of steam and the electric telegraph. It is the more welcome for the
surprise. We had said of China, as the old prophet said of Egypt, “Her
strength is to sit still.” Her people had such elemental conservatism
that by some wonderful force of race and national manners, the wars and
revolutions that occur in her annals have proved but momentary swells
or surges on the pacific ocean of her history, leaving no trace. But in
its immovability this race has claims. China is old, not in time only,
but in wisdom, which is gray hair to a nation,—or, rather, truly seen,
is eternal youth. As we know, China had the magnet centuries before
Europe; and block-printing or stereotype, and lithography, and gunpowder,
and vaccination, and canals; had anticipated Linnæus’s nomenclature
of plants; had codes, journals, clubs, hackney coaches, and, thirty
centuries before New York, had the custom of New Year’s calls of comity
and reconciliation. I need not mention its useful arts,—its pottery
indispensable to the world, the luxury of silks, and its tea, the cordial
of nations. But I must remember that she has respectable remains of
astronomic science, and historic records of forgotten time, that have
supplied important gaps in the ancient history of the western nations.
Then she has philosophers who cannot be spared. Confucius has not yet
gathered all his fame. When Socrates heard that the oracle declared that
he was the wisest of men, he said, it must mean that other men held that
they were wise, but that he knew that he knew nothing. Confucius had
already affirmed this of himself: and what we call the GOLDEN RULE OF
JESUS, Confucius had uttered in the same terms five hundred years before.
His morals, though addressed to a state of society unlike ours, we read
with profit to-day. His rare perception appears in his GOLDEN MEAN, his
doctrine of Reciprocity, his unerring insight,—putting always the blame
of our misfortunes on ourselves; as when to the governor who complained
of thieves, he said, “If you, sir, were not covetous, though you should
reward them for it, they would not steal.” His ideal of greatness
predicts Marcus Antoninus. At the same time, he abstained from paradox,
and met the ingrained prudence of his nation by saying always, “Bend one
cubit to straighten eight.”

China interests us at this moment in a point of politics. I am sure that
gentlemen around me bear in mind the bill which the Hon. Mr. Jenckes of
Rhode Island has twice attempted to carry through Congress, requiring
that candidates for public offices shall first pass examinations on their
literary qualifications for the same. Well, China has preceded us, as
well as England and France, in this essential correction of a reckless
usage; and the like high esteem of education appears in China in social
life, to whose distinctions it is made an indispensable passport.

It is gratifying to know that the advantages of the new intercourse
between the two countries are daily manifest on the Pacific coast. The
immigrants from Asia come in crowds. Their power of continuous labor,
their versatility in adapting themselves to new conditions, their stoical
economy, are unlooked-for virtues. They send back to their friends, in
China, money, new products of art, new tools, machinery, new foods, etc.,
and are thus establishing a commerce without limit. I cannot help adding,
after what I have heard to-night, that I have read in the journals a
statement from an English source, that Sir Frederic Bruce attributed to
Mr. Burlingame the merit of the happy reform in the relations of foreign
governments to China. I am quite sure that I heard from Mr. Burlingame
in New York, in his last visit to America, that the whole merit of it
belonged to Sir Frederic Bruce. It appears that the ambassadors were
emulous in their magnanimity. It is certainly the best guaranty for the
interests of China and of humanity.




XXVII

REMARKS

AT THE MEETING FOR ORGANIZING THE FREE RELIGIOUS ASSOCIATION, BOSTON MAY
30, 1867

    In many forms we try
    To utter God’s infinity,
    But the Boundless hath no form,
    And the Universal Friend
    Doth as far transcend
    An angel as a worm.

    The great Idea baffles wit,
    Language falters under it,
    It leaves the learned in the lurch;
    Nor art, nor power, nor toil can find
    The measure of the eternal Mind,
    Nor hymn nor prayer nor church.


REMARKS

AT THE MEETING FOR ORGANIZING THE FREE RELIGIOUS ASSOCIATION

MR. CHAIRMAN: I hardly felt, in finding this house this morning, that I
had come into the right hall. I came, as I supposed myself summoned, to a
little committee meeting, for some practical end, where I should happily
and humbly learn my lesson; and I supposed myself no longer subject to
your call when I saw this house. I have listened with great pleasure to
the lessons which we have heard. To many, to those last spoken, I have
found so much in accord with my own thought that I have little left to
say. I think that it does great honor to the sensibility of the committee
that they have felt the universal demand in the community for just the
movement they have begun. I say again, in the phrase used by my friend,
that we began many years ago,—yes, and many ages before that. But I think
the necessity very great, and it has prompted an equal magnanimity, that
thus invites all classes, all religious men, whatever their connections,
whatever their specialties, in whatever relation they stand to the
Christian Church, to unite in a movement of benefit to men, under the
sanction of religion. We are all very sensible—it is forced on us every
day—of the feeling that churches are outgrown; that the creeds are
outgrown; that a technical theology no longer suits us. It is not the ill
will of people—no, indeed, but the incapacity for confining themselves
there. The church is not large enough for the man; it cannot inspire
the enthusiasm which is the parent of everything good in history, which
makes the romance of history. For that enthusiasm you must have something
greater than yourselves, and not less.

The child, the young student, finds scope in his mathematics and
chemistry or natural history, because he finds a truth larger than he is;
finds himself continually instructed. But, in churches, every healthy and
thoughtful mind finds itself in something less; it is checked, cribbed,
confined. And the statistics of the American, the English and the German
cities, showing that the mass of the population is leaving off going to
church, indicate the necessity, which should have been foreseen, that
the Church should always be new and extemporized, because it is eternal
and springs from the sentiment of men, or it does not exist.[217] One
wonders sometimes that the churches still retain so many votaries, when
he reads the histories of the Church. There is an element of childish
infatuation in them which does not exalt our respect for man. Read in
Michelet, that in Europe, for twelve or fourteen centuries, God the
Father had no temple and no altar. The Holy Ghost and the Son of Mary
were worshipped, and in the thirteenth century the First Person began to
appear at the side of his Son, in pictures and in sculpture, for worship,
but only through favor of his Son. These mortifying puerilities abound
in religious history. But as soon as every man is apprised of the Divine
Presence within his own mind,—is apprised that the perfect law of duty
corresponds with the laws of chemistry, of vegetation, of astronomy, as
face to face in a glass; that the basis of duty, the order of society,
the power of character, the wealth of culture, the perfection of taste,
all draw their essence from this moral sentiment, then we have a religion
that exalts, that commands all the social and all the private action.

What strikes me in the sudden movement which brings together to-day
so many separated friends,—separated but sympathetic,—and what I
expected to find here, was some practical suggestions by which we were
to reanimate and reorganize for ourselves the true Church, the pure
worship. Pure doctrine always bears fruit in pure benefits. It is only
by good works, it is only on the basis of active duty, that worship
finds expression. What is best in the ancient religions was the sacred
friendships between heroes, the Sacred Bands, and the relations of the
Pythagorean disciples. Our Masonic institutions probably grew from the
like origin. The close association which bound the first disciples of
Jesus is another example; and it were easy to find more. The soul of
our late war, which will always be remembered as dignifying it, was,
first, the desire to abolish slavery in this country, and secondly,
to abolish the mischief of the war itself, by healing and saving the
sick and wounded soldiers,—and this by the sacred bands of the Sanitary
Commission. I wish that the various beneficent institutions which are
springing up, like joyful plants of wholesomeness, all over this country,
should all be remembered as within the sphere of this committee,—almost
all of them are represented here,—and that within this little band that
has gathered here to-day, should grow friendship. The interests that
grow out of a meeting like this should bind us with new strength to the
old eternal duties.




