CHAPTER XIII.

ON MODERATION IN MAKING CAPTURES IN WAR.

  Effects belonging to the subjects of an enemy, and taken detained
    as a pledge or debt--Not to be taken by way of punishment for
    another's offence--The debt or obligation, arising from a state of
    war, illustrated by examples--Forbearance in the exercise of such a
    right from principles of humanity.


I. The capture of an enemy's goods, even in JUST WAR, is not, in ALL
CASES, perfectly justifiable, nor is the captor always exempt from the
ties of restitution. For strictly speaking, according to the rules of
pure justice, it is not lawful to seize or detain goods except to the
exact amount of the debt which the enemy has incurred. Indeed goods may
be detained beyond that, as a necessary pledge of security, but still
upon the condition of being restored, as soon as the danger has ceased:
RESTORED EITHER LITERALLY, OR BY SOME PROPER COMPENSATION BEING MADE.

Here then is a right of capture, which confers no right of property or
acquisition. But when any thing may become due to us, either from a
penalty or the non-performance of an engagement, in both cases a right
to an enemy's goods, if they can be taken, is acquired. By the latter
kind of debt not only the effects of the debtor himself, but those,
belonging to his subjects, may according to the principles introduced
by the law of nations be taken as a security.

This right of the law of nations is very different from that
established in impunity alone, or depending upon the external force
of judicial authority. For as by our private consent the person with
whom we contract acquires not only an external and legal right over
our property, but an internal right, proceeding from conscience, so he
acquires the same right by a kind of common consent, which virtually
comprehends the consent of individuals, in which sense the law is
called the common compact or covenant of the state.

And in transactions of this kind it is most likely that nations
approving of such a rule, introduced a law, which might not only
prevent greater evils, but also enable every one to attain his own
right.

II. But in the other kind of debt arising from penalty, or punishment,
it does not appear, that nations consented to the establishment of
any such right over the effects of subjects. For binding the property
of one man for the offence of another is a kind of odious act, and
therefore ought not to be extended farther than the law appears to have
actually decreed. Nor is the advantage derived from the latter, by any
means equal to that attending the former kind of debt. For what is due
to us from damage, or the non-performance of a treaty may be considered
as a part of our effects, but it is not so with the obligation to
punishment, which is purely of a personal nature, therefore no loss is
incurred by relinquishing this right.

Nor is the argument in the least weakened by what was said before[68]
respecting the Athenian law. For there it was maintained that subjects
were not bound to suffer, because the state was amenable to punishment,
but in order to compel the state to do what she ought to do, in
bringing the guilty to punishment: a debt arising from duty, and
relating to obligations of the former kind, rather than to those of
the latter. For there is a difference between being obliged to punish
another and being one's self amenable to punishment: tho' the latter
may frequently arise from the neglect of doing the former, but still
there is the same distinction between them, as between cause and effect.

The goods of subjects can only be taken by way of reprisal in return
for other goods taken by the enemy; but they can never be taken as
a punishment for the neglect of bringing offenders to justice. The
delinquents themselves, in the number of whom may be reckoned those,
who have neglected to discharge their duty in this respect, must answer
for such offences.

III. The goods of subjects may be taken, and a property acquired
therein, not only in order to obtain payment of the ORIGINAL debt,
which occasioned the war, but of OTHER debts also, to which the same
war may have given birth. And in this sense the words of those are
to be taken, who maintain, that captures in war are not a perfect
compensation for the principal debt, but only used as a means to
enforce satisfaction for the damages sustained from aggressions.
Thus the Romans, in their dispute with Antiochus, as related by Livy,
thought it but right for that king to make reparation for all the
expenses incurred in the war, which he had occasioned. Indeed any
terms, that may be justly imposed upon the conquered may justly be
enforced by war.

IV. The right of seizing the goods of the innocent subject of an
enemy seems to have been introduced, in order to compel the original
aggressor, or debtor to grant redress for the injury he had done: and
although his falling on the innocent may be no way repugnant to what is
legally right, it is in some measure a departure from the principles
of humanity. On the other hand, history, especially the Roman history,
abounds in examples of humanity, where lands have been restored to a
conquered enemy, upon condition of their belonging to the STATE, and
becoming subject to the payment of a tribute.




CHAPTER XV.[69]

ON MODERATION IN ACQUIRING DOMINION.

  How far internal justice permits us to acquire dominion--Moderation,
    in the use of this right over the conquered,
    laudable--Incorporating them with the conquerors--Allowing them
    to retain their dominions--Placing garrisons therein--Imposing
    tributes or other burdens--Utility of such moderation--Change in
    the form of a conquered government--The conquered permitted to
    retain some part of their former liberties--Especially in matters
    of religion--Clemency to be shewn.


I. That equity and moderation towards individuals, which are so highly
extolled, are still more deserving of admiration, when exercised
towards nations and kingdoms; where injustice would be attended with
more signal calamities, and moderation with more beneficial effects.

In just war the right of dominion over a people, and the sovereign
power, which that people possess, may be acquired as well as any
other right. But the claims to such a right ought by no means to be
prosecuted beyond indemnity for aggression, and security against future
evils.

But this motive, so necessary to be observed, especially in all
treaties of peace, as well as in the use of victory, is often
confounded with others. In other points a sovereign prince or state may
relinquish a claim from a principle of moderation, but where the future
security of their subjects is concerned, it is an act of cruelty rather
than of moderation to relax too far in favour of a conquered enemy.

II. Aristotle has, more than once, said, that war is undertaken for
the sake of peace, and toil endured in order to obtain rest. And in
the same manner, Cicero has observed, that men go to war, that they
may live in peace without molestation and injury. War too, as we are
instructed by the teachers of true religion, may be made, to remove
every thing that interrupts, and stands in the way of peace.

In the primitive ages, as we find from history, wars in general were
made to preserve territories rather than to extend them. And any
deviation from this rule was thought unlawful: thus the prophet Amos
reproves the Ammonites for their love of making conquests.

III. The prudent moderation of the ancient Romans approaches nearly to
this model of primitive innocence. For although they made conquests,
they mitigated the fate of the conquered by incorporating them with
themselves.

IV. Another mark of moderation in the use of victory is leaving to
conquered kings, or nations the dominions, which they LAWFULLY held
before.

Polybius highly extols the merit and wisdom of Antigonus, who, having
Sparta in his power, allowed the inhabitants to retain their national
polity and freedom.

V. Sometimes indeed a conqueror, though allowing a subjugated people
to retain their dominion and sovereignty, must provide for his own
security, by placing garrisons in their country.

VI. Contributions too are frequently imposed and levied, not so much
by way of indemnity for expences incurred, as for a future security
between the conqueror, and the conquered country. Upon the same
principle, as was before[70] observed, in explaining the nature of
unequal treaties, conditions may be imposed also requiring a conquered
power to deliver up a certain number of her ships and forts, and to
reduce her troops to a limited number.

VII. But leaving to conquered powers a part or the whole of their
dominions is not only sometimes an act of justice and humanity, but
an act of sound policy also. Among other of Numa's institutions, his
manner of celebrating the rites of TERMINUS, the DEITY OF BOUNDARIES,
is much commended; for he prohibited the use of blood in those
ceremonies, as an intimation that nothing was more conducive to the
peace and harmony of the world, than for every nation to confine
herself within her proper bounds.

In conformity to which maxim Florus observes, that it is more easy to
make conquests than to keep them. To which rule Plato, in his third
book of Laws, adapts the proverbial expression of Hesiod, that HALF IS
BETTER THAN THE WHOLE.

VIII. The Lacedaemonians and the Athenians anciently claimed no farther
dominion over conquered cities and states, than purely wishing them to
adopt forms of government like their own, the Lacedaemonians living
under an aristocratic, and the Athenians under a democratic system. But
whether such changes were conducive to a conqueror's security, it is
not to our present purpose to examine.

IX. If it is not perfectly safe to forbear exercising ANY dominion over
a conquered enemy, the matter may be so regulated as to leave him some
portion of his former sovereignty and power. Thus among the Jews the
sceptre remained with the Sanhedrim, even after Archelaus was deprived
of his kingdom; and Alexander in many cases allowed Darius to remain a
sovereign over others, while he required of him submission to himself.

X. Even though a conquered power was deprived of all sovereignty,
she might be allowed to retain some of her laws, privileges, and
magistracies of inferior importance. Thus, Pliny, in his letters,
informs us, that in the proconsular province of Bithynia, the city of
Apamaea was allowed to regulate the form of her government at her own
pleasure, and, in other places, the Bithynians were permitted to retain
their own magistrates, and their own senate.

XI. This indulgence ought to be shewn to every people, especially in
their attachment to the religion of their forefathers, of which they
should never be deprived but with their own consent and conviction. An
indulgence, which Agrippa in his address to Caius, as cited by Philo
in the account of his embassy, approves of, as highly grateful to the
conquered people, and by no means prejudicial to the conqueror. At the
same time a conqueror will take care that erroneous opinions do not
prevail to the prejudice and overthrow of true religion, as was done by
Constantine upon his crushing the party of Licinius, and afterwards by
the Franks and other kings.




