
Transcriber's notes:


Several chapters were omitted from the English translation of which
this is a transcription. The reasons for this are given in the
footnotes.

Words originally printed in Greek are shown that way in some versions
of this eBook. English transliterations were added to all versions by
the Transcribers and are enclosed in {curly braces}.

Other notes will be found at the end of this eBook.




[Illustration]

    UNIVERSAL
    CLASSICS
    LIBRARY

    EDITOR'S
    AUTOGRAPH EDITION

    ATTEST:

    Robert Arnot
        MANAGING EDITOR




[Illustration]

    UNIVERSAL CLASSICS
    LIBRARY

    ILLUSTRATED
    WITH PHOTOGRAVURES
    ON JAPAN VELLUM
    HAND PAINTED
    REPRODUCTIONS
    AND FULL PAGE
    PORTRAITS
    OF
    AUTHORS

    M. WALTER DUNNE
    PUBLISHER
    NEW YORK AND LONDON




    COPYRIGHT, 1901,
    BY
    M. WALTER DUNNE,
    PUBLISHER




GENERAL PREFACE


[Illustration]

Of the Library of Universal Classics and Rare Manuscripts, twenty
volumes are devoted to the various branches of Government, Philosophy,
Law, Ethics, English and French Belles Lettres, Hebraic, Ottoman, and
Arabian Literature, and one to a collection of 150 reproductions,
bound in English vellum, of the autographs, papers and letters of
Rulers, Statesmen, Poets, Artists and Celebrities ranging through
three centuries, crowned by an illuminated facsimile of that historic
Document, the Magna Carta.

The series in itself is an epitome of the best in History, Philosophy
and Literature. The great writers of past ages are accessible to
readers in general solely through translations. It was, therefore,
necessary that translations of such rare Classics as are embodied
in this series should be of the best, and should possess exactitude
in text and supreme faithfulness in rendering the author's thought.
Under the vigilant scholarship of the Editorial Council this has been
accomplished with unvarying excellence. The classification, selection
and editing of the various volumes have been the subject of much
earnest thought and consultation on the part of more than twenty of the
best known scholars of the day.

The Universities of Yale, Washington, Cornell, Chicago, Pennsylvania,
Columbia, London, Toronto and Edinburgh are all represented among
the contributors, the writers of special introductions, or upon
the consulting staff, the latter including the Presidents of five
of the Universities mentioned. Among others who contribute special
essays upon given subjects may be mentioned the late Librarian of
the British Museum, Dr. Richard Garnett, who furnishes the essay
introducing "Evelyn's Diary." From the Librarian of the National
Library of France, Léon Vallée, comes the fascinating introduction
to the celebrated "Memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon." The scholarly
minister to Switzerland (late First Assistant Secretary of State), Dr.
David J. Hill, lent his wide reading to the brilliant and luminous
essay that precedes the "Rights of War and Peace." The resources of the
Congressional Library at Washington, as well as of foreign libraries,
have all been drawn upon in the gigantic task of compressing into the
somewhat narrow limits of twenty volumes all that was highest, best,
most enduring and useful in the various ramifications of literature at
large.

The first section of the Library is devoted entirely to the manuscript
reproductions of the autographs of celebrated men in all ranks and
phases of life, covering a period of three centuries. They are, in
fact, the American edition of the reproduction of rare and celebrated
autographs drawn from the British Museum that was issued in England
under the editorship of the Assistant Keeper of the Manuscripts. They
afford an opportunity to the inquiring reader to study the characters
of Rulers, Statesmen, Writers, and Artists through the medium of their
chirography.

It has long been recognized that character is traceable through
handwriting. So it is interesting to discern in the characters traced
by Henry VIII the hardened, sensual and selfish character of that
autocrat and polygamist; in the writing of Thomas Wolsey, those crafty
traits combined with perseverance and mock humility which raised him
wellnigh to supremacy in the realm and led him finally to a downfall
more complete than any we read of in English history; and in that of
Charles V, of Spain, the hard-headed continence of character and superb
common sense which enabled him at the height of glory to retire to a
monastery while yet there was "daylight in life," as he expressed it,
"for the making of his soul." Apart from the historical interest of
these Documents, this study of character as revealed in them will prove
fascinating to thinking minds.

The Magna Carta, greatest of all historical charters wrung from the
various kings of England from Henry I downward, was granted by King
John at the pressing instance of the Barons and Commons of England
toward the end of his ill-judged and unfortunate reign. Of this
Document, celebrated and historic as it is, but little is known at
large. Although Blackstone and other prominent lawyers have written
upon it, information about it is hard to obtain. No reproduction of
the original Document has ever been offered to American collectors.
This facsimile is illuminated in colors with the shields of many of the
Peers who compelled King John to accede to their demands for civil and
religious liberty. The original charter was signed at a place called
Runnymede (the Council Meadow) a spot between Windsor and Staines,
on the 15th of June, 1215, about a year before the death of John.
It practically guaranteed to the Commons of England all the civil
and religious rights they enjoy to-day. It dealt with testamentary
law as well, securing to widows all the legal rights which they
to-day possess. It dealt with the rights of accused persons; with
military service; with feudal tenure; with taxation, and it limited
the heretofore autocratic power of the King to an extent unknown
before in the history of the world. If we except the Declaration of
Independence, it is the most interesting historical record of all time.

The Second Section of the Library (ten volumes) is devoted to the
presentation of Government, Philosophy, Law and Ethics. This section
embraces such names as Grotius, Plato, Sir George Cornewall Lewis, Adam
Smith, Hamilton, Madison, Jay, Walter Bagehot, Spinoza, Schopenhauer,
Machiavelli, as well as those builders of Ideal Governments, More,
Bacon, Campanella and Rousseau.

Of all benefactors in Literature of the human race, Grotius may
perhaps rank as first among his equals. Centuries have borne witness
to the justness of his premises and the wisdom of his conclusions. The
principles of national law laid down by him are to-day accepted as the
axioms of the Science. Among the nations, perhaps the United States is
most deeply interested in the right administration of the principles
affirmed by Grotius in his gigantic work on the "Rights of War and
Peace," and it was therefore most fitting, when the recent peace
conference at The Hague completed the great structure of international
comity, the foundations of which were laid by Grotius in 1625, that a
silver wreath was laid by the representative of the United States upon
the grave of the man to whom the Conference owed its initial impulse,
although at a distance in time of nearly three centuries.

When the Publisher determined, under the advice of his Editorial
Council, to publish Grotius, he found that only two volumes of the
first edition were available in the Library of Congress. At much
expense and trouble, he instituted a search in Europe and finally
obtained the missing volume, which he presented to the Congressional
Library, where it now is.

Sir George Cornewall Lewis's "Government of Dependencies" is
characterized by the accuracy of its information. It is a reliable
text book for the guidance of any nation in the treatment of its
dependencies and colonies. It is a Classic that will survive as long
as colonization remains to be done, and it is remarkable that although
it was published for the first time sixty years ago, the illustrations
afforded by the last two generations support the justice of its
principles and the exactness of its deductions.

Adam Smith's "Essay on Colonies" presents an introductory view of
the principles governing colonial policy. It is a fitting work to go
hand in hand with the greater one of Sir George Cornewall Lewis. It
is of practical use to American Statesmen, since the United States
seems at present to be entering upon a world-wide colonial policy. Its
practical wisdom, which has made it a Classic for all times, finds a
special applicability in the conditions of to-day, for Adam Smith was
a theorist in the best sense of the word, that is to say, he was a man
whose breadth of view, instead of unfitting him for practical details,
enabled him to deduce from the lessons of history and experience the
right solutions for the problems of Colonial policy.

Plato's "Republic" and "Statesman" must be regarded to-day not merely
as historical records of a by-gone philosophy, but as living, teaching
dissertations upon theories which cannot fail to awaken in studious
minds the highest ideals of life and government. Modern problems
stated in the light of Plato's philosophy, as it is expressed in
these books, will find readier solutions when examined in the light
of its principles. No student of sociology, of politics, national and
municipal, or of government in all its many-sided aspects, can afford
to be without a knowledge of these immortal discourses.

Goldwin Smith has declared that of all expositions of constitutional
Government, "The Federalist" ranks the highest. When Hamilton, Madison,
and Jay first conceived the idea of printing in the common tongue their
ideas upon the principles of free government, they unwittingly laid
the foundations of the best commentary on the principles of popular
government ever written. Political science owes to them the most
important contribution to its literature made since its birth. The
Essays are equally admirable for sagacity, simplicity, and patriotism,
and while The Federalist will never be read for pleasure, it contains a
mine of wisdom for the student and the constitutional lawyer, and as a
text book of political science is without a parallel.

When Bagehot issued his work on the English Constitution, it was hailed
by the critics as the most wonderful and philosophical dissertation on
the subject in any language or from any pen. John Stuart Mill used to
say that of all great subjects much remained to be written, and that
especially was this true of the English Constitution. Bagehot's work,
although affording the conclusion that monarchy in England exists as a
logical necessity, is so unbiased in its premises, so logical and clear
in its deductions, that this manifest fairness, although leading one to
conclusions distasteful to a republican mind, must endear him to his
readers. Dealing with a subject somewhat dry in its details, he invests
inanimate objects with so much light that they become realities. In the
highest sense he combines popularity and scholarship.

Spinoza's philosophy may be traced both to the influence of Bacon, his
predecessor, and to Descartes, his contemporary. Its combination of
positivism with the enthusiasm of piety characterizes his philosophy
as unique in itself, for while treating man from a purely mechanical
standpoint, it asserts that the mechanism itself is entirely divine.
Spinoza was a voluntary martyr in the cause of Free Thought. He was at
the same time both Pantheist and Monist, yet sincere in his devotion to
nature and the God of nature. His religion naturally made him a Monist,
while his philosophy led him to express the Pantheism that the lover of
God in Nature cannot avoid. While he renounced his Judaism and entered
the ranks of the Christian philosophers, he never received baptism. He
may be ranked among the greatest of the German mystics, whose work had
such profound influence upon the dogmatic Christianity of a later day.
The epithet conferred on him, namely, "God-intoxicated," summarizes
his whole attitude and the character of his philosophy better than any
lengthy dissertation.

When Schopenhauer began to write, he declared himself a true disciple
of Kant, but he modifies and adapts Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason"
to such an extent that he reaches the attitude of opposition. This
attitude he manifests throughout all his writings. He is truly an
Apostle of Protest, but in spite of his positivist contradictions
and his materialistic pantheism, he opens up a mine of suggestions
to the literary and philosophical student. In spite of the apparent
tragedy due to the conflict within him, we cannot help gathering from
Schopenhauer an immensity of what is true, what is good and what is
excellent. One thing especially noticeable about his writings is that
while German philosophers are often ponderous and in fact nebulous,
Schopenhauer is always clear, original, and readable.

To Machiavelli belongs by acclaim the honor of having written the
ideal biography of a State. His clear, straightforward, concise
statement of conditions and characters as he saw then is a model for
all writers of record. He was the first great Italian historian, and
no man has ever been more ardent in his patriotism or a more earnest
supporter of government for and by the people. The greatest tribute to
his inflexible honesty of character is the fact that while no man had
greater opportunities to enrich himself at the cost of the State, he
died leaving his family in the greatest poverty. His varied political
experience, and his assiduous study of classic writers, gave him the
ability as well as the desire to write the history of his native
State. Time has pronounced this History to be a classic worthy of
preservation, and the perspective of time has also enabled us to form a
juster and greater estimate of its author.

The Ideal Republics and Empires that have been constructed from time to
time by political dreamers have all the attractiveness of works like
Pilgrim's Progress or Gulliver's Travels, combined with a philosophy
and political insight that give them a double claim to be considered
Classics. Modern progress may be more deeply indebted than we can
estimate to the fantasies and airy castles of men like Rousseau, More,
and Campanella. The four Ideal Republics or Governments described in
this volume are perhaps the most famous of all, since they rank not
only as great creations of the imagination but as literature of the
highest class; and their writers have a further claim upon posterity
from the fact that they helped to make history.

The Third and concluding Section of the Library deals with that
tremendous range of world-wide literature which we call, for want of
a better name, Belles Lettres. Goethe contributes his brilliant and
sagacious observations on men and things as he communicated them to
Eckerman. Landor, of whom Swinburne has said that Milton alone stands
higher, both in prose and verse, furnishes us with his Classical
Conversations. Montesquieu and Goldsmith are drawn on for their
Persian and Chinese Letters. Lord Chesterfield gives us the irony and
hard-headed criticism combined with worldly common sense contained in
the Letters to His Son, and the various names best known in French
and English Belles Lettres yield what is greatest in them. Ottoman
Literature, comprising Arabian, Persian, and Hebraic Poems, affords
the reader an insight into the romantic and dramatic character of the
Oriental. The Dabistan, possibly the most extraordinary book ever
written in the East, finds itself at home in this section, while the
Literature of the Hebrews is ideally represented in that most wonderful
of all monuments of human wisdom, and perhaps folly, the "Talmud,"
together with the basis of modern metaphysics, the "Kabbala."

The Sufistic Quatrains of Omar Khayyam are here for the first time
presented complete in a collection of this order. The various editions
of Fitzgerald are reprinted, collated, and to them is added the
valuable Heron-Allen analysis of Fitzgerald's sources of inspiration.
The very rare Whinfield version is found here complete; and for the
first time in English appears M. Nicolas' French transcription of the
Teheran Manuscript. It is safe to say that any lover of Omar wishing to
add to his collection the versions here quoted would be compelled to
disburse more than one hundred times the amount this book will cost him.

While the Library of Universal Classics does not claim to be the
final condensation of the treasure houses of human philosophy and
lore, whether practical or ideal, it does most emphatically assert
its right to be called the most useful, most attractive, and most
representative selection, within the limits assigned to it, of those
world-masterpieces of literature which men, for lack of a more luminous
name, call Classics.

        Robert Arnot


[Illustration: _HUGO GROTIUS_

_From an Original Painting._]




[Illustration]

    THE RIGHTS OF
    WAR AND PEACE

    INCLUDING THE
    LAW OF NATURE
    AND OF NATIONS

    TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN OF

    GROTIUS

    WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS FROM
    POLITICAL AND LEGAL WRITERS

    BY
    A. C. CAMPBELL, A. M.

    WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
    DAVID J. Hill,
    Assistant Secretary of State of the United States


    M. WALTER DUNNE, PUBLISHER
    NEW YORK & LONDON




    COPYRIGHT, 1901,
    BY
    M. WALTER DUNNE,
    PUBLISHER




ILLUSTRATIONS


  HUGO GROTIUS                                            _Frontispiece_
      From an original painting.

  WAR                                                                109
      By Gari Melchers,
          From a panel painting in Library of Congress.

  PEACE                                                              213
      By Gari Melchers,
          From a panel painting in Library of Congress.

  WAR AND PEACE                                                      307
      Frontispiece to a rare edition of Grotius.




CONTENTS


         _BOOK I._

  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

         Introduction                                                  1

      I. On War and Right                                             17

     II. Inquiry into the Lawfulness of War                           31

    III. The Division of War into Public and Private, and the
           Nature of Sovereign Power                                  55


         _BOOK II._

      I. Defense of Person and Property                               73

     II. The General Rights of Things                                 85

    III. On the Original Acquisition of Things, and the Right of
           Property in Seas and Rivers                               103

     IV. Title to Desert Lands by Occupancy, Possession, and
           Prescription                                              109

     IX. In What Cases Jurisdiction and Property Cease               117

      X. The Obligation Arising from Property                        123

     XI. On Promises                                                 131

    XII. On Contracts                                                144

   XIII. On Oaths                                                    160

     XV. On Treaties and on Engagements Made by Delegates
           Exceeding Their Powers                                    166

    XVI. The Interpretation of Treaties                              176

   XVII. On Damages Occasioned by Injury, and the Obligation to
           Repair Them                                               195

  XVIII. On the Rights of Embassies                                  202

    XIX. On the Right of Burial                                      213

     XX. On Punishments                                              220

    XXI. On the Communication of Punishment                          256

   XXII. On the Unjust Causes of War                                 267

  XXIII. On Doubtful Causes                                          274

   XXIV. Precautions against Rashly Engaging in War, Even upon
           Just Grounds                                              280


         _BOOK III._

      I. What Is Lawful in War                                       290

     II. In What Manner the Law of Nations Renders the Property of
           Subjects Answerable for the Debts of Sovereigns. The
           Nature of Reprisals                                       307

    III. On Just or Solemn War According to the Law of Nations on
           Declarations of War                                       314

     IV. On the Right of Killing an Enemy in Lawful War and
           Committing Other Acts of Hostility                        323

      V. On the Right to Lay Waste an Enemy's Country and Carry Off
           His Effects                                               332

     VI. On the Acquisition of Territory and Property by Right of
           Conquest                                                  334

    VII. On the Right over Prisoners of War                          345

   VIII. On Empire over the Conquered                                348

     IX. Of the Right of Postliminium                                351

     XI. The Right of Killing Enemies, in Just War, to be Tempered
           with Moderation and Humanity                              359

    XII. On Moderation in Despoiling an Enemy's Country              365

   XIII. On Moderation in Making Captures in War                     369

     XV. On Moderation in Acquiring Dominion                         372

    XVI. On Moderation with Respect to Things Excluded from the
           Right of Postliminium by the Law of Nations               375

   XVII. Respecting Those Who Are Neutral in War                     377

    XIX. On Good Faith between Enemies                               379

     XX. On the Public Faith by Which War Is Concluded; Comprising
           Treaties of Peace, and the Nature of Arbitration,
           Surrender, Hostages, Pledges                              385

    XXI. On Faith During the Continuance of War, on Truces,
           Safe-Conducts, and the Redemption of Prisoners            403

   XXII. On the Faith of Those Invested with Subordinate Powers
           in War                                                    411

   XXIV. On Tacit Faith                                              415

    XXV. Conclusion                                                  417


         INDEX                                                       419




INTRODUCTION

THE WORK AND INFLUENCE OF HUGO GROTIUS.


The claims of the great work of Grotius, "_De Jure Belli ac Pacis_,"
to be included in a list of Universal Classics, do not rest upon
the felicity of style usually expected in a classic composition.
His work is marked by frequent rhetorical deformities, tedious and
involved forms of reasoning, and perplexing obscurities of phraseology
which prevent its acceptance as an example of elegant writing.
Notwithstanding these external defects, it is, nevertheless, one of the
few notable works of genius which, among the labors of centuries, stand
forth as illustrations of human progress and constitute the precious
heritage of the human race.

If it is not literature in the technical sense, the masterpiece of
Grotius is something higher and nobler,--a triumph of intelligence
over irrational impulses and barbarous propensities. Its publication
marks an era in the history of nations, for out of the chaos of lawless
and unreasoning strife it created a system of illuminating principles
to light the way of sovereigns and peoples in the paths of peace and
general concord.


I. THE REIGN OF WAR.

The idea of peaceful equity among nations, now accepted as a human
ideal, though still far from realization, was for ages a difficult, if
not an impossible, conception. All experience spoke against it, for war
was the most familiar phenomenon of history.

Among the Greek city-states, a few temporary leagues and federations
were attempted, but so feeble were the bonds of peace, so explosive
were the passions which led to war, that even among the highly
civilized Hellenic peoples, community of race, language, and religion
was powerless to create a Greek nation. It was reserved for the
military genius of Alexander the Great, at last, by irresistible
conquest, to bring the Greek Empire into being, to be destroyed in turn
by superior force.

The Roman Empire almost achieved the complete political unity of
Europe, and bound parts of three continents under one rule, but the
corruption of the military power which held it together led to its
inevitable dismemberment.

After the conflicts of the barbaric kingdoms which followed the
dissolution of the Western Empire were ended by the predominance of the
Frankish monarchy, the world believed that the _Pax Romana_ was to be
restored in Europe by the hand of Charles the Great; but the disruptive
forces were destined to prevail once more, and the Holy Roman Empire
never succeeded in reviving the power of ancient Rome. And thus the
dream of a universal monarchy, of a central authority able to preside
over kings and princes, adjusting their difficulties, and preserving
the peace between them, was at last proved futile.

In each of the great national monarchies that had already risen or were
still rising on the ruins of imperial dominion, particularly in France,
England, Holland, and the States of Germany, a continuous internal
conflict over questions of religion complicated the bitterness and
destructiveness of foreign wars until Europe was reorganized by the
Peace of Westphalia, in 1648.

It was in the midst of these wars that Grotius was born. He saw his own
country rising from a baptism of blood and all Europe rent and torn by
the awful struggle of the Thirty Years' War, in the midst of which his
great work was written and to whose conclusion it served as a guide
and inspiration. The Empire, dismembered, had been reduced to almost
complete impotence, the Church had been disrupted, and no international
authority was anywhere visible. Amid the general wreck of institutions
Grotius sought for light and guidance in great principles. Looking
about him at the general havoc which war had made, the nations hostile,
the faith of ages shattered, the passions of men destroying the
commonwealths which nourished them, he saw that Europe possessed but
one common bond, one vestige of its former unity,--_the human mind_. To
this he made appeal and upon its deepest convictions he sought to plant
the Law of Nations.


II. THE PREDECESSORS OF GROTIUS.

It is historically accurate to say, that, until formulated by Grotius,
Europe possessed no system of international law. Others had preceded
him in touching upon certain aspects of the rights and duties of
nations, but none had produced a system comparable to his.

The earliest attempt to formulate recognized international customs
was the formation of the early maritime codes, rendered necessary by
the expansion of mediæval commerce from the end of the eleventh to
the end of the sixteenth century, such as the "_Jugemens d' Oléron_,"
adopted by the merchants of France, England, and Spain, and reissued
under other names for the merchants of The Netherlands and the Baltic.
"_The Consolato del Mare_," a more elaborate compilation, was made,
apparently at Barcelona, about the middle of the fourteenth century,
and accepted generally by the traders of the chief maritime powers. It
was in the cradle of commerce, therefore, that international law awoke
to consciousness.

As the Church was often intrusted with the task of pacification, it
is but natural to look among her representatives for the earliest
writers on the laws of international relations. It is, in fact, among
the theological moralists that we find the first students of this
subject. As early as 1564, a Spanish theologian, Vasquez, conceived
of a group of free states with reciprocal rights regulated by _jus
naturale et gentium_, without regard to a world-power, either imperial
or ecclesiastical. In 1612, Saurez pointed out that a kind of customary
law had arisen from the usages of nations, and distinctly described a
society of interdependent states bound by fundamental principles of
justice.

At the close of the fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth
centuries, a series of circumstances arose necessitating the extension
of jurisprudence beyond its ancient boundaries, and thus tending to
produce a group of international jurists. Among the juristic writers
of this time are Balthazar Ayala, a Spanish jurisconsult, who died in
1584, having written in a historico-judicial spirit on the subject
of war in his "_De Jure et Officiis Belli_"; Conrad Brunus, a German
jurist, who wrote of the rights and duties of ambassadors in his
"_De Legationibus_," published in 1548; and pre-eminent above all,
Albericus Gentilis, an Italian professor of jurisprudence and lecturer
at Oxford, a writer of force and originality, who published his "_De
Legationibus_" in 1583 and his "_De Jure Belli_" in 1589.


III. THE LIFE AND PERSONALITY OF GROTIUS.

HUGO GROTIUS, to use the Latin form of his name by which he is best
known, or Hugo de Groot as he is called in Holland, descended from a
race of scholars and magistrates, was born at Delft, on April 10th,
1583. His family history has been related with much detail by De
Burigny, in his "_Vie de Grotius_," published in French at Amsterdam
in 1754; and by Vorsterman van Oyen, in his "_Hugo de Groot en Zijn
Gesclacht_," a complete genealogy in Dutch, published at Amsterdam
in 1883, which gives the descendants of Grotius down to the present
generation. His origin is traced from a French gentleman, Jean Cornets,
who took up his residence in The Netherlands in 1402. His descendant,
Cornelius Cornets, married the daughter of a burgomaster of Delft on
condition that the future children of this marriage should bear the
name of their mother's family, in order to perpetuate the distinction
which it had achieved. The maternal name imposed by Cornelius Cornets's
Dutch father-in-law, Dirk van Kraayenburg de Groot, was de Groot,
meaning the Great, and is said to have been bestowed for signal
services rendered to his country by the first who had borne it four
hundred years before. From this marriage sprung a Hugo de Groot,
distinguished for his learning in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew and five
times burgomaster of his native city. His eldest son, Cornelius, was a
noted linguist and mathematician who studied law in France and received
high office in his own country, afterward becoming a professor of law
and many times rector of the University of Leyden. Another son, John
de Groot, the father of Hugo Grotius, studied there under the famous
Lipsius, who speaks of him with the highest commendation. Four times
burgomaster of Delft, John de Groot became curator of the University of
Leyden, a position which he filled with great dignity and honor.

In his earliest years the young Hugo gave evidence of marked and varied
ability. At eight he wrote Latin verses which betrayed poetic talent;
at twelve he entered the University where he became a pupil of that
prince of scholars, Joseph Scaliger, who directed his studies; and
at fifteen he defended "with the greatest applause" Latin theses in
philosophy and jurisprudence. His fame as a prodigy of diversified
learning spread far and wide, and great scholars declared they had
never seen his equal.

Grotius had won celebrity even in foreign lands when, in 1600, at the
age of seventeen, he was admitted to the bar. The youthful prodigy
had already accompanied the Grand Pensionary, John of Oldenbarneveld
on a special embassy to France, where he was presented to Henry IV,
who bestowed upon him his portrait together with a gold chain, and
graciously called him "The Miracle of Holland." At Orleans he was made
a Doctor of Laws.

Married in 1609 to Marie van Reigersberg, whose devotion was worthy of
his deep affection, and loaded with public honors, having been named
the official historian of the United Provinces and the advocate-general
of two provinces, Holland and Zeeland, Grotius set his hand to a work
entitled "_Mare Librum_," in which he defended the freedom of the sea
and the maritime rights of his country against the arrogant pretensions
of the Portuguese in suppressing the commerce of other nations in
Eastern waters,--a treatise destined to become still more celebrated in
the history of international law by Selden's reply, "_Mare Clausum_,"
written in 1635. Next, turning his attention to the history of The
Netherlands, he devoted himself for a time to his "Annals of the War of
Independence."

In 1613, Grotius added to his laurels as poet, jurist, and historian
by entering the field of politics, and he was appointed Pensionary of
Rotterdam upon the condition that he should continue in office during
his own pleasure. It was during a visit to England upon a diplomatic
mission in this same year that he met the great scholar Isaac Casaubon,
who said in a letter to Daniel Heinsius: "I cannot say how happy I
esteem myself in having seen so much of one so truly great as Grotius.
A wonderful man! This I knew him to be before I had seen him; but the
rare excellence of that divine genius no one can sufficiently feel who
does not see his face and hear him speak. Probity is stamped on all his
features."

Closely related by personal friendship as well as by his official
duties to the Grand Pensionary, John of Oldenbarneveld, Grotius was
destined to share with that unfortunate patriot the proscription and
punishment which Maurice of Orange visited upon the two confederates
in the defense of religious tolerance. Risking all as the apostles of
peace, they were soon condemned to be its martyrs. Oldenbarneveld,
having incurred the bitter hatred of the Stadtholder, was condemned
to death by decapitation on May 12th, 1619. Grotius, less offensive
to Maurice on account of his youth and his gracious personality, was
sentenced six days later to perpetual imprisonment. On the 6th of June,
1619, he was incarcerated in the fortress of Loevestein.

Rigorously treated at first, his docility and resignation soon won the
respect and affection of his keepers. Writing materials and books were
in time accorded him, and finally, on condition that she would continue
to share his captivity, he was granted the presence of his wife. The
studious prisoner and his devoted companion completely disarmed all
suspicion of an intention to escape, and the ponderous chest in which
books came and went continued to bring periodic consolation to the
mind of the busy scholar. A treatise on the truth of the Christian
religion, a catechism for the use of his children, a digest of Dutch
law, and other compositions served to occupy and alleviate the weary
months of confinement, until one day when the time seemed opportune
Madame Grotius secretly inclosed her husband in the great chest and
it was borne away by two soldiers. Descending the stone steps of the
prison the bearers remarked that the trunk was heavy enough to contain
an Arminian, but Madame Grotius's jest on the heaviness of Arminian
books smoothed over the suspicion, if one was really entertained, and
the great jurist was sent in the chest safe to Gorcum, attended by a
faithful domestic, where in the house of a friend the prisoner emerged
without injury and in the guise of a stone mason hastened to Antwerp.
From Antwerp he took refuge in France, where he arrived in April, 1621,
and was joined by his faithful wife at Paris in the following October.

The bitterness of exile was now to be added to the miseries of
imprisonment, for Grotius was not only excluded from The Netherlands,
but in extreme poverty. His letters reveal his anguish of spirit at
this period, but a generous Frenchman, Henri de Même, placed his
country house at Balagni at his disposition, and there, supported by
a small pension, which Louis XIII had graciously accorded him, though
irregularly and tardily paid, Grotius commenced his great work, "_De
Jure Belli ac Pacis_," in the summer of 1623.

Much speculation has been indulged in regarding the causes which led
to the composition of this masterpiece, but a recent discovery has
rendered all this superfluous, as well as the ascription of special
merit to the Counselor Peyresc for suggesting the idea of the work. It
is, indeed, to the pacific genius of Grotius more than to all other
causes that the world owes the origin of his great work; for it sprang
from his dominant thought, ever brooding on the horrors of war and
the ways of peace, during more than twenty years, and never wholly
satisfied till its full expression was completed.

In the winter of 1604, there had sprung out of his legal practice the
idea of a treatise entitled "_De Jure Praedae_," fully written out,
but never printed by its author. The manuscript remained unknown by
all his biographers until it was brought to light and printed under
the auspices of Professor Fruin at The Hague in 1868. This interesting
document proves that not only the general conception but the entire
plan and even the arrangement of the "_De Jure Belli ac Pacis_" were
in the mind of Grotius when he was only twenty-one years of age. The
difference between the earlier work and the later is chiefly one of
detail and amplification, the difference which twenty years of reading,
experience, meditation and maturity of faculty would inevitably create.

The curious may find in his letters the almost daily chronicle of his
progress with his book to the time of its publication after excessive
labors lasting more than a year. In March, 1625, the printing of the
first edition, which had occupied four months, was completed and copies
were sent to the fair at Frankfort. His honorarium as author consisted
of two hundred copies, many of which he presented to his friends. From
the sale of the remainder at a crown each, he was not able to reimburse
his outlay. In the following August he wrote to his father and brother
that if he had their approbation and that of a few friends, he would
have no cause for complaint but would be satisfied. Louis XIII, to
whom the work was dedicated, accepted the homage of the author and
a handsomely bound copy, but failed to exercise the grace customary
with monarchs by according a gratification. At Rome, the treatise was
proscribed in the index in 1627. Almost penniless and suffering from
his protracted toil, Grotius seemed destined to neglect and oblivion,
yet from his exile he wrote to his brother: "It is not necessary to ask
anything for me. If my country can do without me, I can do without her.
The world is large enough...."

Invited to enter the service of France by Richelieu, Grotius would not
accept the conditions which the Cardinal wished to impose,--such at
least is the inevitable inference from his letters. His pension was not
paid and his circumstances became so serious that one of his children
had but a single coat. At length, pushed to the utmost extremity
of want and instigated by his energetic wife, Grotius resolved to
return to Holland. Driven from Rotterdam to Amsterdam, where he
hoped to settle down as a lawyer, the States General twice ordered
his arrest and named a price for his delivery to the authorities.
The new Stadtholder, Frederick Henry, who, before succeeding his
brother Maurice, had written kindly to Grotius after his escape from
imprisonment, now approved his proscription. Abandoned by his prince
as well as by his countrymen, Grotius once more turned his face toward
exile and set out for Hamburg.


IV. THE WORK OF GROTIUS.

It may be of interest at this point in the career of Grotius to
describe briefly the character of the great work which was soon to win
for him a new celebrity, and materially change his prospects in life.

The inspiration of his "_De Jure Belli ac Pacis_" was the love of
peace, yet he was far from being one of those visionaries who totally
condemn the use of armed force and proscribe all war as wrong and
unnecessary. On the contrary, he seeks to discover when, how, and by
whom war may be justly conducted.

His plan of treatment is as follows:--

  In the First Book, he considers whether any war is just, which leads
  to the distinction between public and private war, and this in turn
  to a discussion of the nature and embodiment of sovereignty.

  In the Second Book, the causes from which wars arise, the nature
  of property and personal rights which furnish their occasions, the
  obligations that pertain to ownership, the rule of royal succession,
  the rights secured by compacts, the force and interpretation of
  treaties, and kindred subjects are examined.

  In the Third Book, the question is asked, "What is lawful war?"
  which prepares for the consideration of military conventions and the
  methods by which peace is to be secured.

From the authority of the Empire and the Church, no longer effectual as
an international agency, Grotius appeals to Humanity as furnishing the
true law of nations. Beginning with the idea that there is a kinship
among men established by nature, he sees in this bond a community
of rights. The society of nations, including as it does the whole
human race, needs the recognition of rights as much as mere local
communities. As nations are but larger aggregations of individuals,
each with its own corporate coherence, the accidents of geographic
boundary do not obliterate that human demand for justice which springs
from the nature of man as a moral being. There is, therefore, as a
fundamental bond of human societies a Natural Law, which, when properly
apprehended, is perceived to be the expression and dictate of right
reason. It is thus upon the nature of man as a rational intelligence
that Grotius founds his system of universal law.

As this law of human nature is universally binding wherever men exist,
it cannot be set aside by the mere circumstances of time and place,
whence it results that there is a law of war as well as a law of peace.
As this law applies to the commencement of armed conflicts, war is
never to be undertaken except to assert rights, and when undertaken
is never to be carried on except within the limits of rights. It is
true that in the conflict of arms laws must be silent, but only CIVIL
laws, which govern in times of peace. Those laws which are PERPETUAL,
which spring from the nature of man as man, and not from his particular
civil relations, continue even during strife and constitute the laws of
war. To deny these, or to disobey them, implies a repudiation of human
nature itself and of the divine authority which has invested it with
rights and obligations. To disavow the imperative character of these
perpetual laws, is to revert to barbarism.

It is necessary, however to distinguish between Natural Law, that
principle of justice which springs from man's rational nature, and
Conventional Law, which results from his agreements and compacts.
Natural Law remains ever the same, but institutions change. While the
study of abstract justice, apart from all that has its origin in the
will or consent of men, would enable us to create a complete system of
jurisprudence, there is another source which must not be neglected,
since men have established the sanctity of certain rules of conduct by
solemn convention.

The Law of Nations does not consist, therefore, of a mere body of
deductions derived from general principles of justice, for there is
also a body of doctrine based upon CONSENT; and it is this system of
voluntarily recognized obligations which distinguishes international
jurisprudence from mere ethical speculation or moral theory. There are
CUSTOMS of nations as well as a universally accepted law of nature, and
it is in this growth of practically recognized rules of procedure that
we trace the evolution of law international--_jus inter gentes_--as a
body of positive jurisprudence.

It is evident that the mind of Grotius is continually struggling to
establish a science upon this positive basis, and it is this which
gives a distinctive character to his effort. The great writers of all
ages are cited with a superfluous lavishness, not so much to support
his claims by an aggregation of individual opinions--still less to
display his erudition, as his critics have sometimes complained--as to
give a historic catholicity to his doctrine by showing that the laws
he is endeavoring to formulate have, in fact, been accepted in all
times and by all men. For this purpose also, he makes abundant use of
the great authorities on Roman Law, whose doctrines and formulas were
certain to carry conviction to the minds of those whom he desired to
convince.

It is needless, perhaps, to point out that the work of Grotius is
not and could not be a work of permanent authority as a digest of
international law. His own wise appreciation of the positive and
historical element--the authority derived from custom--should exempt
him from the pretense of absolute finality. It is the Book of Genesis
only that he has given us, but it is his indefeasible distinction to
have recorded the creation of order out of chaos in the great sphere of
international relationship, justly entitling him to the honor accorded
to him by the spontaneous consent of future times as the Father of
International Jurisprudence.

It is not difficult after more than three centuries of thought and
experience to point out the defects in his doctrine. If he justifies
slavery, it is not without ingenuity; for, he argues, if a man may sell
his labor, why not his liberty? and if the conqueror may impose his
will upon the property of the vanquished, why not also upon his person?
If he identifies sovereignty with supreme power without any adequate
conception of its ethical basis, he is at least as advanced in his
thinking as the conceptions of his time, which had not yet grasped the
idea of the state as a moral organism. If he has no adequate notion
of neutrality, believing it to be the duty of a nation to enlist its
energies for what it deems the right side, rather than to disavow all
responsibility for actions foreign to its own interests, he is at least
supported in this by the opinion of the multitude even at the present
time; and even among jurists the modern conception of neutrality is
hardly a century old. If the new schools of jurisprudence make light
of Natural Law as a foundation of public and private rights, it is
not certain that Grotius may not yet be vindicated as representing a
doctrine at least as clear as any other which has been substituted for
it. But, finally, to all these criticisms it may be answered, that
no great thinker can be justly estimated except in relation to his
predecessors and contemporaries. Measured by these, Grotius stands
alone among the jurists of his century for originality of thought and
power of exposition.


V. THE INFLUENCE OF GROTIUS'S WORK.

It was during his sojourn in Hamburg in 1633, eight years after the
publication of his "_De Jure_," and while he was still suffering from
painful pecuniary embarrassment, that Europe suddenly awoke to a sense
of his importance; and, almost at one time, Poland, Denmark, Spain,
England, and Sweden all extended friendly invitations urging him to
enter into their public service. His fame as a jurist had become
international and, rudely repelled by his native Holland, he became
the center of European interest. Gustavus Adolphus had placed the work
of Grotius along side his Bible under his soldier's pillow, as he
prosecuted his campaigns in the Thirty Years' War. The first edition
of that work, written in Latin, the cosmopolitan language of learned
Europe, had been quickly exhausted and widely scattered. Another had
soon been called for at Paris, but the death of Buon, the publisher,
created obstacles to its appearance. A second edition had appeared at
Frankfort in 1626, another at Amsterdam in 1631, and still another
with notes by the author in 1632. The book had aroused the thought of
kings as well as of scholars, and in the circles of high influence
everywhere in Europe the name of Grotius had become well known. His
book had excited the most opposite sentiments and awakened the most
contradictory judgments, but among lawyers and statesmen its reception
was from the first generally marked by admiration. In spite of exile,
poverty, and misfortune, Grotius had become a European celebrity and
was about to enter into the reward of his labors. He had created a code
for war and a programme of peace, and henceforth no statesman could
afford to neglect him.

Gustavus Adolphus, the king of Sweden, before his death on the
battlefield of Lützen, had commended Grotius to his great Chancellor,
Oxenstiern. By the death of Gustavus the Chancellor had, in 1633,
recently come into the regency of the kingdom at a critical moment
when a retreat from the bitter contest with the Empire seemed to be
foredoomed unless prevented by the support and friendship of France.
Recalling the commendation of the late king, Oxenstiern sought
and found in Grotius an ambassador of Sweden to negotiate a new
Franco-Swedish alliance. Accepting this appointment in 1634, Grotius
arrived at Paris on his diplomatic mission on March 2d, 1635.

Richelieu, having failed to draw the great jurist into the orbit of his
influence as a satellite, resented his appearance in a character so
influential and honorable as that of ambassador of Sweden, and Grotius
made little progress in his negotiation. Preoccupied with literature,
he took more interest in the composition of a sacred tragedy on "The
Flight into Egypt" than in reminding France of the existing treaty
of Heilbronn or consolidating the new Franco-Swedish alliance. Where
Grotius the theorist failed, Oxenstiern, the practical statesman, by
a few dexterous strokes of diplomacy during a brief visit to Paris,
easily succeeded; and the ambassador's mission was simplified to the
rôle of a mere observer and reporter of occurrences.

By taste, nature, and training, Grotius was a jurist and not a
diplomatist, and he soon realized that the two vocations, if not
diametrically opposed, are at least separated from each other by a vast
interval. His diplomatic correspondence betrays the keen observer and
the conscientious moralist rather than the accomplished negotiator.
Among the observations recorded in his dispatches, one may be quoted as
an example of his penetration and his humor. Speaking of the Dauphin,
the future Louis XIV, he says: "His frightful and precocious avidity is
a bad omen for neighboring peoples; for he is at present on his ninth
nurse, whom he is rending and murdering as he has the others!"

It is painful to behold the great father of international jurisprudence
descending in his dispatches to petty details of precedence and
alienating from himself the sympathies of his colleagues by ridiculous
ceremonial pretensions. He would no longer visit Mazarin, because
the Cardinal insisted on calling him EMINENCE instead of EXCELLENCE;
Grotius considering this distinction of terms a slight upon his rank as
ambassador. So persistent was he in these follies and so rancorous were
the feuds that the apostle of peace elicited that, in December, 1636,
less than two years after his arrival at Paris, he advised Sweden to
send to France a simple _Chargé d'Affaires_, instead of an ambassador,
in order to restore diplomatic relations.

His quarrels concerning precedence, which rendered him an object
of ridicule at the French Court, were not the only griefs of the
ambassador of Sweden. Inadequately recompensed, he was obliged to wait
two years for his salary and finally, being reduced to a condition
in which he could no longer maintain existence otherwise, he was
compelled to demand of the royal treasury of France a part of the
subsidies promised to the army of his adopted country. Weary of his
importunities, the French government repeatedly requested his recall.
Disgusted with his mission, Grotius at last abandoned the duties of his
office to the intriguing adventurer, Cerisante, who was sent to aid
him, and buried himself in his books until his return to Sweden at his
own request in 1645.

Queen Christina of Sweden, a patroness of scholars, desirous of aiding
Grotius and of retaining him in the service of her kingdom, made many
offers and promises, but their execution being deferred, he became
impatient of his lot, refused a position as counselor of state, and
resolved to leave the country. His plan to abandon Stockholm secretly
was prevented by a messenger of the queen who followed him to the port
where he intended to embark and induced him to return for a farewell
audience. With a handsome present of money and silver plate he took
passage on a vessel placed at his disposition to convey him to Lübeck.
Off the coast near Dantzic a violent tempest arose. On the 17th of
August, 1645, the vessel was driven ashore and Grotius, overcome by his
trying experiences, was taken ill at Rostock, where a few days later he
passed away.

The later years of his life had been chiefly devoted to plans for the
establishment of peace in the religious world, whose dissensions gave
him great distress of mind.

The country of his birth, which had so long denied him citizenship,
received him at last to the silent hospitality of the tomb. His body
was taken to Delft, his native town, where his name is now held in
grateful reverence.

At the time when Grotius left Stockholm, the last of the
plenipotentiaries had arrived at Münster and Osnabrück to attend the
great European congress convoked to terminate the hostilities of the
Thirty Years' War. It is a tradition, but incapable of satisfactory
proof, that it was with the purpose of being present at the councils
of this congress that the author of "_De Jure Belli ac Pacis_" left
Sweden for Germany. However this may be, it is certain that the
mediation of the king of Denmark at Osnabrück and of the papal legate
at Münster, though unsuccessful, was in accordance with the idea of
Grotius expressed in the words: "It would be useful, and indeed it
is almost necessary, that certain congresses of Christian powers
should be held, in which controversies that have arisen among some of
them may be decided by others who are not interested." The immediate
establishment of an international tribunal, evidently contemplated in
this suggestion, was not in harmony with the temper of those times;
but it cannot be doubted that the Peace of Westphalia, whose treaties
were to form a code of public law for Europe, was to a great degree an
embodiment of the principles which Grotius was the first to enunciate.

His "_De Jure Belli ac Pacis_" had already become a classic even before
the author's death, and special professorships were soon founded in
the universities to expound its principles. It would be tedious to
name the numerous editions, translations, and commentaries which have
given it an exceptional place in the literature of Europe. This task
has been in part performed, however, by Dr. Rogge in his "_Bibliotheca
Grotiana_," published at The Hague in 1883, and intended to be a full
bibliography of Grotius's works. The whole number of titles included
is 462, but they do not comprise the writings of the generations of
jurists who have been inspired by the great master or of the critics
and biographers who have discussed his life and work.

Tardily, but with full contrition for the bitter wrong done to one of
her greatest and noblest sons, the memory of Grotius has received from
his native land abundant recognition and commemoration. The appropriate
tomb that marks his resting place in the Nieuwe Kerk at Delft,
symbolical of his learning, genius, and renown, was erected in 1781.
On the 17th of September, 1886, a noble statue of the great jurist was
unveiled in the public square of his native town in front of the church
which contains his tomb. Thus, more than a century after his death,
and again still another century later, Holland has paid her tribute of
respect to her illustrious citizen.

The later years have also brought new honors to Grotius's feet. At
the recent Peace Conference at The Hague was completed the great
structure of international comity whose corner stone was laid by him
in 1625. It was most fitting that an international congress called in
the interest of peace should blend with the negotiation of conventions
for the pacific settlement of disputes between nations by a permanent
tribunal, and for the amelioration of the laws of war, a celebration
of the distinguished writer whose great thought had at last borne
such precious fruits. In pursuance of instructions received from
the Secretary of State, the United States Commission invited their
colleagues in the congress, the heads of the Dutch universities, and
the high civic authorities to join with them in observing the 4th of
July by celebrating the memory of the great jurist. With appropriate
exercises in the apse of the old church, near the monument of Grotius
and mausoleum of William the Silent, the representatives of twenty-six
nations gathered to do him honor. A beautiful commemorative wreath of
silver was laid upon Grotius's tomb bearing the inscription:

    TO
    THE MEMORY OF HUGO GROTIUS
    IN
    REVERENCE AND GRATITUDE
    FROM THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
    ON THE
    OCCASION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PEACE CONFERENCE
    AT
    THE HAGUE JULY 4TH, 1899.

An eloquent oration by the Honorable Andrew D. White, Ambassador of the
United States to Germany, and the head of the Commission, followed by
other appropriate addresses, recalled the debt of mankind to the author
of "_De Jure Belli ac Pacis_"; and thus the plenipotentiaries of the
nineteenth century did homage to the exile of the sixteenth who had
taught the world that even in the shock and storm of battle humanity
cannot escape the dominion of its own essential laws, and that even
independent states are answerable before the bar of human nature for
obedience to principles imposed by a Power higher than the prerogatives
of princes or the will of nations.

        David J. Hill




THE RIGHTS OF WAR AND PEACE, INCLUDING THE LAW OF NATURE AND OF NATIONS.




BOOK I.




