CHAPTER VI

An inquiry concerning preparation for Communion


The Voice of the Disciple


When I consider Thy dignity, O Lord, and mine own vileness, I tremble
very exceedingly, and am confounded within myself. For if I approach
not, I fly from life; and if I intrude myself unworthily, I run into
Thy displeasure. What then shall I do, O my God, Thou helper and
Counsellor in necessities.

2. Teach Thou me the right way; propound unto me some short exercise
befitting Holy Communion. For it is profitable to know how I ought to
prepare my heart devoutly and reverently for Thee, to the intent that I
may receive Thy Sacrament to my soul’s health [or it may be also for
the celebrating this so great and divine mystery].




CHAPTER VII

Of the examination of conscience, and purpose of amendment


The Voice of the Beloved


Above all things the priest of God must draw nigh, with all humility of
heart and supplicating reverence, with full faith and pious desire for
the honour of God, to celebrate, minister, and receive this Sacrament.
Diligently examine thy conscience and with all thy might with true
contrition and humble confession cleanse and purify it, so that thou
mayest feel no burden, nor know anything which bringeth thee remorse
and impedeth thy free approach. Have displeasure against all thy sins
in general, and specially sorrow and mourn because of thy daily
transgressions. And if thou have time, confess unto God in the secret
of thine heart, all miseries of thine own passion.

2. Lament grievously and be sorry, because thou art still so carnal and
worldly, so unmortified from thy passions, so full of the motion of
concupiscence, so unguarded in thine outward senses, so often entangled
in many vain fancies, so much inclined to outward things, so negligent
of internal; so ready to laughter and dissoluteness, so unready to
weeping and contrition; so prone to ease and indulgence of the flesh,
so dull to zeal and fervour; so curious to hear novelties and behold
beauties, so loth to embrace things humble and despised; so desirous to
have many things, so grudging in giving, so close in keeping; so
inconsiderate in speaking, so reluctant to keep silence; so disorderly
in manners, so inconsiderate in actions; so eager after food, so deaf
towards the Word of God; so eager after rest, so slow to labour; so
watchful after tales, so sleepy towards holy watchings; so eager for
the end of them, so wandering in attention to them; so negligent in
observing the hours of prayer, so lukewarm in celebrating, so
unfruitful in communicating; so quickly distracted, so seldom quite
collected with thyself; so quickly moved to anger, so ready for
displeasure at others; so prone to judging, so severe at reproving; so
joyful in prosperity, so weak in adversity; so often making many good
resolutions and bringing them to so little effect.

3. When thou hast confessed and bewailed these and thy other
shortcomings, with sorrow and sore displeasure at thine own infirmity,
make then a firm resolution of continual amendment of life and of
progress in all that is good. Then moreover with full resignation and
entire will offer thyself to the honour of My name on the altar of
thine heart as a perpetual whole burnt-offering, even by faithfully
presenting thy body and soul unto Me, to the end that thou mayest so be
accounted worthy to draw near to offer this sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving to God, and to receive the Sacrament of My Body and Blood
to thy soul’s health. For there is no oblation worthier, no
satisfaction greater for the destroying of sin, than that a man offer
himself to God purely and entirely with the oblation of the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Holy Communion. If a man shall have done what in
him lieth, and shall repent him truly, then how often soever he shall
draw nigh unto Me for pardon and grace, As I live, saith the Lord, I
have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be
converted, and live. All his transgressions that he hath committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him.(1)

(1) Ezekiel xviii. 22, 23.




CHAPTER VIII

Of the oblation of Christ upon the cross, and of resignation of self


The Voice of the Beloved


As I of my own will offered myself unto God the Father on the Cross for
thy sins with outstretched hands and naked body, so that nothing
remained in Me that did not become altogether a sacrifice for the
Divine propitiation; so also oughtest thou every day to offer thyself
willingly unto Me for a pure and holy oblation with all thy strength
and affections, even to the utmost powers of thine heart. What more do
I require of thee than thou study to resign thyself altogether unto Me?
Whatsoever thou givest besides thyself, I nothing care for, for I ask
not thy gift, but thee.

2. As it would not be sufficient for thee if thou hadst all things
except Me, even so whatsoever thou shalt give Me, if thou give Me not
thyself, it cannot please Me. Offer thyself to Me, and give thyself
altogether for God, so shall thy offering be accepted. Behold I offered
Myself altogether to the Father for thee, I give also My whole body and
blood for food, that thou mightest remain altogether Mine and I thine.
But if thou stand in thyself, and offer not thyself freely to My will,
thy offering is not perfect, neither shall the union betwixt us be
complete. Therefore ought the freewill offering of thyself into the
hands of God to go before all thy works, if thou wilt attain liberty
and grace. For this is the cause that so few are inwardly enlightened
and made free, that they know not how to deny themselves entirely. My
word standeth sure, Except a man forsake all, he cannot be My
disciple.(1) Thou therefore, if thou wilt be My disciple, offer thyself
to Me with all thy affections.

(1) Luke xiv. 33.




