CHAPTER XXXIII

Of instability of the heart, and of directing the aim towards God


“My Son, trust not thy feeling, for that which is now will be quickly
changed into somewhat else. As long as thou livest thou art subject to
change, howsoever unwilling; so that thou art found now joyful, now
sad; now at peace, now disquieted; now devout, now indevout; now
studious, now careless; now sad, now cheerful. But the wise man, and he
who is truly learned in spirit, standeth above these changeable things,
attentive not to what he may feel in himself, or from what quarter the
wind may blow, but that the whole intent of his mind may carry him on
to the due and much-desired end. For thus will he be able to remain one
and the same and unshaken, the single eye of his desire being
steadfastly fixed, through the manifold changes of the world, upon Me.

2. “But according as the eye of intention be the more pure, even so
will a man make his way steadfastly through the manifold storms. But in
many the eye of pure intention waxeth dim; for it quickly resteth
itself upon anything pleasant which occurreth, and rarely is any man
found altogether free from the blemish of self-seeking. So the Jews of
old came to Bethany, to the house of Martha and Mary, that they might
see not Jesus, but Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.(1)
Therefore must the eye of the intention be cleansed, that it may be
single and right, and above all things which come in its way, may be
directed unto Me.”

(1) John xii. 9.




CHAPTER XXXIV

That to him who loveth God is sweet above all things and in all things


Behold, God is mine, and all things are mine! What will I more, and
what more happy thing can I desire? O delightsome and sweet world! that
is, to him that loveth the Word, not the world, neither the things that
are in the world.(1) My God, my all! To him that understandeth, that
word sufficeth, and to repeat it often is pleasing to him that loveth
it. When Thou art present all things are pleasant; when Thou art
absent, all things are wearisome. Thou makest the heart to be at rest,
givest it deep peace and festal joy. Thou makest it to think rightly in
every matter, and in every matter to give Thee praise; neither can
anything please long without Thee but if it would be pleasant and of
sweet savour, Thy grace must be there, and it is Thy wisdom which must
give unto it a sweet savour.

2. To him who tasteth Thee, what can be distasteful? And to him who
tasteth Thee not, what is there which can make him joyous? But the
worldly wise, and they who enjoy the flesh, these fail in Thy wisdom;
for in the wisdom of the world is found utter vanity, and to be
carnally minded is death. But they who follow after Thee through
contempt of worldly things, and mortification of the flesh, are found
to be truly wise because they are carried from vanity to verity, from
the flesh to the spirit. They taste that the Lord is good, and
whatsoever good they find in creatures, they count it all unto the
praise of the Creator. Unlike, yea, very unlike is the enjoyment of the
Creator to enjoyment of the Creature, the enjoyment of eternity and of
time, of light uncreated and of light reflected.

3. O Light everlasting, surpassing all created lights, dart down Thy
ray from on high which shall pierce the inmost depths of my heart. Give
purity, joy, clearness, life to my spirit that with all its powers it
may cleave unto Thee with rapture passing man’s understanding. Oh when
shall that blessed and longed-for time come when Thou shalt satisfy me
with Thy presence, and be unto me All in all? So long as this is
delayed, my joy shall not be full. Still, ah me! the old man liveth in
me: he is not yet all crucified, not yet quite dead; still he lusteth
fiercely against the spirit, wageth inward wars, nor suffereth the
soul’s kingdom to be in peace.

4. But Thou who rulest the raging of the sea, and stillest the waves
thereof when they arise, rise up and help me. Scatter the people that
delight in war.(2) Destroy them by Thy power. Show forth, I beseech
Thee, Thy might, and let Thy right hand be glorified, for I have no
hope, no refuge, save in Thee, O Lord my God.

(1) 1 John ii. 15. (2) Psalm lxviii. 30.




CHAPTER XXXV

That there is no security against temptation in this life


“My Son, thou art never secure in this life, but thy spiritual armour
will always be needful for thee as long as thou livest. Thou dwellest
among foes, and art attacked on the right hand and on the left. If
therefore thou use not on all sides the shield of patience, thou wilt
not remain long unwounded. Above all, if thou keep not thy heart fixed
upon Me with steadfast purpose to bear all things for My sake, thou
shalt not be able to bear the fierceness of the attack, nor to attain
to the victory of the blessed. Therefore must thou struggle bravely all
thy life through, and put forth a strong hand against those things
which oppose thee. For to him that overcometh is the hidden manna
given,(1) but great misery is reserved for the slothful.

2. “If thou seek rest in this life, how then wilt thou attain unto the
rest which is eternal? Set not thyself to attain much rest, but much
patience. Seek the true peace, not in earth but in heaven, not in man
nor in any created thing, but in God alone. For the love of God thou
must willingly undergo all things, whether labours or sorrows,
temptations, vexations, anxieties, necessities, infirmities, injuries,
gainsayings, rebukes, humiliations, confusions, corrections,
despisings; these things help unto virtue, these things prove the
scholar of Christ; these things fashion the heavenly crown. I will give
thee an eternal reward for short labour, and infinite glory for
transient shame.

3. “Thinkest thou that thou shalt always have spiritual consolations at
thy will? My Saints had never such, but instead thereof manifold
griefs, and divers temptations, and heavy desolations. But patiently
they bore themselves in all, and trusted in God more than in
themselves, knowing that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.(2)
Wouldst thou have that immediately which many have hardly attained unto
after many tears and hard labours? Wait for the Lord, quit thyself like
a man and be strong; be not faint-hearted, nor go aside from Me, but
constantly devote thy body and soul to the glory of God. I will reward
thee plenteously, I will be with thee in trouble.”(3)

(1) Revelation ii. 17. (2) Romans viii. 17. (3) Psalm xci. 15.




