CHAPTER II

Of thinking humbly of oneself


There is naturally in every man a desire to know, but what profiteth
knowledge without the fear of God? Better of a surety is a lowly
peasant who serveth God, than a proud philosopher who watcheth the
stars and neglecteth the knowledge of himself. He who knoweth himself
well is vile in his own sight; neither regardeth he the praises of men.
If I knew all the things that are in the world, and were not in
charity, what should it help me before God, who is to judge me
according to my deeds?

2. Rest from inordinate desire of knowledge, for therein is found much
distraction and deceit. Those who have knowledge desire to appear
learned, and to be called wise. Many things there are to know which
profiteth little or nothing to the soul. And foolish out of measure is
he who attendeth upon other things rather than those which serve to his
soul’s health. Many words satisfy not the soul, but a good life
refresheth the mind, and a pure conscience giveth great confidence
towards God.

3. The greater and more complete thy knowledge, the more severely shalt
thou be judged, unless thou hast lived holily. Therefore be not lifted
up by any skill or knowledge that thou hast; but rather fear concerning
the knowledge which is given to thee. If it seemeth to thee that thou
knowest many things, and understandest them well, know also that there
are many more things which thou knowest not. Be not high-minded, but
rather confess thine ignorance. Why desirest thou to lift thyself above
another, when there are found many more learned and more skilled in the
Scripture than thou? If thou wilt know and learn anything with profit,
love to be thyself unknown and to be counted for nothing.

4. That is the highest and most profitable lesson, when a man truly
knoweth and judgeth lowly of himself. To account nothing of one’s self,
and to think always kindly and highly of others, this is great and
perfect wisdom. Even shouldest thou see thy neighbor sin openly or
grievously, yet thou oughtest not to reckon thyself better than he, for
thou knowest not how long thou shalt keep thine integrity. All of us
are weak and frail; hold thou no man more frail than thyself.




CHAPTER III

Of the knowledge of truth


Happy is the man whom Truth by itself doth teach, not by figures and
transient words, but as it is in itself.(1) Our own judgment and
feelings often deceive us, and we discern but little of the truth. What
doth it profit to argue about hidden and dark things, concerning which
we shall not be even reproved in the judgment, because we knew them
not? Oh, grievous folly, to neglect the things which are profitable and
necessary, and to give our minds to things which are curious and
hurtful! Having eyes, we see not.

2. And what have we to do with talk about genus and species! He to whom
the Eternal Word speaketh is free from multiplied questionings. From
this One Word are all things, and all things speak of Him; and this is
the Beginning which also speaketh unto us.(2) No man without Him
understandeth or rightly judgeth. The man to whom all things are one,
who bringeth all things to one, who seeth all things in one, he is able
to remain steadfast of spirit, and at rest in God. O God, who art the
Truth, make me one with Thee in everlasting love. It wearieth me
oftentimes to read and listen to many things; in Thee is all that I
wish for and desire. Let all the doctors hold their peace; let all
creation keep silence before Thee: speak Thou alone to me.

3. The more a man hath unity and simplicity in himself, the more things
and the deeper things he understandeth; and that without labour,
because he receiveth the light of understanding from above. The spirit
which is pure, sincere, and steadfast, is not distracted though it hath
many works to do, because it doth all things to the honour of God, and
striveth to be free from all thoughts of self-seeking. Who is so full
of hindrance and annoyance to thee as thine own undisciplined heart? A
man who is good and devout arrangeth beforehand within his own heart
the works which he hath to do abroad; and so is not drawn away by the
desires of his evil will, but subjecteth everything to the judgment of
right reason. Who hath a harder battle to fight than he who striveth
for self-mastery? And this should be our endeavour, even to master
self, and thus daily to grow stronger than self, and go on unto
perfection.

4. All perfection hath some imperfection joined to it in this life, and
all our power of sight is not without some darkness. A lowly knowledge
of thyself is a surer way to God than the deep searching of man’s
learning. Not that learning is to be blamed, nor the taking account of
anything that is good; but a good conscience and a holy life is better
than all. And because many seek knowledge rather than good living,
therefore they go astray, and bear little or no fruit.

5. O if they would give that diligence to the rooting out of vice and
the planting of virtue which they give unto vain questionings: there
had not been so many evil doings and stumbling-blocks among the laity,
nor such ill living among houses of religion. Of a surety, at the Day
of Judgment it will be demanded of us, not what we have read, but what
we have done; not how well we have spoken, but how holily we have
lived. Tell me, where now are all those masters and teachers, whom thou
knewest well, whilst they were yet with you, and flourished in
learning? Their stalls are now filled by others, who perhaps never have
one thought concerning them. Whilst they lived they seemed to be
somewhat, but now no one speaks of them.

6. Oh how quickly passeth the glory of the world away! Would that their
life and knowledge had agreed together! For then would they have read
and inquired unto good purpose. How many perish through empty learning
in this world, who care little for serving God. And because they love
to be great more than to be humble, therefore they “have become vain in
their imaginations.” He only is truly great, who hath great charity. He
is truly great who deemeth himself small, and counteth all height of
honour as nothing. He is the truly wise man, who counteth all earthly
things as dung that he may win Christ. And he is the truly learned man,
who doeth the will of God, and forsaketh his own will.

(1) Psalm xciv. 12; Numbers xii. 8. (2) John viii. 25 (Vulg.).




