CHAPTER VIII

Of a low estimation of self in the sight of God


I will speak unto my Lord who am but dust and ashes. If I count myself
more, behold Thou standest against me, and my iniquities bear true
testimony, and I cannot gainsay it. But if I abase myself, and bring
myself to nought, and shrink from all self-esteem, and grind myself to
dust, which I am, Thy grace will be favourable unto me, and Thy light
will be near unto my heart; and all self-esteem, how little soever it
be, shall be swallowed up in the depths of my nothingness, and shall
perish for ever. There Thou showest to me myself, what I am, what I
was, and whither I have come: so foolish was I and ignorant.(1) If I am
left to myself, behold I am nothing, I am all weakness; but if suddenly
Thou look upon me, immediately I am made strong, and filled with new
joy. And it is great marvel that I am so suddenly lifted up, and so
graciously embraced by Thee, since I am always being carried to the
deep by my own weight.

2. This is the doing of Thy love which freely goeth before me and
succoureth me in so many necessities, which guardeth me also in great
dangers and snatcheth me, as I may truly say, from innumerable evils.
For verily, by loving myself amiss, I lost myself, and by seeking and
sincerely loving Thee alone, I found both myself and Thee, and through
love I have brought myself to yet deeper nothingness: because Thou, O
most sweet Lord, dealest with me beyond all merit, and above all which
I dare ask or think.

3. Blessed be Thou, O my God, because though I be unworthy of all Thy
benefits, Thy bountiful and infinite goodness never ceaseth to do good
even to ingrates and to those who are turned far from Thee. Turn Thou
us unto Thyself, that we may be grateful, humble, and godly, for Thou
art our salvation, our courage, and our strength.

(1) Psalm lxxiii. 22.




CHAPTER IX

That all things are to be referred to God, as the final end


“My Son, I must be thy Supreme and final end, if thou desirest to be
truly happy. Out of such purpose thy affection shall be purified, which
too often is sinfully bent upon itself and upon created things. For if
thou seekest thyself in any matter, straightway thou wilt fail within
thyself and grow barren. Therefore refer everything to Me first of all,
for it is I who gave thee all. So look upon each blessing as flowing
from the Supreme Good, and thus all things are to be attributed to Me
as their source.

2. “From Me the humble and great, the poor and the rich, draw water as
from a living fountain, and those who serve Me with a free and faithful
spirit shall receive grace for grace. But he who will glory apart from
Me, or will be delighted with any good which lieth in himself, shall
not be established in true joy, nor shall be enlarged in heart, but
shall be greatly hindered and thrown into tribulation. Therefore thou
must not ascribe any good to thyself, nor look upon virtue as belonging
to any man, but ascribe it all unto God, without whom man hath nothing.
I gave all, I will receive all again, and with great strictness require
I the giving of thanks.

3. “This is the Truth, and by it the vanity of boasting is put to
flight. And if heavenly grace and true charity shall enter into thee,
there shall be no envy, nor straitening of the heart, nor shall any
self-love take possession of thee. For divine charity conquereth all
things, and enlargeth all the powers of the soul. If thou art truly
wise, thou wilt rejoice in Me alone, thou wilt hope in Me alone; for
there is none good but one, that is God,(1) Who is to be praised above
all things, and in all things to receive blessing.”

(1) Luke xviii. 19.




CHAPTER X

That it is sweet to despise the world and to serve God


Now will I speak again, O my Lord, and hold not my peace; I will say in
the ears of my God, my Lord, and my King, who is exalted above all, _Oh
how plentiful is Thy goodness which Thou hast laid up for them that
fear Thee!_(1) But what art Thou to those who love Thee? What to those
who serve Thee with their whole heart? Truly unspeakable is the
sweetness of the contemplation of Thee, which Thou bestowest upon those
who love Thee. In this most of all Thou hast showed me the sweetness of
Thy charity, that when I was not, Thou madest me, and when I wandered
far from Thee, Thou broughtest me back that I might serve Thee, and
commandedst me to love Thee.

2. O Fountain of perpetual love, what shall I say concerning Thee? How
shall I be unmindful of Thee, who didst vouchsafe to remember me, even
after I pined away and perished? Thou hast had mercy beyond all hope
upon Thy servant, and hast showed Thy grace and friendship beyond all
deserving. What reward shall I render Thee for this Thy grace? For it
is not given unto all to renounce this world and its affairs, and to
take up a religious life. For is it a great thing that I should serve
Thee, whom every creature ought to serve? It ought not to seem a great
thing to me to serve Thee; but rather this appeareth to me a great and
wonderful thing, that Thou vouchsafest to receive as Thy servant one so
poor and unworthy, and to join him unto Thy chosen servants.

3. Behold all things which I have are Thine, and with them I serve
Thee. And yet verily it is Thou who servest me, rather than I Thee.
Behold the heaven and the earth which Thou hast created for the service
of men; they are at Thy bidding, and perform daily whatsoever Thou dost
command. Yea, and this is little; for Thou hast even ordained the
Angels for the service of man. But it surpasseth even all these things,
that Thou Thyself didst vouchsafe to minister unto man, and didst
promise that Thou wouldest give Thyself unto him.

4. What shall I render unto Thee for all these Thy manifold mercies? Oh
that I were able to serve Thee all the days of my life! Oh that even
for one day I were enabled to do Thee service worthy of Thyself! For
verily Thou art worthy of all service, all honour, and praise without
end. Verily Thou art my God, and I am Thy poor servant, who am bound to
serve Thee with all my strength, nor ought I ever to grow weary of Thy
praise. This is my wish, this is my exceeding great desire, and
whatsoever is lacking to me, vouchsafe Thou to supply.

5. It is great honour, great glory to serve Thee, and to despise all
for Thy sake. For they shall have great grace who of their own will
shall submit themselves to Thy most holy service. They who for Thy love
have cast away every carnal delight shall find the sweetest consolation
of the Holy Ghost. They who enter the narrow way of life for Thy Name’s
sake, and have put away all worldly cares, shall attain great liberty
of spirit.

6. Oh grateful and delightsome service of God, whereby man is made
truly free and holy! Oh sacred condition of the religious servant,
which maketh man equal to the Angels, well-pleasing unto God, terrible
to evil spirits, and acceptable to all faithful ones! Oh service to be
embraced and ever desired, in which the highest good is promised, and
joy is gained which shall remain for evermore!

(1) Psalm xxxi. 19.




