CHAPTER IX

That we ought to offer ourselves and all that is ours to God, and to
pray for all


The Voice of the Disciple


Lord, all that is in the heaven and in the earth is Thine.(1) I desire
to offer myself up unto thee as a freewill offering, and to continue
Thine for ever. Lord, in the uprightness of mine heart I willingly
offer(2) myself to Thee to-day to be Thy servant for ever, in humble
submission and for a sacrifice of perpetual praise. Receive me with
this holy Communion of Thy precious Body, which I celebrate before Thee
this day in the presence of the Angels invisibly surrounding, that it
may be for the salvation of me and of all Thy people.

2. Lord, I lay before Thee at this celebration all my sins and offences
which I have committed before Thee and Thy holy Angels, from the day
whereon I was first able to sin even unto this hour; that Thou mayest
consume and burn them every one with the fire of Thy charity, and
mayest do away all the stains of my sins, and cleanse my conscience
from all offence, and restore me to Thy favour which by sinning I have
lost, fully forgiving me all, and mercifully admitting me to the kiss
of peace.

3. What can I do concerning my sins, save humbly to confess and lament
them and unceasingly to beseech Thy propitiation? I beseech Thee, be
propitious unto me and hear me, when I stand before Thee, O my God. All
my sins displease me grievously: I will never more commit them; but I
grieve for them and will grieve so long as I live, steadfastly
purposing to repent me truly, and to make restitution as far as I can.
Forgive, O God, forgive me my sins for Thy holy Name’s sake; save my
soul, which Thou hast redeemed with Thy precious blood. Behold I commit
myself to Thy mercy, I resign myself to Thy hands. Deal with me
according to Thy loving-kindness, not according to my wickedness and
iniquity.

4. I offer also unto Thee all my goodness, though it is exceedingly
little and imperfect, that Thou mayest mend and sanctify it, that Thou
mayest make it well pleasing and acceptable in Thy sight, and ever draw
it on towards perfection; and furthermore bring me safely, slothful and
useless poor creature that I am, to a happy and blessed end.

5. Moreover I offer unto Thee all pious desires of the devout,
necessities of parents, friends, brothers, sisters, and all who are
dear to me, and of those who have done good to me, or to others for Thy
love; and those who have desired and besought my prayers for themselves
and all belonging to them; that all may feel themselves assisted by Thy
grace, enriched by consolation, protected from dangers, freed from
pains; and that being delivered from all evils they may joyfully give
Thee exceeding thanks.

6. I offer also to Thee prayers and Sacramental intercessions for those
specially who have injured me in aught, made me sad, or spoken evil
concerning me, or have caused me any loss or displeasure; for all those
also whom I have at any time made sad, disturbed, burdened, and
scandalized, by words or deeds, knowingly or ignorantly; that to all of
us alike, Thou mayest equally pardon our sins and mutual offences. Take
away, O Lord, from our hearts all suspicion, indignation, anger, and
contention, and whatsoever is able to injure charity and diminish
brotherly love. Have mercy, have mercy, Lord, on those who entreat Thy
mercy; give grace to the needy; and make us such that we may be worthy
to enjoy Thy grace, and go forward to the life eternal. Amen.

(1) 1 Chronicles xxix. 11. (2) 1 Chronicles xxix. 17.




CHAPTER X

That Holy Communion is not lightly to be omitted


The Voice of the Beloved


Thou must frequently betake thee to the Fountain of grace and divine
mercy, to the Fountain of goodness and all purity; to the end that thou
mayest obtain the healing of thy passions and vices, and mayest be made
stronger and more watchful against all temptations and wiles of the
devil. The enemy, knowing what profit and exceeding strong remedy lieth
in the Holy Communion, striveth by all means and occasions to draw back
and hinder the faithful and devout, so far as he can.

2. For when some set about to prepare themselves for Holy Communion,
they suffer from the more evil suggestions of Satan. The very evil
spirit himself (as is written in Job), cometh among the sons of God
that he may trouble them by his accustomed evil dealing, or make them
over timid and perplexed; to the intent that he may diminish their
affections, or take away their faith by his attacks, if haply he may
prevail upon them to give up Holy Communion altogether, or to come
thereto with lukewarm hearts. But his wiles and delusions must not be
heeded, howsoever wicked and terrible they be; but all his delusion
must be cast back upon his own head. The wretch must be despised and
laughed to scorn: neither must Holy Communion be omitted because of his
insults and the inward troubles which he stirreth up.

3. Often also too much carefulness or some anxiety or other touching
confession hindereth from obtaining devotion. Do thou according to the
counsel of wise men, and lay aside anxiety and scruple, because it
hindereth the grace of God and destroyeth devotion of mind. Because of
some little vexation or trouble do not thou neglect Holy Communion, but
rather hasten to confess it, and forgive freely all offences committed
against thee. And if thou hast offended any man, humbly beg for pardon,
and God shall freely forgive thee.

4. What profiteth it to put off for long time the confession of thy
sins, or to defer Holy Communion? Cleanse thyself forthwith, spit out
the poison with all speed, hasten to take the remedy, and thou shalt
feel thyself better than if thou didst long defer it. If to-day thou
defer it on one account, to-morrow perchance some greater obstacle will
come, and so thou mayest be long time hindered from Communion and
become more unfit. As soon as thou canst, shake thyself from thy
present heaviness and sloth, for it profiteth nothing to be long
anxious, to go long on thy way with heaviness of heart, and because of
daily little obstacles to sever thyself from divine things: nay it is
exceeding hurtful to defer thy Communion long, for this commonly
bringeth on great torpor. Alas! there are some, lukewarm and
undisciplined, who willingly find excuses for delaying repentance, and
desire to defer Holy Communion, lest they should be bound to keep
stricter watch upon themselves.

5. Alas! how little charity, what flagging devotion, have they who so
lightly put off Holy Communion. How happy is he, how acceptable to God,
who so liveth, and in such purity of conscience keepeth himself, that
any day he could be ready and well inclined to communicate, if it were
in his power, and might be done without the notice of others. If a man
sometimes abstaineth for the sake of humility or some sound cause, he
is to be commended for his reverence. But if drowsiness have taken hold
of him, he ought to rouse himself and to do what in him lieth; and the
Lord will help his desire for the good will which he hath, which God
specially approveth.

6. But when he is hindered by sufficient cause, yet will he ever have a
good will and pious intention to communicate; and so he shall not be
lacking in the fruit of the Sacrament. For any devout man is able every
day and every hour to draw near to spiritual communion with Christ to
his soul’s health and without hindrance. Nevertheless on certain days
and at the appointed time he ought to receive the Body and Blood of his
Redeemer with affectionate reverence, and rather to seek after the
praise and honour of God, than his own comfort. For so often doth he
communicate mystically, and is invisibly refreshed, as he devoutly
calleth to mind the mystery of Christ’s incarnation and His Passion,
and is inflamed with the love of Him.

7. He who only prepareth himself when a festival is at hand or custom
compelleth, will too often be unprepared. Blessed is he who offereth
himself to God for a whole burnt-offering, so often as he celebrateth
or communicateth! Be not too slow nor too hurried in thy celebrating,
but preserve the good received custom of those with whom thou livest.
Thou oughtest not to produce weariness and annoyance in others, but to
observe the received custom, according to the institution of the
elders; and to minister to the profit of others rather than to thine
own devotion or feeling.




