CHAPTER IX

Of the lack of all comfort


It is no hard thing to despise human comfort when divine is present. It
is a great thing, yea very great, to be able to bear the loss both of
human and divine comfort; and for the love of God willingly to bear
exile of heart, and in nought to seek oneself, nor to look to one’s own
merit. What great matter is it, if thou be cheerful of heart and devout
when favour cometh to thee? That is an hour wherein all rejoice.
Pleasantly enough doth he ride whom the grace of God carrieth. And what
marvel, if he feeleth no burden who is carried by the Almighty, and is
led onwards by the Guide from on high?

2. We are willing to accept anything for comfort, and it is difficult
for a man to be freed from himself. The holy martyr Laurence overcame
the love of the world and even of his priestly master, because he
despised everything in the world which seemed to be pleasant; and for
the love of Christ he calmly suffered even God’s chief priest, Sixtus,
whom he dearly loved, to be taken from him. Thus by the love of the
Creator he overcame the love of man, and instead of human comfort he
chose rather God’s good pleasure. So also learn thou to resign any near
and beloved friend for the love of God. Nor take it amiss when thou
hast been deserted by a friend, knowing that we must all be parted from
one another at last.

3. Mightily and long must a man strive within himself before he learn
altogether to overcome himself, and to draw his whole affection towards
God. When a man resteth upon himself, he easily slippeth away unto
human comforts. But a true lover of Christ, and a diligent seeker after
virtue, falleth not back upon those comforts, nor seeketh such
sweetness as may be tasted and handled, but desireth rather hard
exercises, and to undertake severe labours for Christ.

4. When, therefore, spiritual comfort is given by God, receive it with
giving of thanks, and know that it is the gift of God, not thy desert.
Be not lifted up, rejoice not overmuch nor foolishly presume, but
rather be more humble for the gift, more wary and more careful in all
thy doings; for that hour will pass away, and temptation will follow.
When comfort is taken from thee, do not straightway despair, but wait
for the heavenly visitation with humility and patience, for God is able
to give thee back greater favour and consolation. This is not new nor
strange to those who have made trial of the way of God, for with the
great saints and the ancient prophets there was often this manner of
change.

5. Wherefore one said when the favour of God was present with him, I
said in my prosperity I shall never be moved,(1) but he goeth on to say
what he felt within himself when the favour departed: Thou didst turn
Thy face from me, and I was troubled. In spite whereof he in no wise
despaireth, but the more instantly entreateth God, and saith, Unto
Thee, O Lord, will I cry, and will pray unto my God; and then he
receiveth the fruit of his prayer, and testifieth how he hath been
heard, saying, The Lord heard me and had mercy upon me, the Lord was my
helper. But wherein? Thou hast turned my heaviness into joy, Thou hast
put off my sackcloth and girded me with gladness. If it was thus with
the great saints, we who are poor and needy ought not to despair if we
are sometimes in the warmth and sometimes in the cold, for the Spirit
cometh and goeth according to the good pleasure of His will. Wherefore
holy Job saith, Thou dost visit him in the morning, and suddenly Thou
dost prove him.(2)

6. Whereupon then can I hope, or wherein may I trust, save only in the
great mercy of God, and the hope of heavenly grace? For whether good
men are with me, godly brethren or faithful friends, whether holy books
or beautiful discourses, whether sweet hymns and songs, all these help
but little, and have but little savour when I am deserted by God’s
favour and left to mine own poverty. There is no better remedy, then,
than patience and denial of self, and an abiding in the will of God.

7. I have never found any man so religious and godly, but that he felt
sometimes a withdrawal of the divine favour, and lack of fervour. No
saint was ever so filled with rapture, so enlightened, but that sooner
or later he was tempted. For he is not worthy of the great vision of
God, who, for God’s sake, hath not been exercised by some temptation.
For temptation is wont to go before as a sign of the comfort which
shall follow, and heavenly comfort is promised to those who are proved
by temptation. As it is written, To him that overcometh I will give to
eat of the tree of life.(3)

8. Divine comfort is given that a man may be stronger to bear
adversities. And temptation followeth, lest he be lifted up because of
the benefit. The devil sleepeth not; thy flesh is not yet dead;
therefore, cease thou not to make thyself ready unto the battle, for
enemies stand on thy right hand and on thy left, and they are never at
rest.

(1) Psalm xxx. 6. (2) Job vii. 18. (3) Revelation ii. 7.




CHAPTER X

Of gratitude for the Grace of God


Why seekest thou rest when thou art born to labour? Prepare thyself for
patience more than for comforts, and for bearing the cross more than
for joy. For who among the men of this world would not gladly receive
consolation and spiritual joy if he might always have it? For spiritual
comforts exceed all the delights of the world, and all the pleasures of
the flesh. For all worldly delights are either empty or unclean, whilst
spiritual delights alone are pleasant and honourable, the offspring of
virtue, and poured forth by God into pure minds. But no man can always
enjoy these divine comforts at his own will, because the season of
temptation ceaseth not for long.

2. Great is the difference between a visitation from above and false
liberty of spirit and great confidence in self. God doeth well in
giving us the grace of comfort, but man doeth ill in not immediately
giving God thanks thereof. And thus the gifts of grace are not able to
flow unto us, because we are ungrateful to the Author of them, and
return them not wholly to the Fountain whence they flow. For grace ever
becometh the portion of him who is grateful and that is taken away from
the proud, which is wont to be given to the humble.

3. I desire no consolation which taketh away from me compunction, I
love no contemplation which leadeth to pride. For all that is high is
not holy, nor is everything that is sweet good; every desire is not
pure; nor is everything that is dear to us pleasing unto God. Willingly
do I accept that grace whereby I am made humbler and more wary and more
ready to renounce myself. He who is made learned by the gift of grace
and taught wisdom by the stroke of the withdrawal thereof, will not
dare to claim any good thing for himself, but will rather confess that
he is poor and needy. Give unto God the thing which is God’s,(1) and
ascribe to thyself that which is thine; that is, give thanks unto God
for His grace, but for thyself alone confess thy fault, and that thy
punishment is deserved for thy fault.

4. Sit thou down always in the lowest room and thou shalt be given the
highest place.(2) For the highest cannot be without the lowest. For the
highest saints of God are least in their own sight, and the more
glorious they are, so much the lowlier are they in themselves; full of
grace and heavenly glory, they are not desirous of vain-glory; resting
on God and strong in His might, they cannot be lifted up in any wise.
And they who ascribe unto God all the good which they have received,
“seek not glory one of another, but the glory which cometh from God
only,” and they desire that God shall be praised in Himself and in all
His Saints above all things, and they are always striving for this very
thing.

5. Be thankful, therefore, for the least benefit and thou shalt be
worthy to receive greater. Let the least be unto thee even as the
greatest, and let that which is of little account be unto thee as a
special gift. If the majesty of the Giver be considered, nothing that
is given shall seem small and of no worth, for that is not a small
thing which is given by the Most High God. Yea, though He gave
punishment and stripes, we ought to be thankful, because He ever doth
for our profit whatever He suffereth to come upon us. He who seeketh to
retain the favour of God, let him be thankful for the favour which is
given, and patient in respect of that which is taken away. Let him pray
that it may return; let him be wary and humble that he lose it not.

(1) Matthew xxii. 21. (2) Luke xiv. 10.




