CHAPTER XXII

On the contemplation of human misery


Thou art miserable wheresoever thou art, and whithersoever thou
turnest, unless thou turn thee to God. Why art thou disquieted because
it happeneth not to thee according to thy wishes and desires? Who is he
that hath everything according to his will? Neither I, nor thou, nor
any man upon the earth. There is no man in the world free from trouble
or anguish, though he were King or Pope. Who is he who hath the
happiest lot? Even he who is strong to suffer somewhat for God.

2. There are many foolish and unstable men who say, “See what a
prosperous life that man hath, how rich and how great he is, how
powerful, how exalted.” But lift up thine eyes to the good things of
heaven, and thou shalt see that all these worldly things are nothing,
they are utterly uncertain, yea, they are wearisome, because they are
never possessed without care and fear. The happiness of man lieth not
in the abundance of temporal things but a moderate portion sufficeth
him. Our life upon the earth is verily wretchedness. The more a man
desireth to be spiritual, the more bitter doth the present life become
to him; because he the better understandeth and seeth the defects of
human corruption. For to eat, to drink, to watch, to sleep, to rest, to
labour, and to be subject to the other necessities of nature, is truly
a great wretchedness and affliction to a devout man, who would fain be
released and free from all sin.

3. For the inner man is heavily burdened with the necessities of the
body in this world. Wherefore the prophet devoutly prayeth to be freed
from them, saying, Deliver me from my necessities, O Lord.(1) But woe
to those who know not their own misery, and yet greater woe to those
who love this miserable and corruptible life. For to such a degree do
some cling to it (even though by labouring or begging they scarce
procure what is necessary for subsistence) that if they might live here
always, they would care nothing for the Kingdom of God.

4. Oh foolish and faithless of heart, who lie buried so deep in worldly
things, that they relish nothing save the things of the flesh!
Miserable ones! they will too sadly find out at the last, how vile and
worthless was that which they loved. The saints of God and all loyal
friends of Christ held as nothing the things which pleased the flesh,
or those which flourished in this life, but their whole hope and
affection aspired to the things which are above. Their whole desire was
borne upwards to everlasting and invisible things, lest they should be
drawn downwards by the love of things visible.

5. Lose not, brother, thy loyal desire of progress to things spiritual.
There is yet time, the hour is not past. Why wilt thou put off thy
resolution? Arise, begin this very moment, and say, “Now is the time to
do: now is the time to fight, now is the proper time for amendment.”
When thou art ill at ease and troubled, then is the time when thou art
nearest unto blessing. Thou must go through fire and water that God may
bring thee into a wealthy place. Unless thou put force upon thyself,
thou wilt not conquer thy faults. So long as we carry about with us
this frail body, we cannot be without sin, we cannot live without
weariness and trouble. Gladly would we have rest from all misery; but
because through sin we have lost innocence, we have lost also the true
happiness. Therefore must we be patient, and wait for the mercy of God,
until this tyranny be overpast, and this mortality be swallowed up of
life.

6. O how great is the frailty of man, which is ever prone to evil!
To-day thou confessest thy sins, and to-morrow thou committest again
the sins thou didst confess. Now dost thou resolve to avoid a fault,
and within an hour thou behavest thyself as if thou hadst never
resolved at all. Good cause have we therefore to humble ourselves, and
never to think highly of ourselves, seeing that we are so frail and
unstable. And quickly may that be lost by our negligence, which by much
labour was hardly attained through grace.

7. What shall become of us at the end, if at the beginning we are
lukewarm and idle? Woe unto us, if we choose to rest, as though it were
a time of peace and security, while as yet no sign appeareth in our
life of true holiness. Rather had we need that we might begin yet
afresh, like good novices, to be instructed unto good living, if haply
there might be hope of some future amendment and greater spiritual
increase.

(1) Psalm xxv. 17.




CHAPTER XXIII

Of meditation upon death


Very quickly will there be an end of thee here; take heed therefore how
it will be with thee in another world. To-day man is, and to-morrow he
will be seen no more. And being removed out of sight, quickly also he
is out of mind. O the dulness and hardness of man’s heart, which
thinketh only of the present, and looketh not forward to the future.
Thou oughtest in every deed and thought so to order thyself, as if thou
wert to die this day. If thou hadst a good conscience thou wouldst not
greatly fear death. It were better for thee to watch against sin, than
to fly from death. If to-day thou art not ready, how shalt thou be
ready to-morrow? To-morrow is an uncertain day; and how knowest thou
that thou shalt have a to-morrow?

2. What doth it profit to live long, when we amend so little? Ah! long
life doth not always amend, but often the more increaseth guilt. Oh
that we might spend a single day in this world as it ought to be spent!
Many there are who reckon the years since they were converted, and yet
oftentimes how little is the fruit thereof. If it is a fearful thing to
die, it may be perchance a yet more fearful thing to live long. Happy
is the man who hath the hour of his death always before his eyes, and
daily prepareth himself to die. If thou hast ever seen one die,
consider that thou also shalt pass away by the same road.

3. When it is morning reflect that it may be thou shalt not see the
evening, and at eventide dare not to boast thyself of the morrow.
Always be thou prepared, and so live that death may never find thee
unprepared. Many die suddenly and unexpectedly. For at such an hour as
ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.(1) When that last hour shall come,
thou wilt begin to think very differently of thy whole life past, and
wilt mourn bitterly that thou hast been so negligent and slothful.

4. Happy and wise is he who now striveth to be such in life as he would
fain be found in death! For a perfect contempt of the world, a fervent
desire to excel in virtue, the love of discipline, the painfulness of
repentance, readiness to obey, denial of self, submission to any
adversity for love of Christ; these are the things which shall give
great confidence of a happy death. Whilst thou art in health thou hast
many opportunities of good works; but when thou art in sickness I know
not how much thou wilt be able to do. Few are made better by infirmity:
even as they who wander much abroad seldom become holy.

5. Trust not thy friends and kinsfolk, nor put off the work of thy
salvation to the future, for men will forget thee sooner than thou
thinkest. It is better for thee now to provide in time, and to send
some good before thee, than to trust to the help of others. If thou art
not anxious for thyself now, who, thinkest thou, will be anxious for
thee afterwards? Now the time is most precious. Now is the accepted
time, now is the day of salvation. But alas! that thou spendest not
well this time, wherein thou mightest lay up treasure which should
profit thee everlastingly. The hour will come when thou shalt desire
one day, yea, one hour, for amendment of life, and I know not whether
thou shalt obtain.

6. Oh, dearly beloved, from what danger thou mightest free thyself,
from what great fear, if only thou wouldst always live in fear, and in
expectation of death! Strive now to live in such wise that in the hour
of death thou mayest rather rejoice than fear. Learn now to die to the
world, so shalt thou begin to live with Christ. Learn now to contemn
all earthly things, and then mayest thou freely go unto Christ. Keep
under thy body by penitence, and then shalt thou be able to have a sure
confidence.

7. Ah, foolish one! why thinkest thou that thou shalt live long, when
thou art not sure of a single day? How many have been deceived, and
suddenly have been snatched away from the body! How many times hast
thou heard how one was slain by the sword, another was drowned, another
falling from on high broke his neck, another died at the table, another
whilst at play! One died by fire, another by the sword, another by the
pestilence, another by the robber. Thus cometh death to all, and the
life of men swiftly passeth away like a shadow.

8. Who will remember thee after thy death? And who will entreat for
thee? Work, work now, oh dearly beloved, work all that thou canst. For
thou knowest not when thou shalt die, nor what shall happen unto thee
after death. While thou hast time, lay up for thyself undying riches.
Think of nought but of thy salvation; care only for the things of God.
Make to thyself friends, by venerating the saints of God and walking in
their steps, that when thou failest, thou mayest be received into
everlasting habitations.(2)

9. Keep thyself as a stranger and a pilgrim upon the earth, to whom the
things of the world appertain not. Keep thine heart free, and lifted up
towards God, for here have we no continuing city.(3) To Him direct thy
daily prayers with crying and tears, that thy spirit may be found
worthy to pass happily after death unto its Lord. Amen.

(1) Matthew xxiv. 44. (2) Luke xvi. 9. (3) Hebrews xiii. 14.




