CHAPTER XXI

That we must rest in God above all goods and gifts


Above all things and in all things thou shalt rest alway in the Lord, O
my soul, for he himself is the eternal rest of the saints. Grant me,
most sweet and loving Jesus, to rest in Thee above every creature,
above all health and beauty, above all glory and honour, above all
power and dignity, above all knowledge and skilfulness, above all
riches and arts, above all joy and exultation, above all fame and
praise, above all sweetness and consolation, above all hope and
promise, above all merit and desire, above all gifts and rewards which
Thou canst give and pour forth, above all joy and jubilation which the
mind is able to receive and feel; in a word, above Angels and
Archangels and all the army of heaven, above all things visible and
invisible, and above everything which Thou, O my God, art not.

2. For Thou, O Lord, my God, art best above all things; Thou only art
the Most High, Thou only the Almighty, Thou only the All-sufficient,
and the Fulness of all things; Thou only the All-delightsome and the
All-comforting; Thou alone the altogether lovely and altogether loving;
Thou alone the Most Exalted and Most Glorious above all things; in Whom
all things are, and were, and ever shall be, altogether and
all-perfect. And thus it falleth short and is insufficient whatsoever
Thou givest to me without Thyself or whatsoever Thou revealest or dost
promise concerning Thyself, whilst Thou art not seen or fully
possessed: since verily my heart cannot truly rest nor be entirely
content, except it rest in Thee, and go beyond all gifts and every
creature.

3. O my most beloved Spouse, Jesus Christ, most holy lover of my soul,
Ruler of this whole Creation, who shall give me the wings of true
liberty, that I may flee to Thee and find rest? Oh when shall it be
given me to be open to receive Thee to the full, and to see how sweet
Thou art, O Lord my God? When shall I collect myself altogether in
Thee, that because of Thy love I may not feel myself at all, but may
know Thee only above every sense and measure, in measure not known to
others. But now I ofttimes groan, and bear my sad estate with sorrow;
because many evils befall me in this vale of miseries which continually
disturb and fill me with sorrow, and encloud me, continually hinder and
fill me with care, allure and entangle me, that I cannot have free
access to Thee, nor enjoy that sweet intercourse which is always near
at hand to the blessed spirits. Let my deep sighing come before Thee,
and my manifold desolation on the earth.

4. O Jesus, Light of Eternal Glory, solace of the wandering soul,
before Thee my mouth is without speech, and my silence speaketh to
Thee. How long will my Lord delay to come unto me? Let Him come unto
me, His poor and humble one, and make me glad. Let Him put forth His
hand, and deliver His holy one from every snare. Come, Oh come; for
without Thee shall be no joyful day or hour, for Thou art my joy, and
without Thee is my table empty. I am miserable, and in a manner
imprisoned and loaded with fetters, until Thou refresh me by the light
of Thy presence, and give me liberty, and show Thy loving countenance.

5. Let others seek some other thing instead of Thee, whatsoever it
shall please them; but for my part nothing else pleaseth or shall
please, save Thou, my God, my hope, my eternal salvation. I will not
hold my peace, nor cease to implore, until Thy grace return, and until
Thou speak to me within.

6. “Behold, here I am! Behold, I come to thee, for thou didst call Me.
Thy tears and the longing of thy soul, thy humbleness and contrition of
heart have inclined Me, and brought Me to thee.”

7. And I said Lord, I have called upon Thee, and I have longed to enjoy
Thee, being ready to reject everything for Thy sake. For Thou didst
first move me to seek Thee. Therefore, blessed be Thou, O Lord, who has
wrought this good work upon Thy servant, according to the multitude of
Thy mercy. What then hath Thy servant to say in Thy presence, save to
humble himself greatly before Thee, being alway mindful of his own
iniquity and vileness. For there is none like unto Thee in all marvels
of heaven and earth. Excellent are Thy works, true are Thy judgments,
and by Thy Providence are all things governed. Therefore praise and
glory be unto Thee, O Wisdom of the Father, let my mouth and my soul
and all created things praise and bless Thee together.




CHAPTER XXII

Of the recollection of God’s manifold benefits


Open, O Lord, my heart in Thy law, and teach me to walk in the way of
Thy commandments. Grant me to understand Thy will and to be mindful of
Thy benefits, both general and special, with great reverence and
diligent meditation, that thus I may be able worthily to give Thee
thanks. Yet I know and confess that I cannot render Thee due praises
for the least of Thy mercies. I am less than the least of all the good
things which Thou gavest me; and when I consider Thy majesty, my spirit
faileth because of the greatness thereof.

2. All things which we have in the soul and in the body, and whatsoever
things we possess, whether outwardly or inwardly, naturally or
supernaturally, are Thy good gifts, and prove Thee, from whom we have
received them all, to be good, gentle, and kind. Although one receiveth
many things, and another fewer, yet all are Thine, and without Thee not
even the least thing can be possessed. He who hath received greater
cannot boast that it is of his own merit, nor lift himself up above
others, nor contemn those beneath him; for he is the greater and the
better who ascribeth least to himself, and in giving thanks is the
humbler and more devout; and he who holdeth himself to be viler than
all, and judgeth himself to be the more unworthy, is the apter for
receiving greater things.

3. But he who hath received fewer gifts, ought not to be cast down, nor
to take it amiss, nor to envy him who is richer; but rather ought he to
look unto Thee, and to greatly extol Thy goodness, for Thou pourest
forth Thy gifts so richly, so freely and largely, without respect of
persons. All things come of Thee; therefore in all things shalt thou be
praised. Thou knowest what is best to be given to each; and why this
man hath less, and that more, is not for us but for Thee to understand,
for unto Thee each man’s deservings are fully known.

4. Wherefore, O Lord God, I reckon it even a great benefit, not to have
many things, whence praise and glory may appear outwardly, and after
the thought of men. For so it is that he who considereth his own
poverty and vileness, ought not only to draw therefrom no grief or
sorrow, or sadness of spirit, but rather comfort and cheerfulness;
because Thou, Lord, hast chosen the poor and humble, and those who are
poor in this world, to be Thy friends and acquaintance. So give all
Thine apostles witness whom Thou hast made princes in all lands. Yet
they had their conversation in this world blameless, so humble and
meek, without any malice or deceit, that they even rejoiced to suffer
rebukes for Thy Name’s sake,(1) and what things the world hateth, they
embraced with great joy.

5. Therefore ought nothing so much to rejoice him who loveth Thee and
knoweth Thy benefits, as Thy will in him, and the good pleasure of
Thine eternal Providence, wherewith he ought to be so contented and
comforted, that he would as willingly be the least as any other would
be the greatest, as peaceable and contented in the lowest as in the
highest place, and as willingly held of small and low account and of no
name or reputation as to be more honourable and greater in the world
than others. For Thy will and the love of Thine honour ought to go
before all things, and to please and comfort him more, than all
benefits that are given or may be given to himself.

(1) Acts v. 41.




