CHAPTER XXV

Wherein firm peace of heart and true profit consist


“My Son, I have said, Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you,
not as the world giveth give I unto you.(1) All men desire peace, but
all do not care for the things which belong unto true peace. My peace
is with the humble and lowly in heart. Thy peace shall be in much
patience. If thou heardest Me, and didst follow My voice, thou
shouldest enjoy much peace.”

2. What then shall I do, Lord?

3. “In everything take heed to thyself what thou doest, and what thou
sayest; and direct all thy purpose to this, that thou please Me alone,
and desire or seek nothing apart from Me. But, moreover, judge nothing
rashly concerning the words or deeds of others, nor meddle with matters
which are not committed to thee; and it may be that thou shalt be
disturbed little or rarely. Yet never to feel any disquiet, nor to
suffer any pain of heart or body, this belongeth not to the present
life, but is the state of eternal rest. Therefore count not thyself to
have found true peace, if thou hast felt no grief; nor that then all is
well if thou hast no adversary; nor that this is perfect if all things
fall out according to thy desire. Nor then reckon thyself to be
anything great, or think that thou art specially beloved, if thou art
in a state of great fervour and sweetness of spirit; for not by these
things is the true lover of virtue known, nor in them doth the profit
and perfection of man consist.”

4. In what then, Lord?

5. “In offering thyself with all thy heart to the Divine Will, in not
seeking the things which are thine own, whether great or small, whether
temporal or eternal; so that thou remain with the same steady
countenance in giving of thanks between prosperity and adversity,
weighing all things in an equal balance. If thou be so brave and
long-suffering in hope that when inward comfort is taken from thee,
thou even prepare thy heart for the more endurance, and justify not
thyself, as though thou oughtest not to suffer these heavy things, but
dost justify Me in all things that I appoint, and dost bless My Holy
Name, then dost thou walk in the true and right way of peace, and shalt
have a sure hope that thou shalt again behold My face with joy. For if
thou come to an utter contempt of thyself, know that then thou shalt
enjoy abundance of peace, as much as is possible where thou art but a
wayfaring man.”

(1) John xiv. 27.




CHAPTER XXVI

Of the exaltation of a free spirit, which humble prayer more deserveth
than doth frequent reading


Lord, this is the work of a perfect man, never to slacken his mind from
attention to heavenly things, and among many cares to pass along as it
were without care, not after the manner of one indifferent, but rather
with the privilege of a free mind, cleaving to no creature with
inordinate affection.

2. I beseech Thee, my most merciful Lord God, preserve me from the
cares of this life, lest I become too much entangled; from many
necessities of the body, lest I be taken captive by pleasure; from all
obstacles of the spirit, lest I be broken and cast down with cares. I
say not from those things which the vanity of the world goeth about
after with all eagerness, but from those miseries, which by the
universal curse of mortality weigh down and hold back the soul of thy
servant in punishment, that it cannot enter into liberty of spirit, so
often as it would.

3. O my God, sweetness unspeakable, turn into bitterness all my fleshly
consolation, which draweth me away from the love of eternal things, and
wickedly allureth toward itself by setting before me some present
delight. Let not, O my God, let not flesh and blood prevail over me,
let not the world and its short glory deceive me, let not the devil and
his craftiness supplant me. Give me courage to resist, patience to
endure, constancy to persevere. Grant, in place of all consolations of
the world, the most sweet unction of Thy Spirit, and in place of carnal
love, pour into me the love of Thy Name.

4. Behold, food and drink and clothing, and all the other needs
appertaining to the support of the body, are burdensome to the devout
spirit. Grant that I may use such things with moderation, and that I be
not entangled with inordinate affection for them. To cast away all
these things is not lawful, because nature must be sustained, but to
require superfluities and things which merely minister delight, the
holy law forbiddeth; for otherwise the flesh would wax insolent against
the spirit. In all these things, I beseech Thee, let Thy hand guide and
teach me, that I in no way exceed.




CHAPTER XXVII

That personal love greatly hindereth from the highest good


“My Son, thou must give all for all, and be nothing of thine own. Know
thou that the love of thyself is more hurtful to thee than anything in
the world. According to the love and inclination which thou hast,
everything more or less cleaveth to thee. If thy love be pure, sincere,
well-regulated, thou shalt not be in captivity to anything. Do not
covet what thou mayest not have; do not have what is able to hinder
thee, and to rob thee of inward liberty. It is wonderful that thou
committest not thyself to Me from the very bottom of thy heart, with
all things which thou canst desire or have.

2. “Why art thou consumed with vain sorrow? Why art thou wearied with
superfluous cares? Stand thou by My good pleasure, and thou shalt
suffer no loss. If thou seekest after this or that, and wilt be here or
there, according to thine own advantage or the fulfilling of thine own
pleasure, thou shalt never be in quiet, nor free from care, because in
everything somewhat will be found lacking, and everywhere there will be
somebody who opposeth thee.

3. “Therefore it is not gaining or multiplying of this thing or that
which advantageth thee, but rather the despising it and cutting it by
the root out of thy heart; which thou must not only understand of money
and riches, but of the desire after honour and vain praise, things
which all pass away with the world. The place availeth little if the
spirit of devotion is wanting; nor shall that peace stand long which is
sought from abroad, if the state of thy heart is without the true
foundation, that is, if it abide not in Me. Thou mayest change, but
thou canst not better thyself; for when occasion ariseth and is
accepted thou shalt find what thou didst fly from, yea more.”

A PRAYER FOR CLEANSING OF THE HEART AND FOR HEAVENLY WISDOM


4. Strengthen me, O God, by the grace of Thy Holy Spirit. Give me
virtue to be strengthened with might in the inner man, and to free my
heart from all fruitless care and trouble, and that I be not drawn away
by various desires after any things whatsoever, whether of little value
or great, but that I may look upon all as passing away, and myself as
passing away with them; because there is no profit under the sun, and
all is vanity and vexation of spirit.(1) Oh how wise is he that
considereth thus!

5. Give me, O Lord, heavenly wisdom, that I may learn to seek Thee
above all things and to find Thee; to relish Thee above all things and
to love Thee; and to understand all other things, even as they are,
according to the order of Thy wisdom. Grant me prudently to avoid the
flatterer, and patiently to bear with him that opposeth me; for this is
great wisdom, not to be carried by every wind of words, nor to give ear
to the wicked flattering Siren; for thus do we go safely on in the way
we have begun.

(1) Ecclesiastes ii. 11.




