CHAPTER IV

That many good gifts are bestowed upon those who Communicate devoutly


The Voice of the Disciple


O Lord my God, prevent Thou Thy servant with the blessings of Thy
sweetness, that I may be enabled to draw near worthily and devoutly to
Thy glorious Sacrament. Awaken my heart towards Thee, and deliver me
from heavy slumber. Visit me with Thy salvation that I may in spirit
taste Thy sweetness, which plentifully lieth hid in this Sacrament as
in a fountain. Lighten also mine eyes to behold this so great mystery,
and strengthen me that I may believe it with undoubting faith. For it
is Thy word, not human power; it is Thy holy institution, not the
invention of man. For no man is found fit in himself to receive and to
understand these things, which transcend even the wisdom of the Angels.
What portion then shall I, unworthy sinner, who am but dust and ashes,
be able to search into and comprehend of so deep a Sacrament?

2. O Lord, in the simplicity of my heart, in good and firm faith, and
according to Thy will, I draw nigh unto Thee with hope and reverence,
and truly believe that Thou art here present in the Sacrament, God and
man. Thou willest therefore that I receive Thee and unite myself to
Thee in charity. Wherefore I beseech Thy mercy, and implore Thee to
give me Thy special grace, to this end, that I may be wholly dissolved
and overflow with love towards Thee, and no more suffer any other
consolation to enter into me. For this most high and most glorious
Sacrament is the health of the soul and the body, the medicine of all
spiritual sickness, whereby I am healed of my sins, my passions are
bridled, temptations are conquered or weakened, more grace is poured
into me, virtue begun is increased, faith is made firm, hope is
strengthened, and charity is enkindled and enlarged.

3. For in this Sacrament Thou hast bestowed many good things and still
bestowest them continually on Thine elect who communicate devoutly, O
my God, Lifter up of my soul, Repairer of human infirmity, and Giver of
all inward consolation. For Thou pourest into them much consolation
against all sorts of tribulation, and out of the deep of their own
misery Thou liftest them up to the hope of Thy protection, and with
ever new grace, dost inwardly refresh and enlighten them; so that they
who felt themselves to be anxious and without affection before
Communion, afterwards being refreshed with heavenly food and drink,
find themselves changed for the better. And even in such wise Thou
dealest severally with Thine elect, that they may truly acknowledge and
clearly make proof that they have nothing whatsoever of their own, and
what goodness and grace come to them from Thee; because being in
themselves cold, hard of heart, indevout, through Thee they become
fervent, zealous, and devout. For who is there coming humbly to the
fountain of sweetness, carrieth not away thence at the least some
little of that sweetness? Or who standing by a large fire, feeleth not
from thence a little of its heat? And Thou art ever a full and
overflowing fountain, a fire continually burning, and never going out.

4. Wherefore if it is not suffered to me to draw from the fulness of
the fountain, nor to drink unto satisfying, yet will I set my lips to
the mouth of the heavenly conduit, that at least I may receive a small
drop to quench my thirst, that I dry not up within my heart. And if I
am not yet able to be altogether heavenly and so enkindled as the
Cherubim and Seraphim, yet will I endeavour to give myself unto
devotion, and to prepare my heart, that I may gain if it be but a
little flame of the divine fire, through the humble receiving of the
life-giving Sacrament. But whatsoever is wanting unto me, O merciful
Jesus, Most Holy Saviour, do Thou of Thy kindness and grace supply, who
hast vouchsafed to call all unto Thee, saying, Come unto me, all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

5. I indeed labour in the sweat of my face, I am tormented with sorrow
of heart, I am burdened with sins, I am disquieted with temptations, I
am entangled and oppressed with many passions, and there is none to
help me, there is none to deliver and ease me, but Thou, O Lord God, my
Saviour, to whom I commit myself and all things that are mine, that
Thou mayest preserve me and lead me unto life eternal.

 Receive me unto the praise and glory of Thy name, who hast prepared
 Thy Body and Blood to be my meat and drink. Grant, O Lord God my
 Saviour, that with coming often to Thy mysteries the zeal of my
 devotion may increase.




CHAPTER V

Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and of the office of the priest


The Voice of the Beloved


If thou hadst angelic purity and the holiness of holy John the Baptist,
thou wouldest not be worthy to receive or to minister this Sacrament.
For this is not deserved by merit of man that a man should consecrate
and minister the Sacrament of Christ, and take for food the bread of
Angels. Vast is the mystery, and great is the dignity of the priests,
to whom is given what is not granted to Angels. For priests only,
rightly ordained in the church, have the power of consecrating and
celebrating the Body of Christ. The priest indeed is the minister of
God, using the Word of God by God’s command and institution;
nevertheless God is there the principal Author and invisible Worker,
that to whom all that He willeth is subject, and all He commandeth is
obedient.

2. Therefore thou must believe God Almighty in this most excellent
Sacrament, more than thine own sense or any visible sign at all. And
therefore with fear and reverence is this work to be approached. Take
heed therefore and see what it is of which the ministry is committed to
thee by the laying on of the Bishop’s hand. Behold thou art made a
priest and art consecrated to celebrate. See now that thou do it before
God faithfully and devoutly at due time, and shew thyself without
blame. Thou hast not lightened thy burden, but art now bound with a
straiter bond of discipline, and art pledged to a higher degree of
holiness. A priest ought to be adorned with all virtues and to afford
to others an example of good life. His conversation must not be with
the popular and common ways of men, but with Angels in Heaven or with
perfect men on earth.

3. A priest clad in holy garments taketh Christ’s place that he may
pray unto God with all supplication and humility for himself and for
the whole people. He must always remember the Passion of Christ. He
must diligently look upon Christ’s footsteps and fervently endeavour
himself to follow them. He must bear meekly for God whatsoever ills are
brought upon him by others. He must mourn for his own sins, and for the
sins committed by others, and may not grow careless of prayer and holy
oblation, until he prevail to obtain grace and mercy. When the priest
celebrateth, he honoureth God, giveth joy to the Angels, buildeth up
the Church, helpeth the living, hath communion with the departed, and
maketh himself a partaker of all good things.




