CHAPTER XXIV

Of the judgment and punishment of the wicked


In all that thou doest, remember the end, and how thou wilt stand
before a strict judge, from whom nothing is hid, who is not bribed with
gifts, nor accepteth excuses, but will judge righteous judgment. O most
miserable and foolish sinner, who art sometimes in fear of the
countenance of an angry man, what wilt thou answer to God, who knoweth
all thy misdeeds? Why dost thou not provide for thyself against the day
of judgment, when no man shall be able to be excused or defended by
means of another, but each one shall bear his burden himself alone? Now
doth thy labour bring forth fruit, now is thy weeping acceptable, thy
groaning heard, thy sorrow well pleasing to God, and cleansing to thy
soul.

2. Even here on earth the patient man findeth great occasion of
purifying his soul. When suffering injuries he grieveth more for the
other’s malice than for his own wrong; when he prayeth heartily for
those that despitefully use him, and forgiveth them from his heart;
when he is not slow to ask pardon from others; when he is swifter to
pity than to anger; when he frequently denieth himself and striveth
altogether to subdue the flesh to the spirit. Better is it now to
purify the soul from sin, than to cling to sins from which we must be
purged hereafter. Truly we deceive ourselves by the inordinate love
which we bear towards the flesh.

3. What is it which that fire shall devour, save thy sins? The more
thou sparest thyself and followest the flesh, the more heavy shall thy
punishment be, and the more fuel art thou heaping up for the burning.
For wherein a man hath sinned, therein shall he be the more heavily
punished. There shall the slothful be pricked forward with burning
goads, and the gluttons be tormented with intolerable hunger and
thirst. There shall the luxurious and the lovers of pleasure be plunged
into burning pitch and stinking brimstone, and the envious shall howl
like mad dogs for very grief.

4. No sin will there be which shall not be visited with its own proper
punishment. The proud shall be filled with utter confusion, and the
covetous shall be pinched with miserable poverty. An hour’s pain there
shall be more grievous than a hundred years here of the bitterest
penitence. No quiet shall be there, no comfort for the lost, though
here sometimes there is respite from pain, and enjoyment of the solace
of friends. Be thou anxious now and sorrowful for thy sins, that in the
day of judgment thou mayest have boldness with the blessed. For then
shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such
as have afflicted him and made no account of his labours.(1) Then shall
he stand up to judge, he who now submitteth himself in humility to the
judgments of men. Then shall the poor and humble man have great
confidence, while the proud is taken with fear on every side.

5. Then shall it be seen that he was the wise man in this world who
learned to be a fool and despised for Christ. Then shall all
tribulation patiently borne delight us, while the mouth of the ungodly
shall be stopped. Then shall every godly man rejoice, and every profane
man shall mourn. Then the afflicted flesh shall more rejoice than if it
had been alway nourished in delights. Then the humble garment shall put
on beauty, and the precious robe shall hide itself as vile. Then the
little poor cottage shall be more commended than the gilded palace.
Then enduring patience shall have more might than all the power of the
world. Then simple obedience shall be more highly exalted than all
worldly wisdom.

6. Then a pure and good conscience shall more rejoice than learned
philosophy. Then contempt of riches shall have more weight than all the
treasure of the children of this world. Then shalt thou find more
comfort in having prayed devoutly than in having fared sumptuously.
Then thou wilt rather rejoice in having kept silence than in having
made long speech. Then holy deeds shall be far stronger than many fine
words. Then a strict life and sincere penitence shall bring deeper
pleasure than all earthly delight. Learn now to suffer a little, that
then thou mayest be enabled to escape heavier sufferings. Prove first
here, what thou art able to endure hereafter. If now thou art able to
bear so little, how wilt thou be able to endure eternal torments? If
now a little suffering maketh thee so impatient, what shall hell-fire
do then? Behold of a surety thou art not able to have two Paradises, to
take thy fill or delight here in this world, and to reign with Christ
hereafter.

7. If even unto this day thou hadst ever lived in honours and
pleasures, what would the whole profit thee if now death came to thee
in an instant? All therefore is vanity, save to love God and to serve
Him only. For he who loveth God with all his heart feareth not death,
nor punishment, nor judgment, nor hell, because perfect love giveth
sure access to God. But he who still delighteth in sin, no marvel if he
is afraid of death and judgment. Nevertheless it is a good thing, if
love as yet cannot restrain thee from evil, that at least the fear of
hell should hold thee back. But he who putteth aside the fear of God
cannot long continue in good, but shall quickly fall into the snares of
the devil.

(1) Wisd. v. 1.




CHAPTER XXV

Of the zealous amendment of our whole life


Be thou watchful and diligent in God’s service, and bethink thee often
why thou hast renounced the world. Was it not that thou mightest live
to God and become a spiritual man? Be zealous, therefore, for thy
spiritual profit, for thou shalt receive shortly the reward of thy
labours, and neither fear nor sorrow shall come any more into thy
borders. Now shalt thou labour a little, and thou shalt find great
rest, yea everlasting joy. If thou shalt remain faithful and zealous in
labour, doubt not that God shall be faithful and bountiful in rewarding
thee. It is thy duty to have a good hope that thou wilt attain the
victory, but thou must not fall into security lest thou become slothful
or lifted up.

2. A certain man being in anxiety of mind, continually tossed about
between hope and fear, and being on a certain day overwhelmed with
grief, cast himself down in prayer before the altar in a church, and
meditated within himself, saying, “Oh! if I but knew that I should
still persevere,” and presently heard within him a voice from God, “And
if thou didst know it, what wouldst thou do? Do now what thou wouldst
do then, and thou shalt be very secure.” And straightway being
comforted and strengthened, he committed himself to the will of God and
the perturbation of spirit ceased, neither had he a mind any more to
search curiously to know what should befall him hereafter, but studied
rather to inquire what was the good and acceptable will of God, for the
beginning and perfecting of every good work.

3. Hope in the Lord and be doing good, saith the Prophet; dwell in the
land and thou shalt be fed(1) with its riches. One thing there is which
holdeth back many from progress and fervent amendment, even the dread
of difficulty, or the labour of the conflict. Nevertheless they advance
above all others in virtue who strive manfully to conquer those things
which are most grievous and contrary to them, for there a man profiteth
most and meriteth greater grace where he most overcometh himself and
mortifieth himself in spirit.

4. But all men have not the same passions to conquer and to mortify,
yet he who is diligent shall attain more profit, although he have
stronger passions, than another who is more temperate of disposition,
but is withal less fervent in the pursuit of virtue. Two things
specially avail unto improvement in holiness, namely firmness to
withdraw ourselves from the sin to which by nature we are most
inclined, and earnest zeal for that good in which we are most lacking.
And strive also very earnestly to guard against and subdue those faults
which displease thee most frequently in others.

5. Gather some profit to thy soul wherever thou art, and wherever thou
seest or hearest good examples, stir thyself to follow them, but where
thou seest anything which is blameworthy, take heed that thou do not
the same; or if at any time thou hast done it, strive quickly to amend
thyself. As thine eye observeth others, so again are the eyes of others
upon thee. How sweet and pleasant is it to see zealous and godly
brethren temperate and of good discipline; and how sad is it and
grievous to see them walking disorderly, not practising the duties to
which they are called. How hurtful a thing it is to neglect the purpose
of their calling, and turn their inclinations to things which are none
of their business.

6. Be mindful of the duties which thou hast undertaken, and set always
before thee the remembrance of the Crucified. Truly oughtest thou to be
ashamed as thou lookest upon the life of Jesus Christ, because thou
hast not yet endeavoured to conform thyself more unto Him, though thou
hast been a long time in the way of God. A religious man who exercises
himself seriously and devoutly in the most holy life and passion of our
Lord shall find there abundantly all things that are profitable and
necessary for him, neither is there need that he shall seek anything
better beyond Jesus. Oh! if Jesus crucified would come into our hearts,
how quickly, and completely should we have learned all that we need to
know!

7. He who is earnest receiveth and beareth well all things that are
laid upon him. He who is careless and lukewarm hath trouble upon
trouble, and suffereth anguish upon every side, because he is without
inward consolation, and is forbidden to seek that which is outward. He
who is living without discipline is exposed to grievous ruin. He who
seeketh easier and lighter discipline shall always be in distress,
because one thing or another will give him displeasure.

8. O! if no other duty lay upon us but to praise the Lord our God with
our whole heart and voice! Oh! if thou never hadst need to eat or
drink, or sleep, but wert always able to praise God, and to give
thyself to spiritual exercises alone; then shouldst thou be far happier
than now, when for so many necessities thou must serve the flesh. O!
that these necessities were not, but only the spiritual refreshments of
the soul, which alas we taste too seldom.

9. When a man hath come to this, that he seeketh comfort from no
created thing, then doth he perfectly begin to enjoy God, then also
will he be well contented with whatsoever shall happen unto him. Then
will he neither rejoice for much nor be sorrowful for little, but he
committeth himself altogether and with full trust unto God, who is all
in all to him, to whom nothing perisheth nor dieth, but all things live
to Him and obey His every word without delay.

10. Remember always thine end, and how the time which is lost returneth
not. Without care and diligence thou shalt never get virtue. If thou
beginnest to grow cold, it shall begin to go ill with thee, but if thou
givest thyself unto zeal thou shalt find much peace, and shalt find thy
labour the lighter because of the grace of God and the love of virtue.
A zealous and diligent man is ready for all things. It is greater
labour to resist sins and passions than to toil in bodily labours. He
who shunneth not small faults falleth little by little into greater. At
eventide thou shalt always be glad if thou spend the day profitably.
Watch over thyself, stir thyself up, admonish thyself, and howsoever it
be with others, neglect not thyself. The more violence thou dost unto
thyself, the more thou shall profit. Amen.

(1) Psalm xxxvii. 3.




THE SECOND BOOK
ADMONITIONS CONCERNING THE INNER LIFE




