CHAPTER XIV

Of the fervent desire of certain devout persons to receive the Body and
Blood of Christ


The Voice of the Disciple


O how great is the abundance of Thy sweetness, O Lord, which Thou hast
laid up for them that fear Thee. When I call to mind some devout
persons who draw nigh to Thy Sacrament, O Lord, with the deepest
devotion and affection, then very often I am confounded in myself and
blush for shame, that I approach Thine altar and table of Holy
Communion so carelessly and coldly, that I remain so dry and without
affection, that I am not wholly kindled with love before Thee, my God,
nor so vehemently drawn and affected as many devout persons have been,
who out of the very earnest desire of the Communion, and tender
affection of heart, could not refrain from weeping, but as it were with
mouth of heart and body alike panted inwardly after Thee, O God, O
Fountain of Life, having no power to appease or satiate their hunger,
save by receiving Thy Body with all joyfulness and spiritual eagerness.

2. O truly ardent faith of those, becoming a very proof of Thy Sacred
Presence! For they verily know their Lord in the breaking of bread,
whose heart so ardently burneth within them(1) when Jesus walketh with
them by the way. Ah me! far from me for the most part is such love and
devotion as this, such vehement love and ardour. Be merciful unto me, O
Jesus, good, sweet, and kind, and grant unto Thy poor suppliant to feel
sometimes, in Holy Communion, though it be but a little, the cordial
affection of Thy love, that my faith may grow stronger, my hope in Thy
goodness increase, and my charity, once kindled within me by the
tasting of the heavenly manna, may never fail.

3. But Thy mercy is able even to grant me the grace which I long for,
and to visit me most tenderly with the spirit of fervour when the day
of Thy good pleasure shall come. For, although I burn not with desire
so vehement as theirs who are specially devout towards Thee, yet,
through Thy grace, I have a desire after that greatly inflamed desire,
praying and desiring to be made partaker with all those who so
fervently love Thee, and to be numbered among their holy company.

(1) Luke xxiv. 32.




CHAPTER XV

That the grace of devotion is acquired by humility and self-denial


The Voice of the Beloved


Thou oughtest to seek earnestly the grace of devotion, to ask it
fervently, to wait for it patiently and faithfully, to receive it
gratefully, to preserve it humbly, to work with it diligently, and to
leave to God the time and manner of heavenly visitation until it come.
Chiefly oughtest thou to humble thyself when thou feelest inwardly
little or no devotion, yet not to be too much cast down, nor to grieve
out of measure. God ofttimes giveth in one short moment what He hath
long time denied; He sometimes giveth at the end what at the beginning
of prayer He hath deferred to give.

2. If grace were always given immediately, and were at hand at the
wish, it would be hardly bearable to weak man. Wherefore the grace of
devotion is to be waited for with a good hope and with humble patience.
Yet impute it to thyself and to thy sins when it is not given, or when
it is mysteriously taken away. It is sometimes a small thing which
hindereth and hideth grace; (if indeed that ought to be called _small_
and not rather _great_, which hindereth so great a good); but if thou
remove this, be it small or great, and perfectly overcome it, thou wilt
have what thou hast asked.

3. For immediately that thou hast given thyself unto God with all thine
heart, and hast sought neither this nor that according to thine own
will and pleasure, but hast altogether settled thyself in Him, thou
shalt find thyself united and at peace; because nothing shall give thee
so sweet relish and delight, as the good pleasure of the Divine will.
Whosoever therefore shall have lifted up his will unto God with
singleness of heart, and shall have delivered himself from every
inordinate love or dislike of any created thing, he will be the most
fit for receiving grace, and worthy of the gift of devotion. For where
the Lord findeth empty vessels,(1) there giveth He His blessing. And
the more perfectly a man forsaketh things which cannot profit, and the
more he dieth to himself, the more quickly doth grace come, the more
plentifully doth it enter in, and the higher doth it lift up the free
heart.

4. Then shall he see, and flow together, and wonder, and his heart
shall be enlarged within him,(2) because the hand of the Lord is with
him, and he hath put himself wholly in His hand, even for ever. Lo,
thus shall the man be blessed, that seeketh God with all his heart, and
receiveth not his soul in vain. This man in receiving the Holy
Eucharist obtaineth the great grace of Divine Union; because he hath
not regard to his own devotion and comfort, but, above all devotion and
comfort, to the glory and honour of God.

(1) 2 Kings iv. (2) Isaiah lx. 5.




