CHAPTER XVI

That true solace is to be sought in God alone


Whatsoever I am able to desire or to think of for my solace, I look for
it not here, but hereafter. For if I alone had all the solaces of this
world, and were able to enjoy all its delights, it is certain that they
could not endure long. Wherefore, O my soul, thou canst be fully
comforted and perfectly refreshed, only in God, the Comforter of the
poor, and the lifter up of the humble. Wait but a little while, my
soul, wait for the Divine promise, and thou shalt have abundance of all
good things in heaven. If thou longest too inordinately for the things
which are now, thou shalt lose those which are eternal and heavenly.
Let temporal things be in the use, eternal things in the desire. Thou
canst not be satisfied with any temporal good, for thou wast not
created for the enjoyment of these.

2. Although thou hadst all the good things which ever were created, yet
couldst not thou be happy and blessed; all thy blessedness and thy
felicity lieth in God who created all things; not such felicity as
seemeth good to the foolish lover of the world, but such as Christ’s
good and faithful servants wait for, and as the spiritual and pure in
heart sometimes taste, whose conversation is in heaven.(1) All human
solace is empty and short-lived; blessed and true is that solace which
is felt inwardly, springing from the truth. The godly man everywhere
beareth about with him his own Comforter, Jesus, and saith unto Him:
“Be with me, Lord Jesus, always and everywhere. Let it be my comfort to
be able to give up cheerfully all human comfort. And if Thy consolation
fail me, let Thy will and righteous approval be alway with me for the
highest comfort. _For Thou wilt not always be chiding, neither keepest
Thou Thine anger for ever_.”(2)

(1) Philippians iii. 20. (2) Psalm ciii. 9.




CHAPTER XVII

That all care is to be cast upon God


“My Son, suffer me to do with thee what I will; I know what is
expedient for thee. Thou thinkest as a man, in many things thou judgest
as human affection persuadeth thee.”

2. Lord, what Thou sayest is true. Greater is Thy care for me than all
the care which I am able to take for myself. For too insecurely doth he
stand who casteth not all his care upon Thee. Lord, so long as my will
standeth right and firm in Thee, do with me what Thou wilt, for
whatsoever Thou shalt do with me cannot be aught but good. Blessed be
Thou if Thou wilt leave me in darkness: blessed also be Thou if Thou
wilt leave me in light. Blessed be Thou if Thou vouchsafe to comfort
me, and always blessed be Thou if Thou cause me to be troubled.

3. “My Son! even thus thou must stand if thou desirest to walk with Me.
Thou must be ready alike for suffering or rejoicing. Thou must be poor
and needy as willingly as full and rich.”

4. Lord, I will willingly bear for Thee whatsoever Thou wilt have to
come upon me. Without choice I will receive from Thy hand good and
evil, sweet and bitter, joy and sadness, and will give Thee thanks for
all things which shall happen unto me. Keep me from all sin, and I will
not fear death nor hell. Only cast me not away for ever, nor blot me
out of the book of life. Then no tribulation which shall come upon me
shall do me hurt.




CHAPTER XVIII

That temporal miseries are to be borne patiently after the example of
Christ


“My Son! I came down from heaven for thy salvation; I took upon Me thy
miseries not of necessity, but drawn by love that thou mightest learn
patience and mightest bear temporal miseries without murmuring. For
from the hour of My birth, until My death upon the Cross, I ceased not
from bearing of sorrow; I had much lack of temporal things; I
oftentimes heard many reproaches against Myself; I gently bore
contradictions and hard words; I received ingratitude for benefits,
blasphemies for My miracles, rebukes for My doctrine.”

2. Lord, because Thou wast patient in Thy life, herein most of all
fulfilling the commandment of Thy Father, it is well that I, miserable
sinner, should patiently bear myself according to Thy will, and as long
as Thou wilt have it so, should bear about with me for my salvation,
the burden of this corruptible life. For although the present life
seemeth burdensome, it is nevertheless already made very full of merit
through Thy grace, and to those who are weak it becometh easier and
brighter through Thy example and the footsteps of Thy saints; but it is
also much more full of consolation than it was of old, under the old
Testament, when the gate of heaven remained shut; and even the way to
heaven seemed more obscure when so few cared to seek after the heavenly
kingdom. But not even those who were then just and in the way of
salvation were able, before Thy Passion and the ransom of Thy holy
Death, to enter the kingdom of heaven.

3. Oh what great thanks am I bound to give Thee, who hast vouchsafed to
show me and all faithful people the good and right way to Thine eternal
kingdom, for Thy way is our way, and by holy patience we walk to Thee
who art our Crown. If Thou hadst not gone before and taught us, who
would care to follow? Oh, how far would they have gone backward if they
had not beheld Thy glorious example! Behold we are still lukewarm,
though we have heard of Thy many signs and discourses; what would
become of us if we had not such a light to help us follow Thee?




