CHAPTER II

That the greatness and charity of God is shown to men in the Sacrament


The Voice of the Disciple


Trusting in Thy goodness and great mercy, O Lord, I draw near, the sick
to the Healer, the hungering and thirsting to the Fountain of life, the
poverty-stricken to the King of heaven, the servant to the Lord, the
creature to the Creator, the desolate to my own gentle Comforter. But
whence is this unto me, that Thou comest unto me? Who am I that Thou
shouldest offer me Thyself? How doth a sinner dare to appear before
Thee? And how dost thou vouchsafe to come to the sinner? Thou knowest
Thy servant, and Thou knowest that he hath in him no good thing for
which Thou shouldest grant him this grace. I confess therefore mine own
vileness, I acknowledge Thy goodness, I praise Thy tenderness, and I
give Thee thanks for Thine exceeding great love. For Thou doest this
for Thine own sake, not for my merits, that Thy goodness may be more
manifest unto me, Thy charity more abundantly poured out upon me, and
Thy humility more perfectly commended unto me. Therefore because this
pleaseth Thee and Thou hast commanded that thus it shall be, Thy
condescension pleaseth me also; and oh that mine iniquity hinder it
not.

2. O most sweet and tender Jesus, what reverence, what giving of thanks
is due to Thee with perpetual praise for the receiving of Thy sacred
Body and Blood, the dignity whereof no man is found able to express.
But what shall I think upon in this Communion in approaching my Lord,
whom I am not able worthily to honour, and nevertheless whom I long
devoutly to receive? What shall be better and more healthful meditation
for me, than utter humiliation of myself before Thee, and exaltation of
Thine infinite goodness towards me? I praise Thee, O my God, and exalt
Thee for evermore. I despise myself, and cast myself down before Thee
into the deep of my vileness.

3. Behold, Thou art the Saint of saints and I the refuse of sinners;
behold, Thou stoopest unto me who am not worthy to look upon Thee;
behold, Thou comest unto me, Thou willest to be with me, Thou invitest
me to Thy feast. Thou willest to give me the heavenly food and bread of
angels to eat; none other, in truth, than Thyself, The living bread,
which didst descend from heaven; and givest life to the world.(1)

4. Behold, whence this love proceedeth! what manner of condescension
shineth forth herein. What great giving of thanks and praise is due
unto Thee for these benefits! Oh how salutary and profitable Thy
purpose when Thou didst ordain this! How sweet and pleasant the feast
when Thou didst give Thyself for food! Oh how admirable is thy working,
O Lord, how mighty Thy power, how unspeakable Thy truth! For Thou didst
speak the word, and all things were made; and this is done which Thou
hast commanded.

5. A thing wonderful, and worthy of faith, and surpassing all the
understanding of man, that Thou, O Lord my God, very God and very man,
givest Thyself altogether to us in a little bread and wine, and art so
our inexhaustible food. Thou, O Lord of all, who hast need of nothing,
hast willed to dwell in us through Thy Sacrament. Preserve my heart and
my body undefiled, that with a joyful and pure conscience I may be able
very often to [celebrate, and](2) receive to my perpetual health. Thy
mysteries, which Thou hast consecrated and instituted both for Thine
own honour, and for a perpetual memorial.

6. Rejoice, O my soul, and give thanks unto God for so great a gift and
precious consolation, left unto thee in this vale of tears. For so oft
as thou callest this mystery to mind and receivest the body of Christ,
so often dost thou celebrate the work of thy redemption, and art made
partaker of all the merits of Christ. For the charity of Christ never
groweth less, and the greatness of His propitiation is never exhausted.
Therefore, by continual renewal of thy spirit, thou oughtest to dispose
thyself hereunto and to weigh the great mystery of salvation with
attentive consideration. So great, new, and joyful ought it to appear
to thee when thou comest to communion, as if on this self-same day
Christ for the first time were descending into the Virgin’s womb and
becoming man, or hanging on the cross, suffering and dying for the
salvation of mankind.

(1) John vi. 51. (2) The words in brackets are only suitable for a
priest.




CHAPTER III

That it is profitable to Communicate often


The Voice of the Disciple


Behold I come unto Thee, O Lord, that I may be blessed through Thy
gift, and be made joyful in Thy holy feast which Thou, O God, of Thy
goodness hast prepared for the poor.(1) Behold in Thee is all that I
can and ought to desire, Thou art my salvation and redemption, my hope
and strength, my honour and glory. Therefore rejoice the soul of Thy
servant this day, for unto Thee, O Lord Jesus, do I lift up my soul.(2)
I long now to receive Thee devoutly and reverently, I desire to bring
Thee into my house, so that with Zacchaeus I may be counted worthy to
be blessed by Thee and numbered among the children of Abraham. My soul
hath an earnest desire for Thy Body, my heart longeth to be united with
Thee.

2. Give me Thyself and it sufficeth, for besides Thee no consolation
availeth. Without Thee I cannot be, and without Thy visitation I have
no power to live. And therefore I must needs draw nigh unto Thee often,
and receive Thee for the healing of my soul, lest haply I faint by the
way if I be deprived of heavenly food. For so Thou, most merciful
Jesus, preaching to the people and healing many sick, didst once say, I
will not send them away fasting to their own homes, lest they faint by
the way.(3) Deal therefore now to me in like manner, for Thou left
Thyself for the consolation of the faithful in the Sacrament. For Thou
art the sweet refreshment of the soul, and he who shall eat Thee
worthily shall be partaker and inheritor of the eternal glory.
Necessary indeed it is for me, who so often slide backwards and sin, so
quickly wax cold and faint, to renew, cleanse, enkindle myself by
frequent prayers and penitences and receiving of Thy sacred Body and
Blood lest haply by too long abstinence, I fall short of my holy
resolutions.

3. For the imaginations of man’s heart are evil from his youth,(4) and
except divine medicine succour him, man slideth away continually unto
the worse. The Holy Communion therefore draweth us back from evil, and
strengtheneth us for good. For if I now be so negligent and lukewarm
when I communicate [or celebrate], how should it be with me, if I
receive not this medicine, and sought not so great a help? [And though
I am not every day fit nor well prepared to celebrate, I will
nevertheless give diligent heed at due season, to receive the divine
mysteries, and to become partaker of so great grace]. For this is the
one principal consolation of a faithful soul, so long as it is absent
from Thee in mortal body, that being continually mindful of its God, it
receiveth its Beloved with devout spirit.

4. Oh wonderful condescension of Thy pity surrounding us, that Thou, O
Lord God, Creator and Quickener of all spirits, deignest to come unto a
soul so poor and weak, and to appease its hunger with Thy whole Deity
and Humanity. Oh happy mind and blessed soul, to which is granted
devoutly to receive Thee its Lord God, and in so receiving Thee to be
filled with all spiritual joy! Oh how great a Lord doth it entertain,
how beloved a Guest doth it bring in, how delightful a Companion doth
it receive, how faithful a Friend doth it welcome, how beautiful and
exalted a Spouse, above every other Beloved, doth it embrace, One to be
loved above all things that can be desired! Oh my most sweet Beloved,
let heaven and earth and all the glory of them, be silent in Thy
presence; seeing whatsoever praise and beauty they have it is of Thy
gracious bounty; and they shall never reach unto the loveliness of Thy
Name, Whose Wisdom is infinite.(5)

(1) Psalm lxviii. 10. (2) Psalm lxxxvi. 4. (3) Matthew xv. 32. (4)
Genesis viii. 21. (5) Psalm cxlvii. 5.




