CHAPTER XIX

Of bearing injuries, and who shall be approved as truly patient


“What sayest thou, My Son? Cease to complain; consider My suffering and
that of My saints. Thou hast not yet resisted unto blood.(1) It is
little which thou sufferest in comparison with those who have suffered
so many things, have been so strongly tempted, so grievously troubled,
so manywise proved and tried. Thou oughtest therefore to call to mind
the more grievous sufferings of others that thou mightest bear thy
lesser ones more easily, and if they seem not to thee little, see that
it is not thy impatience which is the cause of this. But whether they
be little or whether they be great, study to bear them all with
patience.

2. “So far as thou settest thyself to bear patiently, so far thou dost
wisely and art deserving of the more merit; thou shalt also bear the
more easily if thy mind and habit are carefully trained hereunto. And
say not ‘I cannot bear these things from such a man, nor are things of
this kind to be borne by me, for he hath done me grievous harm and
imputeth to me what I had never thought: but from another I will suffer
patiently, such things as I see I ought to suffer.’ Foolish is such a
thought as this, for it considereth not the virtue of patience, nor by
whom that virtue is to be crowned, but it rather weigheth persons and
offences against self.

3. “He is not truly patient who will only suffer as far as seemeth
right to himself and from whom he pleaseth. But the truly patient man
considereth not by what man he is tried, whether by one above him, or
by an equal or inferior, whether by a good and holy man, or a perverse
and unworthy; but indifferently from every creature, whatsoever or how
often soever adversity happeneth to him, he gratefully accepteth all
from the hand of God and counteth it great gain: for with God nothing
which is borne for His sake, however small, shall lose its reward.

4. “Be thou therefore ready for the fight if thou wilt have the
victory. Without striving thou canst not win the crown of patience; if
thou wilt not suffer thou refusest to be crowned. But if thou desirest
to be crowned, strive manfully, endure patiently. Without labour thou
drawest not near to rest, nor without fighting comest thou to victory.”

5. Make possible to me, O Lord, by grace what seemeth impossible to me
by nature. Thou knowest how little I am able to bear, and how quickly I
am cast down when a like adversity riseth up against me. Whatsoever
trial of tribulation may come to me, may it become unto me pleasing and
acceptable, for to suffer and be vexed for Thy sake is exceeding
healthful to the soul.

(1) Hebrews xii. 4.




CHAPTER XX

Of confession of our infirmity and of the miseries of this life


_I will acknowledge my sin unto Thee;_(1) I will confess to Thee, Lord,
my infirmity. It is often a small thing which casteth me down and
maketh me sad. I resolve that I will act bravely, but when a little
temptation cometh, immediately I am in a great strait. Wonderfully
small sometimes is the matter whence a grievous temptation cometh, and
whilst I imagine myself safe for a little space; when I am not
considering, I find myself often almost overcome by a little puff of
wind.

2. Behold, therefore, O Lord, my humility and my frailty, which is
altogether known to Thee. Be merciful unto me, and _draw me out of the
mire that I sink not_,(2) lest I ever remain cast down. This is what
frequently throweth me backward and confoundeth me before Thee, that I
am so liable to fall, so weak to resist my passions. And though their
assault is not altogether according to my will, it is violent and
grievous, and it altogether wearieth me to live thus daily in conflict.
Herein is my infirmity made known to me, that hateful fancies always
rush in far more easily than they depart.

3. Oh that Thou, most mighty God of Israel, Lover of all faithful
souls, wouldst look upon the labour and sorrow of Thy servant, and give
him help in all things whereunto he striveth. Strengthen me with
heavenly fortitude, lest the old man, this miserable flesh, not being
yet fully subdued to the spirit, prevail to rule over me; against which
I ought to strive so long as I remain in this most miserable life. Oh
what a life is this, where tribulations and miseries cease not, where
all things are full of snares and of enemies, for when one tribulation
or temptation goeth, another cometh, yea, while the former conflict is
yet raging others come more in number and unexpected.

4. And how can the life of man be loved, seeing that it hath so many
bitter things, that it is subjected to so many calamities and miseries.
How can it be even called life, when it produces so many deaths and
plagues? The world is often reproached because it is deceitful and
vain, yet notwithstanding it is not easily given up, because the lusts
of the flesh have too much rule over it. Some draw us to love, some to
hate. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, these draw to love of the world; but the punishments and miseries
which righteously follow these things, bring forth hatred of the world
and weariness.

5. But, alas! an evil desire conquereth a mind given to the world, and
thinketh it happiness to be under the nettles(3) because it savoureth
not nor perceiveth the sweetness of God nor the inward gracefulness of
virtue. But they who perfectly despise the world and strive to live
unto God in holy discipline, these are not ignorant of the divine
sweetness promised to all who truly deny themselves and see clearly how
grievously the world erreth, and in how many ways it is deceived.

(1) Psalm xxxii. 5. (2) Psalm lxix. 14. (3) Job xxx. 7.




