CHAPTER IV

Of prudence in action


We must not trust every word of others or feeling within ourselves, but
cautiously and patiently try the matter, whether it be of God.
Unhappily we are so weak that we find it easier to believe and speak
evil of others, rather than good. But they that are perfect, do not
give ready heed to every news-bearer, for they know man’s weakness that
it is prone to evil and unstable in words.

2. This is great wisdom, not to be hasty in action, or stubborn in our
own opinions. A part of this wisdom also is not to believe every word
we hear, nor to tell others all that we hear, even though we believe
it. Take counsel with a man who is wise and of a good conscience; and
seek to be instructed by one better than thyself, rather than to follow
thine own inventions. A good life maketh a man wise toward God, and
giveth him experience in many things. The more humble a man is in
himself, and the more obedient towards God, the wiser will he be in all
things, and the more shall his soul be at peace.




CHAPTER V

Of the reading of Holy Scriptures


It is Truth which we must look for in Holy Writ, not cunning of words.
All Scripture ought to be read in the spirit in which it was written.
We must rather seek for what is profitable in Scripture, than for what
ministereth to subtlety in discourse. Therefore we ought to read books
which are devotional and simple, as well as those which are deep and
difficult. And let not the weight of the writer be a stumbling-block to
thee, whether he be of little or much learning, but let the love of the
pure Truth draw thee to read. Ask not, who hath said this or that, but
look to what he says.

2. Men pass away, but the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Without
respect of persons God speaketh to us in divers manners. Our own
curiosity often hindereth us in the reading of holy writings, when we
seek to understand and discuss, where we should pass simply on. If thou
wouldst profit by thy reading, read humbly, simply, honestly, and not
desiring to win a character for learning. Ask freely, and hear in
silence the words of holy men; nor be displeased at the hard sayings of
older men than thou, for they are not uttered without cause.




CHAPTER VI

Of inordinate affections


Whensoever a man desireth aught above measure, immediately he becometh
restless. The proud and the avaricious man are never at rest; while the
poor and lowly of heart abide in the multitude of peace. The man who is
not yet wholly dead to self, is soon tempted, and is overcome in small
and trifling matters. It is hard for him who is weak in spirit, and
still in part carnal and inclined to the pleasures of sense, to
withdraw himself altogether from earthly desires. And therefore, when
he withdraweth himself from these, he is often sad, and easily angered
too if any oppose his will.

2. But if, on the other hand, he yield to his inclination, immediately
he is weighed down by the condemnation of his conscience; for that he
hath followed his own desire, and yet in no way attained the peace
which he hoped for. For true peace of heart is to be found in resisting
passion, not in yielding to it. And therefore there is no peace in the
heart of a man who is carnal, nor in him who is given up to the things
that are without him, but only in him who is fervent towards God and
living the life of the Spirit.




CHAPTER VII

Of fleeing from vain hope and pride


Vain is the life of that man who putteth his trust in men or in any
created Thing. Be not ashamed to be the servant of others for the love
of Jesus Christ, and to be reckoned poor in this life. Rest not upon
thyself, but build thy hope in God. Do what lieth in thy power, and God
will help thy good intent. Trust not in thy learning, nor in the
cleverness of any that lives, but rather trust in the favour of God,
who resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble.

2. Boast not thyself in thy riches if thou hast them, nor in thy
friends if they be powerful, but in God, who giveth all things, and in
addition to all things desireth to give even Himself. Be not lifted up
because of thy strength or beauty of body, for with only a slight
sickness it will fail and wither away. Be not vain of thy skilfulness
or ability, lest thou displease God, from whom cometh every good gift
which we have.

3. Count not thyself better than others, lest perchance thou appear
worse in the sight of God, who knoweth what is in man. Be not proud of
thy good works, for God’s judgments are of another sort than the
judgments of man, and what pleaseth man is ofttimes displeasing to Him.
If thou hast any good, believe that others have more, and so thou
mayest preserve thy humility. It is no harm to thee if thou place
thyself below all others; but it is great harm if thou place thyself
above even one. Peace is ever with the humble man, but in the heart of
the proud there is envy and continual wrath.




