CHAPTER XLII

That our peace is not to be placed in men


“My Son, if thou set thy peace on any person because thou hast high
opinion of him, and art familiar with him, thou shalt be unstable and
entangled. But if thou betake thyself to the ever-living and abiding
Truth, the desertion or death of a friend shall not make thee sad. In
Me ought the love of thy friend to subsist, and for My sake is every
one to be loved, whosoever he be, who appeareth to thee good, and is
very dear to thee in this life. Without Me friendship hath no strength
or endurance, neither is that love true and pure, which I unite not.
Thou oughtest to be so dead to such affections of beloved friends, that
as far as in thee lieth, thou wouldst rather choose to be without any
companionship of men. The nearer a man approacheth to God, the further
he recedeth from all earthly solace. The deeper also he descendeth into
himself, and the viler he appeareth in his own eyes, the higher he
ascendeth towards God.

2. “But he who attributeth anything good to himself, hindereth the
grace of God from coming to him, because the grace of the Holy Ghost
ever seeketh the humble heart. If thou couldst make thyself utterly
nothing, and empty thyself of the love of every creature, then should
it be My part to overflow unto thee with great grace. When thou settest
thine eyes upon creatures, the face of the Creator is withdrawn from
thee. Learn in all things to conquer thyself for thy Creator’s sake,
then shalt thou be able to attain unto divine knowledge. How small
soever anything be, if it be loved and regarded inordinately, it
holdeth us back from the highest good, and corrupteth.”




CHAPTER XLIII

Against vain and worldly knowledge


“My Son, let not the fair and subtle sayings of men move thee. For the
kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.(1) Give ear to My words,
for they kindle the heart and enlighten the mind, they bring
contrition, and they supply manifold consolations. Never read thou the
word that thou mayest appear more learned or wise; but study for the
mortification of thy sins, for this will be far more profitable for
thee than the knowledge of many difficult questions.

2. “When thou hast read and learned many things, thou must always
return to one first principle. I am He that teacheth man knowledge,(2)
and I give unto babes clearer knowledge than can be taught by man. He
to whom I speak will be quickly wise and shall grow much in the spirit.
Woe unto them who inquire into many curious questions from men, and
take little heed concerning the way of My service. The time will come
when Christ will appear, the Master of masters, the Lord of the Angels,
to hear the lessons of all, that is to examine the consciences of each
one. And then will He search Jerusalem with candles,(3) and the hidden
things of darkness(4) shall be made manifest, and the arguings of
tongues shall be silent.

3. “I am He who in an instant lift up the humble spirit, to learn more
reasonings of the Eternal Truth, than if a man had studied ten years in
the schools. I teach without noise of words, without confusion of
opinions, without striving after honour, without clash of arguments. I
am He who teach men to despise earthly things, to loathe things
present, to seek things heavenly, to enjoy things eternal, to flee
honours, to endure offences, to place all hope in Me, to desire nothing
apart from Me, and above all things to love Me ardently.

4. “For there was one, who by loving Me from the bottom of his heart,
learned divine things, and spake things that were wonderful; he
profited more by forsaking all things than by studying subtleties. But
to some I speak common things, to others special; to some I appear
gently in signs and figures, and again to some I reveal mysteries in
much light. The voice of books is one, but it informeth not all alike;
because I inwardly am the Teacher of truth, the Searcher of the heart,
the Discerner of the thoughts, the Mover of actions, distributing to
each man, as I judge meet.”

(1) 1 Corinthians iv. 20. (2) Psalm xciv. 10. (3) Zephaniah i. 12. (4)
1 Corinthians iv. 5.




CHAPTER XLIV

Of not troubling ourselves about outward things


“My Son, in many things it behoveth thee to be ignorant, and to esteem
thyself as one dead upon the earth, and as one to whom the whole world
is crucified. Many things also thou must pass by with deaf ear, and
must rather think upon those things which belong unto thy peace. It is
more profitable to turn away thine eyes from those things that
displease, and to leave each man to his own opinion, than to give
thyself to discourses of strife. If thou stand well with God and hast
His judgment in thy mind, thou wilt verily easily bear to be as one
conquered.”

2. O Lord, to what have we come? Behold a temporal loss is mourned
over; for a trifling gain we labour and hurry; and spiritual loss
passeth away into forgetfulness, and we rarely recover it. That which
profiteth little or nothing is looked after, and that which is
altogether necessary is negligently passed by; because the whole man
slideth away to outward things, and unless he quickly recovereth
himself in outward things he willingly lieth down.




