CHAPTER XI

That the desires of the heart are to be examined and governed


“My Son, thou hast still many things to learn, which thou hast not well
learned yet.”

2. What are they, Lord?

3. “To place thy desire altogether in subjection to My good pleasure,
and not to be a lover of thyself, but an earnest seeker of My will. Thy
desires often excite and urge thee forward; but consider with thyself
whether thou art not more moved for thine own objects than for My
honour. If it is Myself that thou seekest, thou shalt be well content
with whatsoever I shall ordain; but if any pursuit of thine own lieth
hidden within thee, behold it is this which hindereth and weigheth thee
down.

4. “Beware, therefore, lest thou strive too earnestly after some desire
which thou hast conceived, without taking counsel of Me; lest haply it
repent thee afterwards, and that displease thee which before pleased,
and for which thou didst long as for a great good. For not every
affection which seemeth good is to be forthwith followed; neither is
every opposite affection to be immediately avoided. Sometimes it is
expedient to use restraint even in good desires and wishes, lest
through importunity thou fall into distraction of mind, lest through
want of discipline thou become a stumbling-block to others, or lest by
the resistance of others thou be suddenly disturbed and brought to
confusion.

5. “Sometimes, indeed, it is needful to use violence, and manfully to
strive against the sensual appetite, and not to consider what the flesh
may or not will; but rather to strive after this, that it may become
subject, however unwillingly, to the spirit. And for so long it ought
to be chastised and compelled to undergo slavery, even until it be
ready for all things, and learn to be contented with little, to be
delighted with things simple, and never to murmur at any
inconvenience.”




CHAPTER XII

Of the inward growth of patience, and of the struggle against evil
desires


O Lord God, I see that patience is very necessary unto me; for many
things in this life fall out contrary. For howsoever I may have
contrived for my peace, my life cannot go on without strife and
trouble.

2. “Thou speakest truly, My Son. For I will not that thou seek such a
peace as is without trials, and knoweth no adversities; but rather that
thou shouldest judge thyself to have found peace, when thou art tried
with manifold tribulations, and proved by many adversities. If thou
shalt say that thou art not able to bear much, how then wilt thou
sustain the fire hereafter? Of two evils we should always choose the
less. Therefore, that thou mayest escape eternal torments hereafter,
strive on God’s behalf to endure present evils bravely. Thinkest thou
that the children of this world suffer nought, or but little? Thou wilt
not find it so, even though thou find out the most prosperous.

3. “‘But,’ thou wilt say, ‘they have many delights, and they follow
their own wills, and thus they bear lightly their tribulations.’

4. “Be it so, grant that they have what they list; but how long,
thinkest thou, will it last? Behold, like the smoke those who are rich
in this world will pass away, and no record shall remain of their past
joys. Yea, even while they yet live, they rest not without bitterness
and weariness and fear. For from the very same thing wherein they find
delight, thence they oftentimes have the punishment of sorrow. Justly
it befalleth them, that because out of measure they seek out and pursue
pleasures, they enjoy them not without confusion and bitterness. Oh how
short, how false, how inordinate and wicked are all these pleasures!
Yet because of their sottishness and blindness men do not understand;
but like brute beasts, for the sake of a little pleasure of this
corruptible life, they incur death of the soul. Thou therefore, my son,
go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine appetites.(1)
Delight thou in the Lord, and He shall give thee thy heart’s desire.(2)

5. “For if thou wilt truly find delight, and be abundantly comforted of
Me, behold in the contempt of all worldly things and in the avoidance
of all worthless pleasures shall be thy blessing, and fulness of
consolation shall be given thee. And the more thou withdrawest thyself
from all solace of creatures, the more sweet and powerful consolations
shalt thou find. But at the first thou shalt not attain to them,
without some sorrow and hard striving. Long-accustomed habit will
oppose, but it shall be overcome by better habit. The flesh will murmur
again and again, but will be restrained by fervour of spirit. The old
serpent will urge and embitter thee, but will be put to flight by
prayer; moreover, by useful labour his entrance will be greatly
obstructed.”

(1) Ecclesiastes xviii. 30. (2) Psalm xxxvii. 4.




