CHAPTER III

Of the good, peaceable man


First keep thyself in peace, and then shalt thou be able to be a
peacemaker towards others. A peaceable man doth more good than a
well-learned. A passionate man turneth even good into evil and easily
believeth evil; a good, peaceable man converteth all things into good.
He who dwelleth in peace is suspicious of none, but he who is
discontented and restless is tossed with many suspicions, and is
neither quiet himself nor suffereth others to be quiet. He often saith
what he ought not to say, and omitteth what it were more expedient for
him to do. He considereth to what duties others are bound, and
neglecteth those to which he is bound himself. Therefore be zealous
first over thyself, and then mayest thou righteously be zealous
concerning thy neighbour.

2. Thou knowest well how to excuse and to colour thine own deeds, but
thou wilt not accept the excuses of others. It would be more just to
accuse thyself and excuse thy brother. If thou wilt that others bear
with thee, bear thou with others. Behold how far thou art as yet from
the true charity and humility which knows not how to be angry or
indignant against any save self alone. It is no great thing to mingle
with the good and the meek, for this is naturally pleasing to all, and
every one of us willingly enjoyeth peace and liketh best those who
think with us: but to be able to live peaceably with the hard and
perverse, or with the disorderly, or those who oppose us, this is a
great grace and a thing much to be commended and most worthy of a man.

3. There are who keep themselves in peace and keep peace also with
others, and there are who neither have peace nor suffer others to have
peace; they are troublesome to others, but always more troublesome to
themselves. And there are who hold themselves in peace, and study to
bring others unto peace; nevertheless, all our peace in this sad life
lieth in humble suffering rather than in not feeling adversities. He
who best knoweth how to suffer shall possess the most peace; that man
is conqueror of himself and lord of the world, the friend of Christ,
and the inheritor of heaven.




CHAPTER IV

Of a pure mind and simple intention


By two wings is man lifted above earthly things, even by simplicity and
purity. Simplicity ought to be in the intention, purity in the
affection. Simplicity reacheth towards God, purity apprehendeth Him and
tasteth Him. No good action will be distasteful to thee if thou be free
within from inordinate affection. If thou reachest after and seekest,
nothing but the will of God and the benefit of thy neighbour, thou wilt
entirely enjoy inward liberty. If thine heart were right, then should
every creature be a mirror of life and a book of holy doctrine. There
is no creature so small and vile but that it showeth us the goodness of
God.

2. If thou wert good and pure within, then wouldst thou look upon all
things without hurt and understand them aright. A pure heart seeth the
very depths of heaven and hell. Such as each one is inwardly, so
judgeth he outwardly. If there is any joy in the world surely the man
of pure heart possesseth it, and if there is anywhere tribulation and
anguish, the evil conscience knoweth it best. As iron cast into the
fire loseth rust and is made altogether glowing, so the man who turneth
himself altogether unto God is freed from slothfulness and changed into
a new man.

3. When a man beginneth to grow lukewarm, then he feareth a little
labour, and willingly accepteth outward consolation; but when he
beginneth perfectly to conquer himself and to walk manfully in the way
of God, then he counteth as nothing those things which aforetime seemed
to be so grievous unto him.




CHAPTER V

Of self-esteem


We cannot place too little confidence in ourselves, because grace and
understanding are often lacking to us. Little light is there within us,
and what we have we quickly lose by negligence. Oftentimes we perceive
not how great is our inward blindness. We often do ill and excuse it
worse. Sometimes we are moved by passion and count it zeal; we blame
little faults in others and pass over great faults in ourselves.
Quickly enough we feel and reckon up what we bear at the hands of
others, but we reflect not how much others are bearing from us. He who
would weigh well and rightly his own doings would not be the man to
judge severely of another.

2. The spiritually-minded man putteth care of himself before all cares;
and he who diligently attendeth to himself easily keepeth silence
concerning others. Thou wilt never be spiritually minded and godly
unless thou art silent concerning other men’s matters and take full
heed to thyself. If thou think wholly upon thyself and upon God, what
thou seest out of doors shall move thee little. Where art thou when
thou art not present to thyself? and when thou hast overrun all things,
what hath it profited thee, thyself being neglected? If thou wouldst
have peace and true unity, thou must put aside all other things, and
gaze only upon thyself.

3. Then thou shalt make great progress if thou keep thyself free from
all temporal care. Thou shalt lamentably fall away if thou set a value
upon any worldly thing. Let nothing be great, nothing high, nothing
pleasing, nothing acceptable unto thee, save God Himself or the things
of God. Reckon as altogether vain whatsoever consolation comes to thee
from a creature. The soul that loveth God looketh not to anything that
is beneath God. God alone is eternal and incomprehensible, filling all
things, the solace of the soul, and the true joy of the heart.




