CHAPTER XLV

That we must not believe everyone, and that we are prone to fall in our
words


Lord, be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of man.(1) How
often have I failed to find faithfulness, where I thought I possessed
it. How many times I have found it where I least expected. Vain
therefore is hope in men, but the salvation of the just, O God, is in
Thee. Blessed be thou, O Lord my God, in all things which happen unto
us. We are weak and unstable, we are quickly deceived and quite
changed.

2. Who is the man who is able to keep himself so warily and
circumspectly as not sometimes to come into some snare of perplexity?
But he who trusteth in Thee, O Lord, and seeketh Thee with an unfeigned
heart, doth not so easily slip. And if he fall into any tribulation,
howsoever he may be entangled, yet very quickly he shall be delivered
through Thee, or by Thee shall be comforted, because Thou wilt not
forsake him that trusteth in Thee unto the end. A friend who continueth
faithful in all the distresses of his friend is rare to be found. Thou,
O Lord, Thou alone art most faithful in all things, and there is none
other like unto Thee.

3. Oh, how truly wise was that holy soul which said, “My mind is
steadfastly fixed, and it is grounded in Christ.”(2) If thus it were
with me, the fear of man should not so easily tempt me, nor the arrows
of words move me. Who is sufficient to foresee all things, who to guard
beforehand against future ills? If even things which are foreseen
sometimes hurt us, what can things which are not foreseen do, but
grievously injure? But wherefore have I not better provided for myself,
miserable that I am? Why, too, have I given such heed to others? But we
are men, nor are we other than frail men, even though by many we are
reckoned and called angels. Whom shall I trust, O Lord, whom shall I
trust but Thee? Thou art the Truth, and deceivest not, nor canst be
deceived. And on the other hand, Every man is a liar,(3) weak, unstable
and frail, especially in his words, so that one ought scarcely ever to
believe what seemeth to sound right on the face of it.

4. With what wisdom hast thou warned us beforehand to beware of men,
and that a man’s foes are they of his own household,(4) and that we
must not believe if one say unto us Lo here, or Lo there.(5) I have
been taught by my loss, and O that I may prove more careful and not
foolish hereby. “Be cautious,” saith some one: “be cautious, keep unto
thyself what I tell thee.” And whilst I am silent and believe that it
is hid with me, he himself cannot keep silence concerning it, but
straightway betrayeth me and himself, and goeth his way. Protect me, O
Lord, from such mischief-making and reckless men; let me not fall into
their hands, nor ever do such things myself. Put a true and steadfast
word into my mouth, and remove a deceitful tongue far from me. What I
would not suffer, I ought by all means to beware of doing.

5. Oh, how good and peacemaking a thing it is to be silent concerning
others, and not carelessly to believe all reports, nor to hand them on
further; how good also to lay one’s self open to few, to seek ever to
have Thee as the beholder of the heart; not to be carried about with
every wind of words, but to desire that all things inward and outward
be done according to the good pleasure of Thy will! How safe for the
preserving of heavenly grace to fly from human approval, and not to
long after the things which seem to win admiration abroad, but to
follow with all earnestness those things which bring amendment of life
and heavenly fervour! How many have been injured by their virtue being
made known and too hastily praised. How truly profitable hath been
grace preserved in silence in this frail life, which, as we are told,
is all temptation and warfare.

(1) Psalm lx. 11. (2) St. Agatha. (3) Psalm cxvi. 11; Romans iii. 4.
(4) Matthew x. 17, 36. (5) Matthew xxiv. 23.




CHAPTER XLVI

Of having confidence in God when evil words are cast at us


“My Son, stand fast and believe in Me. For what are words but words?
They fly through the air, but they bruise no stone. If thou are guilty,
think how thou wouldst gladly amend thyself; if thou knowest nothing
against thyself, consider that thou wilt gladly bear this for God’s
sake. It is little enough that thou sometimes hast to bear hard words,
for thou art not yet able to bear hard blows. And wherefore do such
trivial matters go to thine heart, except that thou art yet carnal, and
regardest men more than thou oughtest? For because thou fearest to be
despised, thou art unwilling to be reproved for thy faults, and seekest
paltry shelters of excuses.

2. “But look better into thyself, and thou shalt know that the world is
still alive in thee, and the vain love of pleasing men. For when thou
fleest away from being abased and confounded for thy faults, it is
plain that thou art neither truly humble nor truly dead to the world,
and that the world is not crucified to thee. But hearken to My word,
and thou shalt not care for ten thousand words of men. Behold, if all
things could be said against thee which the utmost malice could invent,
what should it hurt thee if thou wert altogether to let it go, and make
no more account of it than of a mote? Could it pluck out a single hair
of thy head?

3. “But he that hath no heart within him, and hath not God before his
eyes, is easily moved by a word of reproach; but he who trusteth in Me,
and seeketh not to abide by his own judgment, shall be free from the
fear of men. For I am the Judge and the Discerner of all secrets; I
know how the thing hath been done; I know both the injurer and the
bearer. From Me went forth that word, by My permission this hath
happened, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.(1) I shall
judge the guilty and the innocent; but beforehand I have willed to try
them both by a secret judgment.

4. “The testimony of men often deceiveth. My judgment is true; it will
stand, and it shall not be overturned. It commonly lieth hid, and only
to few in certain cases is it made known; yet it never erreth, nor can
err, although it seem not right to the eyes of foolish men. To Me,
therefore, must men have recourse in all judgment, and must not lean to
their opinion. For there shall no evil happen to the just,(2)
whatsoever may be sent to him by God. Even though some unjust charge be
brought against him, he will care little; nor, again, will he exult
above measure, if through others he be clearly vindicated. For he
considereth that I am He who try the hearts and reins,(3) who judge not
outwardly and according to human appearance; for often in Mine eyes
that is found blameworthy which in the judgment of men is held worthy
of praise.”

5. O Lord God, O Judge, just, strong, and patient, who knowest the
frailty and sinfulness of men, be Thou my strength and my whole
confidence; for my own conscience sufficeth me not. Thou knowest what I
know not; and therefore ought I under all rebuke to humble myself, and
to bear it meekly. Therefore mercifully forgive me as often as I have
not done this, and grant me the next time the grace of greater
endurance. For better unto me is Thine abundant pity for the attainment
of Thy pardon, than the righteousness which I believe myself to have
for defence against my conscience, which lieth wait against me.
Although I know nothing against myself, yet I am not hereby
justified,(4) because if Thy mercy were removed away, in Thy sight
should no man living be justified.(5)

(1) Luke ii. 35. (2) Proverbs xii. 21. (3) Psalm vii. 9. (4) 1
Corinthians iv. 4. (5) Psalm cxliii. 2.




