CHAPTER XVI

That we ought to lay open our necessities to Christ and to require His
Grace


The Voice of the Disciple


O most sweet and loving Lord, whom now I devoutly desire to receive,
Thou knowest my infirmity and the necessity which I suffer, in what
evils and vices I lie; how often I am weighed down, tempted, disturbed,
and defiled. I come unto Thee for remedy, I beseech of Thee consolation
and support. I speak unto Thee who knowest all things, to whom all my
secrets are open, and who alone art able perfectly to comfort and help
me. Thou knowest what good thing I most stand in need of, and how poor
I am in virtues.

2. Behold, I stand poor and naked before Thee, requiring grace, and
imploring mercy. Refresh the hungry suppliant, kindle my coldness with
the fire of Thy love, illuminate my blindness with the brightness of
Thy presence. Turn thou all earthly things into bitterness for me, all
grievous and contrary things into patience, all things worthless and
created into contempt and oblivion. Lift up my heart unto Thee in
Heaven, and suffer me not to wander over the earth. Be Thou alone sweet
unto me from this day forward for ever, because Thou alone art my meat
and drink, my love and joy, my sweetness and my whole good.

3. Oh that Thou wouldest altogether by Thy presence, kindle, consume,
and transform me into Thyself; that I may be made one spirit with Thee,
by the grace of inward union, and the melting of earnest love! Suffer
me not to go away from Thee hungry and dry; but deal mercifully with
me, as oftentimes Thou hast dealt wondrously with Thy saints. What
marvel if I should be wholly kindled from Thee, and in myself should
utterly fail, since Thou art fire always burning and never failing,
love purifying the heart and enlightening the understanding.




CHAPTER XVII

Of fervent love and vehement desire of receiving Christ


The Voice of the Disciple


With the deepest devotion and fervent love, with all affection and
fervour of heart, I long to receive Thee, O Lord, even as many Saints
and devout persons have desired Thee in communicating, who were
altogether well pleasing to Thee by their sanctity of life, and dwelt
in all ardent devotion. O my God, Eternal Love, my whole Good,
Happiness without measure, I long to receive Thee with the most
vehement desire and becoming reverence which any Saint ever had or
could have.

2. And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of devotion,
yet do I offer Thee the whole affection of my heart, even as though I
alone had all those most grateful inflamed desires. Yea, also,
whatsoever things a pious mind is able to conceive and long for, all
these with the deepest veneration and inward fervour do I offer and
present unto Thee. I desire to reserve nothing unto myself, but freely
and entirely to offer myself and all that I have unto Thee for a
sacrifice. O Lord my God, my Creator and Redeemer! with such affection,
reverence, praise, and honour, with such gratitude, worthiness, and
love, with such faith, hope, and purity do I desire to receive Thee
this day, as Thy most blessed Mother, the glorious Virgin Mary,
received and desired Thee, when she humbly and devoutly answered the
Angel who brought unto her the glad tidings of the mystery of the
Incarnation. Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according
to thy word.(1)

3. And as Thy blessed forerunner, the most excellent of Saints, John
Baptist, being full of joy in Thy presence, leapt while yet in the womb
of his mother, for joy in the Holy Ghost; and afterwards discerning
Jesus walking amongst men, humbled himself exceedingly, and said, with
devout affection, The friend of the bridegroom, who standeth and
heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice;(2)
even so I wish to be inflamed with great and holy desires, and to
present myself unto Thee with my whole heart. Whence also, on behalf of
myself and of all commended to me in prayer, I offer and present unto
Thee the jubilation of all devout hearts, their ardent affections,
their mental ecstasies, and supernatural illuminations and heavenly
visions, with all the virtues and praises celebrated and to be
celebrated by every creature in heaven and earth; to the end that by
all Thou mayest worthily be praised and glorified for ever.

4. Receive my prayers, O Lord my God, and my desires of giving Thee
infinite praise and unbounded benediction, which, according to the
multitude of Thine unspeakable greatness, are most justly due unto
Thee. These do I give Thee, and desire to give every day and every
moment; and with beseechings and affectionate desires I call upon all
celestial spirits and all Thy faithful people to join with me in
rendering Thee thanks and praises.

5. Let all peoples, nations, and tongues praise Thee, and magnify Thy
holy and sweet-sounding Name, with highest jubilations and ardent
devotion. And let all who reverently and devoutly celebrate Thy most
high Sacrament, and receive it with full assurance of faith, be
accounted worthy to find grace and mercy with Thee, and intercede with
all supplication for me a sinner; and when they shall have attained
unto their wished-for devotion and joyous union with Thee, and shall
depart full of comfort and wondrously refreshed from Thy holy, heavenly
table, let them vouchsafe to be mindful of me, for I am poor and needy.

(1) Luke i. 38. (2) John iii. 29.




CHAPTER XVIII

That a man should not be a curious searcher of the Sacrament, but a
humble imitator of Christ, submitting his sense to holy faith


The Voice of the Beloved


Thou must take heed of curious and useless searching into this most
profound Sacrament, if thou wilt not be plunged into the abyss of
doubt. He that is a searcher of Majesty shall be oppressed by the glory
thereof.(1) God is able to do more than man can understand. A pious and
humble search after truth is to be allowed, when it is always ready to
be taught, and striving to walk after the wholesome opinions of the
fathers.

2. Blessed is the simplicity which leaveth alone the difficult paths of
questionings, and followeth the plain and firm steps of God’s
commandments. Many have lost devotion whilst they sought to search into
deeper things. Faith is required of thee, and a sincere life, not
loftiness of intellect, nor deepness in the mysteries of God. If thou
understandest not nor comprehendest the things which are beneath thee,
how shalt thou comprehend those which are above thee? Submit thyself
unto God, and humble thy sense to faith, and the light of knowledge
shall be given thee, as shall be profitable and necessary unto thee.

3. There are some who are grievously tempted concerning faith and the
Sacrament; but this is not to be imputed to themselves but rather to
the enemy. Care not then for this, dispute not with thine own thoughts,
nor make answer to the doubts which are cast into thee by the devil;
but believe the words of God, believe His Saints and Prophets, and the
wicked enemy shall flee from thee. Often it profiteth much, that the
servant of God endureth such things. For the enemy tempteth not
unbelievers and sinners, because he already hath secure possession of
them; but he tempteth and harasseth the faithful and devout by various
means.

4. Go forward therefore with simple and undoubting faith, and draw nigh
unto the Sacrament with supplicating reverence. And whatsoever thou art
not enabled to understand, that commit without anxiety to Almighty God.
God deceiveth thee not; he is deceived who believeth too much in
himself. God walketh with the simple, revealeth Himself to the humble,
giveth understanding to babes, openeth the sense to pure minds, and
hideth grace from the curious and proud. Human reason is weak and may
be deceived; but true faith cannot be deceived.

5. All reason and natural investigation ought to follow faith, not to
precede, nor to break it. For faith and love do here especially take
the highest place, and work in hidden ways in this most holy and
exceeding excellent Sacrament. God who is eternal and incomprehensible,
and of infinite power, doth great and inscrutable things in heaven and
in earth, and His wonderful works are past finding out. If the works of
God were of such sort that they might easily be comprehended by human
reason, they should no longer be called wonderful or unspeakable.

(1) Proverbs xxv. 27 (Vulg.).




