CHAPTER XVII

Of a Religious life


It behoveth thee to learn to mortify thyself in many things, if thou
wilt live in amity and concord with other men. It is no small thing to
dwell in a religious community or congregation, and to live there
without complaint, and therein to remain faithful even unto death.
Blessed is he who hath lived a good life in such a body, and brought it
to a happy end. If thou wilt stand fast and wilt profit as thou
oughtest, hold thyself as an exile and a pilgrim upon the earth. Thou
wilt have to be counted as a fool for Christ, if thou wilt lead a
religious life.

2. The clothing and outward appearance are of small account; it is
change of character and entire mortification of the affections which
make a truly religious man. He who seeketh aught save God and the
health of his soul, shall find only tribulation and sorrow. Nor can he
stand long in peace, who striveth not to be least of all and servant of
all.

3. Thou art called to endure and to labour, not to a life of ease and
trifling talk. Here therefore are men tried as gold in the furnace. No
man can stand, unless with all his heart he will humble himself for
God’s sake.




CHAPTER XVIII

Of the example of the holy fathers


Consider now the lively examples of the holy fathers, in whom shone
forth real perfectness and religion, and thou shalt see how little,
even as nothing, is all that we do. Ah! What is our life when compared
to theirs? They, saints and friends of Christ as they were, served the
Lord in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, in labour and
weariness, in watchings and fastings, in prayer and holy meditations,
in persecutions and much rebuke.

2. O how many and grievous tribulations did the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, endure; and all others who would walk in the
footsteps of Christ. For they hated their souls in this world that they
might keep them unto life eternal. O how strict and retired a life was
that of the holy fathers who dwelt in the desert! what long and
grievous temptations they did suffer! how often were they assaulted by
the enemy! what frequent and fervid prayers did they offer unto God!
what strict fasts did they endure! what fervent zeal and desire after
spiritual profit did they manifest! how bravely did they fight that
their vices might not gain the mastery! how entirely and steadfastly
did they reach after God! By day they laboured, and at night they gave
themselves ofttimes unto prayer; yea, even when they were labouring
they ceased not from mental prayer.

3. They spent their whole time profitably; every hour seemed short for
retirement with God; and through the great sweetness of contemplation,
even the need of bodily refreshment was forgotten. They renounced all
riches, dignities, honours, friends, kinsmen; they desired nothing from
the world; they ate the bare necessaries of life; they were unwilling
to minister to the body even in necessity. Thus were they poor in
earthly things, but rich above measure in grace and virtue. Though poor
to the outer eye, within they were filled with grace and heavenly
benedictions.

4. They were strangers to the world, but unto God they were as kinsmen
and friends. They seemed unto themselves as of no reputation, and in
the world’s eyes contemptible; but in the sight of God they were
precious and beloved. They stood fast in true humility, they lived in
simple obedience, they walked in love and patience; and thus they waxed
strong in spirit, and obtained great favour before God. To all
religious men they were given as an example, and they ought more to
provoke us unto good livings than the number of the lukewarm tempteth
to carelessness of life.

5. O how great was the love of all religious persons at the beginning
of this sacred institution! O what devoutness of prayer! what rivalry
in holiness! what strict discipline was observed! what reverence and
obedience under the rule of the master showed they in all things! The
traces of them that remain until now testify that they were truly holy
and perfect men, who fighting so bravely trod the world underfoot. Now
a man is counted great if only he be not a transgressor, and if he can
only endure with patience what he hath undertaken.

6. O the coldness and negligence of our times, that we so quickly
decline from the former love, and it is become a weariness to live,
because of sloth and lukewarmness. May progress in holiness not wholly
fall asleep in thee, who many times hast seen so many examples of
devout men!




CHAPTER XIX

Of the exercises of a religious man


The life of a Christian ought to be adorned with all virtues, that he
may be inwardly what he outwardly appeareth unto men. And verily it
should be yet better within than without, for God is a discerner of our
heart, Whom we must reverence with all our hearts wheresoever we are,
and walk pure in His presence as do the angels. We ought daily to renew
our vows, and to kindle our hearts to zeal, as if each day were the
first day of our conversion, and to say, “Help me, O God, in my good
resolutions, and in Thy holy service, and grant that this day I may
make a good beginning, for hitherto I have done nothing!”

2. According to our resolution so is the rate of our progress, and much
diligence is needful for him who would make good progress. For if he
who resolveth bravely oftentimes falleth short, how shall it be with
him who resolveth rarely or feebly? But manifold causes bring about
abandonment of our resolution, yet a trivial omission of holy exercises
can hardly be made without some loss to us. The resolution of the
righteous dependeth more upon the grace of God than upon their own
wisdom; for in Him they always put their trust, whatsoever they take in
hand. For man proposeth, but God disposeth; and the way of a man is not
in himself.(1)

3. If a holy exercise be sometimes omitted for the sake of some act of
piety, or of some brotherly kindness, it can easily be taken up
afterwards; but if it be neglected through distaste or slothfulness,
then is it sinful, and the mischief will be felt. Strive as earnestly
as we may, we shall still fall short in many things. Always should some
distinct resolution be made by us; and, most of all, we must strive
against those sins which most easily beset us. Both our outer and inner
life should be straitly examined and ruled by us, because both have to
do with our progress.

4. If thou canst not be always examining thyself, thou canst at certain
seasons, and at least twice in the day, at evening and at morning. In
the morning make thy resolves, and in the evening inquire into thy
life, how thou hast sped to-day in word, deed, and thought; for in
these ways thou hast often perchance offended God and thy neighbour.
Gird up thy lions like a man against the assaults of the devil; bridle
thine appetite, and thou wilt soon be able to bridle every inclination
of the flesh. Be thou never without something to do; be reading, or
writing, or praying, or meditating, or doing something that is useful
to the community. Bodily exercises, however, must be undertaken with
discretion, nor are they to be used by all alike.

5. The duties which are not common to all must not be done openly, but
are safest carried on in secret. But take heed that thou be not
careless in the common duties, and more devout in the secret; but
faithfully and honestly discharge the duties and commands which lie
upon thee, then afterwards, if thou hast still leisure, give thyself to
thyself as thy devotion leadeth thee. All cannot have one exercise, but
one suiteth better to this man and another to that. Even for the
diversity of season different exercises are needed, some suit better
for feasts, some for fasts. We need one kind in time of temptations and
others in time of peace and quietness. Some are suitable to our times
of sadness, and others when we are joyful in the Lord.

6. When we draw near the time of the great feasts, good exercises
should be renewed, and the prayers of holy men more fervently besought.
We ought to make our resolutions from one Feast to another, as if each
were the period of our departure from this world, and of entering into
the eternal feast. So ought we to prepare ourselves earnestly at solemn
seasons, and the more solemnly to live, and to keep straightest watch
upon each holy observance, as though we were soon to receive the reward
of our labours at the hand of God.

7. And if this be deferred, let us believe ourselves to be as yet
ill-prepared, and unworthy as yet of the glory which shall be revealed
in us at the appointed season; and let us study to prepare ourselves
the better for our end. Blessed is that servant, as the Evangelist Luke
hath it, whom, when the Lord cometh He shall find watching. Verily I
say unto you He will make him ruler over all that He hath.(2)

(1) Jeremiah x. 23. (2) Luke xii. 43, 44.




