CHAPTER XIV

On avoiding rash judgment


Look well unto thyself, and beware that thou judge not the doings of
others. In judging others a man laboureth in vain; he often erreth, and
easily falleth into sin; but in judging and examining himself he always
laboureth to good purpose. According as a matter toucheth our fancy, so
oftentimes do we judge of it; for easily do we fail of true judgment
because of our own personal feeling. If God were always the sole object
of our desire, we should the less easily be troubled by the erring
judgment of our fancy.

2. But often some secret thought lurking within us, or even some
outward circumstance, turneth us aside. Many are secretly seeking their
own ends in what they do, yet know it not. They seem to live in good
peace of mind so long as things go well with them, and according to
their desires, but if their desires be frustrated and broken,
immediately they are shaken and displeased. Diversity of feelings and
opinions very often brings about dissensions between friends, between
countrymen, between religious and godly men.

3. Established custom is not easily relinquished, and no man is very
easily led to see with the eyes of another. If thou rest more upon thy
own reason or experience than upon the power of Jesus Christ, thy light
shall come slowly and hardly; for God willeth us to be perfectly
subject unto Himself, and all our reason to be exalted by abundant love
towards Him.




CHAPTER XV

Of works of charity


For no worldly good whatsoever, and for the love of no man, must
anything be done which is evil, but for the help of the suffering a
good work must sometimes be postponed, or be changed for a better; for
herein a good work is not destroyed, but improved. Without charity no
work profiteth, but whatsoever is done in charity, however small and of
no reputation it be, bringeth forth good fruit; for God verily
considereth what a man is able to do, more than the greatness of what
he doth.

2. He doth much who loveth much. He doth much who doth well. He doth
well who ministereth to the public good rather than to his own.
Oftentimes that seemeth to be charity which is rather carnality,
because it springeth from natural inclination, self-will, hope of
repayment, desire of gain.

3. He who hath true and perfect charity, in no wise seeketh his own
good, but desireth that God alone be altogether glorified. He envieth
none, because he longeth for no selfish joy; nor doth he desire to
rejoice in himself, but longeth to be blessed in God as the highest
good. He ascribeth good to none save to God only, the Fountain whence
all good proceedeth, and the End, the Peace, the joy of all Saints. Oh,
he who hath but a spark of true charity, hath verily learned that all
worldly things are full of vanity.




CHAPTER XVI

Of bearing with the faults of others


Those things which a man cannot amend in himself or in others, he ought
patiently to bear, until God shall otherwise ordain. Bethink thee that
perhaps it is better for thy trial and patience, without which our
merits are but little worth. Nevertheless thou oughtest, when thou
findeth such impediments, to beseech God that He would vouchsafe to
sustain thee, that thou be able to bear them with a good will.

2. If one who is once or twice admonished refuse to hearken, strive not
with him, but commit all to God, that His will may be done and His
honour be shown in His servants, for He knoweth well how to convert the
evil unto good. Endeavour to be patient in bearing with other men’s
faults and infirmities whatsoever they be, for thou thyself also hast
many things which have need to be borne with by others. If thou canst
not make thine own self what thou desireth, how shalt thou be able to
fashion another to thine own liking. We are ready to see others made
perfect, and yet we do not amend our own shortcomings.

3. We will that others be straitly corrected, but we will not be
corrected ourselves. The freedom of others displeaseth us, but we are
dissatisfied that our own wishes shall be denied us. We desire rules to
be made restraining others, but by no means will we suffer ourselves to
be restrained. Thus therefore doth it plainly appear how seldom we
weigh our neighbour in the same balance with ourselves. If all men were
perfect, what then should we have to suffer from others for God?

4. But now hath God thus ordained, that we may learn to bear one
another’s burdens, because none is without defect, none without a
burden, none sufficient of himself, none wise enough of himself; but it
behoveth us to bear with one another, to comfort one another, to help,
instruct, admonish one another. How much strength each man hath is best
proved by occasions of adversity: for such occasions do not make a man
frail, but show of what temper he is.




