CHAPTER XXXIX

That man must not be immersed in business


“My Son, always commit thy cause to Me; I will dispose it aright in due
time. Wait for My arrangement of it, and then thou shalt find it for
thy profit.”

2. O Lord, right freely I commit all things to Thee; for my planning
can profit but little. Oh that I did not dwell so much on future
events, but could offer myself altogether to Thy pleasures without
delay.

3. “My Son, a man often striveth vehemently after somewhat which he
desireth; but when he hath obtained it he beginneth to be of another
mind, because his affections towards it are not lasting, but rather
rush on from one thing to another. Therefore it is not really a small
thing, when in small things we resist self.”

4. The true progress of man lieth in self-denial, and a man who denieth
himself is free and safe. But the old enemy, opposer of all good
things, ceaseth not from temptation; but day and night setteth his
wicked snares, if haply he may be able to entrap the unwary. Watch and
pray, saith the Lord, lest ye enter into temptation.(1)

(1) Matthew xxvi. 41.




CHAPTER XL

That man hath no good in himself, and nothing whereof to glory


Lord, what is man that Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that
Thou visitest him?(1) What hath man deserved, that Thou shouldest
bestow thy favour upon him? Lord, what cause can I have of complaint,
if Thou forsake me? Or what can I justly allege, if Thou refuse to hear
my petition? Of a truth, this I may truly think and say, Lord, I am
nothing, I have nothing that is good of myself, but I fall short in all
things, and ever tend unto nothing. And unless I am helped by Thee and
inwardly supported, I become altogether lukewarm and reckless.

2. But Thou, O Lord, art always the same, and endurest for ever, always
good, righteous, and holy; doing all things well, righteously, and
holily, and disposing all in Thy wisdom. But I who am more ready to go
forward than backward, never continue in one stay, because changes
sevenfold pass over me. Yet it quickly becometh better when it so
pleaseth Thee, and Thou puttest forth Thy hand to help me; because Thou
alone canst aid without help of man, and canst so strengthen me that my
countenance shall be no more changed, but my heart shall be turned to
Thee, and rest in Thee alone.

3. Wherefore, if I but knew well how to reject all human consolations,
whether for the sake of gaining devotion, or because of the necessity
by which I was compelled to seek Thee, seeing there is no man who can
comfort me; then could I worthily trust in Thy grace, and rejoice in
the gift of new consolation.

4. Thanks be to Thee, from whom all cometh, whensoever it goeth well
with me! But I am vanity and nothing in Thy sight, a man inconstant and
weak. What then have I whereof to glory, or why do I long to be held in
honour? Is it not for nought? This also is utterly vain. Verily vain
glory is an evil plague, the greatest of vanities, because it draweth
us away from the true glory, and robbeth us of heavenly grace. For
whilst a man pleaseth himself he displeaseth Thee; whilst he gapeth
after the praises of man, he is deprived of true virtues.

5. But true glory and holy rejoicing lieth in glorying in Thee and not
in self; in rejoicing in Thy Name, not in our own virtue; in not taking
delight in any creature, save only for Thy sake. Let thy Name, not mine
be praised; let Thy work, not mine be magnified; let Thy holy Name be
blessed, but to me let nought be given of the praises of men. Thou art
my glory, Thou art the joy of my heart. In Thee will I make my boast
and be glad all the day long, but for myself let me not glory save only
in my infirmities.(2)

6. Let the Jews seek the honour which cometh from one another; but I
will ask for that which cometh from God only.(3) Truly all human glory,
all temporal honour, all worldly exultation, compared to Thy eternal
glory, is but vanity and folly. O God my Truth and my Mercy, Blessed
Trinity, to Thee alone be all praise, honour, power, and glory for ever
and for ever. Amen.

(1) Psalm viii. 4. (2) 2 Corinthians xii. 5. (3) John v. 44.




CHAPTER XLI

Of contempt of all temporal honour


“My Son, make it no matter of thine, if thou see others honoured and
exalted, and thyself despised and humbled. Lift up thine heart to Me in
heaven, and then the contempt of men upon earth will not make thee
sad.”

2. O Lord, we are in blindness, and are quickly seduced by vanity. If I
look rightly within myself, never was injury done unto me by any
creature, and therefore I have nought whereof to complain before Thee.
But because I have many times and grievously sinned against Thee, all
creatures do justly take arms against me. Therefore to me confusion and
contempt are justly due, but to Thee praise and honour and glory. And
except I dispose myself for this, namely, to be willing that every
creature should despise and desert me, and that I should be esteemed
altogether as nothing, I cannot be inwardly filled with peace and
strength, nor spiritually enlightened, nor fully united to Thee.




