CHAPTER VIII

Of the danger of too much familiarity


Open not thine heart to every man, but deal with one who is wise and
feareth God. Be seldom with the young and with strangers. Be not a
flatterer of the rich; nor willingly seek the society of the great. Let
thy company be the humble and the simple, the devout and the gentle,
and let thy discourse be concerning things which edify. Be not familiar
with any woman, but commend all good women alike unto God. Choose for
thy companions God and His Angels only, and flee from the notice of
men.

2. We must love all men, but not make close companions of all. It
sometimes falleth out that one who is unknown to us is highly regarded
through good report of him, whose actual person is nevertheless
unpleasing to those who behold it. We sometimes think to please others
by our intimacy, and forthwith displease them the more by the
faultiness of character which they perceive in us.




CHAPTER IX

Of Obedience and Subjection


It is verily a great thing to live in obedience, to be under authority,
and not to be at our own disposal. Far safer is it to live in
subjection than in a place of authority. Many are in obedience from
necessity rather than from love; these take it amiss, and repine for
small cause. Nor will they gain freedom of spirit, unless with all
their heart they submit themselves for the love of God. Though thou run
hither and thither, thou wilt not find peace, save in humble subjection
to the authority of him who is set over thee. Fancies about places and
change of them have deceived many.

2. True it is that every man willingly followeth his own bent, and is
the more inclined to those who agree with him. But if Christ is amongst
us, then it is necessary that we sometimes yield up our own opinion for
the sake of peace. Who is so wise as to have perfect knowledge of all
things? Therefore trust not too much to thine own opinion, but be ready
also to hear the opinions of others. Though thine own opinion be good,
yet if for the love of God thou foregoest it, and followest that of
another, thou shalt the more profit thereby.

3. Ofttimes I have heard that it is safer to hearken and to receive
counsel than to give it. It may also come to pass that each opinion may
be good; but to refuse to hearken to others when reason or occasion
requireth it, is a mark of pride or wilfulness.




CHAPTER X

Of the danger of superfluity of words


Avoid as far as thou canst the tumult of men; for talk concerning
worldly things, though it be innocently undertaken, is a hindrance, so
quickly are we led captive and defiled by vanity. Many a time I wish
that I had held my peace, and had not gone amongst men. But why do we
talk and gossip so continually, seeing that we so rarely resume our
silence without some hurt done to our conscience? We like talking so
much because we hope by our conversations to gain some mutual comfort,
and because we seek to refresh our wearied spirits by variety of
thoughts. And we very willingly talk and think of those things which we
love or desire, or else of those which we most dislike.

2. But alas! it is often to no purpose and in vain. For this outward
consolation is no small hindrance to the inner comfort which cometh
from God. Therefore must we watch and pray that time pass not idly
away. If it be right and desirable for thee to speak, speak things
which are to edification. Evil custom and neglect of our real profit
tend much to make us heedless of watching over our lips. Nevertheless,
devout conversation on spiritual things helpeth not a little to
spiritual progress, most of all where those of kindred mind and spirit
find their ground of fellowship in God.




CHAPTER XI

Of seeking peace of mind and of spiritual progress


We may enjoy abundance of peace if we refrain from busying ourselves
with the sayings and doings of others, and things which concern not
ourselves. How can he abide long time in peace who occupieth himself
with other men’s matters, and with things without himself, and
meanwhile payeth little or rare heed to the self within? Blessed are
the single-hearted, for they shall have abundance of peace.

2. How came it to pass that many of the Saints were so perfect, so
contemplative of Divine things? Because they steadfastly sought to
mortify themselves from all worldly desires, and so were enabled to
cling with their whole heart to God, and be free and at leisure for the
thought of Him. We are too much occupied with our own affections, and
too anxious about transitory things. Seldom, too, do we entirely
conquer even a single fault, nor are we zealous for daily growth in
grace. And so we remain lukewarm and unspiritual.

3. Were we fully watchful of ourselves, and not bound in spirit to
outward things, then might we be wise unto salvation, and make progress
in Divine contemplation. Our great and grievous stumbling-block is
that, not being freed from our affections and desires, we strive not to
enter into the perfect way of the Saints. And when even a little
trouble befalleth us, too quickly are we cast down, and fly to the
world to give us comfort.

4. If we would quit ourselves like men, and strive to stand firm in the
battle, then should we see the Lord helping us from Heaven. For He
Himself is alway ready to help those who strive and who trust in Him;
yea, He provideth for us occasions of striving, to the end that we may
win the victory. If we look upon our progress in religion as a progress
only in outward observances and forms, our devoutness will soon come to
an end. But let us lay the axe to the very root of our life, that,
being cleansed from affections, we may possess our souls in peace.

5. If each year should see one fault rooted out from us, we should go
quickly on to perfection. But on the contrary, we often feel that we
were better and holier in the beginning of our conversion than after
many years of profession. Zeal and progress ought to increase day by
day; yet now it seemeth a great thing if one is able to retain some
portion of his first ardour. If we would put some slight stress on
ourselves at the beginning, then afterwards we should be able to do all
things with ease and joy.

6. It is a hard thing to break through a habit, and a yet harder thing
to go contrary to our own will. Yet if thou overcome not slight and
easy obstacles, how shalt thou overcome greater ones? Withstand thy
will at the beginning, and unlearn an evil habit, lest it lead thee
little by little into worse difficulties. Oh, if thou knewest what
peace to thyself thy holy life should bring to thyself, and what joy to
others, methinketh thou wouldst be more zealous for spiritual profit.




