CHAPTER XII

That he who is about to Communicate with Christ ought to prepare
himself with great diligence


The Voice of the Beloved


I am the Lover of purity, and Giver of sanctity. I seek a pure heart,
and there is the place of My rest. Prepare for Me the larger upper room
furnished, and I will keep the Passover at thy house with my
disciples.(1) If thou wilt that I come unto thee and abide with thee,
purge out the old leaven,(2) and cleanse the habitation of thy heart.
Shut out the whole world, and all the throng of sins; sit as a sparrow
alone upon the house-top,(3) and think upon thy transgressions with
bitterness of thy soul. For everyone that loveth prepareth the best and
fairest place for his beloved, because hereby the affection of him that
entertaineth his beloved is known.

2. Yet know thou that thou canst not make sufficient preparation out of
the merit of any action of thine, even though thou shouldest prepare
thyself for a whole year, and hadst nothing else in thy mind. But out
of My tenderness and grace alone art thou permitted to draw nigh unto
My table; as though a beggar were called to a rich man’s dinner, and
had no other recompense to offer him for the benefits done unto him,
but to humble himself and to give him thanks. Do therefore as much as
lieth in thee, and do it diligently, not of custom, nor of necessity,
but with fear, reverence, and affection, receive the Body of thy
beloved Lord God, who vouchsafeth to come unto thee. I am He who hath
called thee; I commanded it to be done; I will supply what is lacking
to thee; come and receive Me.

3. When I give the grace of devotion, give thanks unto thy God; it is
not because thou art worthy, but because I had mercy on thee. If thou
hast not devotion, but rather feelest thyself dry, be instant in
prayer, cease not to groan and knock; cease not until thou prevail to
obtain some crumb or drop of saving grace. Thou hast need of Me, I have
no need of thee. Nor dost thou come to sanctify Me, but I come to
sanctify thee and make thee better. Thou comest that thou mayest be
sanctified by Me, and be united to Me; that thou mayest receive fresh
grace, and be kindled anew to amendment of life. See that thou neglect
not this grace, but prepare thy heart with all diligence, and receive
thy Beloved unto thee.

4. But thou oughtest not only to prepare thyself for devotion before
Communion, thou must also keep thyself with all diligence therein after
receiving the Sacrament; nor is less watchfulness needed afterwards,
than devout preparation beforehand: for good watchfulness afterwards
becometh in turn the best preparation for the gaining more grace. For
hereby is a man made entirely indisposed to good, if he immediately
return from Communion to give himself up to outward consolations.
Beware of much speaking; remain in a secret place, and hold communion
with thy God; for thou hast Him whom the whole world cannot take away
from thee. I am He to whom thou oughtest wholly to give thyself; so
that now thou mayest live not wholly in thyself, but in Me, free from
all anxiety.

(1) Mark xiv. 14, 15. (2) 1 Corinthians v. 7. (3) Psalm cii. 7.




CHAPTER XIII

That the devout soul ought with the whole heart to yearn after union
with Christ in the Sacrament


The Voice of the Disciple


Who shall grant unto me, O Lord, that I may find Thee alone, and open
all my heart unto Thee, and enjoy Thee as much as my soul desireth; and
that no man may henceforth look upon me, nor any creature move me or
have respect unto me, but Thou alone speak unto me and I unto Thee,
even as beloved is wont to speak unto beloved, and friend to feast with
friend? For this do I pray, this do I long for, that I may be wholly
united unto Thee, and may withdraw my heart from all created things,
and by means of Holy Communion and frequent celebration may learn more
and more to relish heavenly and eternal things. Ah, Lord God, when
shall I be entirely united and lost in Thee, and altogether forgetful
of myself? Thou in me, and I in Thee;(1) even so grant that we may in
like manner continue together in one.

2. Verily Thou art my Beloved, the choicest among ten thousand,(2) in
whom my soul delighteth to dwell all the days of her life. Verily Thou
art my Peacemaker, in Whom is perfect peace and true rest, apart from
Whom is labour and sorrow and infinite misery. Verily Thou art a God
that hidest Thyself, and Thy counsel is not with the wicked, but Thy
Word is with the humble and the simple. O how sweet, O Lord, is Thy
spirit, who that Thou mightest manifest Thy sweetness towards Thy
children, dost vouchsafe to refresh them with the bread which is full
of sweetness, which cometh down from heaven. Verily there is no other
nation so great, which hath its gods drawing nigh to them, as Thou, our
God, art present unto all Thy faithful ones,(3) unto whom for their
daily solace, and for lifting up their heart unto heaven, Thou givest
Thyself for their food and delight.

3. For what other nation is there so renowned as the Christian people?
Or what creature is so beloved under heaven as the devout soul to which
God entereth in, that he may feed it with His glorious flesh? O
unspeakable grace! O wonderful condescension! O immeasurable love
specially bestowed upon men! But what reward shall I give unto the Lord
for this grace, for charity so mighty? There is nothing which I am able
to present more acceptable than to give my heart altogether unto God,
and to join it inwardly to Him. Then all my inward parts shall rejoice,
when my soul shall be perfectly united unto God. Then shall He say unto
me, “If thou wilt be with Me, I will be with thee.” And I will answer
Him, “Vouchsafe, O Lord, to abide with me, I will gladly be with Thee;
this is my whole desire, even that my heart be united unto Thee.”

(1) John xv. 4. (2) Cant. v. 10. (3) Deuteronomy iv. 7.




