CHAPTER I

Of the inward voice of Christ to the faithful soul


I will hearken what the Lord God shall say within me.(1) Blessed is the
soul which heareth the Lord speaking within it, and receiveth the word
of consolation from His mouth. Blessed are the ears which receive the
echoes of the soft whisper of God, and turn not aside to the
whisperings of this world. Blessed truly are the ears which listen not
to the voice that soundeth without, but to that which teacheth truth
inwardly. Blessed are the eyes which are closed to things without, but
are fixed upon things within. Blessed are they who search inward things
and study to prepare themselves more and more by daily exercises for
the receiving of heavenly mysteries. Blessed are they who long to have
leisure for God, and free themselves from every hindrance of the world.
Think on these things, O my soul, and shut the doors of thy carnal
desires, so mayest thou hear what the Lord God will say within thee.

2. These things saith thy Beloved, “I am thy salvation, I am thy peace
and thy life. Keep thee unto Me, and thou shalt find peace.” Put away
thee all transitory things, seek those things that are eternal. For
what are all temporal things but deceits, and what shall all created
things help thee if thou be forsaken by the Creator? Therefore put all
things else away, and give thyself to the Creator, to be well pleasing
and faithful to Him, that thou mayest be able to attain true
blessedness.

(1) Psalm lxxxv. 8.




CHAPTER II

What the truth saith inwardly without noise of words


Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth.(1) I am Thy servant; O give me
understanding that I may know Thy testimonies. Incline my heart unto
the words of Thy mouth.(2) Let thy speech distil as the dew. The
children of Israel spake in old time to Moses, Speak thou unto us and
we will hear, but let not the Lord speak unto us lest we die.(3) Not
thus, O Lord, not thus do I pray, but rather with Samuel the prophet, I
beseech Thee humbly and earnestly, Speak, Lord, for Thy servant
heareth. Let not Moses speak to me, nor any prophet, but rather speak
Thou, O Lord, who didst inspire and illuminate all the prophets; for
Thou alone without them canst perfectly fill me with knowledge, whilst
they without Thee shall profit nothing.

2. They can indeed utter words, but they give not the spirit. They
speak with exceeding beauty, but when Thou art silent they kindle not
the heart. They give us scriptures, but Thou makest known the sense
thereof. They bring us mysteries, but Thou revealest the things which
are signified. They utter commandments, but Thou helpest to the
fulfilling of them. They show the way, but Thou givest strength for the
journey. They act only outwardly, but Thou dost instruct and enlighten
the heart. They water, but Thou givest the increase. They cry with
words, but Thou givest understanding to the hearer.

3. Therefore let not Moses speak to me, but Thou, O Lord my God,
Eternal Truth; lest I die and bring forth no fruit, being outwardly
admonished, but not enkindled within; lest the word heard but not
followed, known but not loved, believed but not obeyed, rise up against
me in the judgment. Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth; Thou hast the
words of eternal life.(4) Speak unto me for some consolation unto my
soul, for the amendment of my whole life, and for the praise and glory
and eternal honour of Thy Name.

(1) 1 Samuel iii. 9. (2) Psalm cxix. 125. (3) Exodus xx. 19. (4) John
vi. 68.




CHAPTER III

How all the words of God are to be heard with humility, and how many
consider them not


“My Son, hear My words, for My words are most sweet, surpassing all the
knowledge of the philosophers and wise men of this world. My words are
spirit, and they are life,(1) and are not to be weighed by man’s
understanding. They are not to be drawn forth for vain approbation, but
to be heard in silence, and to be received with all humility and with
deep love.”

2. And I said, “Blessed is the man whom Thou teachest, O Lord, and
instructest him in Thy law, that Thou mayest give him rest in time of
adversity,(2) and that he be not desolate in the earth.”

3. “I,” saith the Lord, “taught the prophets from the beginning, and
even now cease I not to speak unto all; but many are deaf and hardened
against My voice; many love to listen to the world rather than to God,
they follow after the desires of the flesh more readily than after the
good pleasure of God. The world promiseth things that are temporal and
small, and it is served with great eagerness. I promise things that are
great and eternal, and the hearts of mortals are slow to stir. Who
serveth and obeyeth Me in all things, with such carefulness as he
serveth the world and its rulers?

Be thou ashamed, O Sidon, saith the sea;(3)
And if thou reason seekest, hear thou me.


For a little reward men make a long journey; for eternal life many will
scarce lift a foot once from the ground. Mean reward is sought after;
for a single piece of money sometimes there is shameful striving; for a
thing which is vain and for a trifling promise, men shrink not from
toiling day and night.”

4. “But, O shame! for an unchangeable good, for an inestimable reward,
for the highest honour and for a glory that fadeth not away, it is
irksome to them to toil even a little. Be thou ashamed therefore,
slothful and discontented servant, for they are found readier unto
perdition than thou unto life. They rejoice more heartily in vanity
than thou in the truth. Sometimes, indeed, they are disappointed of
their hope, but my promise faileth no man, nor sendeth away empty him
who trusteth in Me. What I have promised I will give; what I have said
I will fulfil; if only a man remain faithful in My love unto the end.
Therefore am I the rewarder of all good men, and a strong approver of
all who are godly.

5. “Write My words in thy heart and consider them diligently, for they
shall be very needful to thee in time of temptation. What thou
understandest not when thou readest, thou shalt know in the time of thy
visitation. I am wont to visit Mine elect in twofold manner, even by
temptation and by comfort, and I teach them two lessons day by day, the
one in chiding their faults, the other in exhorting them to grow in
grace. He who hath My words and rejecteth them, hath one who shall
judge him at the last day.”

A PRAYER FOR THE SPIRIT OF DEVOTION


6. O Lord my God, Thou art all my good, and who am I that I should dare
to speak unto Thee? I am the very poorest of Thy servants, an abject
worm, much poorer and more despicable than I know or dare to say.
Nevertheless remember, O Lord, that I am nothing, I have nothing, and
can do nothing. Thou only art good, just and holy; Thou canst do all
things, art over all things, fillest all things, leaving empty only the
sinner. Call to mind Thy tender mercies, and fill my heart with Thy
grace, Thou who wilt not that Thy work should return to Thee void.

7. How can I bear this miserable life unless Thy mercy and grace
strengthen me? Turn not away Thy face from me, delay not Thy
visitation. Withdraw not Thou Thy comfort from me, lest my soul “gasp
after thee as a thirsty land.” Lord, teach me to do Thy will, teach me
to walk humbly and uprightly before Thee, for Thou art my wisdom, who
knowest me in truth, and knewest me before the world was made and
before I was born into the world.

(1) John vi. 63. (2) Psalm xciv. 13. (3) Isaiah xxiii. 4.




