CHAPTER LV

Of the corruption of Nature and the efficacy of Divine Grace


O Lord my God, who hast created me after thine own image and
similitude, grant me this grace, which Thou hast shown to be so great
and so necessary for salvation, that I may conquer my wicked nature,
which draweth me to sin and to perdition. For I feel in my flesh the
law of sin, contradicting the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the obedience of sensuality in many things; nor can I
resist its passions, unless Thy most holy grace assist me, fervently
poured into my heart.

2. There is need of Thy grace, yea, and of a great measure thereof,
that my nature may be conquered, which hath alway been prone to evil
from my youth. For being fallen through the first man Adam, and
corrupted through sin, the punishment of this stain descended upon all
men; so that Nature itself, which was framed good and right by Thee, is
now used to express the vice and infirmity of corrupted Nature; because
its motion left unto itself draweth men away to evil and to lower
things. For the little power which remaineth is as it were one spark
lying hid in the ashes. This is Natural reason itself, encompassed with
thick clouds, having yet a discernment of good and evil, a distinction
of the true and the false, though it be powerless to fulfil all that it
approveth, and possess not yet the full light of truth, nor
healthfulness of its affections.

3. Hence it is, O my God, that I delight in Thy law after the inward
man,(1) knowing that Thy commandment is holy and just and good;
reproving also all evil, and the sin that is to be avoided: yet with
the flesh I serve the law of sin, whilst I obey sensuality rather than
reason. Hence it is that to will to do good is present with me, but how
to perform it I find not.(2) Hence I ofttimes purpose many good things;
but because grace is lacking to help mine infirmities, I fall back
before a little resistance and fail. Hence it cometh to pass that I
recognize the way of perfectness, and see very clearly what things I
ought to do; but pressed down by the weight of my own corruption, I
rise not to the things which are more perfect.

4. Oh how entirely necessary is Thy grace to me, O Lord, for a good
beginning, for progress, and for bringing to perfection. For without it
I can do nothing, but I can do all things through Thy grace which
strengtheneth me.(3) O truly heavenly grace, without which our own
merits are nought, and no gifts of Nature at all are to be esteemed.
Arts, riches, beauty, strength, wit, eloquence, they all avail nothing
before Thee, O Lord, without Thy grace. For the gifts of Nature belong
to good and evil alike; but the proper gift of the elect is grace—that
is, love—and they who bear the mark thereof are held worthy of
everlasting life. So mighty is this grace, that without it neither the
gift of prophecy nor the working of miracles, nor any speculation,
howsoever lofty, is of any value at all. But neither faith, nor hope,
nor any other virtue is accepted with Thee without love and grace.

5. O most blessed grace that makest the poor in spirit rich in virtues,
and renderest him who is rich in many things humble in spirit, come
Thou, descend upon me, fill me early with Thy consolation, lest my soul
fail through weariness and drought of mind. I beseech thee, O Lord,
that I may find grace in Thy sight, for Thy grace is sufficient for
me,(4) when I obtain not those things which Nature longeth for. If I be
tempted and vexed with many tribulations, I will fear no evil, while
Thy grace remaineth with me. This alone is my strength, this bringeth
me counsel and help. It is more powerful than all enemies, and wiser
than all the wise men in the world.

6. It is the mistress of truth, the teacher of discipline, the light of
the heart, the solace of anxiety, the banisher of sorrow, the deliverer
from fear, the nurse of devotion, the drawer forth of tears. What am I
without it, save a dry tree, a useless branch, worthy to be cast away!
“Let Thy grace, therefore, O Lord, always prevent and follow me, and
make me continually given to all good works, through Jesus Christ, Thy
Son. Amen.”

(1) Romans vii. 12, 22. 25. (2) Romans vii. 18. (3) Philippians iv. 13.
(4) 2 Corinthians xii. 9.




CHAPTER LVI

That we ought to deny ourselves, and to imitate Christ by means of the
Cross


My Son, so far as thou art able to go out of thyself so far shalt thou
be able to enter into Me. As to desire no outward thing worketh
internal peace, so the forsaking of self inwardly joineth unto God. I
will that thou learn perfect self-denial, living in My will without
contradiction or complaint. Follow Me: I am the way, the truth, and the
life.(1) Without the way thou canst not go, without the truth thou
canst not know, without the life thou canst not live. I am the Way
which thou oughtest to follow; the Truth which thou oughtest to
believe; the Life which thou oughtest to hope for. I am the Way
unchangeable; the Truth infallible; the Life everlasting. I am the Way
altogether straight, the Truth supreme, the true Life, the blessed
Life, the uncreated Life. If thou remain in My way thou shalt know the
Truth, and the truth shall make thee free,(2) and thou shalt lay hold
on eternal life.

2. “If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.(3) If thou
wilt know the truth, believe in Me. If thou wilt be perfect, sell all
that thou hast. If thou wilt be My disciple, deny thyself. If thou
wouldst possess the blessed life, despise the life which now is. If
thou wilt be exalted in heaven, humble thyself in the world. If thou
wilt reign with Me, bear the cross with Me; for only the servants of
the cross find the way of blessedness and of true light.”

3. O Lord Jesu, forasmuch as Thy life was straitened and despised by
the world, grant unto me to imitate Thee in despising the world, for
the servant is not greater than his lord, nor the disciple above his
master.(4) Let Thy servant be exercised in Thy life, because there is
my salvation and true holiness. Whatsoever I read or hear besides it,
it refresheth me not, nor giveth me delight.

4. “My son, because thou knowest these things and hast read them all,
blessed shalt thou be if thou doest them. He who hath My commandments
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me, and I will love him, and
will manifest Myself to him,(5) and I will make him to sit down with Me
in My Father’s Kingdom.”

5. O Lord Jesu, as Thou hast said and promised, even so let it be unto
me, and grant me to prove worthy. I have received the cross at Thy
hand; I have carried it, and will carry it even unto death, as Thou
hast laid it upon me. Truly the life of a truly devoted servant is a
cross, but it leadeth to paradise. I have begun; I may not return back
nor leave it.

6. Come, my brothers, let us together go forward. Jesus shall be with
us. For Jesus’ sake have we taken up this cross, for Jesus’ sake let us
persevere in the cross. He will be our helper, who was our Captain and
Forerunner. Behold our King entereth in before us, and He will fight
for us. Let us follow bravely, let no man fear terrors; let us be
prepared to die bravely in battle, and let us not so stain our
honour,(6) as to fly from the cross.

(1) John xiv. 6. (2) John viii. 32. (3) Matthew xix. 17, 21. (4)
Matthew x. 24. (5) John xiv. 21. (6) 1 Mac. ix. 10.




