CHAPTER XXXVI

Against vain judgments of men


“My Son, anchor thy soul firmly upon God, and fear not man’s judgment,
when conscience pronounceth thee pious and innocent. It is good and
blessed thus to suffer; nor will it be grievous to the heart which is
humble, and which trusteth in God more than in itself. Many men have
many opinions, and therefore little trust is to be placed in them. But
moreover it is impossible to please all. Although Paul studied to
please all men in the Lord, and to become all things to all men,(1) yet
nevertheless with him it was a very small thing that he should be
judged by man’s judgment.”(2)

2. He laboured abundantly, as much as in him lay, for the building up
and the salvation of others; but he could not avoid being sometimes
judged and despised by others. Therefore he committed all to God, who
knew all, and by patience and humility defended himself against evil
speakers, or foolish and false thinkers, and those who accused him
according to their pleasure. Nevertheless, from time to time he
replied, lest his silence should become a stumbling-block to those who
were weak.

3. “Who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of a man that shall die?
To-day he is, and to-morrow his place is not found. Fear God and thou
shalt not quail before the terrors of men. What can any man do against
thee by words or deeds? He hurteth himself more than thee, nor shall he
escape the judgment of God, whosoever he may be. Have thou God before
thine eyes, and do not contend with fretful words. And if for the
present thou seem to give way, and to suffer confusion which thou hast
not deserved, be not angry at this, nor by impatience diminish thy
reward; but rather look up to Me in heaven, for I am able to deliver
thee from all confusion and hurt, and to render to every man according
to his works.”

(1) 1 Corinthians ix. 22. (2) 1 Corinthians iv. 3.




CHAPTER XXXVII

Of pure and entire resignation of self, for the obtaining liberty of
heart


“My Son, lose thyself and thou shalt find Me. Stand still without all
choosing and all thought of self, and thou shalt ever be a gainer. For
more grace shall be added to thee, as soon as thou resignest thyself,
and so long as thou dost not turn back to take thyself again.”

2. O Lord, how often shall I resign myself, and in what things shall I
lose myself?

3. “Always; every hour: in that which is little, and in that which is
great. I make no exception, but will that thou be found naked in all
things. Otherwise how canst thou be Mine and I thine, unless thou be
inwardly and outwardly free from every will of thine own? The sooner
thou dost this, the better shall it be with thee; and the more fully
and sincerely, the more thou shalt please Me, and the more abundantly
shalt thou be rewarded.

4. “Some resign themselves, but with certain reservations, for they do
not fully trust in God, therefore they think that they have some
provision to make for themselves. Some again at first offer everything;
but afterwards being pressed by temptation they return to their own
devices, and thus make no progress in virtue. They will not attain to
the true liberty of a pure heart, nor to the grace of My sweet
companionship, unless they first entirely resign themselves and daily
offer themselves up as a sacrifice; without this the union which
bringeth forth fruit standeth not nor will stand.

5. “Many a time I have said unto thee, and now say again, Give thyself
up, resign thyself, and thou shalt have great inward peace. Give all
for all; demand nothing, ask nothing in return; stand simply and with
no hesitation in Me, and thou shalt possess Me. Thou shalt have liberty
of heart, and the darkness shall not overwhelm thee. For this strive
thou, pray for it, long after it, that thou mayest be delivered from
all possession of thyself, and nakedly follow Jesus who was made naked
for thee; mayest die unto thyself and live eternally to Me. Then shall
all vain fancies disappear, all evil disturbings, and superfluous
cares. Then also shall immoderate fear depart from thee, and inordinate
love shall die.”




CHAPTER XXXVIII

Of a good government in external things, and of having recourse to God
in dangers


“My Son, for this thou must diligently make thy endeavour, that in
every place and outward action or occupation thou mayest be free
within, and have power over thyself; and that all things be under thee,
not thou under them; that thou be master and ruler of thy actions, not
a slave or hireling, but rather a free and true Hebrew, entering into
the lot and the liberty of the children of God, who stand above the
present and look upon the eternal, who with the left eye behold things
transitory, and with the right things heavenly; whom temporal things
draw not to cleave unto, but who rather draw temporal things to do them
good service, even as they were ordained of God to do, and appointed by
the Master Workman, who hath left nought in His creation without aim
and end.

2. “And if in any chance of life thou stand not in outward appearances,
nor judgest things which are seen and heard by the fleshly sense, but
straightway in every cause enterest with Moses into the tabernacle to
ask counsel of God; thou shalt hear a divine response and come forth
instructed concerning many things that are and shall be. For always
Moses had recourse to the tabernacle for the solving of all doubts and
questionings; and fled to the help of prayer to be delivered from the
dangers and evil deeds of men. Thus also oughtest thou to fly to the
secret chamber of thy heart, and earnestly implore the divine succour.
For this cause we read that Joshua and the children of Israel were
deceived by the Gibeonites, that they asked not counsel at the mouth of
the Lord,(1) but being too ready to listen to fair speeches, were
deceived by pretended piety.”

(1) Joshua ix. 14.




