CHAPTER XXXI

Of the neglect of every creature, that the Creator may be found


O Lord, I still need more grace, if I would arrive where neither man
nor any other creature may hinder me. For so long as anything keepeth
me back, I cannot freely fly unto Thee. He desired eagerly thus to fly,
who cried, saying, Oh that I had wings like a dove, for then would I
flee away and be at rest. What is more peaceful than the single eye?
And what more free than he that desireth nothing upon earth? Therefore
must a man rise above every creature, and perfectly forsake himself,
and with abstracted mind to stand and behold that Thou, the Creator of
all things, hast among Thy creatures nothing like unto Thyself. And
except a man be freed from all creatures, he will not be able to reach
freely after Divine things. Therefore few are found who give themselves
to contemplation, because few know how to separate themselves entirely
from perishing and created things.

2. For this much grace is necessary, which may lift up the soul and
raise it above itself. And except a man be lifted up in the spirit, and
freed from all creatures, and altogether united to God, whatsoever he
knoweth, whatsoever even he hath, it mattereth but little. He who
esteemeth anything great save the one only incomprehensible, eternal,
good, shall long time be little and lie low. For whatsoever is not God
is nothing, and ought to be counted for nothing. Great is the
difference between a godly man, illuminated with wisdom, and a scholar
learned in knowledge and given to books. Far nobler is that doctrine
which floweth down from the divine fulness above, than that which is
acquired laboriously by human study.

3. Many are found who desire contemplation, but they do not strive to
practice those things which are required thereunto. It is also a great
impediment, that much is made of symbols and external signs, and too
little of thorough mortification. I know not how it is, and by what
spirit we are led, and what we who would be deemed spiritual are aiming
at, that we give so great labour and so eager solicitude for transitory
and worthless things, and scarcely ever gather our senses together to
think at all of our inward condition.

4. Ah, me! Forthwith after a little recollection we rush out of doors,
and do not subject our actions to a strict examination. Where our
affections are set we take no heed, and we weep not that all things
belonging to us are so defiled. For because all flesh had corrupted
itself upon the earth, the great deluge came. Since therefore our
inmost affections are very corrupt, it followeth of necessity that our
actions also are corrupt, being the index of a deficient inward
strength. Out of a pure heart proceedeth the fruit of good living.

5. We demand, how much a man hath done; but from how much virtue he
acted, is not so narrowly considered. We ask if he be strong, rich,
handsome, clever, whether he is a good writer, good singer, good
workman; but how poor he may be in spirit, how patient and gentle, how
devout and meditative, on these things many are silent. Nature looketh
upon the outward appearance of a man, grace turneth its thought to the
heart. The former frequently judgeth amiss; the latter trusteth in God,
that it may not be deceived.




CHAPTER XXXII

Of self-denial and the casting away all selfishness


“My Son, thou canst not possess perfect liberty unless thou altogether
deny thyself. All they are enslaved who are possessors of riches, they
who love themselves, the selfish, the curious, the restless; those who
ever seek after soft things, and not after the things of Jesus Christ;
those who continually plan and devise that which will not stand. For
whatsoever cometh not of God shall perish. Hold fast the short and
complete saying, ‘Renounce all things, and thou shalt find all things;
give up thy lust, and thou shalt find rest.’ Dwell upon this in thy
mind, and when thou art full of it, thou shalt understand all things.”

2. O Lord, this is not the work of a day, nor children’s play; verily
in this short saying is enclosed all the perfection of the religious.

3. “My son, thou oughtest not to be turned aside, nor immediately cast
down, because thou hast heard the way of the perfect. Rather oughtest
thou to be provoked to higher aims, and at the least to long after the
desire thereof. Oh that it were so with thee, and that thou hadst come
to this, that thou wert not a lover of thine own self, but wert ready
always to My nod, and to his whom I have placed over thee as thy
father. Then shouldest thou please Me exceedingly, and all thy life
should go on in joy and peace. Thou hast still many things to renounce,
which if thou resign not utterly to Me, thou shalt not gain what thou
seekest. I counsel thee to buy of Me gold tried in the fire, that thou
mayest be rich,(1) that is heavenly wisdom, which despiseth all base
things. Put away from thee earthly wisdom, and all pleasure, whether
common to men, or thine own.

4. “I tell thee that thou must buy vile things with those which are
costly and great in the esteem of men. For wonderfully vile and small,
and almost given up to forgetfulness, doth true heavenly wisdom appear,
which thinketh not high things of itself, nor seeketh to be magnified
upon the earth; many honour it with their lips, but in heart are far
from it; it is indeed the precious pearl, which is hidden from many.”

(1) Revelation iii. 18.




