CHAPTER XIII

Of the obedience of one in lowly subjection after the example of Jesus
Christ


“My Son, he who striveth to withdraw himself from obedience,
withdraweth himself also from grace, and he who seeketh private
advantages, loseth those which are common unto all. If a man submit not
freely and willingly to one set over him, it is a sign that his flesh
is not yet perfectly subject to himself, but often resisteth and
murmureth. Learn therefore quickly to submit thyself to him who is over
thee, if thou seekest to bring thine own flesh into subjection. For the
outward enemy is very quickly overcome if the inner man have not been
laid low. There is no more grievous and deadly enemy to the soul than
thou art to thyself, if thou art not led by the Spirit. Thou must not
altogether conceive contempt for thyself, if thou wilt prevail against
flesh and blood. Because as yet thou inordinately lovest thyself,
therefore thou shrinkest from yielding thyself to the will of others.

2. “But what great thing is it that thou, who art dust and nothingness,
yieldest thyself to man for God’s sake, when I, the Almighty and the
Most High, who created all things out of nothing, subjected Myself to
man for thy sake? I became the most humble and despised of men, that by
My humility thou mightest overcome thy pride. Learn to obey, O dust!
Learn to humble thyself, O earth and clay, and to bow thyself beneath
the feet of all. Learn to crush thy passions, and to yield thyself in
all subjection.

3. “Be zealous against thyself, nor suffer pride to live within thee,
but so show thyself subject and of no reputation, that all may be able
to walk over thee, and tread thee down as the clay in the streets. What
hast thou, O foolish man, of which to complain? What, O vile sinner,
canst thou answer those who speak against thee, seeing thou hast so
often offended God, and many a time hast deserved hell? But Mine eye
hath spared thee, because thy soul was precious in My sight; that thou
mightest know My love, and mightest be thankful for My benefits; and
that thou mightest give thyself altogether to true subjection and
humility, and patiently bear the contempt which thou meritest.”




CHAPTER XIV

Of meditation upon the hidden judgments of God, that we may not be
lifted up because of our well-doing


Thou sendest forth Thy judgments against me, O Lord, and shakest all my
bones with fear and trembling, and my soul trembleth exceedingly. I
stand astonished, and remember that the heavens are not clean in thy
sight.(1) If Thou chargest Thine angels with folly, and didst spare
them not, how shall it be unto me? Stars have fallen from heaven, and
what shall I dare who am but dust? They whose works seemed to be
praiseworthy, fell into the lowest depths, and they who did eat Angels’
food, them have I seen delighted with the husks that the swine do eat.

2. There is therefore no holiness, if Thou O Lord, withdraw Thine hand.
No wisdom profiteth, if Thou leave off to guide the helm. No strength
availeth, if Thou cease to preserve. No purity is secure, if Thou
protect it not. No self-keeping availeth, if Thy holy watching be not
there. For when we are left alone we are swallowed up and perish, but
when we are visited, we are raised up, and we live. For indeed we are
unstable, but are made strong through Thee; we grow cold, but are
rekindled by Thee.

3. Oh, how humbly and abjectly must I reckon of myself, how must I
weigh it as nothing, if I seem to have nothing good! Oh, how profoundly
ought I to submit myself to Thy unfathomable judgments, O Lord, when I
find myself nothing else save nothing, and again nothing! Oh weight
unmeasurable, oh ocean which cannot be crossed over, where I find
nothing of myself save nothing altogether! Where, then, is the
hiding-place of glory, where the confidence begotten of virtue? All
vain-glory is swallowed up in the depths of Thy judgments against me.

4. What is all flesh in Thy sight? _For how shall the clay boast
against Him that fashioned it?_(2) How can he be lifted up in vain
speech whose heart is subjected in truth to God? The whole world shall
not lift him up whom Truth hath subdued; nor shall he be moved by the
mouth of all who praise him, who hath placed all his hope in God. For
they themselves who speak, behold, they are all nothing; for they shall
cease with the sound of their words, but the truth of the Lord endureth
for ever.(3)

(1) Job xv. 15. (2) Isaiah xxix. 16. (3) Psalm cxvii. 2.




CHAPTER XV

How we must stand and speak, in everything that we desire


“My Son, speak thou thus in every matter, ‘Lord, if it please Thee, let
this come to pass. Lord, if this shall be for Thine honour, let it be
done in Thy Name. Lord, if thou see it good for me, and approve it as
useful, then grant me to use it for Thy honour. But if thou knowest
that it shall be hurtful unto me, and not profitable for the health of
my soul, take the desire away from me’! For not every desire is from
the Holy Ghost, although it appear to a man right and good. It is
difficult to judge with certainty whether a good or an evil spirit move
thee to desire this or that, or whether thou art moved by thine own
spirit. Many have been deceived at the last, who seemed at the
beginning to be moved by a good spirit.

2. “Therefore, whatsoever seemeth to thee desirable, thou must always
desire and seek after it with the fear of God and humility of heart,
and most of all, must altogether resign thyself, and commit all unto Me
and say, ‘Lord, thou knowest what is best; let this or that be,
according as Thou wilt. Give what Thou wilt, so much as Thou wilt, when
Thou wilt. Do with me as Thou knowest best, and as best shall please
Thee, and as shall be most to Thine honour. Place me where Thou wilt,
and freely work Thy will with me in all things. I am in Thine hand, and
turn me in my course. Behold, I am Thy servant, ready for all things;
for I desire to live not to myself but to Thee. Oh, that I might live
worthily and perfectly.’”

A PRAYER TO BE ENABLED TO DO GOD’S WILL PERFECTLY


3. Grant me Thy grace, most merciful Jesus, that it may be with me, and
work in me, and persevere with me, even unto the end. Grant that I may
ever desire and wish whatsoever is most pleasing and dear unto Thee.
Let Thy will be mine, and let my will alway follow Thine, and entirely
accord with it. May I choose and reject whatsoever Thou dost; yea, let
it be impossible for me to choose or reject except according to Thy
will.

4. Grant that I may die to all worldly things, and for Thy sake love to
be despised and unknown in this world. Grant unto me, above all things
that I can desire, to rest in Thee, and that in Thee my heart may be at
peace. Thou art the true peace of the heart, Thou alone its rest; apart
from Thee all things are hard and unquiet. In Thee alone, the supreme
and eternal God, _I will lay me down in peace and take my rest_.(1)
Amen.

(1) Psalm iv. 8.




