CHAPTER XVI.

1891.

AN APPEAL IN BEHALF OF THE CONTINUANCE OF KEELY'S RESEARCHES.

        There is a distinct advantage in having one section
        of scientific men beginning their work untrammelled by
        preconceived notions.--Engineering.

        A knowledge of scientific theories seems to kill all knowledge
        of scientific facts.--Professor Schuster.

        Tizeau found that the speed of light is increased in water
        which moves in the same direction as the light. This result
        must be due either to the motion of matter through the medium,
        or to the fact that moving matter carries the ether with
        it. The whole question of matter and motion as a medium is
        a vital one, and we shall hardly make any serious advance
        before experiment has found a new opening.--Professor Schuster.


How Mr. Keely, in 1891, was Able To Secure the Attention Of Men of
Science To His Researching Experiments.

During the summer of 1890, Mr. Keely was harassed by threats, said to
proceed from disappointed stockholders in the Keely Motor Company,
of suits at law for "obtaining money under false pretences." After
making many unsuccessful attempts with the editors of leading
magazines in London, Boston, and New York, to bring before the
public the claims of Mr. Keely for sympathy in his colossal work,
the proposals of an editor, on the staff of the London Times (who
had the year before introduced himself to Mrs. Bloomfield Moore to
obtain information of Keely) to make known the researches of the
persecuted discoverer and his need of assistance, at that time, were
accepted. The programme, as laid out by this editor, was to use his
extended influence with the leading journals throughout Great Britain,
and to have brief notices of Keely inserted; to be followed up with
a magazine article, for which the material was furnished. Later this
arrangement was modified by the editor, who then proposed to write an
essay for some influential journal, handling the various molecular and
atomic theories; pointing out wherein Keely's views were original,
and showing their revolutionizing tendencies. This work, which was
to have been commenced in November, was delayed until all need was
over. When the editor wrote to Philadelphia in January, 1891, that he
had been unable to commence his work for want of sufficient material
(enclosing questions to be answered by Mr. Keely before he could set
about it), the answer returned was that the threatened troubles were
over, that Mr. Keely had gained the protection of men of science,
and the order for the essay was countermanded. At this very time
a subscription was in circulation to raise money from disaffected
stockholders for the purpose of bringing the threatened action at
law, in case Mr. Keely did not resume work on his engine, instead of
pursuing researches in order to gain more knowledge of the operation
of this unknown polar force in nature.

It was at this juncture that the late Professor Joseph Leidy, that
eminent man of science who had been the first to recognize the
importance of Keely's discovery to the scientific world, arranged
with the Provost of the University of Pennsylvania that an appeal
should be made to the trustees, the faculty and the professors of
that institution, to permit Keely to continue his researches for
science under their protection.

Accordingly, on the 14th of January, 1891, a paper entitled "Keely's
Discoveries" was read at the house of Provost Pepper. The answer sent
by one of the professors, in reply to Dr. Pepper's invitation, probably
expressed the views held by all the distinguished men who assembled
to listen to the appeal, which was to the effect that the professor
would be present to hear the paper read, if the Provost wished it;
but, if he came, he should make it very unpleasant for the reader,
as he had no faith in Keely nor in his discoveries. All those who
were present listened with attention, and among the few who became
interested in the claims of Keely as a discoverer, was the professor
who had made this remark. The preamble to the appeal was read by the
Provost, Dr. Pepper.



Preamble.

Before commencing to read my paper I wish to lay before you the object
of this effort to interest men of science in the researches of a man
who, in the cause of justice alone, is entitled to have his life's
work fairly represented to you. Some of our men of science have,
unwittingly, been the medium by which great injustice has been done
to Mr. Keely; and to others also, by placing me before the world as a
woman whom the Keely Motor Company management has robbed of large sums
of money; whereas, in truth, I have never been in any way involved
by the Keely Motor Company.

In the winter of 1881-82, Mr. Keely, who was dependent upon "The
Keely Motor Company" for the means to continue his researches, as
to the nature of the unknown force he had discovered, was virtually
abandoned by the Company. Himself as ignorant as were its managers
of the source of the mysterious energy he had stumbled over, he
was driven to despair by their action; and, when I was led to his
assistance, I found his wife's roof mortgaged over her head, and that,
his honour assailed, he had resolved to take his life rather than
submit to the indignities threatening him. At this time I had taken
from my private estate ten thousand dollars, to found a small public
library to my father's memory, in the town of Westfield, Hampden Co.,
Massachusetts. After convincing myself that Mr. Keely had made a
great discovery, I felt that if this money could save his discovery,
jeopardized as it was, it was my duty to so appropriate it. At that
time, Mr. Keely thought half of the amount so appropriated would be
all that he should require; but, unfortunately, his efforts were for
years confined to the construction of an engine for the Company that
had abandoned him. Later, he commenced researches which resulted in
the discovery that he had unknowingly imprisoned the ether; greatly
increasing my interest in his work.

The plan to which I shall allude in my paper, as framed by Professor
Leidy for Mr. Keely to follow, and approved by Professor Hertz, of
Bonn, and Professor Fitzgerald, of Trinity College, Dublin, may be
summed up as one that permits Mr. Keely to pursue his researches on
his own line, without further investigation, up to the completion
of his system in a form which will enable him to give to commerce
with one hand his model for aerial navigation, and to science,
with the other, the knowledge that is necessary for extending its
researches in the field of radiant energy--which Mr. Keely has been
exploring for so many years. I ask the prestige of your sympathy,
as well as for your interest in Mr. Keely's work, on this basis;
and if in one year you are not convinced that satisfactory results
have been attained for science, I will promise to leave Mr. Keely in
the hands of the "usurers and Shylocks of commerce," who have already
forced him into renouncing seven-eighths of his interest in what the
Keely Motor Company claims as its property.

At present I do not desire from anyone endorsement of Keely's
discoveries. Until his system is completed he wishes to avoid all
discussion and all public mention of the anticipated value of his
inventions. Mr. Keely's programme of experimental research, as laid
down by himself last March, when I first proposed to furnish him with
all the funds needed to carry it out, comprises its continuance
until he has gained sufficient knowledge of the energy he is
controlling--which is derived from the disintegration of water--to
enable him to impart to others a system that will permit men of
science to produce and to handle the energy, and enable him to
instruct artisans in the work which lies in their province; viz.,
the construction of machines to apply this costless motive power
in mechanics.

The prestige of your interest in Mr. Keely's labours can alone
secure to him freedom to pursue researches on his own road; a
course pronounced by Professor Leidy, Professor Hertz, and Professor
Fitzgerald, to be "the only proper line for him to pursue."

The building of an engine is not in Mr. Keely's province. His
researches completed to that point which is necessary, for perfect
control of the force, practical application will follow. The result of
his experimental work for nine months on this line has been such as to
revive the interest of the speculative management of the Keely Motor
Company, to that extent that Mr. Keely is now offered the support
of its stockholders if he will resume construction of an engine;
and this after more than seven years of failure on the part of the
company to furnish him with one dollar to carry on "the enterprise."

The official Report put forth in January by the Keely Motor Company
managers annulled my contract with Mr. Keely; but he is willing
to abide by it, if I am able to continue to furnish him with the
necessary funds. This position of affairs has forced me to the front,
to ask whether you will place it in my power to renew the contract
with Mr. Keely; or leave him under the control of men who seem to
be oblivious of the interests of the stockholders of the company in
their "clamour" for an engine. When this system is completed, in its
application to mechanics, the present mode of running engines with
shafts and beltings will disappear, creating a revolution in all
branches of industry.

Looking at my request from another point of view, do you not think it
due to extend to Mr. Keely an opportunity to prove all that one of
your number is ready to announce as his conviction in regard to the
claims of Mr. Keely? You all know to whom I refer--Professor Joseph
Leidy. "Oh, Leidy is a biologist," said an English physicist not long
since; "get the opinion of a physicist for us." If I did not wish
for the opinion of physicists, I should not have appealed to you for
help at this most critical juncture. But I also ask that no opinion
be given by any physicist until Mr. Keely's theories are understood
and demonstrated, by experiment. Yes, Dr. Leidy is a biologist, and
what better preparation could a man have than a study of the science
of life to enable him to discern between laws of nature as invented
by physicists, and nature's operations as demonstrated by Keely?

The science of life has not been the only branch to which Dr. Leidy has
given profound attention; it is his extensive and accurate knowledge
of its methods, limits, and tendencies, which prepared the way for
that quick comprehension of possibilities, lying hidden from the sight
of those men of science whose minds have rested (rusted?) in the dead
grooves of mechanical physics. In Dr. Leidy we find entire scientific
and intellectual liberty of thought, with that love of justice and
truth which keeps its possessor from arrogance and intolerance, leading
him with humility to "prove all things and hold fast to truth." To
such men the world owes all that we have of advance since the days
when science taught that the earth is flat, arguing that were it
round the seas and oceans would fall off into space. In Dr. Leidy's
name and in justice to him, I ask your sanction to and approval of
my efforts to preserve Keely's discoveries for science;--discoveries
which explain, not only the causes of the planetary motions but the
source of the one eternal and universal force.



An Appeal in Behalf of Science.

A paper read by Mrs. Bloomfield Moore at the house of Provost Pepper
on the evening of January 14th, 1891, before members of the board of
trustees and professors of the University of Pennsylvania.


        Each day he wrought, and better than he planned,
        Shape breeding shape beneath his restless hand;
        The soul without still helps the soul within,
        And its deft magic ends what we begin.

                                                George Eliot.


I hope that I do not seem to be too presumptuous in my effort to
awaken an interest, on your part, in the discoveries of Keely which
have aroused a marked degree of attention among some of the most
learned men in Europe.

I should hardly have ventured to ask the prestige of your support to
be given to Mr. Keely, in his further scientific researches, were it
not that one of your number fully realizes, I think, the important
nature of these researches. You all know to whom I refer--Professor
Joseph Leidy. In his book, "Fresh Water Rhizopods of North America,"
he says, in his concluding remarks: "I may perhaps continue in the same
field of research and give to the reader further results, but I cannot
promise to do so, for though the subject has proved to me an unceasing
source of pleasure I see before me so many wonderful things in other
fields, that a strong impulse disposes me to leap the hedges to examine
them." I have reason to know that, had Dr. Leidy not followed this
impulse, our age might have been robbed of its birthright.

It was not until I appealed to Professor Leidy and Dr. Willcox, to
convince themselves whether I was right or wrong in extending aid to
Mr. Keely, that their decision enabled me to continue to assist him
until he has once more made such advances, in experimental research,
as to cause the managers of the Keely Motor Company to believe that
his engine is near completion, and that they can dispense with outside
assistance hereafter.

But I know as it has been in the past so will it be again, and that,
as the months glide away, if no engine is completed, the company will
once more desert the discoverer; while, if he is allowed to pursue his
researches, up to the completion of his system under your protection,
his discoveries will be guarded for science, and the interests of
the stockholders will not be sacrificed to the greed of speculators,
as has so often been done in the past.

As I have had occasion to say, elsewhere, after the warning given
in the history of Huxley's Bathybius, Professor Leidy would not have
risked his world-wide reputation by the endorsement of Keely's claims,
as the discoverer of hidden energy in inter-molecular and atomic
spaces, had he not tested the demonstrations until fully convinced of
the discovery of a force previously unknown to science, and of the
honesty of Mr. Keely in his explanations. Therefore, following the
advice of Professor G. Fr. Fitzgerald, of Dublin, I do not ask for
further investigations. Until Professor Leidy and Dr. Willcox came to
the front, in May, 1891, Mr. Keely had no influential supporters, and
was under such a cloud, from his connection with speculators, that to
advocate his integrity of purpose and to uphold the importance of his
work, was enough to awaken doubts as to the sanity of his upholders.

We are told by Herodotus that science is to know things truly; yet
past experience shows us that what has been called knowledge at one
period of time is proved to be but folly in another age. Science is
to know things truly, and the laws of nature are the same yesterday,
to-day, and forever. Throughout the universe the same laws are at work
and regulate all things. Men interpret these laws to suit their own
ideas. The system which Keely is unfolding shows us that there is not
one grain of sand, nor one invisible corpuscule of floating matter,
that does not come under the same law that governs the most mighty
planet, and that all forms of matter are aggregated under one law. "The
designs of the Creator as expounded by our latest teachers," writes
Gilman, "have required millions of ages to carry out. They are so vast
and complex that they can only be realized in the sweep of ages. One
design is subordinated by another without ever being lost sight of,
until the time has arrived for its complete fulfilment. These designs
involve an infinitude of effort, ending often in what, to our view,
looks like failure, to be crowned after a series of ages with complete
success at last."

In this long chain of physical causes, says Dr. Willcox, seemingly
endless, but really commencing with that one link that touches the
hand of Him who made all matter, and all potencies that dwell within
matter, this cosmical activity has been ceaseless, these cosmical
effects numerous past conception, by which universal nature has slowly
unfolded and become the universe of to-day.

In this way both Christianity and science unfold their truths
progressively. Truth, like the laws of nature, never changes; yet truth
as an absolute thing, existing in and by itself, is relatively capable
of change; for as the atoms hold in their tenacious grasp undreamed-of
potencies, so truths hold germs potential of all growth. Each new
truth disclosed to the world, when its hour of need comes, unfolds and
reveals undreamed-of means of growth. As the Rev. George Boardman has
said of Christianity, so may it be said of science: Being a perennial
vine, it is ever yielding new wine.

A philosopher has said that if ever a human being needed divine
pity it is the pseudo-scientist who believes in nothing but what he
can prove by his own methods. In the light of Keely's discoveries,
science will have to admit that when she concentrates her attention
upon matter, to the exclusion of mind, she is as the hunter who has
no string in reserve for his bow. When she recognizes that a full
and adequate science of matter is impossible to man, and that the
science of mind is destined ultimately to attain to a much higher
degree of perfection than the science of matter--that it will give
the typical ideas and laws to which all the laws of physics must be
referred--then science will be better supplied with strings than she
now is, to bring her quarry down.

It is Professor Leidy's and Dr. Willcox's second strings, to their
bows, which will enable you to secure to science the richest quarry
that has ever been within its reach. I know that the experience of
Professor Rowland, as related by him, must have had the effect to
prejudice you against Mr. Keely. Professor Fitzgerald writes to me on
this subject: "I am sorry that Mr. Keely did not cut the wire, wherever
Professor Rowland asked to have it cut, because it will undoubtedly be
said that he had some sinister reason for not doing so, whatever his
real reasons were; but, of course, when one cuts a bit off a valuable
string one prefers naturally to cut the bit off the end, as Keely did,
rather than out of the middle." This very wire which Mr. Keely did cut
at one end, twice, for Professor Rowland, one of the pieces falling
into my hand, is now in Professor Fitzgerald's possession. It was
the offensive manner of Professor Rowland when he seized the shears,
telling Keely it was his guilty conscience which made him refuse to cut
the wire, and that it must be cut in the middle, which put Keely on the
defensive, causing him to refuse to allow Professor Rowland to cut it.

It would seem that the professor in the Johns Hopkins University,
from his remarks on that occasion, thought, instead of an experiment
in negative attraction, that Keely was imposing upon the ignorant
by giving a simple experiment in pneumatics, familiar to all
schoolboys. Professor Rowland did not realize how low he was rating the
powers of discernment of a professor in the University of Pennsylvania
who had witnessed Keely's experiments again and again, when his
instruments or devices were in perfect working order. Mr. Keely,
who was ambitious to show Professor Rowland that his disintegrator
had no connection with any concealed apparatus, had suspended it
from the ceiling by a staple. The hook had given way, and the jar
to the instrument in falling to the floor disarranged its interior
construction on that day. To those who have not witnessed any of
Keely's experiments, under favourable conditions, his theories
naturally seem vague speculations; but not one theory has Keely
put forward, as a theory, which he has not demonstrated as having a
solid foundation in fact. Some of our men of science once settled
the problem of the origin of life to their own satisfaction, only
to learn in the end that speculation is not science; but this very
problem is one the solution of which Keely now seems to be approaching.

It would become a matter of easy analysis, writes Keely, if the
properties governing the different orders of matter could be understood
in their different evolutions. The force of the mind on matter is an
illustration of the power of the finer over the crude, but the law
making the crude forms of matter subservient to the finer or higher
forms, is an unknown law to finite minds.

Buckle has asserted that the highest of our so called laws of
nature are as yet purely empirical; and that, until some law is
discovered which is connected with the laws of the mind that made it,
our knowledge has no sure basis. So saturated has Mr. Keely's mind
been with his discovery of this law that he has contented himself
to remain ignorant in physics, as taught by the schools; and also
with simpler matters it would seem; while testing and building up
his hypotheses into a system which no one but himself can complete,
and which without completion must be lost to the world. I should form
a very poor opinion of the mind that would accept an hypothesis as
anything more than the signpost at cross roads, which points to the
direction that may be taken. In physics the very first fact to which
the learner is introduced is already sophisticated by hypotheses. Every
experiment in chemistry is but a member of a series, all based upon
some one or other of many hypotheses; which are as necessary to
the construction of a system as is the scaffolding which is used in
building an edifice. If the scaffolding proves unsound it does not
affect the edifice, as it can be at once replaced with material more
solid. So an hypothesis, which is merely a conjecture or a suggestion,
cannot affect the solidity of a philosophy or a system. It must be
tested and found to support all the facts which bear upon it, and
capable of accounting for them, before it can be accepted as a theory.

It is my wish to have the professors of the University of Pennsylvania
meet at my house the founder of a system which, in my opinion, embraces
a pure philosophy: to listen to his theories, and to elicit from him
such information as to the nature of his researches, in what is called
electro-magnetic radiation, as I trust will convince them that I have
not been pursuing a will-o'-the-wisp during the years that my mind
has been concentrated on the work in which Mr. Keely is engaged. The
bearings of this work are so various that I shall not have time to
touch upon more than the one which interests me beyond any or all of
the others; namely, its connection with the medical art. Appreciating
as I do the life of self-denial which physicians who are devoted to
their profession must lead, and having in their ranks relatives and
many warm friends on both sides of the ocean (one of them, my nephew,
Dr. Jessup, is here to-night) I trust that what I say of the medical
art will not be misconstrued.

The great sorrows of my life have come upon me through the ignorance of
medical men, who, I know, followed their best judgment in the course of
treatment that they pursued in the illnesses of those dear to me. When
my children were in their infancy I had reason to embrace the opinions
of Professor Magendie, as set forth in one of his lectures before the
students of his class in the Allopathic College of Paris. These are
his words: "I know medicine is called a science. It is nothing like a
science. It is a great humbug. Doctors are mere empirics when they are
not charlatans. We are as ignorant as men can be. Who knows anything
about medicine? I do not, nor do I know anyone who does know anything
about it. Nature does a great deal; imagination does a great deal,
doctors do d----h little when they do no harm."

Later in life, in 1871, I was sent, while suffering with neurasthenia,
from Paris to Schwalbach Baths by Dr. Beylard, who recommended me to
the care of Dr. Adolph Genth; to whom, in my first interview, I said:
"I wish for your opinion, and for your advice, if you can give it to
me without prescribing any medicine." He replied: "With all my heart,
Madam, and I wish to God there were more women like you; but we should
soon lose our patients, if we did not dose them." A terrible excuse for
the use of those agencies which Dr. John Good has said have sent more
human beings to their graves than war, pestilence and famine combined.

One of Mr. Keely's discoveries shapes his theory that all nervous and
brain disorders may be cured by equating the differentiation that
exists in the disordered structure. When his system is completed,
medical men will have a new domain opened to them for experiment. Gross
material agencies, such as drugs, will be replaced by the finer forces
of nature: light, as taught by the late Dr. Pancoast of our city, and
magnetism, as experimented with by the late Professor Keil of Jena,
showing the efficacy of the ordinary magnet in the cure of certain
infirmities,--these experiments were communicated by him more than
fifty years since to the Royal Society of London.

Paracelsus taught that man is nourished and sustained by magnetic
power, which he called the universal motor of nature. In Switzerland,
in Italy and in France, the light-treatment is now being tested;
red light used in cases of melancholia; blue light in cases of great
nervous excitement, operating like magic in some instances. Dr. Oscar
Jennings, the electrician at St. Anne's Hospital for the Insane
in Paris, tells me that students, versed in Biblical lore, declare
that the esoteric teachings of the Book of Job enunciate a system
of light-cure. Ostensibly because of my faith in the importance of
Keely's discoveries, as opening up new fields of research to medical
men, an invalid daughter (suffering from puerperal mania after the
birth of her third child) was taken from me, in conformance with
orders of the Swedish guardian of her monied interests in Sweden, and
I was summoned before the Police Direction, in Vienna, and required to
bind myself not to experiment upon my child. It is well known to the
London experts in mental disorders, the most distinguished of whom
I have consulted, that my daughter's treatment, while she was under
my care, had been confined to giving no medicine, forcing no food,
and such changes from time to time in her surroundings as she needed,
with a few electric baths.

The orthodox practice of medicine is nothing more and nothing less than
"a system of blind experiment," as it has been called.

At the opening of a clinical society in London, Sir Thomas Watson said:
"We try this and not succeeding we try that, and baffled again we try
something else." Other eminent medical men have given utterance to
these aphorisms: "The science of medicine is founded on conjecture
and improved by murder;" "Mercury has made more cripples than war;"
"Ninety-nine medical facts are medical lies;" "Every dose of medicine
is a blind experiment;" "The older physicians grow the more sceptical
they become of the virtues of their own medicines." Dr. Ridge said:
"Everything in nature is acknowledged to be governed by law. It is
singular, however, that while science endeavours to reduce this to
actual fact in all other studies, those of health and disease have
not hitherto been arranged under any law whatever."

Keely's system, should he live to complete it, will show that
nature works under one law in everything; that discord is disease,
that harmony is health. He believes that nervous and brain disorders
are curable; but he will never have the leisure to enter this field
of research himself, and it will be left for physicians to pursue
their experiments to that point where they shall be able to decide
whether he is right or wrong. This is why I seek to interest medical
men in Keely's belief; his theories of latent energy he is able to
handle without help, and to demonstrate a solid foundation for them on
facts. "Nothing can lie like a fact," said Velpeau. But nature's laws
are infallible facts, and the facts referred to by Velpeau are of the
order of the fallible ones enunciated by science, such as "The atom is
indivisible." "The atom is infinitely divisible," says Keely, repeating
Schopenhauer's words, whose writings I dare say he has never read.

Professor George Fr. Fitzgerald, of Trinity College, Dublin, in closing
a lecture delivered before the British Association last March, on
"Electro-magnetic Radiation," enunciates a possible theory of ether and
matter. This hypothesis, he says, explains the differences in nature
as differences of motion. If it be true, ether and matter--gold, air,
wood, brains--are but different motions. You will be able to judge of
the marvellous mechanism invented by Keely, for his researches, when I
tell you that by his demonstrations with these instruments, he is able
to place this hypothesis in the rank of theories, boldly announcing
that all motion is thought, and that all force is mind force. With a
clearness that characterizes his great brain he has plunged through the
deep and broad questions surrounding the mechanism of the universe,
and he claims, on behalf of science, as did the late Provost Jellett
of the British Association, "the right to prosecute its investigations
until it attains to a mechanical explanation of all things."

In this lecture Professor Fitzgerald, commenting upon Professor Hertz's
experiments in the vibration of ether waves, says: "If there is reason
to think that any greater oscillation might disintegrate the atom,
we are still a long way from it." Does not this statement border on
an admission that the atom may be divisible? Those who are pursuing
their researches in this field are farther off than they know from the
great central truth which Faraday did not live long enough to reach,
although conjectured by him.

We have not only Faraday's discoveries, but those of Scheele,
the Swedish chemist, as an example of exact observations leading
to erroneous conclusions. The investigations of Scheele led up to
the rich harvest which has since been reaped from a knowledge of
the nature of the compounds of organic chemistry. Scheele was one
of the founders of quantitative analysis, but the phlogistic theory
advanced by him was overthrown--the fate of all theories which are
not based on solid foundations. Faraday admitted that his own ideas on
gravitating force, and of the ether, were but vague impressions of his
mind thrown out as matter for speculation. He left no theory on these
lines, for he had nothing to offer as the result of demonstration,
nor even of sufficient consideration to broach a theory: merely
impressions, which are allowable for a time as guides to thought
and farther research. Yet more than once did these speculations
of his giant intellect touch upon one of nature's hidden laws, the
greatest one yet made known to man. Had Faraday lived long enough
to pursue his researches, from his starting point of conjecture,
he would have been, without doubt, instead of Keely, the discoverer
of the latent or hidden potencies existing in all forms of matter,
visible and invisible. But the physicists of his time looked upon
his speculations as contrary to the received dogmas of science, and
preferred their own errors to his speculations. They saw the signpost,
but took the road directly opposite to the one Faraday had pointed out.

It is admitted that even a false theory, when rightly constructed, has
its uses, and that, instead of hindering, it hastens the advance of
knowledge. Every one, possessing the slightest acquaintance with the
history of astronomy, knows that the doctrines of cycles, epicycles
and ellipses, were begotten naturally and necessarily out of each
other; and that if Kepler had not propounded speculative errors
Newton would not have hit upon speculative truth. It has been said
that when men of science disclaim hypotheses, or speculation, they
are either unfit for their vocation or, like Newton, they are better
than their creed. Hypotheses are at once the effect and the cause of
progress. One might as well attempt to preserve and employ an army
without organization as to preserve and employ phenomena without a
theory to weld them into one. But the theory must be provisionally,
if not positively, true; it must be intelligible and consistent;
it must explain a greater number of facts and reconcile a greater
variety of apparent contradictions than any which has preceded it;
and it must have become developed not by the addition merely, but by
the addition and solution, of subsidiary explanations. I ask of you
an examination of Keely's theories before giving an opinion of them.

Time only can decide whether Keely's hypotheses and theories
will outlive these tests. If not, his system must be overthrown,
as past systems have been, to make room for a better one. All that
I ask is that he may have the opportunity to develop it under your
encouragement. There are scientists in Europe ready to assist him with
pecuniary assistance. They know enough--those who are interested in
his discoveries--to know that they can help him in no other way.

Professor Hertz of Bonn, said to me: "Keely must work out his system
himself to that point where he can instruct physicists to repeat
his experiments." Picking up a photograph of Keely's instruments of
research, grouped together, he added: "No man is likely to be a fraud
who is working on these lines."

Science is alert, on tiptoe as it were, waiting for the one mighty
explanation of the force, "behind the framework of nature," which
has hitherto "eluded its skill;" and which the system of Keely makes
clear to the understanding, demonstrating that one power, one law,
reigns throughout creation; the immaterial controlling the material,
after the divine order and law of creation that the immaterial
should govern the material--that the whole realm of matter is under
the dominion of the immaterial. But "the known always excludes the
unknown" when in opposition to it. As in past generations, so now in
ours, physicists have said: "We will not waste our time in looking
at facts and phenomena which cannot be accepted in opposition to
established principles of science and to known laws of nature; and
which, even if we beheld we should not believe."

The recognition and practical application of new truths are, as has
been said, notoriously slow processes. Harvey's beneficent discovery
excited vehement opposition from his contemporaries. Professor Riolan
combated this discovery with as much obstinacy as violence; even
denying the existence and the functions of lymphatic vessels. Harvey
himself united with Riolan in opposing the discoveries of Aselli and
Pacquet respecting the lymphatic system. Jenner's discovery met with
the same opposition, and more than forty years elapsed before the
suggestion of Sir Humphrey Davy became of practical use. Mr. Wills was
so affected by the ridicule which he encountered in his experiments
with nitrous oxide in destroying physical pain, that he abandoned
them. Nearly half a century later Dr. Morton was assailed by several of
our journals in America for the use of ether in producing anæsthesia;
as also was Sir James Simpson for his use of ether and chloroform.

The scientists excommunicated Dr. Wigan, who had proved by anatomical
examination that each brain-hemisphere is a perfect brain; that
we have, in fact, two brains, as we have two eyes and two ears. His
experiences as a physician were declared to be impostures or delusions;
his deductions fallacious. They could not be true, because they were
inconsistent with the established principles of physiology and mental
science. And with such experiences in the past, we should keep in
mind that the powers of nature are so mysterious and inscrutable
that men must be cautious in limiting them to the ordinary laws of
experience. Proclus wrote of the power of mind or will to set up
certain vibrations--not in the grosser atmospheric particles whose
undulations beget light, sound, heat, electricity--but in the latent
immaterial principle of force, of which modern science knows scarcely
anything.

What is beyond their own power, men cannot comprehend to be in the
power of others. Said Sextus: "If by magic you mean a perpetual
research among all that is most latent and obscure in nature, I
profess that magic, and he who does so comes nearer to the fountain
of all knowledge."

Sir Isaac Newton said: "It is well known that bodies act upon one
another by the attractions of gravity, magnetism and electricity;
and these instances show the tenour and course of nature, and make
it not improbable that there may be more powers of attraction than
these. For nature is very consonant and conformable to herself."

With such intimations of the hidden force that is ever in operation,
"behind the framework of nature," shall we, because it is hidden
from science, refuse to listen to the explanations which Mr. Keely
is now prepared to give? All nature is a compound of conflicting,
and therefore of counter-balancing and equilibrating, forces. Without
this there could be no such thing as stability. In nature nothing
is great and nothing is little, writes Figuier. Sir Henry Roscoe
says: "The structure of the smallest particle, invisible even to
our most searching vision, may be as complicated as that of any of
the heavenly bodies which circle around our sun." If you admit this,
as stated by one of your own orthodox scientists, why refuse to admit
the possibility of the subdivision of all corpuscles of matter, which
Keely declares can be done by certain orders of vibration, thus showing
up new elements? I do not ask endorsement of Keely's theories; but if
physicists did not think it possible to rupture the atom, would they be
calculating the chances of doing so, as Professor Fitzgerald has done?

Why not admit that certain tenets of science may prove to be nothing
more than hypotheses, too hastily adopted as theories, and that
Keely has succeeded, as he claims, to have discovered the order of
vibration, which by increasing the oscillation of the atom, causes it
to rupture itself? This introductory impulse is given at forty-two
thousand eight hundred vibrations, instead of one hundred millions;
which, having been reached by Professor Hertz, failed to tear apart
the atom, and convinced Professor Fitzgerald of the "long way off"
that they still are from rupturing it. But even this conclusion
was arrived at under an erroneous hypothesis; for the atomic charge
does not oscillate across the diameter of the atom, and its possible
radiating power was calculated on this hypothesis.

Again, as to the canons of science, which are proved by Mr. Keely's
researches to be erroneous: take the one which teaches that molecular
aggregation is ever attended with dissipation of energy. From
whence, then, comes the immense force which is liberated from the
constituents of gunpowder by its exciter, fire?--which is a certain
order of vibration. Concussion, another order of vibration, releases
the hidden energy stored in the molecules of dynamite, which tears
the rocks asunder as if they were egg-shells. Still another order
of vibration, which Keely has discovered, dissociates the supposed
elements of water, releasing from its corpuscular embrace almost
immeasurable volumes of force.

The discoverer of this law of nature has long been harassed and made
to feel like a galley-slave chained to a rock, while with Prometheus
aspirations he is seeking to bring down fire and light from heaven
for his fellow-men.

When Professor Leidy followed his impulse to leap the hedge which
divided his special field of research from the domain that Keely
was exploring, his was the first effort made by a man of science
to save to the world "the hidden knowledge" bestowed upon one who,
in my opinion, is alone capable of completing his system in a form to
transmit this knowledge to others. I doubt not that this will seem to
you as the language of fanaticism; but my convictions do not come from
things hoped for. They are the result of the evidence of things seen,
year after year, for nearly a decade of years.

As a school-girl, fifty years ago, I had the privilege of attending
courses of lectures at Yale College, where experiments were given in
natural philosophy and in chemistry; which kept up the interest that
was awakened in earlier years; when, with my mineral hammer and basket,
my father took me in his walks, laying the foundation of that love of
true science which has made the discoveries of Keely of such intense
interest to me.

Superficial as was and still is my knowledge of science, in its various
branches, my interest has never abated; and thus, by my course of
reading, I have kept myself abreast of the most advanced writers of
modern thought, preparing the way for the help that I have been able
to give Mr. Keely by putting books into his hands which, after more
than twelve years of blind struggles to grapple with the force he had
stumbled over, helped him to comprehend its nature, sooner than he
would have done had he been left to work out his conjectures unaided,
he tells me.

Marvellous as is the extent of Keely's knowledge of vibratory physics,
I doubt very much whether he knows enough of mechanical physics
to perform the trickery which Professor Rowland accused him of
attempting. "Of course every one is looking for a trick where Keely
is concerned," writes a Baltimore man; and, so long as speculations
in the stock of the Keely Motor Company are authorized by the managers
of that company, or efforts made to dispose of it before any practical
result is attained, so long will Keely be unjustly suspected of being
in league with them to obtain money under false pretences.

It was after six or seven years of failure on the part of the
stockholders of the company to furnish Keely with one dollar, even,
that I made a contract with him in April, 1890, to supply all that he
needed for the completion of his system; having first received the
assurance of Mr. Keely's lawyer that he would carry out the united
wishes of Mr. Keely and myself. At that time this announcement was
made in the public journals:--

"There has been placed in the hands of Professor Leidy a fund for
the use of inventor John W. Keely. The stipulation attached is that
no use shall be made of the financial assistance for speculative
purposes. This provision, which is made in the interests of the Keely
Motor Company as well as for science, will end with the first attempt
to speculate on the stock by exhibitions given of the operations
of unpatentable engines. Professor Leidy holds the fund at his
disposition, and will pay all bills for instruments constructed for
researching purposes."

The report issued last month by the directors of the Keely Motor
Company annulled this contract; and it now remains for your board
to decide whether I shall, in behalf of science, continue to supply
Mr. Keely with the means of continuing his researches, under the
protecting auspices of the University of Pennsylvania, or leave him
in the hands of those who are so blind to their own interests, as
holders of stock in the Keely Motor Company, they cannot be made to
see that their only hope of commercial success lies in the completion
of the system that Keely is developing; and that the course proposed
by Professor Leidy, and commended by Professor Hertz and Professor
Fitzgerald, for Keely to follow, is the only one that will ever enable
him to complete it.

This system is as much a work of evolution as is any one of the slow
operations of nature. "Truth can afford to wait:" she knows that the
Creator of all things never hurries. In these twenty years of toil
Keely's patient perseverance has been godlike. It is the sharpest
rebuke that could be uttered to those whose impatient "hue and cry"
has been, "Give us a commercial engine and we will immortalize
you;"--grinding from him, meantime, seven-eighths of his interests
in his inventions.

But in his labours Keely finds a recompense that, as yet, "the world
knows not of;" for day by day he sees the once, to him, obscure
domain lit up with ever-increasing glory; a domain the boundaries
of which are the boundaries of the universe: the entrance into which
promises the fulfilment of the hopes of those who look forward to "a
time when we shall no longer go to the blind to lead the blind in our
search to make life worth living; but, instead, be able to promote,
in accordance with scientific method and in harmony with law, the
physical, intellectual and moral evolution of our race."

As of Newton, with the change of one word only, so one day will it
be said of Keely:--


        All intellectual eye--our solar round
        First gazing through, he by the blended power
        Of laws etheric, universal, saw
        The whole in silent harmony revolve.
        What were his raptures then! How pure! How strong!
        And what the triumphs of old Greece and Rome
        With his compared? When Nature and her laws
        Stood all disclosed to him, and open laid
        Their every hidden glory to his view.


On the 23rd of March, following the reading of this address, Professor
Koenig, who had become deeply interested in Mr. Keely's researches,
wrote:--

"With regard to the experiments, which I saw at Mr. Keely's, I
venture upon the following suggestion, as a test of the nature of the
force Mr. Keely is dealing with. The revolution of the compass as
a result of negative polar attraction. It is stated in Mr. Keely's
paper that he finds gold, silver, platinum, to be excellent media
for the transmission of these triple currents. Now it is well known
that these same metals are most diamagnetic, that is, unaffected by
magnetic influences. If, therefore, a needle be made of one of these
metals and suspended in place of the steel needle, in the compass, and
put under the influence of Mr. Keely's force, it ought to revolve the
same as the steel needle will under magnetic and polar and anti-polar
influence. If Mr. Keely could make such a needle revolve, it would
convince me that he is dealing with a force unknown to physicists."

To this requirement Mr. Keely replied: "To run a needle, composed of
non-magnetic material, by polar and depolar action is a matter of as
infinite impossibility as would be the raising of a heavy weight from
the bottom of a well by sucking a vacuum in it, or the inhalation of
water into the lungs instead of air, to sustain life."

However, at Dr. Brinton's suggestion, Mr. Keely took up a line of
research that was new to him, and succeeded in making a needle of
the three metals, gold, silver and platinum, rotate by differential
molecular action; induced by negative attractive outreach, which is
as free of magnetic force as a cork.

Professor Brinton had so mastered Keely's working hypotheses as to say,
early in April, that he was sure he could make them understood by any
intelligent person--writing of them: "All that is needed now is to
show that Keely's experiments sustain the principles that underlie
these hypotheses. As soon as Professor Koenig is prepared to report
on the purely technical and physical character of the experiments,
I shall be ready to go into full details as to their significance
in reference to both matter and mind. It will be enough for me if
Dr. Koenig is enabled simply to say that the force handled by Keely
is not any one of the already well-known forces. Let him say that,
and I will undertake to say what it is."

On the evening of the 13th of April, the Provost of the University of
Pennsylvania, with others who were invited, met at Mrs. Moore's house
to hear the report of the "observation" of Mr. Keely's researching
experiments. The result was not made public; as it was desired,
by all concerned, that nothing should be made known which could in
any way influence the price of the stock of the company, to which
Mr. Keely is under obligations; and which, as far as marketable value
is concerned, is quite worthless until his system is completed to that
point where some one device or machine can be patented. But, after
Professor Koenig had made his report to those assembled, and Professor
Brinton had read his abstract, all that had been asked for Mr. Keely,
in behalf of the interests of science, was conceded to him. Mr. Keely
has been able to continue his researches, up to the present time,
without the delays which actions-at-law would have occasioned.

Professor Brinton, before making public his "Abstract of Keely's
Philosophy," wishes to add two parts, one on the difficulties in the
way of physicists in understanding Keely's theories; the other on
the relations of the conditions of the inter-etheric order to the
laws of mind.

The address of Mrs. Moore, type-copied, was sent to various editors
and men of science in Philadelphia, as well as to leading capitalists;
and, in this crisis of Keely's connection with the stockholders of The
Keely Motor Company, some of these editors rendered substantial aid in
making known his critical position; most notably the Inquirer, owned
by Mr. Elverson, and the Evening Telegraph, owned by Mr. Warburton,
with the result that a decided change in public opinion took place,
after these journals announced, in April, that Professor Koenig
had tested the energy, employed by Keely, with the most sensitive
galvanometer of the university, in the presence of Professor Leidy,
Professor Brinton, Doctor Tuttle (a Baltimore physicist) and others,
finding no trace of electricity; and by other tests no magnetism. The
two professors who thoroughly investigated Keely's theories, and
observed his demonstrations, were chosen because they possessed
the qualities of mind which Herbert Spencer said constitute the
first condition of success in scientific research, viz. "an honest
receptivity and a willingness to abandon all preconceived notions,
however cherished, if they be found to contradict the truth."

Professor Leidy and Dr. Willcox, during their observations of Keely's
progressive experimental researches, had expressed no opinion of
Keely's theories, other than that they did not correspond with
their own ideas; but Professor Koenig boldly said, "I not only
think Mr. Keely's theories possible, but I consider them quite
probable." Professor Brinton, who made a study of Keely's theories, so
mastered them as to be able to suggest to Keely a new line of research,
required by Dr. Koenig in the tests proposed; and the synopsis of
Keely's philosophy, prepared by Doctor Brinton, has made Keely's
hitherto unintelligible language intelligible to men of science.

Notwithstanding this favourable result, a New York journalist, under
a fictitious name, pretended to have discovered that Keely is a fraud,
using well-known forces; which statements were published (with woodcuts
of instruments discarded by Keely two years before) in the New York
Herald and The Press, in Philadelphia. It is amusing to see how
"history repeats itself;" for, in the year 1724, in a letter to the
Royal Society, Hatzfeldt attacked Sir Isaac Newton in much the same
spirit. One would suppose in reading what Hatzfeldt has written of
an invention of his time, that it had been written, word for word, of
this ignorant investigator of Keely's experiments in researching. After
commenting upon the corruption of human nature as shown, in his day,
by want of veracity, and the tendency to vicious misrepresentation,
he says: "If the said machine was contrived according to the weak
sense and understanding of those who pretend it to be moved in other
ways than that declared, it would have been discerned before this.

"And those who pretend it to be moved by water, or air, or magnetism,
one of which (meaning water) even our most famous author did in the
beginning affirm it to be moved by, is so very weak that I don't at
all think it deserving to be considered.

"And what is still worse, to pretend it to be a cheat is a manner
of proceeding which is neither consistent with equity nor common
sense. As long as arts and sciences have the misfortune of depending
on the direction of such like persons, no progress toward truth can
be made, but I shall make it sufficiently appear that there is yet
more truth behind the hill than ever has been brought to light. There
be persons who, when disappointed of gain, turn their shafts against
those who have circumvented them.

"All those who know anything of philosophy know that gravity is
generally (and chiefly by Sir Isaac Newton and his followers) denied
to be essential to matter, which I shall not only prove the contrary
of, but I shall likewise show the properties in matter, on which
the principle depends, to be the most glorious means to prove the
existence of God, and to establish natural religion."

Is it not rather remarkable that, after a sleep of nearly two
centuries, it is again claimed that gravity is inherent in all matter?

It has been very generally supposed that Keely is working at haphazard,
as it were; in other words, that he has no theory to go upon. Professor
Brinton writes of Keely's theories: "Mr. Keely has a coherent and
intelligent theory of things, or philosophy, on which he lays out his
work and proceeds in his experiments." March 6th, the same professor
writes: "Keely's paper on Latent Force in intermolecular spaces is
clear enough and instructive, but the average reader will find the
perusal up-hill work, from lack of preliminary teaching. Naturally,
Mr. Keely, whose mind has been busy with this topic for years, and
who is more familiar with it than with any other, does not appreciate
how blankly ignorant of it is the average reader. Also naturally he
writes above the heads of his audience."

A correspondent in Invention, London, writes December 12, 1891: We
have at various times in these columns alluded to the investigations
of the Philadelphia scientist, J. W. Keely, and this researcher--who
is now stated to be engaged in finding a method whereby the power [18]
which he professes to have discovered can be employed as a motor in
the place of steam--is just now the object of considerable attention
in the press of the United States. To summarize the present state
of the criticism to which this man is subjected, we may mention that
for some time past The New York Herald, among other papers, has been
printing a series of articles that have been recently prepared by an
American inventor named Browne, professing to show how Keely has,
for nearly twenty years, been deceiving expert engineers, shrewd
men of the world, some few university professors and others, by
the use of compressed air, obtaining testimonials of his discovery
of an unknown force in nature. In reading his articles any one who
has seen the photographs--as the writer has done--of the researching
instruments discarded by Keely, in past years, and those that he is
now employing in their place, cannot fail to detect the misstatements
and misrepresentations made.

Mr. Browne (?) even overrides the testimony of the late Professor
Leidy, Dr. Willcox, Dr. Koenig, Dr. Brinton--the Baltimore
physicist--Dr. Tuttle, and the engineers Linville and Le Van, all
of whom have tested the force used by Keely, and admitted that no
electricity, no magnetism, no compressed air is used. Without endorsing
in the slightest anything that Keely has discovered, or claims to have
discovered, we think that, with the English love of fair play, both
sides should always fairly be heard before either is condemned, and as
Mr. Keely has consented to instruct a well-known English physicist in
his method of producing the force handled, there is every chance of
the truth being known, and the correct state of the matter divulged
to the scientific world at large, when, mayhap, this rival inventor
may have to retract his assertions or stand a suit for libel. We do
not say it will be so--we only assert it may be. Professor Brinton,
who has made a study of Keely's methods, writes this month to a
friend in London:--"The exposé of Keely's alleged methods continues
each week. Some of the proposed explanations are plausible, others
are plainly absurd. They only serve to attract renewed attention to
Keely. I have written to the editor to ask him to arrange a meeting
for me with the writer, but I have not yet been able to discover the
Mr. Browne, [19] of Brooklyn, who is the supposititious author."

Mr. Keely has chosen the successor [20] of Professor Tyndall, at the
Royal Institution of Great Britain, as the physicist to whom he will
communicate his method. This will be welcome news indeed to scientists
on both sides of the Atlantic, and the result will be awaited with
anxiety alike by both the friends and foes of Keely. We shall watch
for the result, as will our American confrères.--Wm. Norman Brown.









