Part II.

One Phase of Keely's Discovery in its Relations to the Cure or Disease.

        I know medicine is called a science. It is nothing like a
        science. It is a great humbug! Doctors are mere empirics when
        they are not charlatans. We are as ignorant as men can be. Who
        knows anything in the world about medicine? Gentlemen, you
        have done me the honour to come here to attend my lectures,
        and I must tell you now, frankly, in the beginning, that I
        know nothing about medicine, nor do I know anyone who does
        know anything about it. Nature does a great deal, imagination
        does a great deal, doctors do devilish little when they do
        not do harm. Sick people always feel they are neglected,
        unless they are well drugged, les imbéciles!

        Professor Magendie (before the students of his class in
        "The Allopathic College of Paris").


In the year 1871, the writer was sent from Paris to Schwalbach, by
Dr. Beylard, and recommended to the care of Dr. Adolph Genth. She said
to the physician, "I wish for your opinion and your advice, if you
can give it to me without giving me any medicine." He replied, "With
all my heart, madam; and I wish to God there were more women like you,
but we should soon lose most of our patients if we did not dose them."

This is a terrible excuse for the use of those agencies which Dr. John
Good says have sent more human beings to their graves than war,
pestilence and famine combined. Keely holds the opinion that Nature
works under the one law of Compensation and Equilibrium--the law of
Harmony; and that when disease indicates the disturbance of this law
Nature at once seeks to banish the disease by restoring equilibrium,
He seeks to render assistance on the same plan; replacing grossly
material agencies by the finer forces of nature; as has been so
successfully done by Dr. Pancoast and Dr. Babbitt in America.

"Nature," says Dr. Pancoast, author of The True Science of Light,
"works by antagonism in all her operations: when one of her forces
overdoes its work, disease, or at least a local disorder, is the
immediate consequence; now, if we attack this force, and overcome it,
the opposite force has a clear field and may re-assert its rights--thus
equilibrium is restored, and Equilibrium is health. The Sympathetic
System, instead of attacking the stronger force, sends recruits to
the weaker one, and enables it to recover its powers; or, if the
disorder be the result of excessive tension of Nerves or Ganglia,
a negative remedy may be employed to reduce the tension. Thus, too,
equilibrium is restored."

Dr. Hartmann writes:--

Mr. Keely is perfectly right in saying that 'all disease is a
disturbance of the equilibrium between positive and negative
forces.' In my opinion, no doctor ever cured any disease. All he
can possibly do is to establish conditions under which the patient
(or nature) may cure himself.

If you enter the field of therapeutics and medicine, we find a
decided fermentation of new ideas; not among the fossil specimens of
antediluvian quackery, but among those who are called "irregulars,"
because they have the courage to depart from the tracks trodden out
by their predecessors. The more intelligent classes of physicians
have long ago realized the fact that drugs and medicines are
perfectly useless, excepting in cases where diseases can be traced
to some mechanical obstruction, in some organ that may be reached
by mechanical action. In all other cases our best physicians have
become agnostics, leaving nature to have her own way, and observing
the expectative method, which, in fact, is no method of cure at all,
but merely consists in doing no harm to the patient. Recently,
however, light, electricity, and magnetism have been employed;
so that even in the medical guild the finer forces of nature are
taking the place of grossly material, and therefore injurious
substances. The time is probably near when these finer forces
will be employed universally. Everybody knows that a note struck
upon an instrument will produce sound in a correspondingly attuned
instrument in its vicinity. If connected with a tuning fork, it will
produce a corresponding sound in the latter; and if connected with
a thousand such tuning forks, it will make all the thousand sound,
and produce a noise far greater than the original sound, without the
latter becoming any weaker for it. Here, then, is an augmentation or
multiplication of power. If we had any means to transform sound again
into mechanical motion, we would have a thousand-fold multiplication
of mechanical motion. It would be presumptuous to say that it will
not be as easy for the scientists of the future to transform sound
into mechanical motion, as it is for the scientist of the present to
transform heat into electricity. Perhaps Mr. Keely has already solved
the problem. There is a fair prospect that in the very near future,
we shall have, in his ethereal force, a power far surpassing that
of steam or electricity. Nor does the idea seem to be Utopian if
we remember that modern science heretofore only knew the law of the
conservation of energy; while to the scientist of the future the law
of the augmentation of energy will be unveiled.... As the age which
has passed away has been the age of steam, the coming era will be
the age of induction. There will be a universal rising up of lower
vibrations into higher ones, in the realm of motion. Mr. Keely will,
perhaps, transform sound into mechanical motion by applying the law
of augmentation and multiplication of force."...

Keely, writing on brain disturbance, says, In considering the mental
forces as associated with the physical, I find, by my past researches,
that the convolutions which exist in the cerebral field are entirely
governed by the sympathetic conditions that surround them.

The question arises, what are these aggregations and what do they
represent, as being linked with physical impulses? They are simply
vibrometric resonators, thoroughly subservient to sympathetic acoustic
impulses given to them by their atomic sympathetic surrounding media,
all the sympathetic impulses that so entirely govern the physical
in their many and perfect impulses (we are now discussing purity
of conditions) are not emanations properly inherent in their own
composition. They are only media--the acoustic media--for transferring
from their vibratory surroundings the conditions necessary to the
pure connective link for vitalizing and bringing into action the
varied impulses of the physical.

All abnormal discordant aggregations in these resonating convolutions
produce differentiation to concordant transmission; and, according
as these differentiations exist in volume, so the transmissions are
discordantly transferred, producing antagonism to pure physical action.

Thus, in Motor Ataxy a differentiation of the minor thirds of the
posterior parietal lobule produces the same condition between the
retractors and extensors of the leg and foot; and thus the control of
the proper movements is lost through this differentiation. The same
truth can be universally applied to any of the cerebral convolutions
that are in a state of differential harmony to the mass of immediate
cerebral surroundings. Taking the cerebral condition of the whole
mass as one, it is subservient to one general head centre, although
as many neutrals are represented as there are convolutions.

The introductory minors are controlled by the molecular; the
next progressive third by the atomic; and the high third by the
Etheric. All these progressive links have their positive, negative,
and neutral position. When we take into consideration the structural
condition of the human brain, we ought not to be bewildered by the
infinite variety of its sympathetic impulses; inasmuch as it unerringly
proves the true philosophy that the mass chords of such structures are
governed by vibratory etheric flows--the very material which composes
them. There is no structure whatever, animal, vegetable, mineral,
that is not built up from the universal cosmic ether. Certain orders
of attractive vibration produce certain orders of structure; thus,
the infinite variety of effects--more especially in the cerebral
organs. The bar of iron or the mass of steel, have, in each, all
the qualifications necessary, under certain vibratory impulses, to
evolve all the conditions that govern that animal organism--the brain:
and it is as possible to differentiate the molecular conditions of
a mass of metal of any shape so as to produce what you may express
as a crazy piece of iron or a crazy piece of steel; or, vice versâ,
an intelligent condition in the same.

I find in my researches, as to the condition of molecules under
vibration, that discordance cannot exist in the molecule proper;
and that it is the highest and most perfect structural condition
that exists; providing that all the progressive orders are the
same. Discordance in any mass is the result of differentiated groups,
induced by antagonistic chords, and the flight or motions of such,
when intensified by sound, are very tortuous and zig-zag; but when free
of this differentiation are in straight lines. Tortuous lines denote
discord, or pain; straight lines denote harmony, or pleasure. Any
differentiated mass can be brought to a condition of harmony, or
equation, by proper chord media, and an equated sympathy produced.

There is good reason for believing that insanity is simply a condition
of differentiation in the mass chords of the cerebral convolutions,
which creates an antagonistic molecular bombardment towards the neutral
or attractive centres of such convolutions; which, in turn, produce a
morbid irritation in the cortical sensory centres in the substance of
ideation; accompanied, as a general thing, by sensory hallucinations,
ushered in by subjective sensations; such as flashes of light and
colour, or confused sounds and disagreeable odours, etc., etc.

There is no condition of the human brain that ought not to be
sympathetically coincident to that order of atomic flow to which its
position, in the cerebral field, is fitted. Any differentiation in
that special organ, or, more plainly, any discordant grouping tends
to produce a discordant bombardment--an antagonistic conflict; which
means the same disturbance transferred to the physical, producing
inharmonious disaster to that portion of the physical field which is
controlled by that especial convolution. This unstable aggregation
may be compared to a knot on a violin string. As long as this knot
remains it is impossible to elicit, from its sympathetic surroundings,
the condition which transfers pure concordance to its resonating
body. Discordant conditions, i.e., differentiation of mass, produce
negatization to coincident action.

The question now arises, What condition is it necessary to bring about
in order to bring back normality, or to produce stable equilibrium
in the sympathetic centres?

The normal brain is like a harp of many strings strung to perfect
harmony. The transmitting conditions being perfect, are ready, at
any impulse, to induce pure sympathetic assimilation. The different
strings represent the different ventricles and convolutions. The
differentiations of any one from its true setting is fatal, to a
certain degree, to the harmony of the whole combination.

If the sympathetic condition of any physical organism carries a
positive flow of 80 per cent. on its whole combination, and a negative
one of 20 per cent., it is the medium of perfect assimilation to one
of the same ratio, if it is distributed under the same conditions to
the mass of the other. If two masses of metal, of any shape whatever,
are brought under perfect assimilation, to one another, their unition,
when brought into contact, will be instant. If we live in a sympathetic
field we become sympathetic, and a tendency from the abnormal to the
normal presents itself by an evolution of a purely sympathetic flow
towards its attractive centres. It is only under these conditions that
differentiation can be broken up, and a pure equation established. The
only condition under which equation can never be established is
when a differential disaster has taken place, of 66 2/3 against the
100 pure, taking the full volume as one. If this 66 2/3 or even 100
exists in one organ alone, and the surrounding ones are normal, then
a condition can be easily brought about to establish the concordant
harmony or equation to that organ. It is as rare to find a negative
condition of 66 2/3 against the volume of the whole cerebral mass, as
it is to find a coincident between differentiation; or, more plainly,
between two individuals under a state of negative influence. Under
this new system, it is as possible to induce negations alike as it
is to induce positives alike.

Pure sympathetic concordants are as antagonistic to negative
discordants as the negative is to the positive; but the vast volume
the sympathetic holds over the non-sympathetic, in ethereal space,
makes it at once the ruling medium and re-adjuster of all opposing
conditions if properly brought to bear upon them.

Until Keely's "Theoretical Exposé" is given to science, there are
few who will fathom the full meaning of these views.

His discoveries embrace the manner or way of obtaining the keynote,
or "chord of mass," of mineral, vegetable, and animal substances;
therefore, the construction of instruments, or machines, by which
this law can be utilized in mechanics, in arts, and in restoration of
equilibrium in disease, is only a question of the full understanding
of the operation of this law.

Keely estimates that, after the introductory impulse is given on the
harmonic thirds, molecular vibration is increased from 20,000 per
second to 100,000,000.

On the enharmonic sixths, that the vibration of the inter-molecule
is increased to 300,000,000.

On the diatonic ninths, that atomic vibration reaches 900,000,000; on
the dominant etheric sixths, 8,100,000,000; and on the inter-etheric
ninths, 24,300,000,000; all of which can be demonstrated by sound
colours.

In such fields of research, Mr. Keely finds little leisure. Those who
accuse him of "dilly-dallying," of idleness, of "always going to do
and never doing," of "visionary plans," etc., etc., know nothing of
the infinite patience, the persistent energy, which for a quarter of
a century has upheld him in his struggle to attain this end. Still
less, if possible, is he understood by those who think he is seeking
self-aggrandizement, fame, fortune, or glory.

The time is approaching when all who have sought to defame this
discoverer and inventor, all who have stabbed him with unmerited
accusations, all who have denounced him as "a bogus inventor,"
"a fraud," "an impostor," "a charlatan," "a modern Cagliostro,"
will be forced to acknowledge that he has done a giant's work for
true science, even though he should not live to attain commercial
success. But history will not forget that, in the nineteenth century,
the story of Prometheus has been repeated, and that the greatest mind
of the age, seeking to scale the heavens to bring down the light of
truth for mankind, met with Prometheus's reward.

Note.--Dr. Hartmann, in a report, or condensed statement, in reference
to Keely's discovery, writes as follows: "He will never invent a
machine by which the equilibrium of the living forces in a disordered
brain can be restored."

As such a statement would lead the reader of the report to fancy
that Keely expected to invent such an instrument, it is better to
correct the error that Dr. Hartmann has fallen into. Keely has never
dreamed of inventing such an instrument. He hopes, however, to perfect
one that he is now at work upon, which will enable the operator to
localize the seat of disturbance in the brain in mental disorders. If
he succeeds, this will greatly simplify the work of "re-adjusting
opposing conditions"; and will also enable the physician to decide
whether the "differential disaster" has taken place which prevents the
possibility of establishing the equation that is necessary to a cure.

According to Keely's theories it is that form of energy known as
magnetism--not electricity--which is to be the curative agent of
the future, thus reviving a mode of treatment handed down from the
time of the earliest records, and made known to the Royal Society
of London more than fifty years since by Professor Keil, of Jena,
who demonstrated the susceptibility of the nervous system to the
influence of the natural magnet, and its efficacy in the cure of
certain infirmities.

As Cheston Morris, M.D., has well said in his paper on "Vital Molecular
Vibrations," "We are entering upon a new field in biology, pathology,
and of course, therapeutics, whose limits are at present far beyond
our ken."

"The adaptability of drugs," says Dr. Henry Wood, "to heal disease
is becoming a matter of doubt, even among many who have not yet
studied deeper causation. Materia Medica lacks the exact elements of
a science. The just preponderance, for good or ill, of any drug upon
the human system is an unsolved problem, and will so remain.... After
centuries of professional research, in order to perfect "the art
of healing," diseases have steadily grown more subtle and more
numerous.... Only when internal, divine forces come to be relied upon,
rather than outside reinforcement, will deterioration cease. Said
Plato, 'You ought not to attempt to cure the body without the soul.'"









