CHAPTER XII.

1891.

VIBRATORY PHYSICS.--TRUE SCIENCE.

        We seem to be approaching a theory as to the construction
        of ether. Hertz has produced vibrations, vibrating more
        than one hundred million times per second. He made use of
        the principle of resonance. You all understand how, by a
        succession of well-timed small impulses, a large vibration
        may be set up.--Prof. Fitzgerald.


Dr. Schimmel, in his lecture on "The Unity of Nature's Forces,"
says:--"The Greek philosophers, Leucippus, Anaxagoras, Democritus,
and Aristotle, base their philosophies on the existence of an ether
and atoms." According to Spiller's system, "both ether and atoms are
material. The atoms are indivisible. Chemistry, being based on the
correctness of this statement, forces us to accept it." But we are
not forced to accept it if it is proved to be false.

Keely has now reached a stage in his researches at which he is able
to demonstrate the truth of the hypotheses which he is formulating
into a system; and consequently the stage where he can demonstrate
whether theories, that have prevailed concerning the cause of physical
phenomena, are sound or without basis in fact. Until this stage was
reached it would have been as useless to make Mr. Keely's theories
known, as it would be to publish a treatise to prove that two and two
make five. Scientific men reject all theories in physics in which there
is not an equal proportion of science and mathematics, excluding all
questions of pure metaphysics. They are right; for, until the world
had undergone a state of preparation for another revelation of truth,
the man who demonstrated all that Keely is now prepared to demonstrate
would have been burned alive as a wizard. To use the words of Babcock,
one of Keely's staunchest adherents, in 1880:--"This discoverer has
entered a new world, and although an unexplored region of untold wealth
lies beyond, he is treading firmly its border, which daily widens
as with ever-increasing interest he pursues his explorations. He has
passed the dreary realm where scientists are groping. His researches
are made in the open field of elemental force, where gravity, inertia,
cohesion, momentum, are disturbed in their haunts and diverted to use;
where, from unity of origin, emanates infinite energy in diversified
forms," and, to this statement I would add--where he is able to
look from nature up to nature's God, understanding and explaining,
as no man before ever understood and explained, how simple is "the
mysterious way in which God works His wonders to perform."

Mr. Babcock continues:--"Human comprehension is inadequate to grasp the
possibilities of this discovery for power, for increased prosperity,
and for peace. It includes all that relates mechanically to travel,
manufacture, mining, engineering, and warfare." Up to within two
years, Keely, this discoverer of unknown laws of nature, has been left
partially to the mercy of men who were interested only in mechanical
"possibilities." In the autumn of 1888, he was led into a line of
research which made the mechanical question one of secondary interest;
and yet the present results are such as to prove that on this line
alone can he ever hope to attain commercial success. The course then
adopted has also been the means of placing his discoveries before
the world, endorsed in such a manner as to command attention to his
views and theories. It has been said that if extreme vicissitudes of
belief on the part of men of science are evidences of uncertainty,
it may be affirmed that of all kinds of knowledge none is more
uncertain than science. The only hope for science is more science,
says Drummond. Keely now bestows the only hope for science--"more
science." He accounts for the non-recognition by scientists of
his claims, in these words: "The system of arranging introductory
etheric impulses by compound chords set by differential harmonies,
is one that the world of science has never recognized, simply
because the struggles of physicists, combating with the solution of
the conditions governing the fourth order of matter, have been in a
direction thoroughly antagonistic, and opposite to a right one. It is
true that luminosity has been induced by chemical antagonism, and,
in my mind, this ought to have been a stepping-stone towards a more
perfect condition than was accepted by them; but independent of what
might be necessary to its analysis, the bare truth remains that the
conditions were isolated--robbed of their most vital essentials--by
not having the medium of etheric vibration associated with them."

In order to subdivide the atoms in the atomic triplet, the molecular
ether, liberated from the molecule, is absolutely necessary to effect
the rupture of the atoms; and so on, progressively, in each order of
ether, molecular, inter-molecular, atomic, inter-atomic, etheric,
inter-etheric, the ether liberated in each successive division is
essential to the next subdivision.

The keynote of Mr. Keely's researches is that the movements of elastic
elements are rhythmical, and before he had reached his present stage
in producing vibrations, on the principle of resonance, he has had
problems to solve which needed the full measure of inspiration or
apperception that he has received.

Hertz has produced vibrations about one metre long, vibrating more
than one hundred million times a second. Keely has produced, using
an atmospheric medium alone, 519,655,633 vibrations per second; but,
interposing pure hydrogen gas between soap films and using it as a
medium of acceleration, he asserts that on the enharmonic third a rate
of vibration may be induced which could not be set down in figures,
and could only be represented in sound colours. He has invented
instruments which demonstrate in many variations the colours of
sound, registering the number of necessary vibrations to produce each
variation. The transmissive sympathetic chord of B flat, third octave,
when passing into inaudibility, would induce billions of billions
of vibrations, represented by sound colour on a screen illuminated
from a solar ray. But this experiment is one of infinite difficulty,
from the almost utter impossibility of holding the hydrogen between
the two films long enough to conduct the experiment. Keely made over
1200 trials before succeeding once in inducing the intense blue field
necessary, covering a space of six weeks, four hours at a time daily;
and should he ever succeed in his present efforts to produce a film
that will stand, he anticipates being able to register the range of
motion in all metallic mediums. On this subject Keely writes:--The
highest range of vibration I ever induced was in the one experiment
that I made in liberating ozone by molecular percussion, which
induced luminosity, and registered a percussive molecular force of
110,000 lbs. per square inch, as registered on a lever constructed
for the purpose. The vibrations induced by this experiment reached
over 700,000,000 per second, unshipping the apparatus, thus making it
insecure for a repetition of the experiments. The decarbonized steel
compressors of said apparatus moved as if composed of putty. Volume
of sphere, 15 cubic inches; weight of surrounding metal, 316 lbs.

Recently some questions, propounded to Mr. Keely by a scientist,
elicited answers which the man of science admitted were clear and
definite, but no physicist could accept Keely's assertion that
incalculable amounts of latent force exist in the molecular spaces,
for the simple reason that science asserts that molecular aggregation
is attended with dissipation of energy instead of its absorption. The
questions asked were:--

I. "In disintegrating water, how many foot-pounds of energy have you
to expend in order to produce or induce the vibratory energy in your
acoustical apparatus?"

Answer.--"No foot-pounds at all. The force necessary to excite
disintegration when the instrument is sensitized, both in sensitization
and developments, would not be sufficient to wind up a watch."

II. "What is the amount of energy that you get out of that initial
amount of water, say twelve drops, when decomposed into ether?"

Answer.--"From twelve drops of water a force can be developed that
will fill a chamber of seven pint volume no less than six times with
a pressure of ten tons to the square inch."

III. "In other words, if you put so many pounds of energy into
vibratory motion, how many foot-pounds do you get out of this?"

Answer.--"All molecular masses of metal represent in their interstitial
molecular spaces incalculable amounts of latent force, which, if
awakened and brought into intense vibratory action by the medium of
sympathetic liberation, would result in thousands of billions more
power in foot-pounds than that necessary to awaken it. The resultant
development of any and all forces is only accomplished by conditions
that awaken the latent energy they have carried with them during
molecular aggregation. If the latent force that exists in a pound of
water could be sympathetically evolved or liberated up to the seventh
subdivision or compound inter-etheric, and could be stored free of
rotation, it would be in my estimation sufficient to run the power
of the world for a century."

This statement gives another of Keely's discoveries to the world,
viz., that molecular dissociation does not create energy, as men
have asserted Keely has claimed, but supplies it in unlimited
quantities, as the product of the latent energy accumulated in
molecular aggregation. This is to the physicist as if Keely had
asserted that two and two make a billion, but as a man of science,
who is held to be "the scientific equal of any man in the world,"
has come forward to make known that, in his opinion, "Keely has fairly
demonstrated the discovery of a force previously unknown to science,"
the discoverer at lasts feels at liberty to make public the nature of
his discoveries. Until Dr. Joseph Leidy had taken this stand, Mr. Keely
could not, without jeopardizing his interests, and the interests
of the Keely Motor Company, have made known in what particulars his
system conflicts with the systems upheld by the age in which we live.

After the warning given in the history of Huxley's "Bathybius,"
we may feel quite sure that if Keely had failed to demonstrate the
genuineness of his claims by actual experiment, no scientist would
have risked the world-wide reputation of a lifetime by endorsement of
the discovery of an unknown force, as Professor Leidy has done, while
Keely himself was under such a cloud that, to advocate his integrity
and uphold the importance of his discovery, has hitherto been enough
to awaken doubts as to the sanity of his upholders. Among many others
who have written of it from the standpoint of Keely's accountability
for the mistakes of the managers of the Keely Motor Company--men who
made no pretence of caring for anything but dividends--was one who
asserted, in the New York Tribune, that it was a "remarkable delusion,
full of tricks too numerous to mention, the exposure of which ought
to be made to bring the Keely craze to an end." In the same journal
an editorial states that "Mr. Keely appears to have no mechanical
ingenuity, his strong point being his ability as a collector. He has
one of the largest and best arranged collections of other people's
money to be found in the United States. Having, a number of years ago,
during a fit of temporary insanity, constructed a machine which, if any
power on earth could start it, would explode and pierce the startled
dome of heaven with flying fragments of cog-wheels and cranks, he now
sits down calmly, and allows this same mechanical nightmare to make
his living for him. This is genius; this is John W. Keely; he toils
not, neither does he spin, but he has got an hysterical collection
of crooked pipes and lob-sided wheels tied up in his back room that
extract the reluctant dollar from the pocket of avarice without fail."

This is a specimen of the nature of the ridicule which was encountered
by Keely's "upholders," as well as by himself. Until Professor Leidy
and Dr. Willcox came to the front, in March, 1890, Mr. Keely had no
influential supporters, and not one scientist could be found who was
ready to encounter the wasps.

Such is the position of all defenders of the truth in all ages;
but the torch being held aloft, in such hands as have now seized it,
the opportunity is given to see what Keely proclaims as truth.

We know that science denies the divisibility of atoms, but Keely
affirms and demonstrates that all corpuscules of matter may be divided
and subdivided by a certain order of vibration. During all these years
in which he has given exhibitions of the operation of his generators,
liberators, and disintegrators, in turn, each being an improvement,
successively, on the preceding one, no one has attempted to give
to the public any theory, or even so much as a sensible conjecture,
of the origin of the force.

When Mr. Keely was asked, by a woman in 1884, if it were not possible
that he had dissociated hydrogen gas, and that his unknown force
came from that dissociation, he replied that he thought it might be;
but he made no assertion that he had. This conjecture was repeated to
an English scientist, who replied that he was willing to make a bet
of 10,000l. that hydrogen is a simple element. The same scientist
says now that he should answer such a question with more caution,
and say that he had never known hydrogen to be dissociated.



Theory and Formula of Aqueous Disintegration.

The peculiar conditions as associated with the gaseous elements of
which water is composed, as regards the differential volume and gravity
of its gases, make it a ready and fit subject of vibratory research. In
submitting water to the influence of vibratory transmission, even on
simple thirds, the high action induced on the hydrogen as contrasted
with the one on the oxygen (under the same vibratory stream), causes
the antagonism between these elements that induces dissociation. The
differential antagonistic range of motion, so favouring the
antagonistic thirds as to become thoroughly repellent. The gaseous
element thus induced and registered, shows thousands of times much
greater force as regards tenuity and volume than that induced by the
chemical disintegration of heat, on the same medium. In all molecular
dissociation or disintegration of both simple or compound elements,
whether gaseous or solid, a stream of vibratory antagonistic thirds,
sixths, or ninths, on their chord mass will compel progressive
subdivisions. In the disintegration of water the instrument is set
on thirds, sixths, and ninths, to get the best effects. These triple
conditions are focalized on the neutral centre of said instrument
so as to induce perfect harmony or concordance to the chord-note of
the mass-chord of the instrument's full combination; after which the
diatonic and the enharmonic scale located at the top of the instrument,
or ring, is thoroughly harmonized with the scale of ninths which is
placed at the base of the vibratory transmitter with the telephone
head. The next step is to disturb the harmony on the concentrative
thirds, between the transmitter and disintegrator. This is done
by rotating the syren so as to induce a sympathetic communication
along the nodal transmitter, or wire, that associates the two
instruments. When the note of the syren becomes concordant to the
neutral centre of the disintegrator, the highest order of sympathetic
communication is established. It is now necessary to operate the
transferable vibratory negatizer, or negative accelerator, which is
seated in the centre of the diatonic and enharmonic ring, at the top
of disintegrator, and complete disintegration will follow (from the
antagonisms induced on the concordants by said adjunct), in triple
progression, thus:--First, thirds: Molecular dissociation resolving the
water into a gaseous compound of hydrogen and oxygen. Second, sixths:
resolving the hydrogen and oxygen into a new element by second order
of dissociation, producing what I call, low atomic ether. Third,
ninths: The low atomic ether resolved into a new element, which I
denominate high or second atomic harmonic. All these transmissions
being simultaneous on the disturbance of sympathetic equilibrium by
said negative accelerator.

Example:--Taking the chord mass of the disintegrator B flat, or any
chord mass that may be represented by the combined association of
all the mechanical parts of its structure (no two structures being
alike in their chord masses), taking B flat, the resonators of said
structure are set at B flat first octave, B flat third octave, and
B flat ninth octave, by drawing out the caps of resonators until
the harmony of thirds, sixths, and ninths are reached; which a
simple movement of the fingers on the diatonic scale, at the head,
will determine by the tremulous action which is highly sensible to
the touch, on said caps. The caps are then rigidly fixed in their
different positions by set screws. The focalization to the neutral
centre is then established by dampening the steel rods, on the scale
at the back, representing the thirds, sixths, and ninths, drawing a
piece of small gum tube over them, which establishes harmony to the
chord mass of the instrument. Concordance is thus effected between
the disintegrator and the ninths of the scale at base of transmitters
with telephonic head.

This scale has a permanent sympathetic one, set on the ninth of
any mass chord that may be represented, on any and all the multiple
variations of mechanical combinations. In fact, permanently set for
universal accommodation.

The next step is to establish pure harmony between the transmitter
and the disintegrator, which is done by spinning the syren disk,
then waiting until the sympathetic note is reached, as the syren
chord, decreasing in velocity, descends the scale. At this juncture,
the negative accelerator must be immediately and rapidly rotated,
inducing high disturbance of equilibrium between the transmitter
and the disintegrator by triple negative evolution, with the result
that a force of from five to ten, fifteen, twenty, and thirty thousand
pounds to the square inch is evolved by the focalization of this triple
negative stream on the disintegrating cell, or chamber, whether there
be one, two, three, five, or ten drops of water enclosed within it.



Graduation of Machines.

Mr. Keely gives a few introductory words concerning the necessary
graduating of his instruments, for effecting conditions necessary to
ensure perfect sympathetic transmission, which will serve to show how
great are the difficulties that have been attendant upon getting his
machines into a condition to control and equate the differentiation
in molecular masses, requiring greater skill than in researching
the force of a sunbeam. He writes:--The differentiation in molecular
metallic masses, or grouping, is brought about in their manipulations
in manufacturing them for commercial uses; in the forging of a piece
of metal, in the drawing of a length of wire, and in the casting of
a molten mass to any requisite form.

The nearest approach to molecular uniformity in metallic masses is in
the wire drawn for commercial uses, gold and platina being the nearest
to freedom from differentiation. But even these wires, when tested
by a certain condition of the first order of intensified molecular
vibration for a transferring medium between centres of neutrality, I
find to be entirely inadequate for the transfer of concordant unition,
as between one and the other, on account of nodal interferences. We
can appreciate the difficulty of converting such a medium to a uniform
molecular link, by knowing that it can be accomplished only after
removing all nodal interference, by inducing between the nodal waves
a condition in which they become subservient to the inter-sympathetic
vibratory molecular link of such structure or wire.

Therefore, it is necessary to submit the wire to a system of
graduation in order to find what the combined chords of these nodal
interferences represent when focalized to one general centre. Then the
differentiation between these nodal waves and the inter-molecular link
must be equated, by what I call a process of vibratory induction, so
as to induce pure concordance between one and the other. To elaborate
on this system of graduation, for effecting conditions necessary to
ensure perfect and unadulterated transmission, would make up a book
that would take days to read and months to study.

The graduating of a perfectly constructed instrument, to a condition
to transmit sympathetically, is no standard whatever for any other
one that may be built, nor ever will be, because no concordant
conditions of compound molecular aggregation can ever exist in visible
groupings. If it were even possible to make their parts perfectly
accurate one to the other, in regard to atmospheric displacement
and weight, their resonating qualities would still have a high rate
of sympathetic variation in their molecular groupings alone. If one
thousand million of coins, each one representing a certain standard
value, and all struck from the same die, were sympathetically graduated
under a vibratory subdivision of 150,000, the most amazing variation
would present itself, as between each individual coin throughout the
number, in regard to their molecular grouping and resonance....

It will be realized in the future what immense difficulties have been
encountered by Mr. Keely in perfecting his system of graduation, and in
constructing devices for the guidance of artificers and mechanicians,
whereby those who are not as abnormally endowed as he is for his work,
can bring a proper vibratory action into play to induce positive
sympathetic transmission; as will also be realized the stupidity of
the men who still seek to confine his researches to perfecting the
so-called Keely motor, before his system is sufficiently developed
to enable others to follow it up, should his physical strength give
out. His system of graduating research, when completed, will enable
men to take up the work, not from the standard of an already completed
structure that is true in its operation, though a perfect duplicate
as to size and gravity be made, for each successively constructed
machine requires a knowledge of its own conditions of sensitivity,
as regards its mass chords. Keely writes:--

"That tuning forks can be so constructed as to show coincident
or concordant association with each other, is but a very weak
illustration of the fact which governs pure acoustic assimilation. The
best only approach a condition of about a fortieth, as regards pure
attractive and propulsive receptiveness. By differentiating them to
concordant thirds, they induce a condition of molecular bombardment
between themselves, by alternate changes of long and short waves of
sympathy. Bells rung in vacuo liberate the same number of corpuscules,
at the same velocity as those surrounded by a normal atmosphere; and
hence the same acoustic force attending them, but they are inaudible
from the fact that, in vacuo, the molecular volume is reduced. Every
gaseous molecule is a resonator of itself, and is sensitive to any
and all sounds induced, whether accordant or discordant.



Answers to Questions.

The positive vibrations are the radiating or propulsive; the negative
vibrations are the ones that are attracted towards the neutral
centre. The action of the magnetic flow is dual in its evolutions,
both attractive and propulsive. The sound vibrations of themselves
have no power whatever to induce dissociation, even in its lowest
form. Certain differential, dual, triple and quadruple, chords give
introductory impulses which excite an action on molecular masses,
liquid and gaseous, that increase their range of molecular motion and
put them in that receptive state for sympathetic vibratory interchange
which favours molecular disintegration; then, as I have shown, the
diatonic enharmonic is brought into play, which further increases the
molecular range of motion beyond fifty per cent. of their diameters,
when molecular separation takes place, giving the tenuous substance
that is necessary to induce progressive subdivision. This molecular
gaseous substance, during its evolution, assumes a condition of
high rotation in the sphere or tube in which it has been generated,
and becomes itself the medium, with the proper exciters, for further
progressive dissociation. The exciters include an illuminated revolving
prism, condenser, and coloured lenses, with a capped glass tube strong
enough to carry a pressure of at least one thousand pounds per square
inch. To one of these caps a sectional wire of platinum and silver
is attached; the other cap is attached to the tube, so screwed to the
chamber as to allow it to lead to the neutral centre of said chamber.



Mineral Disintegration.

I have been repeatedly urged to repeat my disintegrations of quartz
rock; but it has been utterly out of my power to do so. The mechanical
device with which I conducted those experiments was destroyed at the
time of the proceedings against me. Its graduation occupied over four
years, after which it was operated successfully. It had been originally
constructed as an instrument for overcoming gravity; a perfect,
graduated scale of that device was accurately registered, a copy of
which I kept; I have since built three successive disintegrators
set up from that scale, but they did not operate. This peculiar
feature remained a paradox to me until I had solved the conditions
governing the chords of multiple masses; when this problem ceased
to be paradoxical in its character. As I have said, there are no
two compound aggregated forms of visible matter that are, or ever
can be, so duplicated as to show pure sympathetic concordance one to
the other. Hence the necessity of my system of graduation, and of a
compound device that will enable anyone to correct the variations
that exist in compound molecular structures; or in other words to
graduate such, so as to bring them to a successful operation....


Keely.



Disturbance of Magnetic Needle.

If Keely's theories are correct, science will in time classify all
the important modifications of the one force in nature as sympathetic
streams, each stream composed of triple flows. Mr. Keely maintains
that the static condition which the magnetic needle assumes, when
undisturbed by any extraneous force outside of its own sympathetic
one, proves conclusively that the power of the dominant third, of
the triple combination of the magnetic terrestrial envelope, is the
controlling one of this sympathetic triplet, and the one towards
which all the others co-ordinate. All the dominant conditions of
nature represent the focal centres towards which like surrounding
ones become sympathetically subservient. The rapid rotation of the
magnetic needle of a compass which Mr. Keely shows in his experiments,
rests entirely on the alternating of the dominant alone, which is
effected by a triple condition of vibration that is antagonistic to
its harmonious flow as associated with its other attendants. A rapid
change of polarity is induced, and rapid rotation necessarily follows.

Quoting from Keely's writings,--"The human ear cannot detect the
triple chord of any vibration, or sounding note, but every sound that
is induced of any range, high or low, is governed by the same laws,
as regards triple action of such, that govern every sympathetic flow
in Nature. Were it not for these triple vibratory conditions, change
of polarity could never be effected, and consequently there could be
no rotation. Thus the compounding of the triple triple, to produce the
effect, would give a vibration in multiplication reaching the ninth,
in order to induce subservience, the enumeration of which it would
be folly to undertake, as the result would be a string of figures
nearly a mile in length to denote it.

When the proper impulse is given to induce the rotation with pure
alternating corpuscular action, the conditions of action become
perpetual in their character, lasting long enough from that one impulse
to wear out any machine denoting such action, and on the sympathetic
stream eternally perpetual. The action of the neutral or focalizing
centres represents molecular focalization and redistribution, not
having any magnetism associated with them; but when the radiating arms
of their centres are submitted to the triple compound vibratory force,
representing their mass thirds, they become magnetic and consequently
cease their rotation. Their rotation is induced by submitting them
to three different orders of vibration, simultaneously giving the
majority to the harmonic third.



Theory of the Induction of Sympathetic Chords to excite rotation,
by vibrophonic trajection to and from centres of neutrality, as
induced and shown to Professor Leidy, Dr. Willcox, and others, on
revolving globe.

All hollow spheres, of certain diameters, represent, as per diameters
and their volume of molecular mass, pure, unadulterated, sympathetic
resonation towards the enharmonic and diatonic thirds of any, and
in fact all, concordant sounds. In tubes it is adversely different,
requiring a definite number of them so graduated as to represent a
confliction by thirds, sixths, and ninths, as towards the harmonic
scale. When the conditions are established, the acoustic result of
this combination, when focalized, represents concordant harmony,
as between the chord mass of the instrument to be operated and
chord mass of the tubes of resonation. Therefore the shortest
way towards establishing pure concordance, between any number of
resonating mediums, is by the position that Nature herself assumes
in her multitudinous arrangements of the varied forms and volumes of
matter--the spherical. The great difficulty to overcome, in order to
get a revolution of the said sphere, exists in equating the interior
adjuncts of same. In other words, the differentiation induced must be
so equated as to harmonize and make their conditions purely concordant
to the molecular mass of the sphere. Example: Suppose the chord of the
sphere mass represents B flat, or any other chord, and the internal
adjuncts by displacement of atmospheric volume differentiates the
volume one-twentieth; this displacement in the shell's atmospheric
volume would represent an antagonistic twentieth against the shell's
mass concordance, to equate which it would be necessary to so graduate
the shell's internal adjuncts as to get at the same chord;--an octave
or any number of octaves that comes nearest to the concordance of
the shell's atmospheric volume. No intermediates between the octaves
would ever reach sympathetic union.

We will now take up the mechanical routine as associated with adjuncts
of interference, and follow the system for chording the mechanical
aggregation in its different parts, in order to induce the transmissive
sympathy necessary to perfect evolution, and to produce revolution
of the sphere or shell.

Example.--Suppose that we had just received from the machine shop a
spun shell of twelve inches internal diameter, 1·32 of an inch thick,
which represents an atmospheric volume of 904·77 cubic inches. On
determination by research we find the shell to be on its resonating
volume B flat, and the molecular volume of the metal that the sphere
is composed of, B natural. This or any other antagonistic chord, as
between the chord mass of the shell and its atmospheric volume, would
not interfere but would come under subservience. We now pass a steel
shaft through its centre, 1/2 inch in diameter, which represents its
axial rest. This shaft subjects the atmospheric volume of the shell to
a certain displacement or reduction, to correct which we first register
the chord note of its mass, and find it to be antagonistic to the
chord mass of the shell, a certain portion of an octave. This must be
corrected. The molecular volume of the shaft must be reduced in volume,
either by filing or turning, so as to represent the first B flat chord
that is reached by such reduction. When this is done the first line of
interference is neutralized, and the condition of sympathy is as pure
between the parts as it was when the globe was minus its axis. There is
now introduced on its axis a ring which has seven tubes or graduating
resonators, the ring being two-thirds the diameter of the globe,
the resonators three inches long and 3/4 inch diameter, each one to
be set on the chord of B flat, which is done by sliding the small
diaphragm in the tube to a point that will indicate B flat. This
setting then controls the metallic displacement of the metallic
combination, as also of the arms necessary to hold the ring and
resonators on shaft or axis. Thus the second equation is established,
both on resonation and displacement. We are now ready to introduce
the diatonic scale ring of three octaves which is set at two-thirds
of the scale antagonistic to the chord mass of the globe itself. This
is done by graduating every third pin of its scale to B flat, thirds,
which represent antagonistic thirds to the shell's molecular mass. This
antagonism must be thoroughly sensitive to the chord mass of one of
the hemispheres of which the globe is composed. The axis of the scale
ring must rotate loosely on the globe's shaft without revolving with
the globe itself; which it is prevented from doing by being weighted
on one side of the ring by a small hollow brass ball, holding about
two ounces of lead. The remaining work on the device is finished by
painting the interior of the globe, one hemisphere black and one white,
and attaching a rubber bulb such as is used to spray perfume, to the
hollow end of the shaft. This bulb equates vibratory undulations,
thus preventing an equation of molecular bombardment on its dark side
when sympathetically influenced. It is now in condition to denote
the sympathetic concordance between living physical organisms, or
the receptive transmittive concordance necessary to induce rotation.



Philosophy of Transmission and Rotation of Musical Sphere.

The only two vibratory conditions that can be so associated as to
excite high sympathetic affinity, as between two physical organisms,
are:--Etheric chord of B flat, 3rd octave, and on etheric sympathetic
chords transmission E flat on the scale 3rd, 6ths, and 9ths; octaves
harmonic; having the 3rd dominant, the 6th enharmonic, and the 9th
diatonic.

The chord mass representing the musical sphere, being the sympathetic
etheric chord of B flat third octave, indicated by the focalization of
its interior mechanical combination, as against the neutral sevenths
of its atmospheric volume, makes the shell highly sensitive to the
reception of pure sympathetic concordance, whether it be physical,
mechanical, or a combination of both. Taking the chord mass of
the different mechanical parts of the sphere and its adjuncts, as
previously explained, when associated and focalized to represent
pure concordance, as between its atmospheric volume and sphere mass,
which means the pure unit of concordance, we have the highest position
that can be established in relation to its sympathetic susceptiveness
to negative antagonism. The beauty of the perfection of the laws that
govern the action of Nature's sympathetic flows is here demonstrated in
all the purity of its workings, actually requiring antagonistic chords
to move and accelerate. The dark side of the shell, which represents
fifty per cent. of its full area of pure concordant harmony, is the
receptive area for the influence of the negative transmissive chords
of the thirds, sixths and ninths to bombard upon; which bombardment
disturbs the equilibrium of said sphere, and induces rotation. The
rotation can be accelerated or retarded, according as the antagonistic
chords of the acoustic forces are transmitted in greater or lesser
volume. The action induced by the mouth organ, transmitted at a
distance from the sphere without any connection of wire, demonstrates
the purity of the principle of sympathetic transmission, as negatized
or disturbed by discordants; which, focalizing on the resonating
sevenths of resonators, or tubes attached to ring, the sympathetic
flow is by this means transmitted to the focalizing centre, or centre
of neutrality, to be re-distributed at each revolution of sphere,
keeping intact the sympathetic volume during sensitization, thus
preventing the equation or stoppage of its rotation.

Again, the sphere resting on its journals in the ring, as graduated
to the condition of its interior combinations, represents a pure
sympathetic concordant under perfect equation ready to receive the
sympathetic, or to reject the non-sympathetic. If a pure sympathetic
chord is transmitted coincident to its full combination, the sphere
will remain quiescent; but if a transmission of discordance is brought
to bear upon it, its sympathetic conditions become repellent to this
discordance....

Keely.



Hertz in his conjectures that a knowledge of the structure of ether
should unveil the essence of matter itself, and of its inherent
properties, weight and inertia, is treading the path that leads to this
knowledge. Professor Fitzgerald says:--"Ether must be the means by
which electric and magnetic forces exist, it should explain chemical
actions, and if possible gravity." The law of sympathetic vibration
explains chemical affinities as a sympathetic attractive, but inherent,
force; in short, as gravity. This opens up too wide a territory even
but to peer into in the dawning light of Keely's system of vibratory
physics. The boundary line is crossed, and the crowds of researchers
in electro-magnetism are full of ardour. Hertz constructed a circuit,
whose period of vibration for electric currents was such that he was
able to see sparks, due to the increased vibration, leaping across a
small air-space in this resonant circuit; his experiments have proved
and demonstrated the ethereal theory of electro-magnetism:--that
electro-magnetic actions are due to a medium pervading all known
space; while Keely's experiments have proved that all things are due
to conditions of ether.

Professor Fitzgerald closes one of his lectures on ether in these
words:--"There are metaphysical grounds for reducing matter to motion,
and potential to kinetic energy. Let us for a moment contemplate what
is betokened by this theory that in electro-magnetic engines we are
using as our mechanism the ether, the medium that fills all known
space. It was a great step in human progress when man learnt to make
material machines, when he used the elasticity of his bow, and the
rigidity of his arrow to provide food and defeat his enemies. It was a
great advance when he learnt to use the chemical action of fire; when
he learnt to use water to float his boats, and air to drive them; when,
by artificial selection, he provided himself with food and domestic
animals. For two hundred years he has made heat his slave to drive
his machinery. Fire, water, earth, and air have long been his slaves,
but it is only within the last few years that man has won the battle
lost by the giants of old, has snatched the thunderbolt from Jove
himself, and enslaved the all-pervading ether."

Of the experiments of Hertz, in inducing vibrations "in ether waves,"
Professor Fitzgerald says: "If we consider the possible radiating
power of an atom, we find that it may be millions of millions of
times as great as Professor Wiedermann has found to be the radiating
power of a sodium atom in a Bunsen burner; so if there is reason
to think that any greater oscillation might disintegrate the atom,
we are still a long way from it."

Here we have an admission that the atom may be divisible; but the
professor's conjecture is made upon an incorrect hypothesis. The
"possible theory of ether and matter" which Professor Fitzgerald puts
forward, in his lecture on Electro-Magnetic Radiation, is in harmony
with Keely's theories. This hypothesis explains the differences
in nature as differences in motion, ending: "Can we resist the
conclusion that all motion is thought? Not that contradiction in terms,
'unconscious thought,' but living thought; that all nature is the
language of One in whom we live, and move, and have our being?" This
great truth the Buddhists have taught for ages. There is no such thing
as blind or dead matter, as there is no blind nor unconscious thought.









