CHAPTER XVIII.

A PIONEER IN AN UNKNOWN REALM.

        Thus, either present elements are the true elements, or
        there is a probability of eventually obtaining some more
        high and general power of Nature, even than electricity;
        and which, at the same time, might reveal to us an entirely
        new grade of the elements of matter, now hidden from our view
        and almost from our suspicion.--The Nature of the Chemical
        Elements. Faraday, 1836.

        A mysterious force exists in the vibrations of the ether,
        called sound, which science and invention have so far
        failed to utilize; but which, no doubt in the near future,
        will come under man's control, for driving the wheels of
        industry.--Thought as Force. E. S. Huntington.

                              Force and forces--
                No end of forces! Have they mind like men?

                                                        Browning.


The Spectator, commenting on the jubilee of the Chemical Society,
last year, said it was notable for two remarkable speeches; one by
Lord Salisbury, and the other by Sir Lyon Playfair. Lord Salisbury
reminded his hearers that about one hundred years ago, a very
celebrated tribunal had informed Lavoisier that the French Republic
had no need of chemists; "but," said his Lordship, "Lavoisier,
though a man of very advanced opinions, was behind this age." Lord
Salisbury proceeded to exalt chemistry as an instrument of the higher
educational discipline. Astronomy, he said, was hardly more than a
science of things that probably are; for, at such distance in space,
it was impossible to verify your inferences. Geology he regarded as a
science of things as they probably were; verification being impossible
after such a lapse of time. But chemistry he treated as a science
of things as they actually are at the present time. The Spectator
remarks:--Surely that is questionable. All hypothesis is more or less a
matter of probability. No one has ever verified the existence of atoms.

Sir Lyon Playfair, following Lord Salisbury, said, Boyle has been
called the father of chemistry and the brother of the Earl of Cork;
ironically hinting, perhaps, that Lord Salisbury was reflecting as
much immediate glory on chemistry, by his interest in it, as did the
relationship of the first considerable chemist to the Irish earl. Sir
Lyon, acknowledging the revolutionizing progress of chemistry,
remarked that within the last fifty years it had seen great changes;
then, oxygen was regarded as the universal lover of other elements;
and nitrogen was looked upon as a quiet, confirmed bachelor; but
oxygen had turned out to be a comparatively respectable bigamist, that
only marries two wives at a time; and nitrogen had turned out to be a
polygamist; generally requiring three conjugates, and sometimes five,
at a time. The false teachings of physicists in the past were admitted,
including Sir Lyon's own errors; his old conceptions concerning
carbonic acid and carbonic oxide all having broken down, under the
crushing feet of progress. After all, says the Spectator, it seems
that the French revolutionists should have welcomed chemistry, instead
of snubbing it, for it has been the most revolutionary of sciences.

At the present time, notwithstanding the experiences of the past,
Science stands as calmly on the pedestal, to which she has exalted
herself, as if not even an earthquake could rock its foundations. In
her own opinion, she holds the key to nature's domains. Some few there
are who are ready to admit that it is possible Nature still holds the
key herself; and who are not unwilling to encounter another revolution,
if they can extend their knowledge of Nature's laws; even though it
may leave only ruins, where now all is supposed to be so solid as to
defy earthquakes and other revolutionizing forces.

In reviewing the history of the onward march of chemistry in the
past, we find that Robert Boyle, who lived from 1627 to 1691, was
the first chemist who grasped the idea of the distinctions between
an elementary and a compound body. He has been called the first
scientific chemist, and he certainly did much to advance chemical
science, particularly in the borderland of chemistry and physics,
but he did this more by his overthrow of false theories, than in any
other way. It was left for Scheele (born 1742), an obscure Swedish
chemist whose discoveries extended over the whole range of chemical
science, and his French contemporary, Lavoisier (born 1743), to
bring about a complete revolution in chemistry. Thus, step by step,
and period by period, experimental science has prepared the way to
reach that elevation which humanity is destined eventually to attain,
when all errors have been discarded and truth reigns triumphant. The
question has been asked, in view of the past history of discovery,
what may not the science of the future accomplish in the unseen
pathways of the air? That still unconquered field lies before us,
and we know that it is only a question of time when man will hold
dominion there with as firm sway as he now holds it on land and sea.

Physics and chemistry walk hand in hand. Scientists cannot cut the tie
that joins them together in experimental science. Physics treats of
the changes of matter without regard to its internal constitution. The
laws of gravitation and cohesion belong to physical science. They
concern matter without reference to its composition. Chemistry makes
us acquainted with the constituents of the different forms of matter,
their proportions and the changes which they are capable of bringing
about in each other. But notwithstanding the lessons of the past, both
chemistry and physics are blind to what the future has in store for
them. Scientists have erected barriers to progress, building them so
as to appear of solid masonry on the ground of false hypotheses; but,
when the hour is ripe, these will be swept away as if by a cyclone,
leaving not one stone on another. It was Boyle who overthrew the
so-called Aristotelian doctrine, and Paracelsus's teachings of the
three constitutents of matter, disputed first by Van Helmont. Boyle
taught that chemical combination consists of an approximation of the
smallest particles of matter, and that a decomposition takes place when
a third body is present, capable of exerting on the particles of the
one element a greater attraction than is exercised by the particles
of the element with which it is combined. In this conjecture there is
just a hint of the grand potentialities in the unknown realm which is
now being explored by Keely, the discoverer of the order of vibration
that releases the latent force held in the interstitial spaces of the
constituents of water; one order of vibration, being more in sympathy
with one of the elements of water than with the other, possesses a
greater attraction for that element and thereby raptures its atoms,
showing up new elements. Not all men of science are willing to admit
the atomic theory; although it explains satisfactorily all the known
laws of chemical combination. Dalton, accepting the teachings of
the ancients as to the atomic constitution of matter, was the first
to propound a truly chemical atomic theory; a quantitative theory,
declaring that the atoms of the different elements are not of the same
weight, and that the relative atomic weights of the elements are the
proportions, by weight, in which the elements combine. All previous
theories, or suggestions, had been simply qualitative. Berzelius,
the renowned Swedish chemist, advancing Dalton's atomic theory, laid
the foundation stones of chemical science, as it now exists. Since
his day, by the new methods of spectrum analysis, elements unknown
before have been discovered; and researchers in this field are
now boldly questioning whether all the supposed elements are really
undecomposable substances, and are conjecturing that they are not. On
this subject Sir Henry Roscoe says:--

"So far as our chemical knowledge enables us to judge, we may assume,
with a considerable degree of probability, that by the application
of more powerful means than are known at present, chemists will
succeed in obtaining still more simple bodies from the so-called
elements. Indeed, if we examine the history of our science, we find
frequent examples occurring of bodies, that only a short time ago were
considered to be elementary, which have been shown to be compounds,
upon more careful examination."

What the chemist's retort has failed to accomplish has been effected
by the discoverer of latent force existing in all forms of matter,
where it is held locked in the interstitial spaces, until released
by a certain order of vibration. As yet, the order of vibration which
releases this force, has not been discovered in any forms of matter,
excepting in the constituents of gunpowder, dynamite, and water. The
Chinese are supposed to have invented, centuries before the birth of
Christ, the explosive compound gunpowder, which requires that order of
vibration known as heat to bring about a rupture of the molecules of
the nitre, sulphur, and charcoal, of which it is composed. Dynamite
requires another order of vibration--concussion--to release the
latent force held in the molecular embrace of its constituents. The
order of vibration discovered by Keely, which causes the rupture
of the molecular and atomic capsules of the constituents of water,
must remain--though in one point only--a secret with the discoverer,
until he has completed his system for science, and some one patentable
invention. Let physicists be incredulous or cautious, it matters not
to him. He has proved to his own satisfaction the actual existence of
atoms and their divisibility--and, to the satisfaction of thousands
capable of forming an opinion, the existence of an unknown force. Men
of science have not been in any haste to aid him, either with money
or with sympathy, in his researches; and he will take his own time
to bestow upon them the fruit of those researches.

Those who have not clear ideas as to the nature of elementary
bodies--molecules and atoms--may like to know that elements are
defined as simple substances, out of which no other two or more
essentially differing substances have been obtained. Compounds are
bodies out of which two or more essentially differing substances have
been obtained. A molecule is the smallest part of a compound or element
that is capable of existence in a free state. Atoms are set down, by
those who believe in the atomic theory, as the indivisible constituents
of molecules. Thus, an element is a substance made up of atoms of the
same kind; a compound is a substance made up of atoms of unlike kind.

Over seventy elements are now known, out of which, or compounds of
these with each other, our globe is composed, and also the meteoric
stones which have fallen on our earth. The science of chemistry aims at
the experimental examination of the elements and their compounds, and
the investigation of the laws which regulate their combination one with
another. For example, in the year 1805, Gay-Lussac and Von Humboldt
found that one volume of oxygen combines with exactly two volumes of
hydrogen to form water, and that these exact proportions hold good
at whatever temperature the gases are brought into contact. Oxygen
and hydrogen are now classified as elementary bodies.

The existence of atoms, if proved, as claimed by the pioneer of whom
we write, confirms Priestly's idea that all discoveries are made
by chance; for it certainly was by a mere chance, as we view things
with our limited knowledge, that Keely stumbled over the dissociation
of the supposed simple elements of water by vibratory force; [23]
thus making good Roscoe's assumption that, by the application of more
powerful means than were known to him, still more simple bodies would
be shown up. Had Keely subdivided these corpuscles of matter, after a
method known to physicists, he would have been hailed as a discoverer,
when it was announced by Arthur Goddard, in the British Mercantile
Gazette, in 1887, that Keely declared electricity to be a certain
form of atomic vibration of what is called the luminiferous ether.

Had Keely been better understood, science might have been marching
with giant strides across this unknown realm during the many years
in which men of learning have refused to witness the operation of the
dissociation of water, because one of their number decided, in 1876,
that Keely was using compressed air. Fixing bounds to human knowledge,
she still refuses to listen to the suggestion that what she has
declared as truth may be as grossly erroneous as were her teachings
in the days when the rotation of the earth was denied; this denial
being based upon the assertions of all the great authorities of more
than one thousand years, that the earth could not move because it was
flat and stationary. Herodotus ridiculed those who did not believe
this. For two thousand years after the daily rotation of the earth
was first suggested, the idea was disputed and derided. The history
of the past, says General Drayson, who claims to have discovered
a third movement of the earth, teaches us that erroneous theories
were accepted as grand truths by all the scientific authorities of
the whole world during more than five thousand years. [24] Although
the daily rotation of the earth and its annual revolution around
the sun had been received as facts by the few advanced minds, some
five hundred years before Christ, yet the obstructions caused by
ignorance and prejudice prevented these truths from being generally
accepted until about three hundred years ago, when Copernicus first,
and afterwards Galileo, revived the theory of the earth's two principal
movements. Human nature is the same as in the days when Seneca said
that men would rather cling to an error than admit they were in the
wrong; so it is not strange that General Drayson, as the discoverer
of a third movement, has not received the attention that he deserves,
although his mathematical demonstrations seem to be beyond dispute.

With Keely's claim, that latent force exists in all forms of matter,
it is different; for it is susceptible of proof by experiment. In the
days when the sphericity of the earth was denied, for the asserted
reason that the waters of the oceans and seas on its surface would
be thrown off in its revolutions were it so, because water could
not stay on a round ball, the statement could not be disputed; the
theory of the laws of gravitation being then unknown. Copernicus
and Galileo had nothing but theories to offer; consequently it took
long years to overcome the bigotry and the baneful influence of
the great authorities of the time. It is otherwise with Keely, who,
for fifteen years and more, has been demonstrating this discovery to
thousands of men; some of whom, but not all, were competent to form
an opinion as to whether he was "humbugging with compressed air,"
or with a concealed dynamo, or, still more absurd, with tricks in
suction, as I asserted by a learned professor.

Now that some of our men of science have consented to form their
opinions from observation, without interfering with the lines of
progressive experimental research which the discoverer is pursuing,
there seems to be no doubt as to the result; nor of the protection
of the discovery by science. Truth is mighty, and must in the end
prevail over mere authority.

It has been said that we need nothing more than the history of
astronomy to teach us how obstinately the strongholds of error are
clung to by incompetent reasoners; but when a stronghold is demolished,
there is nothing left to cling to. Sir John Lubbock says:--The great
lesson which science teaches is how little we yet know, and how much
we have still to learn. To which it might be added, and how much we
have to unlearn!

All mysteries are said to be either truths concealing deeper truths,
or errors concealing deeper errors; and thus, as the mysteries
unfold, truth or error will show itself in a gradually clearer light,
enabling us to distinguish between the two. It is now left for men
of science to decide as to the nature of the mysteries which Keely
is slowly unfolding, and whether his demonstrations substantiate his
theories. They have been invited to follow him in his experimental
research, step by step; to bestow upon him sympathy and encouragement,
so long withheld, until he reaches that stage where he will no longer
need their protection. Then, if science is satisfied that he has gained
a treasure for her, in his years of dead-work, she must step aside
and wait patiently until he has fulfilled his obligations to those
who organized themselves into a company to aid him, long before she
came forward to interest herself in his behalf. Those men of science
who have refused to countenance this great work, even by witnessing
experiments made to prove the discovery of an unknown force, are
men who attempt no explanation of the miracles of nature by which
we are surrounded, assuming that no explanation can be given; but,
as Bacon has said, he is a bad mariner, who concludes, when all is
sea around him, that there is no land beyond.

If the multitude of so-called laws of nature could be resolved into
one grand universal law, would it not be considered a great step
in the progress of scientific knowledge? This is what our pioneer
claims for his discoveries, one law working throughout nature, in all
things; for, as Macvicar says, the productive and conservative agency
in creation, as it exists and acts, does not consist of two things,
"idea" and "power"; but of a unity embracing both, for which there is
no special name. The relation between the Creator and the Creation,
the First Cause and what he has effected, is altogether inscrutable;
but intelligence acting analytically, as it cannot be kept from doing,
insists on these two elements in the problem, viz. idea and power.

"The law of the universe is a distinct dualism while the creative
energies are at work; and of a compound union when at rest."

The hypothesis that motion can only be effected mechanically,
by pressure or traction or contact of some kind, is an utterly
helpless one to explain even familiar movements. Gravitation itself,
the grandest and most prevailing phenomenon of the material universe,
has set all genius at defiance when attempting to conceive a mechanism
which might account for it. The law of sympathetic association, or
sympathetic assimilation, between two or more atoms, or masses of
atoms, explains this grand phenomenon; but Roscoe, in theorizing on
the atomic theory, says that from purely chemical considerations it
appears unlikely the existence of atoms will ever be proved. It never
could have been proved by mechanical physics nor by chemistry. The law
which locks the atoms together would have remained an unknown law,
had not Keely opened the door leading into one of nature's domains
which was never entered before, unless by the fabled Orpheus, who,
mythology tells us, was killed because he revealed to man what the
gods wished to conceal. Certainly, whether Orpheus ever existed or
not, the principle which Pythagoras promulgated as the teaching of
Orpheus is disclosed in one of Keely's discoveries.

In the great fresco of the school of Athens, by Raphael, Pythagoras
is represented as explaining to his pupils his theory that the same
principle underlies the harmonies of music and the motion of heavenly
bodies. One of these pupils holds in his hand a tablet, shaped like a
zither, on which are inscribed the Greek words, Diapason, Diapente,
Diatessaron. Of the diapason, or concord of all, Spenser writes,
in The Faerie Queen:--


        Nine was the circle set in heaven's place,
        All which compacted made a goodly diapase.


Here we have a clue to the Thirds, Sixths and Ninths of Keely's
theories, in the operation of his polar negative attractor. The
conception of the Pythagoreans of music, as the principle of the
creation's order, and the mainstay and supporter of the material world,
is strictly in accordance with the marvellous truths which are now
being unfolded to science. Rightly divined Browning when he wrote of


            ... music's mystery, which mind fails
        To fathom; its solution no mere clue;


and Cardinal Newman also, when he discoursed of musical sounds,
"under which great wonders unknown to us seem to have been typified,"
as "the living law of divine government." Since the days of Leucippus,
poets and philosophers have often touched upon the mysteries hidden in
sound, which are now being revealed in the experimental researches of
Keely. These truths make no impression on those who are not gifted
with any comprehension of nature's harmonious workings, and are
regarded as flights of fancy and of rhetoric. Among the utterances of
inspiration--and all truth is inspired--one of the most remarkable,
when taken in connection with these discoveries, is found in these
eloquent words of the Dean of Boston University in his "Review of
Herbert Spencer," printed in 1876:--

"Think of the universal warring of tremendous forces which is for
ever going on, and remember that out of this strife is born, not
chaos void and formless, but a creation of law and harmony. Bear
in mind, too, that this creation is filled with the most marvellous
mechanisms, with the most exquisite contrivances, and with forms of
the rarest beauty. Remember, also, that the existence of these forms
for even a minute depends upon the nicest balance of destructive
forces. Abysses of chaos yawn on every side, and yet creation holds
on its way. Nature's keys need but to be jarred to turn the tune into
unutterable discord, and yet the harmony is preserved. Bring hither
your glasses--and see that, from atomic recess to the farthest depth,
there is naught but 'toil co-operant to an end.' All these atoms move
to music; all march in tune. Listen until you catch the strain, and
then say whether it is credible that a blind force should originate
and maintain all this."

Sir John Herschel said:--There is some principle in the science of
music that has yet to be discovered.

It is this principle which has been discovered by Keely. Let his
theories be disputed as they have been, and as they still may be,
the time has come in which his supporters claim that he is able to
demonstrate what he teaches; is able to show how superficial are
the foundations of the strongholds to which physicists are clinging;
and able to prove purity of conditions in physical science which not
even the philosophers and poets of the past have so much as dreamed
of in their hours of inspiration.


                  ... ways are made,
        Burdens are lifted, or are laid,
        By some great law unseen and still,
        Unfathomed purpose to fulfil.


Our materialistic physicists, our Comtist and agnostic philosophers,
have done their best to destroy our faith.

Of him who will not believe in Soul because his scalpel cannot detect
it, Browning wrote:


                    To know of, think about--
        Is all man's sum of faculty effects,
        When exercised on earth's least atom.
        What was, what is, what may such atoms be?--
        Unthinkable, unknowable to man.
        Yet, since to think and know fire through and through
        Exceeds man, is the warmth of fire unknown?
        Its uses--are they so unthinkable?
        Pass from such obvious power to powers unseen,
        Undreamed of save in their sure consequence:
        Take that we spoke of late, which draws to ground
        The staff my hand lets fall; it draws at least--
        Thus much man thinks and knows, if nothing more.


These lines were written in reference to Keely's discovery of the
infinite subdivision of the atom; for not until a much later period was
Browning influenced by a New York journalist to look upon Keely as "a
modern Cagliostro." Keely's discovery was the key-note of "Ferishtah's
Fancies," written by Browning before he met this journalist.

Professor Koenig writes:--I have long given up the idea of
understanding the Universe; with a little insight into its microcosm,
I would feel quite satisfied; as every day it becomes more puzzling.

But there are no boundaries set to knowledge in the life of the Soul,
and these discoveries reach out so far towards the Infinite, that
we are led by them to realize how much there is left for science to
explore in the supposed unfathomable depths of the etheric domain,
whence proceeds the influence that connects us with that infinite
and eternal energy from which all things proceed.

The attitude of willingness to receive truths, of whatever
nature, now manifested by men of science in regard to Keely's
experimental research, is shared by all who are not "wise in their
own conceit." They stand ready to welcome, while waiting for proof,
the discovery of Darwin's grand-niece, Mrs. F. J. Hughes, as now
demonstrated by Keely, viz., that the laws which develop and control
harmonies, develop and control the universe; and they will rejoice
to be convinced (as Keely teaches) that all corpuscular aggregation
absorbs energy, holding it latent in its embrace until liberated by a
certain order of vibration; that nature does not aggregate one form
of matter under one law, and another form of matter under another
law. When this has been demonstrated, to their entire satisfaction,
they will acknowledge that Faraday's speculations on the nature
of force and matter pointed the way to Keely's discoveries. Some
broad-minded men have been pursuing lines of research which give
evidence of their desire to solve the problem for themselves as
to the mode of rupturing the atom, which science declares to be
indivisible. Before any great scientific principle receives distinct
enunciation, says Tyndall, it has dwelt more or less clearly in many
minds. The intellectual plateau is already high, and our discoverers
are those who, like peaks above the plateau, rise over the general
level of thought at the time. If, as Browning has said,


    'Tis not what man does which exalts him, but what man would do,


surely this discoverer merits the sympathy and the admiration of
all men, whether he succeeds commercially or not, for his persistent
efforts to make his discoveries of use to the world. Keely has always
said that scientists would never be able to understand his discoveries
until he had reached some practical or commercial result. Only now he
sees an interest awakened among men of science, which is as gratifying
to him as it is unexpected. For the first time in his life, he is
working with the appreciation of men competent to comprehend what
he has done in the past, and what remains to be done in the future,
without one aspiration on their part for monetary results.

Foremost among these men was the late Joseph Leidy, Professor of
Biology in the University of Pennsylvania; but physicists were not
satisfied to take the opinion of this great man, because he was a
biologist. What better preparation than the study of the science of
life could a man have to qualify him for discriminating between laws
of nature as conjectured by physicists, and Nature's operations as
demonstrated by Keely?

To such men, possessing entire scientific and intellectual liberty of
thought, with that love of justice and truth which keeps its possessor
from self-conceit, arrogance and intolerance, the world owes all
that we now possess of scientific advance, since the days when men
believed the thunder and lightning to be the artillery of the gods.


Lucifer, September, 1892.









