The Project Gutenberg eBook of Keely and His Discoveries: Aerial Navigation
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Keely and His Discoveries: Aerial Navigation

Author: Mrs. Bloomfield H. Moore


        
Release date: January 7, 2018 [eBook #56332]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/56332

Credits: Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
        Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
        made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)










                       KEELY AND HIS DISCOVERIES

                           AERIAL NAVIGATION


                                   BY
                         Mrs. BLOOMFIELD MOORE


  The universe is ONE. There is no supernatural: all is related, cause
  and sequence. Nothing exists but substance and its modes of motion.

                                Spinoza.

                                 LONDON
                KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Ltd.
                 PATERNOSTER HOUSE, CHARING CROSS ROAD
                                  1893









        John Stuart Mill, in order to protect science, carried
        empiricism to its extreme sceptical consequences, and thereby
        cut the ground from under the feet of all science.--Professor
        Otto Pfleiderer, D.D.

        The word of our God shall stand for ever.--Isa. xl. 8.

        Imagination is wholly taken captive by the stupendous
        revelation of the God-force which modern conceptions of
        the Cosmos furnish. Through the whole universe beats the
        one life-force, that is God, controlling every molecule
        in the petal of a daisy, in the meteoric ring of Saturn,
        in the remotest nebula that outskirts space, as though
        that molecule were the universe. In each molecule and atom
        God lives and moves and has His being, thereby sustaining
        theirs.... Prophet after prophet cries, and psalmist after
        psalmist sings, that so indeed he has found it; that therein
        is the divine sonship of man, therein the assurance of eternal
        life.--Rev. R. A. Armstrong.

        The living man with his interior consciousness of self and
        individuality is on two planes of nature at once, as a ship
        is in two media at once, half in the water and half in the
        air. To manage your ship successfully you must take cognizance
        of the laws governing each of those media. To deal successfully
        with your human being you must understand his physiology
        no doubt, but you must equally understand his psychology,
        and something of the collateral phenomena of nature in those
        regions or planes to which the phenomena of the psychic man
        belong.--A. P. Sinnett.

        The splendid generalizations of our physicists and our
        naturalists, have had for me an enthralling and entrancing
        interest. I find as I look out on the world, in the light of
        all this new knowledge, a pressure of God upon consciousness
        everywhere; and if this physical force which is God, moves
        through, sustains, communes, with each smallest physical
        atom of the whole, much more must that conscious energy
        which is God, move through, sustain, commune with, these
        conscious atoms, these several monads, which are you and I,
        and our friend, and our brother far away. The even flow of
        the divine force through every material atom, which is the
        supreme revelation of physical science in our time, itself
        leads irresistibly on to the suggestion of the constant flow
        of spiritual energy in actual communion with every spiritual
        monad that there is. It becomes but a question of opening the
        eyes of the soul, unstopping the ears of the inward spirit,
        to see and hear the God who in us also surely lives and moves
        and has His being, thereby sustaining ours. As the physical
        atom is physically touched and held and thrilled by God,
        it is what we should expect that the conscious monad, no
        less should be consciously touched and held and thrilled by
        Him.--Rev. R. A. Armstrong.


            "Euroclydon driveth us--where?
              On quicksands and shoals of the sea,
            On rocks that wait hungry to tear
              And devour with tigerish glee.

            "But lo! where we land tempest-tost
              Is the work that has waited our hand;--
            Not one step of that life shall be lost
              Whose way an All-seeing hath planned."


        We never know through what divine mysteries of compensation
        the Great Father of the Universe may be carrying out His
        sublime plans.--Miss Murdoch.

        Enthusiasm is the genius of sincerity, and Truth accomplishes
        no victory without it.--Bulwer Lytton.

        Science is bound by the everlasting law of honour to face
        every problem fearlessly.--Lord Kelvin.

        For my part, I too much value the pursuit of truth and the
        discovery of any new fact in nature, to avoid inquiry because
        it appears to clash with prevailing opinions.--Wm. Crookes,
        F.R.S.

        The secret of success is constancy to purpose.--Lord
        Beaconsfield.


            The simple peasant who observes a fact
            And from a fact deduces principles,
            Adds social treasure to the public wealth.

            Facts are the basis of Philosophy.
            Philosophy is the harmony of facts
            Seen in their right relations.--Lyrics of a Golden Age.









                               DEDICATED

                                   TO

                JAMES DEWAR, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S., M.R.I.

  FULLERIAN PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY, R.I. JACKSON PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY
                             OF CAMBRIDGE,

              IN ADMIRATION OF HIS DISTINGUISHED SERVICES

                              FOR SCIENCE,

                 AND IN GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF HIS

                    PROLONGED AND STEADFAST INTEREST

                     IN KEELY'S WORK OF EVOLUTION.

          12, Great Stanhope Street, Mayfair, 16th May, 1893.









CONTENTS.


                                                            PAGE

    Preface.--By the Rev. John Andrew                         xi

    Introduction                                              xv

    CHAPTER I. 1872-1882.

    Introductory                                               1

    CHAPTER II. 1882-1886.

    Ether the True Protoplasm, An Epitome of Macvicar's
    Sketch of a Philosophy                                    11

    CHAPTER III. 1885-1887.

    The Nature of Keely's Problems                            30

    CHAPTER IV. 1887.

    Sympathetic Vibratory Force                               41

    CHAPTER V.

    Etheric Vibration.--The Key Force                         54

    CHAPTER VI.

    The Fountain Head of Force                                65

    CHAPTER VII.

    The Key to the Problems.--Keely's Secrets                 72

    CHAPTER VIII. 1888.

    Helpers on the Road, and Hinderers                       101

    CHAPTER IX. 1889-1890.

    Keely supported by Eminent Men of Science.--Aerial
    Navigation                                               113

    CHAPTER X. 1881-1891.

    The Keely Motor Bubble.--Macvicar's Logical Analysis     129

    CHAPTER XI. 1890.

    Vibratory Sympathetic and Polar Flows.--Keely's
    Contributions to Science                                 145

    CHAPTER XII.

    Vibratory Physics.--True Science                         167

    CHAPTER XIII.

    "More Science"                                           186

    CHAPTER XIV.

    Vibratory Physics.--The Connecting Link between
    Mind and Matter                                          206

    CHAPTER XV.

    The Philosophy of History.--Keely the Founder of a
    System                                                   229

    CHAPTER XVI. 1891.

    An Appeal in Behalf of the Continuance of Keely's
    Researches                                               238

    CHAPTER XVII. 1891.

    More of Keely's Theories.--His Traducers exposed         265

    CHAPTER XVIII.

    A Pioneer in an Unknown Realm                            285

    CHAPTER XIX.

    Latent Force in Interstitial Spaces.--Electro-Magnetic
    Radiation.--Molecular Dissociation.
    By John Ernst Worrell Keely                              298

    CHAPTER XX. 1892.

    Progressive Science.--Keely's Present Position.--A
    Review of the Situation                                  319

    CHAPTER XXI.

    Faith by Science: The Dawn of a New Order of Things      332

    CONCLUSION.

    Keely's Physical Philosophy.--By Professor D. G.
    Brinton, M.D., of the University of Pennsylvania         358

    Appendix I.                                              365

    Appendix II.                                             368

    Appendix III.                                            370

    Verses                                                   373









PREFACE.

By the Rev. John Andrew, of Belfast.

"Wait on the Lord."


When the Almighty is taking men into His deeper confidence as to His
Creation ways, and how His ways may be taken advantage of for man's
service and benefit, the gifted one through whom such revealing is
being made should not be hurried by the common bustle of the world,
but should be protected in the privacy where the Creator and he
are closeted together in the giving and receiving which is thus
transpiring.

Scientific patience is, in all such cases, imperative. When the gifted
one is bustled by the world, as Mr. Keely has been, his inspiration
is disturbed and his advance hindered. If the first inkling of some
great revealing thus in progress should promise some mighty find for
the material advantage of mankind, there is naturally a quickened
desire to gain possession; but if in such an event impatience should
impel the seer, ere his far-visioned sight has reached the end,
deplorable delay may be the result.

This is the thing which has happened in the case which this little
volume comes forth to relate and explain. It is not intended to unfold
the systematic methods of the gifted genius concerning whom it speaks;
that will come, in his own words, in due time. The aim of this volume
is to show the course of events in relation to his researches; and to
open the mystery of how it came about that he should have been so much
misunderstood and hindered. It tells how he, in the dim dawn of initial
inspiration, first glimpsed and touched The Power which is about to
be given to the possession of mankind for the supply of wants, and
the relief of toil. How he struggled and wrestled like the patriarch
of old who said, "I will not let Thee go, except Thou bless me." How
men of the world, seeing the struggle and estimating the power, said,
"Make haste and harness this power to our machinery, and we shall
pay you." How, in his need of means, he was tempted and fell; making
an attempt to harness to machinery a power whose very form and kind
he had not yet been given to discern. And then, when this too hasty
attempt had failed, how the disappointed world laughed and mocked,
and fumed, and called him an impostor.

This volume seeks to explain this Keely Mystery; and to show that
although a mistake was made, it was only a passing mistake. The
mistake has been rectified; and the seer, now in possession of peace
and privacy, has fully sighted the power, and is making progress in
bringing it into subjugation.

He has been interviewed by competent men, men of enlarged scientific
vision; and in the protection of their esteem, and by the liberal
pecuniary aid of one who has made scientific interests an object
of sacred solicitude, Mr. Keely is likely to succeed in opening
to the world another of the stores which the Almighty Creator and
Preserver, ever provident of His children's needs, has prepared in
reserve against the time of their necessity. We may theorize, but God
alone knows the means by which the regeneration of mankind, and the
establishment of the kingdom of righteousness and peace shall come
about. The All-merciful has a purpose and plan of His own. The power
which Mr. Keely is dealing with belongs to the ways and means of the
evolution of civilization and material providence; and it will depend
on how men make use of it how far it may clear or block the way of this
planet's highest weal. The power, however, which Mr. Keely is dealing
with lies so close to the spiritual realm of things, and brings us
so near to the point at which the Almighty is in immediate touch of
His Creation in His unceasing upholding of it, that all Christian men
might be expected to take a deep interest in researches which promise
so much. It may reasonably be hoped that this volume may promote this
interest, and turn the attention to coming events which are casting
more than shadows before. With this hope we commend it to the reading
of the wise. Those who delight in yellow-covered literature may pass
it by; it contains no plot for the excitement of such.









INTRODUCTION.

        Ex Vivo Omnia.

        We stand before the dawning of a new day in science and
        humanity,--a new discovery, surpassing any that has been
        hitherto made; which promises to afford us a key to some of
        the most recondite secrets of nature, and to open up to our
        view a new world.--Dr. Hufeland.


The error of our century in questions of research seems to have been in
the persistent investigation of the phenomena of matter (or material
organization) as the sole province of physics, regarding psychical
research as lying outside. The term physics is derived from a Greek
word signifying "nature." Nature does not limit herself to matter and
mechanism. The phenomena of spirit are as much a part of Nature as are
those of matter. The psychological theories of our physicists display
a decided leaning towards materialism, disregarding the manifestations
of the vital principle,--the vis motrix,--and refusing to investigate
beyond the limits which they have imposed upon themselves, and which,
if accepted by all, would take us back to the belief of the pagans,
as echoed by Voltaire:


        Est-ce-là ce rayon de l'Essence Suprême
        Que l'on nous peint si lumineux?
        Est-ce-là cet Esprit survivant à nous-même?
        Il nait avec nos sens, croît, s'affaiblit comme eux:
            Hélas! il périra de même.


Sympathetic philosophy teaches that the various phenomena of the human
constitution cannot be properly comprehended and explained without
observing the distinction between the physical and material, and the
moral and spiritual nature of man. It demonstrates incontrovertibly
the separate existence and independent activity of the soul of man,
and that the spirit governs the body instead of being governed by
the body. As Spenser has said,--


        For of the soul the body form doth take;
        For soul is form, and doth the body make.


Huxley tells us that science prospers exactly in proportion as
it is religious, and that religion flourishes in exact proportion
to the scientific depth and firmness of its basis. "Civilization,
society, and morals," says Figuier, "are like a string of beads,
whose fastening is the belief in the immortality of the soul. Break
the fastening and the beads are scattered."

Now, as Nature nowhere exhibits to our visual perceptions a soul
acting without a body, and as we do not know in what manner the
spiritual faculties are united to the organization, psychology is
compelled to investigate the operations of the intellect as if they
were performed altogether independently of the body; whereas they
are only manifested, in the ordinary state of existence, through the
intermediate agency of the corporeal organs.

The accumulation of psychological facts and speculations
which characterize this age appears to have made little or no
permanent impression upon the minds of our scientists and our
philosophers. Bishop Berkeley asks, "Have not Fatalism and Sadducism
gained ground during the general passion for the corpuscularian and
mechanical philosophy which hath prevailed?" Buffon, in writing
of the sympathy, or relation, which exists throughout the whole
animal economy, said, "Let us, with the ancients, call this singular
correspondence of the different parts of the body a sympathy, or,
with the moderns consider it as an unknown relation in the action
of the nervous system, we cannot too carefully observe its effects,
if we wish to perfect the theory of medicine." Colquhoun, commenting
upon Buffon's statement, says that far too little attention has
been paid to the spiritual nature of man,--to the effects of those
immaterial and invisible influences which, analogous to the chemical
and electrical agents, are the true springs of our organization,
continually producing changes internally which are externally perceived
as the marked effects of unseen causes, and which cannot be explained
upon the principles of any law of mechanism.

These unseen causes are now made clear to us by the truths which
Vibratory Physics and Sympathetic Philosophy demonstrate and
sustain. The prophecy of Dr. Hufeland (made in connection with an
account of certain phenomena arising from the unchangeable laws of
sympathetic association) is soon to be fulfilled, and the door thrown
open to "a new world" of research. Professor Rücker in his papers on
"Molecular Forces," William Crookes in his lecture on "The Genesis
of Elements," Norman Lockyer in his book on "The Chemistry of the
Sun,"--all these scientists have approached so near to this hitherto
bolted, double-barred and locked portal that the wonder is not so
much that they have approached as that, drawing so near, they have
not passed within.

Professor Rücker, in his papers (read before the Royal Institution
of Great Britain) explaining the attractive and repulsive action
of molecules, found himself obliged to apologize to scientists
for suggesting the possibility of an intelligence by which alone
he could explain certain phenomena unaccounted for by science; but
do we not find proof in ourselves that the action of molecules is
an intelligent action? For we must admit the individuality of the
molecules in our organisms, in order to understand how it is that
nourishment maintains life. Try as we may to account for the action
of aliment upon the system, all is resolved into the fact that there
must be some intelligent force at work. Do we ourselves disunite
and intermingle, by myriad channels, in order to rejoin and replace
a molecule which awaits this aid? We must either affirm that it is
so, that we place them where we think they are needed, or that it
is the molecules that find a place of themselves. We know that we
are occupied in other ways which demand all our thoughts. It must,
therefore, be that these molecules find their own place. Admit this,
and we accord life and intelligence to them. If we reason that it
is our nerves which appropriate substances that they need for the
maintenance of their energy and their harmonious action, we then
concede to the nerves what we deny to the molecules. Or, if we think
it more natural to attribute this power to the viscera,--the stomach,
for example,--we only change the thesis.

It will be said that it is pantheism to assert that matter, under
all the forms which it presents, is only groups of aggregates
of sympathetic molecules, of a substance unalterable in its
individualities; a thinking, acting substance. Let us not deny what
we are unable to explain. God is all that is, without everything that
is being individually God. Etheric force has been compared to the
trunk of a tree, the roots of which rest in Infinity. The branches
of the tree correspond to the various modifications of this one
force,--heat, light, electricity, and its close companion force,
magnetism. It is held in suspension in our atmosphere. It exists
throughout the universe. Actual science not admitting a void, then all
things must touch one another. To touch is to be but one by contiguity,
or there would be between one thing and another something which might
be termed space, or nothing. Now, as nothing cannot exist, there must
be something between "the atomic triplets" which are, according to the
Keely theory, found in each molecule. This something in the molecule
he affirms to be "the universal fluid," or molecular ether. One thing
touching another, all must therefore be all in all, and through all,
by the sensitive combination of all the molecules in the universe,
as is demonstrated by electricity, galvanism, the loadstone, etc. If
we account for the intelligent action of molecules by attributing
it to what has been variously called "the universal fluid," "the
electric fluid," "the galvanic fluid," "the nervous fluid," "the
magnetic fluid," it will only be substituting one name for another;
it is still some part or other of the organization which discerns and
joins to itself a portion of one of the fluids referred to, or one of
these fluids which discerns and mingles with the material molecules;
it is still the life of the part, the life of the molecule, life
individualized in all and through all.

Admitting, then, that there is a universal fluid, it must exist in
and through all things. If void does not exist, everything is full;
if all is full, everything is in contact; if everything is in contact,
the whole influences and is influenced because all is life; and life is
movement, because movement is a continual disunion and union of all the
molecules which compose the whole. The ancient philosophers admitted
all this. Under the different names of "macrocosm," "microcosm,"
"corpuscles," "emanations," "attraction," "repulsion," "sympathy," and
"antipathy,"--all names which are only one,--their various propositions
were merely the product of inductions influenced by their modes of
observing, as the deductions of scientists are influenced in our day.

Balzac tells us that everything here below is the product of an
ethereal substance, the common basis of various phenomena, known under
the inappropriate names of electricity, heat, light, galvanic and
magnetic fluid, etc., and that the universality of its transmutations
constitutes what is vulgarly called matter. We cannot take up a book
on physics (written with true scientific knowledge) in which we do not
find evidence that its author acknowledges that there is, correctly
speaking, but one force in nature. Radcliffe tells us that what is
called electricity is only a one-sided aspect of a law which, when
fully revealed, will be found to rule over organic as well as inorganic
nature--a law to which the discoveries of science and the teachings of
philosophy alike bear testimony,--a law which does not entomb life in
matter, but which transfigures matter with a life which, when traced
to its source, will prove only to be the effluence of the Divine life.

Macvicar teaches that the nearer we ascend to the fountain-head of
being and of action, the more magical must everything inevitably
become; for that fountain-head is pure volition. And pure volition,
as a cause is precisely what is meant by magic; for by magic is meant a
mode of producing a phenomenon without mechanical appliances,--that is,
without that seeming continuity of resisting parts and that leverage
which satisfy our muscular sense and our imagination and bring the
phenomenon into the category of what we call "the natural;" that is,
the sphere of the elastic, the gravitating,--the sphere into which
the vis inertiæ is alone admitted.

There is in Professor Crookes's "Genesis of the Elements" an hypothesis
of great interest,--a projectment of philosophical truth which brings
him nearer than any known living scientist to the ground held by
Keely. Davy defines hypothesis as the scaffolding of science, useful
to build up true knowledge, but capable of being put up or taken
down at pleasure, without injuring the edifice of philosophy. When
we find men in different parts of the world constructing the same
kind of scaffolding, we may feel fairly sure that they have an
edifice to build. The scaffolding may prove to be insecure, but it
can be flung away and another constructed. It is the edifice that
is all-important,--the philosophy not the hypotheses. The science
of learning, says Professor Lesley, and the science of knowledge
are not quite identical; and learning has too often, in the case
of individuals, overwhelmed and smothered to death knowledge. It
is a familiar fact that great discoveries come at long intervals,
brought by specially-commissioned and highly-endowed messengers;
while a perpetual procession of humble servants of nature arrive with
gifts of lesser moment, but equally genuine, curious, and interesting
novelties. From what unknown land does all this wealth of information
come? Who are these bearers of it? And who intrusted each with his
particular burden, which he carries aloft as if it deserved exclusive
admiration? Why do those who bring the best things walk so seriously
and modestly along as if they were in the performance of a sacred duty,
for which they scarcely esteem themselves worthy?

The Bishop of Carlisle, in his paper on "The Uniformity of Nature,"
suggests the answer to all who are prepared to approach the abyss
which has hitherto divided physical science from spiritual science,--an
abyss which is soon to be illumined by the sunlight of demonstration
and spanned by the bridge of knowledge. To quote from the paper of
the Bishop of Carlisle, "There are matters of the highest moment
which manifestly do lie outside the domain of physical science. The
possibility of the continuance of human existence in a spiritual form
after the termination of physical life is, beyond contradiction,
one of the grandest and most momentous of possibilities, but in
the nature of things it lies outside physics. Yet there is nothing
absolutely absurd, nothing which contradicts any human instinct,
in the supposition of such possibility; consequently, the student
of physical science, even if he cannot find time or inclination to
look into such matters himself, may well have patience with those who
can. And he may easily afford to be generous: the field of physical
science is grand enough for any ambition, and there is room enough
in the wide world both for physical and for psychical research."

But does psychical research lie outside the domain of physical
science? What is the supernatural but the higher workings of laws
which we call natural, as far as we have been able to investigate
them? Is not the supernatural, then, just as legitimate a subject of
consideration, for the truly scientific mind, as is the natural? If
it explains, satisfactorily, phenomena which cannot be otherwise
explained, there is no good reason why its aid should not be invoked
by men of science. The truth is, that the ordinary course of nature
is one continued miracle, one continued manifestation of the Divine
mind. "Everything which is, is thought," says Amiel, "but not conscious
and individual thought. Everything is a symbol of a symbol; and a
symbol of what?--of mind. We are hemmed round with mystery, and the
greatest mysteries are contained in what we see, and do, every day."

Keely affirms, with other philosophers, that there is only one unique
substance, and that this substance is the Divine spirit, the spirit
of life, and that this spirit of life is God, who fills everything
with His thoughts; disjoining and grouping together these multitudes
of thoughts in different bodies called atmospheres, fluids, matters,
animal, vegetable, and mineral forms.

Herbert Spencer says that amid the mysteries that become the more
mysterious the more they are thought about, there will remain the one
absolute certainty, that we are ever in the presence of an infinite
and an eternal energy, from which all things proceed. Macvicar
foreshadowed the teachings of this new philosophy when he wrote, "All
motion in the universe is rhythmical. This is seen in the forward and
backward movement of the pendulum, the ebb and the flow of the tides,
the succession of day and night, the systolic and diastolic action of
the heart, and in the inspiration and expiration of the lungs. Our
breathing is a double motion of universal æther, an active and a
reactive movement. This androgyne principle, with its dual motion,
is the breath of God in man." The writings of the ancients teem with
these ideas, which have been handed down to us from generation to
generation, and are now flashing their light, like torches in the
darkness, upon mysteries too long regarded as "lying outside the
domains of physical science."

Twenty years ago Macvicar wrote his "Sketch of a Philosophy," in
which he advanced the above views, with other views now maintained and
demonstrated by Keely, who during these twenty years, without knowing
Macvicar's views, or of his existence even, has been engaged in that
"dead-work which cannot be delegated," the result of which is not
learning, but knowledge; for learning, says Lessing, is only our
knowledge of the experience of others; knowledge is our own. This
burden of dead-work, writes Lesley, every great discoverer has had
to carry for years and years, unknown to the world at large, before
the world was electrified by his appearance as its genius. Without
it, there can be no discovery of what is rightly called a scientific
truth. Every advancement in science comes from this "dead-work," and
creates, of its own nature, an improvement in the condition of the
race; putting, as it does, the multitudes of human society on a fairer
and friendlier footing with one another. And during these twenty years
of "dead-work" the discoverer of etheric force has pursued the even
tenor of his way, under circumstances which show him to be a giant
in intellectual greatness, insensible to paltry, hostile criticism,
patient under opposition, dead to all temptations of self-interest,
calmly superior to the misjudgments of the short-sighted and ignoble;
noble means as indispensable to him as noble ends; fame and riches less
important than his honour; his joys arising from the accomplishment of
his work and the love and the sympathy of the few who have comprehended
him! "Only the noble-hearted can understand the noble-hearted." Keely's
chief ambition has been to utilize the force he discovered; not for
his own aggrandizement, but to bless the lives of his fellow-men. He
has scaled the rocks which barricade earth from heaven, and he knows
that the fire which he has brought down with him is divine.

This so-called secret is an open secret, which, after it is known,
may be read everywhere,--in the revolution of the planets as well as
in the crystallization of minerals and in the growth of a flower.

"But why does not Keely share his knowledge with others?" "Why does
he not proclaim his secret to the world?" are questions that are
often asked. Keely has no secret to proclaim to the world. Not until
the aerial ship is in operation will the world be able to comprehend
the nature of Keely's discoveries. When the distinguished physicist,
Professor Dewar, of the Royal Institution of Great Britain, goes
to America this summer, he will be instructed by Mr. Keely in his
dissociation processes. Every man who has passed the mere threshold of
science ought to be aware that it is quite possible to be in possession
of a series of facts long before he is capable of giving a rational
and satisfactory explanation of them--in short, before he is enabled
to discover their causes even. This "dead-work" has occupied many
years of Keely's life; and only within the last five years has he
reached that degree of perfection which warranted the erection of a
scaffolding for the construction of the true edifice of philosophy.

We have only to recall the wonderful discoveries which have been made
in modern times, relative to the properties of heat, of electricity, of
galvanism, etc., in order to acknowledge that had any man ventured to
anticipate the powers and uses of the steam-engine, the voltaic pile,
the electrical battery, or of any other of those mighty instruments
by means of which the mind of man has acquired so vast a dominion
over the world of matter, he would probably have been considered a
visionary; and had he been able to exhibit the effects of any of these
instruments, before the principles which regulate their action had
become generally known to philosophers, they would in all likelihood
have been attributed to fraud or to juggling. Herein lies the secret
of Keely's delay. His work is not yet completed to that point where
he can cease experimenting and publish the results of his "dead-work"
to the world.

"When will he be ready?" is a question often asked; but it is one that
God only can answer, as to the year and day. It now seems as if the
time were near at hand,--within this very year; but not even Keely
himself can fix the date, until he has finished his present course of
experiments, his "graduation"  of his twenty-seventh and last group of
depolar disks, for effecting change and interchange with polar force.

"But what are his hypotheses? And what the tenets of his new
philosophy?" His hypotheses are as antithetic to existing hypotheses
in chemistry as the Newtonian system, at its first publication, was
antithetic to the vortices of Descartes. The philosophy is not of his
creation; nor is it a new philosophy. It is as old as the universe. Its
tenets are unpopular, heterodox tenets, but their grandeur, when
compared with prevailing theories, will cause the latter to appear
like the soap-bubbles that Sir William Drummond said the grown-up
children of science amuse themselves with; whilst the honest vulgar
stand gazing in stupid admiration, dignifying these learned vagaries
with the name of science. It is the sole edifice of true philosophy,
the corner-stone of which was laid at Creation, when God said,
"Let there be light; and there was light." The scaffolding which
our modern Prometheus has built is not the airy fabric of delusion,
nor the baser fabric of a fraud, as has been so often asserted. It
has been built plank by plank, upon firm ground, and every plank is
of pure gold, as will be seen in due time.

It has been justly said that we have no ground for assuming that we
have approached a limit in the field of discovery, or for claiming
finality in our interpretations of Nature. We have, as yet, only
lifted one corner of the curtain, enabling us to peep at some of
the machinery by which her operations are effected, while much more
remains concealed; and we know little of the marvels which in course
of time may be made clear to us.

Earnest minds in all ages and in all countries have arrived at the
same inferences which Keely has reached in his researches,--viz.,
that the one intelligent force in nature is not a mere mathematical
dynamism in space and time, but a true Power existing in its type
and fulness,--deity. You may say that such an inference belongs to
religion, not to science, but you cannot divorce the two. No systematic
distinction between philosophical, religious, and scientific ideas can
be maintained. All the three run into one another with the most perfect
legitimacy. Their dissociation can be effected only by art, their
divorce only by violence. Great as is the revolution in mechanics which
is to take place through this discovery, it has an equally important
bearing on all questions connected with psychical research. Once
demonstrated, we shall hear no more of the brain secreting thought,
as the liver secretes bile. The laws of "rhythmical harmony," of
"assimilation," of "sympathetic association," will be found governing
all things, in the glorious heavens above us, down to the least atom
upon our earth. Leibnitz's assertion, that "perceptivity and its
correlative perceptibility are coextensive with the whole sphere of
individualized being," will be accounted for without depriving us
of a Creator. "The music of the spheres" will be proved a reality,
instead of a figure of speech. St. Paul's words, "In Him we live,
and move, and have our being," will be better understood. The power
of mind over matter will be incontrovertibly demonstrated.

"The requirement of every demonstration is that it shall give
sufficient proof of the truth it asserts." This Keely is prepared to
give,--mechanical demonstration; and should he really have discovered
the fundamental creative law, which he long since divined must exist,
proving that the universal ether which permeates all molecules is
the tangible link between God and man, connecting the infinite with
the finite,--that it is the true protoplasm, or mother element of
everything,--we may look for a philosophy which will explain all
unexplained phenomena and reconcile the conflicting opinions of
scientists.

The great law of sympathetic association, once understood, will become
known as it is,--viz., as the governing medium of the universe. Herein
lies the secret, the revelation of which will usher in the spiritual
age foretold by the Prophets of the Old Testament and the Apostles
of the New Testament. Inspiration is not confined to prophets and
apostles and poets: the man of science, the writer, all who reach out
after the Infinite, receive their measure of inspiration according
to their capacity. We need a new revelation to turn back "the tidal
wave of materialism" which has rolled in upon the scientific world,
as much as Moses needed one when he sought to penetrate the mysteries
of the Creation; and our revelation is near at hand,--a revelation
which will change the statical "I am" into the dynamical "I will,"--a
revelation which, while teaching us to look from Nature up to Nature's
God, will reveal to us our own powers as "children of God," as "heirs
of immortality."

"Knowledge," said Lord Beaconsfield, "is like the mystic ladder in the
Patriarch's dream. Its base rests on the primeval earth--its crest
is lost in the shadowy splendour of the empyrean; while the great
authors who, for traditionary ages, have held the chain of science
and philosophy, of poesy and erudition, are the angels ascending and
descending the sacred scale, maintaining, as it were, the communication
between man and heaven."

This beautiful imagery holds within it that seed of truth, which
is said to exist in the wildest fable; for, although all great
discoveries, pertaining to the material world, have been made
gradually, with much starting on the wrong track, much false deduction
and much worthless result, spiritual truths can be revealed to man
in no other way than by that spiritual influence which maintains
communication between the terrestrial and the celestial, or the
material and the spiritual. "Truth is attained through immediate
intuition," say the Aryan teachers; but only by those who have educated
their sixth sense; as will be seen in Mr. Sinclair's new work,
"Vera Vita; or, the Philosophy of Sympathy." While the imaginative
scientist is puzzling himself about new natural forces and the
apparent suspension of old and hitherto invariable laws, Sinclair,
in his writings, shows us that it is because we do not recognize the
elements of nature that their influences remain mysterious to us.

Mr. Sinclair is as firm in his belief as is Mr. Keely that this element
is the great connecting link between the Creator and the created,
and that it is capable of rendering more marvellous services to man
than all the discovered uses of electricity.

The coincidences in the theories of these two philosophers are the
more remarkable, inasmuch as Mr. Sinclair's have their origin, as set
forth in his book "A New Creed," in metaphysics; while "Keely's wide
and far-reaching philosophy" (to quote the words of a distinguished
physicist) "has a physical genesis, and has been developed by long
years of patient and persistent research." But it is an undisputed fact
that, in countries far distant from each other, different men have
fallen into the same lines of research; and have made correspondent
discoveries, at the same time, without having had any communication
with each other; and never has there been a time when so many were
testing all things that appear to give proof of the super-sensual
element in man. There is a very general impression all over the world,
says Marie Correlli, that the time is ripe for a clearer revelation
of God and "the hidden things of God" than we have ever had before.

All persons who are interested in Keely's discoveries and the
nature of the unknown element discovered by Keely and Sinclair,
will find in the writings of the latter a more lucid explanation
of sympathetic association than Keely himself has ever been able to
give in writing. The title of this remarkable book would have been
more wisely chosen had its author called it "A New Element and a New
Order of Things." The Rev. Philip Schaff, D.D., says of creeds:--"The
Bible is the word of God to man: the Creed is the answer of man to
God. The Bible is the book to be explained and applied; the Creed is
the Church's understanding and summary of the Bible." It is in this
light that Mr. Sinclair's new creed, human and humane, should be read.

There is no conductivity in the ether lines, writes Sinclair, for
selfish desires and motives; for they are not of the soul, but are only
sounds of the lips (or wishes of the material part of us), so that the
established connecting-rod between the living soul and the source of
life is insulated from desires that are not begotten in sympathy, and
they at once run to earth. Where there is no connection there can be no
communion. Without the natural sympathetic etheric connection between
the source of life and the soul, there can be no communication. "A New
Creed," like the sympathetic etheric philosophy of Keely, reveals the
connecting link between the finite and the Infinite, and teaches us
that the primal law of evolution and of progress is slowly but surely
preparing our race for the time when Christianity will be something
more than a mere profession, and "the brotherhood of humanity" will
no longer be the meaningless phrase that it now is. We are led to see,
by this pure philosophy, that "our solar system is a type of a healthy
social system; that in it each one affects, binds, controls, sustains,
helps, makes free each other; that no star lives for itself alone;"
that man was not made to mourn, and that our sufferings arise from
our ignorance of the laws governing the innate motive power within us.


    The times are not degenerate! Men's faith
        Mounts higher than of old. No crumbling creed
        Can take from the immortal soul its need
    Of something greater than itself. The wraith
        Of dead belief we cherished in our youth,
        Fades but to let us welcome new born truth.
    Man may not worship at the ancient shrine,
        Prone on his face, in self-accusing scorn.
        That night is passed; he hails a fairer morn,
    And knows himself a something half divine!
        No humble worm whose heritage is sin,
    But part of God--he feels the Christ within!
    No fierce Jehovah with a frowning mien
        He worships. Nay, through love, and not through fear,
        He seeks the truth, and finds its source is near!
    He feels and owns the power of things unseen,
        Where once he scoffed. God's great primeval plan
        Is fast unfolding in the soul of man.--Ella W. Wilcox.









KEELY AND HIS DISCOVERIES.

CHAPTER I.

1872 TO 1882.

INTRODUCTORY.

        Within the half-century the hypothetical ether has amply
        vindicated its novel claim to take its place as a mysterious
        entity side by side with matter and energy among the ultimate
        components of the objective universe.... Modern science sets
        before our eyes the comprehensive and glorious idea of a
        cosmos which is one and the same throughout, in sun and star
        and world and atom, in light and heat and life and mechanism,
        in herb and tree and man and animal, in body, soul, and spirit,
        mind and matter.--Grant Allen on Evolution.

        The man who can demonstrate the existence of an unsuspected
        and unknown force has a right, in the absence of demonstrative
        proof to the contrary, to form his own theory of its origin,
        and to make it the basis of his own system. Keely is looking
        at physical phenomena and their explanations from a point of
        view so different from that of the inductive school, that we
        hardly know how to combine the two, or show their bearings
        upon each other. For myself, I think now, as I thought and
        said in my address, that the absolutely exclusive position,
        taken up by Huxley, Tyndall, and the so-called Material
        School, is ludicrously indefensible; and that we should be
        as perfectly open to evidence in any direction, as we were
        2000 years ago.--The Rev. H. W. Watson, D.Sc., F.R.S.


So many men of learning are now holding Dr. Watson's views that
the time seems to have arrived, in which the theories of Keely will
receive, from those who are competent to judge of their value, the
attention that they deserve. Before entering upon their merits,
or setting them down for others to judge of their worth, the way
must be prepared by showing the claims which they possess from their
correspondence with some of the most advanced ideas of the present day,
as well as with the teachings of the wisest men in past centuries.

The mode which is the least laborious to accomplish this end, is
by collecting what has been written and printed, which bears upon,
and elucidates this subject.

It is now very generally known that Mr. Keely, while pursuing a line
of experiment in vibrations, "accidentally" as Edison would say,
made his discovery of an energy, the origin of which was unknown
to himself; and six years passed, in experiment, before he was able
to repeat its production at will. In the meantime he had exhausted
his resources and willingly accepted the proposal of men, who, after
witnessing the operation of the energy that he was able to show with
this unknown force, offered to organize a company to furnish him with
the means to construct an engine to use this force as the motive power,
anticipating immediate success.

But discovery is one thing, invention quite another thing, and
the years rolled on without Mr. Keely's being able to fulfil his
promises. In 1882, which was about ten years after the company was
formed, an action at law was brought against him for non-fulfilment
of his contract. The Evening Bulletin of March 30th of that year thus
explains, truthfully, the position.



THE KEELY MOTOR.

A STATEMENT FROM ONE OF THE INVENTOR'S STOCKHOLDERS.

"To the Editor of the Evening Bulletin: In your issue of last Tuesday
appears an article which deserves attention, and also calls for some
explanation upon that very much misunderstood question of the Keely
motor. From some cause not easy to learn, there seems to be a tendency
to keep only one side of that subject before the public.

"Being one of the unfortunates of the Keely motor speculation, interest
has led me to investigate not only the invention and the man who has
everything to do with it, but also the management of the company,
which is equally important to those who put their money into the
enterprise as an investment. Permit me, therefore, to state a few of
the facts which, if known, would very much change some of the popular
views now held.

"There are perhaps a thousand stockholders in the Keely Motor
Company. The mass of these, like myself, are not the prosecutors in
this case against Mr. Keely. We do not believe that Mr. Keely can
be forced to divulge any valuable secrets if he possesses them. We
do not believe that a case in court is calculated to prolong the
inventor's life, or render it more safe from the accidents to which
he is exposed. We do not believe that these proceedings are likely
to increase his good will towards the company. Some of us know that
by purchasing Keely motor stock, we have not thereby put our money
into the invention, nor has Mr. Keely had the benefit of it. We also
know that some, if not all, of the parties to this prosecution,
especially those who are most vehement in its favour under the
pretence of protecting the common stockholders, are selfish to
the last degree, while for themselves they have the least cause
to complain. Their official records show an utter disregard of the
interests of stockholders or the rights of the inventor: while the
success of the invention is to them a secondary consideration. It
is they, and not the inventor, who have drummed up the customers,
and recommended and sold the stock. They, and not he, are answerable
to the purchasers. If Mr. Keely is guilty of deception, they are to
say the least equally so. Look at a few statements:

"When the Keely Motor Company was started, in 1874, its organizers
received their stock without paying for it. About three-fourths of
the whole amount were thus given away by Mr. Keely. He retained about
one-seventh, and was cheated out of a good portion of that before
he had gone far. Only 400 shares out of 20,000 were retained in the
treasury, and that but a short time; for these recipients of the
"dead-head stock" made hasty havoc of the market by a rapid unloading
of their shares and pocketing the proceeds. So the poor little 400
shares of treasury stock brought only the minimum price to afford
temporary relief to a distressed company.

"The bankrupt condition of this incipient corporation threatened it
with a cessation of existence, unless somebody came to the rescue,
for the 'originals,' who had received a harvest by the sale of their
'free stock,' would not now give a dollar to save the concern. They
were all fixed, but what of the innocent stockholders who had purchased
this stock? They should not be allowed to suffer, as they must if the
company went out. So Mr. Keely came to the rescue, and consented to
the following scheme, which was prepared by schemers, as the sequel
proved. He had two inventions besides the motor, and they could be
handled to advantage in this emergency. These Mr. Keely assigned
to the company, and the stock was increased from 20,000 to 100,000
shares. The 80,000 new shares were to be divided equally: 40,000 to
pay for the inventions, and 40,000 went to the company without one
dollar of pay. So, Mr. Keely received no money in this transaction;
and of the 40,000 shares which he should have received, not 5000
ever reached him; fraudulent claims having captured the rest while
in the hands of the 'trustee.' Of the 5000 shares also, much had
been obligated in advance by the inventor to carry forward the work
which otherwise must have been delayed, so that he had less than 1000
shares left when all claims were settled. This grand act is called the
'consolidation,' which took place in 1879, and since which all moneys
raised by the company have come from the sale of shares out of this
40,000, which Mr. Keely then gave to the company. By some mysterious
operations in the 'management' this 'Treasury Stock' has shrunk
away very rapidly, bringing at times only a fraction of the price
which other stocks of the same kind were selling for in the market,
while the little cash which it has brought has only in part been used
by Mr. Keely, and that has been served out to him in a sparing way,
which would be shameful even if he had not furnished it all to begin
with. The company now owe to Mr. Keely fifty thousand dollars loaned
outright in its early history. To this indebtedness considerable
has since been added. The public statements that Mr. Keely has been
supplied with large amounts of money from the company are untrue,
while it is true that of those who are regarded as his dupes a half
dozen or more have made on an average at least $50,000 each from the
'enterprise.' The money with which Mr. Keely capitalized the company,
in the first place, was obtained from the sale of territorial rights
to men who have formed other companies for the purpose.

"If Mr. Keely deserves prosecution by any parties, it is those who
bought these rights, and not the ring who now control the company
with stock which has cost them nothing.

"If anybody deserves to be sued by the stockholders it is these
very persons who recommended and sold them the stock, and have taken
the benefit of it, and who at the same time are responsible for the
miserable management which has caused detention of the work, distress
in the company, depreciation in the stock and dissatisfaction among
stockholders.

"One."



The further history of "The Keely Motor Bubble" will be given later on,
but it is the position in earlier years, that we must first deal with,
to get a clear comprehension of the causes of the delays which again
and again shattered the hopes of the sanguine investors just when
they were the most buoyant, from an apparent increased control of
the mysterious force Keely was handling. Further quotations from the
press will best show the light in which Keely's work was regarded by
those who considered themselves competent to pass judgment upon him
and his efforts. The Daily News in Philadelphia, on May 25th, 1886,
contained a most sensible editorial, with the heading



What has Keely Discovered?

"For a number of years Mr. John W. Keely, of this city, and various
associates have occupied the attention of the public to a greater
or less extent, from time to time. The claim on behalf of Mr. Keely
is that he has discovered a new motive power, so far transcending
all previous achievements in this direction, as to overturn most of
the universally recognized conclusions regarding dynamics. Of course
such a claim was sure to be met with derision, and the derision was
sure of continuance until silenced by the most thorough practical
demonstration.

"Discussion of the matter has not seemed profitable in the absence of
such a demonstration; but now it seems proper to note an apparently
new status of Mr. Keely's affairs, as shown by some experiments
conducted last Saturday in the presence of a number of visitors. Some,
at least, of these visitors were qualified for critical observation,
and the noteworthy fact is that Mr. Keely was able to produce, under
their close inspection, a dynamic result which none of them pretended
to account for by any known law of physics, outside of that which
Mr. Keely claims as the base of his operation. He evolved, almost
instantaneously, according to the united report of those who were
present, a substance having an elastic energy varying from 10,000 to
20,000 pounds per square inch, and instantly discharged or liberated it
into the atmosphere, without the evolution of heat in its production,
or of cold on its sudden liberation. These phenomena alone would
seem to establish that the substance he is dealing with is one not
hitherto known to science.

"It seems rather frivolous to dismiss this matter with the supposition
that trained specialists are to be hoodwinked by concealed springs,
buried pipes for the introduction of compressed air and the
like. Surely such gentlemen ought very easily to determine at once
whether the surroundings and conditions of the experiments were such
as to favour any kind of legerdemain; and if they found them so, it
is strange that they should spend some hours in investigating that
which has been asserted to be 'a transparent humbug.'

"The appearances are that Mr. Keely has at least removed his enterprise
from the domain of ridicule to that of respectful investigation,
and this, after all, is great progress."



On Wednesday, July 28th, 1886, the Public Ledger had a leader headed,



Let us have some actual useful Work.

"With regard to the occasional revivals of the Keely motor, whether
annual, semi-annual, or biennial, as they have come along in the
last ten or a dozen years, the Ledger has paid but little attention
to them for a long time; and possibly this last display last week
might have been allowed to take the same unnoticed course, but that
the "whizz" of the big sphere seems to have been so rapid, and the
racket so stunning, as to more greatly puzzle those present at the
exhibition than on any former occasion. The matter for a long time
has presented itself to us in but two aspects mainly. First, there
was large public interest in the asserted development of physical
force by new and very strange means--very interesting if there really
was a probability of a new device or new means of developing power
that could be harnessed and made to do useful work; and second, so
far as the matter took the form of exploiting a private enterprise
or stimulating a boom for a private speculation, there was but very
limited interest for the public. In this latter aspect it was almost
exclusively an affair between Mr. Keely and the stockholders of his
company, who felt willing to back their faith in the substantiality of
his invention or discovery, by investing their money in the company's
stock. This was no affair for a public journal to meddle in, unless
some imposture was designed that might affect the general public.

"That is the way the Ledger has regarded the matter for several
years; and, as during that period it seemed to be almost exclusively
a private matter of little public interest, we have had little or
no concern with it. Of course the Ledger stood ready all the time,
as it stands now ready, to welcome anything that promises to be
useful or of advantage in any way as an addition to the mechanical
or other working facilities of our day. That Mr. Keely might have a
clue to such an addition we did not dispute on the mere ground that
it was new or strange, or because experts pronounced it impossible;
for many stranger things have happened. Mankind, even those who
are illumined by the highest human knowledge and intelligence,
do not yet know all that is to be known, as we are reminded almost
every day by the strides of scientific and mechanical progress. We
would rather have found Mr. Keely less inclined to be mysterious;
we could have wished him to have been less disposed to talk in terms
that sound very like meaningless jargon to most well-informed persons;
but still we did not think it proper, or fair, or wise, to reject his
claims on these grounds, but have simply let them rest in abeyance,
so far as the Ledger is concerned, because behind all this, and behind
many more such essays, is the possibility that the success of some one
of them may solve the problem of what is to be done when the world's
supply of fuel, whether in form of wood, or coal, or peat, or gas,
is either practically exhausted or to be got at only at a cost that
would largely preclude its use. Mr. Keely, we say, may have a clue
to that, as also may some one of those who are experimenting with
the several manifestations of electric or magnetic force.

"What we would have had Mr. Keely do, and, until he does it, his
operations have but little practical value in the sight of the Ledger,
would have been to harness his motor to do some useful work, to gear
it by cogwheel or by belt and pulley, or by some other mechanical
device, to a main shaft that has driving lathes, or planers, or other
machines--something that was doing actual useful work, day in and
day out, as other machines do. Of machines that will manifest great
pressure on a gauge, of contrivances that have enormous lifting power,
of explosives that demonstrate stupendous force, the appliances of
science and the mechanic arts have large numbers, and they are handier
and more manageable than any Mr. Keely has shown. These are not to
the point--except, perhaps, to persons endowed with large faith. The
machine that will do actual, useful, large work, by a manipulation of
new energy, or by a display of energy by new and manageable means,
this or these are the things the public and the Ledger will be glad
to hail."



At this time Mr. Keely had not reached that stage in his researches
when he could carry out the suggestions made by the able writer of the
Ledger leader; and if our discoverer of an unknown force had not been
known to some persons "endowed with large faith" in his discovery,
it would have been lost to the world. An anonymous writer has said
the idea that living nature is not a collection of dead-heads, never
seems to have struck the non-progressivists. The thing that is has
been, and the thing that is will continue to be; this is the sum and
substance of the doctrine they profess. They commit the mistake of
supposing they live in a finished planet when in reality they exist
on an orb that has relatively just begun to live. The time allowed
us for observation and study of nature and of ourselves, is limited
in a marked degree. Just when we are beginning to know how to read
the book, we are forced to close its pages because the intellectual
eyesight finds itself within the trammels of age. All we can do is to
make a hit here, and a hit there, and to hand on our little bit of
intelligence to those who come after us, in the hope that they also
will keep their eyes and ears open, and, in like manner, hand on a
cumulative store of knowledge to their heirs and successors. During
the brief span of a man's existence, then, it is difficult for him
to prove much progress either in himself or in his surroundings. The
eternal hills seem the same to him when the light of life dies out,
as when first his eyes beheld their outlines. Stern, uncompromising,
apparently immutable, the hills remain to him the type of all that
is fixed, all that is unchangeable around. Yet this is not the story
of science. Tennyson, who is always true to nature, says:--


        "The hills are shadows, and they flow
        From form to form, and nothing stands;
        They melt like mists, the solid lands;
        Like clouds they shape themselves and go."

                        In Memoriam, cxxiii., 2nd Stanza.


This is good poetry; better still, it is good science.

The Himalayas, big and grand as they are, must represent mountains
whose rise was a thing of a very "recent" date, geologically
speaking. This is proved, because we see rocks belonging to a
relatively recent age, appearing as part and parcel of their lofty
peaks. Very different is the case with the hills and mountains of,
say, north-western Scotland. There you come upon peaks of an age
well-nigh coëval with the world's earliest settling down to a steady,
solid, and respectable existence. The Scottish hills are the old,
the very old, aristocrats of the cosmical circle; the Himalayas,
Alps, and the rest, are the new race whose origin goes not further
back than a generation, as it were.

Yet, about the oldest of the mountains there is nothing which is
absolutely enduring. Equally with the newer hills, geological progress
and action are written on the face of their history. The hills are
only phases of cosmical arrangement; they are here in the to-day
of the world; they may be gone in the world's to-morrow. Before
Science had learned to lisp this, the prophetic word of men moved
by the Holy Ghost had said: "Of old Thou hast laid the foundations
of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy hands. They shall
perish, but Thou remainest; yea, all of them shall wax old like a
garment, and as a vesture shalt Thou change them and they shall be
changed." The world is neither perfect nor finished in a geological
sense, any more than it is perfect in an ethical sense. It is full
of progressive action everywhere, and, to quote from another author,
"our planet and our solar system are but as the small dust of the
balance in the colossal scale of the worlds that are."

Had there been no one to read the future in the light of the past,
among those who witnessed the production of the force discovered
by Keely in 1872, he could not have continued his researches, as
he has done during these intervening years, from lack of the funds
necessary to carry them on. But there were men who knew the worth
of the discovery, and who, sanguine as to almost immediate results,
did something more than stand idly "ready to welcome" them when
produced. They furnished the money with which Keely laboured year after
year, and encouraged him to persevere, when without such aid he might
have been forced to abandon his researches for want of the necessaries
of life. During this period, Keely's discovery was only thought of
in reference to its commercial value, and for a decade he made no
progress: but, after his researches led up to the conviction that he
was on the road to another and infinitely more important discovery,
namely, the source of life and the connecting link between intelligent
will and matter, his progress has been almost uninterrupted. His
ambition is not only to give a costless motive power to the world,
but to make clear to men of science the path he is exploring.









