CHAPTER V.

ETHERIC VIBRATION. THE KEY FORCE.

                                Discovery is not invention.--Edison.


Science has been compared to a stately and wide-spreading tree,
stretching outward and upward its ever-growing boughs. As yet mankind
has reached only to its lowermost branches, too often satisfied with
the dead calyxes which have fallen from it to the ground, after serving
their uses for the protection of the vital germs of truth. The seed of
the next advance in science can only germinate as the dry husk decays,
within which its potentiality was secretly developed.

For upwards of ten centuries false portions of the philosophy of
Aristotle enslaved the minds of civilized Europe, only, at last,
to perish and pass away like withered leaves.

The most perfect system of philosophy must always be that which can
reconcile and bring together the greatest number of facts that can
come within the sphere of the subject. In this consists the sole glory
of Newton, whose discovery rests upon no higher order of proof. In
the words of Dr. Chalmers, "Authority scowled upon this discovery,
taste was disgusted by it, and fashion was ashamed of it. All the
beauteous speculation of former days was cruelly broken up by this
new announcement of the better philosophy, and scattered like the
fragments of an aerial vision, over which the past generations of
the world had been slumbering in profound and pleasing reverie."

Thus we see that time is no sure test of a doctrine, nor ages of
ignorance any standard by which to measure a system. Facts can have a
value only when properly represented and demonstrated by proof. Velpeau
said nothing can lie like a fact. Sir Humphry Davy asserted that
no one thing had so much checked the progress of philosophy as the
confidence of teachers in delivering dogmas as facts, which it would
be presumptuous to question. This reveals the spirit which made the
crude physics of Aristotle the natural philosophy of Europe.

The philosophy of vibratory rotation, which is yet to be propounded
to the world, reveals the identity of facts which seem dissimilar,
binding together into a system the most unconnected and unlike results
of experience, apparently. John Worrell Keely, the discoverer of an
unknown force and the propounder of a pure philosophy, learned at an
early stage of his researches not to accept dogmas as truths, finding
it safer to trust to that "inner light" which has guided him than
to wander after the ignis fatuus of a false system. He has been like
a traveller exploring an unknown zone in the shade of night, losing
his way at times, but ever keeping before him the gleam of breaking
day which dawned upon him at the start. Scientists have kept aloof
from him, or, after superficial examinations, have branded him as "a
modern Cagliostro," "a wizard," "a magician," and "a fraud." Calumnies
he never stoops to answer, for he knows that when his last problem
is solved to his own satisfaction his discovery and his inventions
will defend him in trumpet tones around our globe. Buchanan says,
"Who would expect a society of learned men, the special cultivators
and guardians of science, as they claim to be, to know as much of the
wonderful philosophy now developing as those who have no artificial
reputation to risk in expressing an opinion, no false and inflated
conceptions of dignity and stability to hold them back, and who stand
ready to march on from truth to truth as fast and far as experimental
demonstration can lead them?"

Johnson tells us that the first care of the builder of a new system
is to demolish the fabrics that are standing. But the cobwebs of
age cannot be disturbed without rousing the bats, to whom daylight
is death.

When has Nature ever whispered her secrets but for the advancement
of our race on that royal road which leads to the subjugation of the
power she reveals? But not until the inspiration of thought has done
its work in applying the power to mechanics, can the tyrant thus
encountered be transformed into the slave.

So was it with steam, so has it been with electricity, and so will it
be with vibratory force. All experience shows that the steady progress
of the patient study of what are termed Nature's laws does not attract
public attention until there are some practical results. Professor
Tyndall has said that the men who go close to the mouth of Nature and
listen to her communications leave the discoveries they make for the
benefit of posterity to be developed by practical men. The invention of
vibratory machinery for the liberation and the operation in mechanics
of sympathetic force is an instance where practical application of the
discovery may be made by the discoverer. After years of experiments
with this force, what does the public know of its nature? Nothing;
for as yet no practical results have been obtained. Here is a power
sustaining the same relations to electricity that the trunk of a
tree does to its branches,--the discovery of which heralds to the
scientific world possibilities affecting motive industries, such as
should command the attention of all men; and yet it is known only as
a theme for jest and ridicule and reproach! And why is this? Partly
from the mismanagement of a prematurely-organized Keely Motor Company,
and partly because men competent to judge for themselves have preferred
to take the opinion of others not competent, instead of investigating
each for himself.

Attempts to interest scientists in the marvellous mechanism by
which etheric force is evolved from the atmosphere have failed,
even as Galileo failed at Padua to persuade the principal professor
of philosophy there to look at the moon and planets through his
glasses. The professor pertinaciously refused, as wrote Galileo to
his friend Kepler. Mankind hate truth, said Lady Mary Montague: she
should have said, mankind hate new truths. The most simple and rational
advances in medical science have been received with scorn and derision,
or with stupid censure. Harvey was nicknamed "the circulator" [3]
after his discovery of the circulation of the blood,--which discovery
was ridiculed by his colleagues and compeers. The same reception
awaited Jenner's introduction of vaccination.

The revelation of new truths is compared to the upheaval of rocks
which reveal deeply-hidden strata. Stolid conservatism dislikes and
avoids such facts, because they involve new thinking and disturb old
theories. The leaden weight of scepticism drags down the minds of many,
paralyzing their power of reasoning upon facts which reveal truth, from
another standpoint than their own, with new simplicity and grandeur
in the divine laws of the universe. Others there are, embracing the
majority of mankind, according to Hazlitt, who stick to an opinion
that they have long supported, and that supports them. But whenever
a discovery or invention has made its way so well by itself as to
achieve reputation, most people assert that they always believed in
it from the first; and so will it be with Keely's inventions, in time.

In our day so rapidly are anticipations realized and sanguine hopes
converted into existing facts, one wonderful discovery followed
by another, that it is strange to find men possessing any breadth
of intellect rejecting truths from hearsay, instead of examining
all things and holding fast to the truth. The laws of sympathetic
association need only to be demonstrated and understood to carry
conviction of their truth with them. They control our world and
everything in it, from matter to spirit. They control all the systems
of worlds in the universe; for they are the laws which Kepler predicted
would in this century he revealed to man. The divine element is shown
by these laws to be like the sun behind the clouds,--the source of
all light, though itself unseen.

Already the existence of this unknown force is as well established as
was the expansive power of steam in the days when the world looked on
and laughed at Rumsey and Fitch and Fulton while they were constructing
their steamboats. Even when they were used for inland navigation,
men of science declared ocean navigation by steam impracticable, up
to the very hour of its consummation. In like manner with electricity,
scientists declared an ocean telegraph impossible, asserting that the
current strong enough to bear messages would melt the wires. Nothing
could be more unpopular than railways were at their start. In England,
Stephenson's were called "nuisances," and false prophets arose then
(as now with Keely's inventions) to foretell their failure. It was
predicted that they would soon be abandoned, and, if not given up,
that they would starve the poor, destroy canal interests, crush
thousands in fearful accidents, and cover the land with horror.

When I say that the existence of this force is established, I do
not mean that it is established by a favourable verdict from public
opinion,--which, as Douglas Jerrold said, is but the average stupidity
of mankind, and which is always steadily and persistently opposed
to great and revolutionary discoveries. Establishment consists
in convincing men competent to judge that the effects produced by
etheric force could not be caused by any known force. And it is now
years since such a verdict was first given, substantiated repeatedly
since, by the testimony of men as incapable of fraud or collusion as
is the discoverer himself.

Newton, in discovering the existence of a force which we call gravity,
did not pursue his investigations sufficiently far to proclaim a power
which neutralizes or overcomes gravity, the existence of which Keely
demonstrates in his vibratory-lift experiments.

But it is one thing to discover a force in nature, and quite another
thing to control it. It is one thing to lasso a wild horse, and
quite another thing to subdue the animal, harness it, bridle it,
and get the curb-bit in the mouth.

Keely has lassoed his wild horse; he has harnessed it and bridled it;
and when he has the bit in its place, this force will take its stand
with steam and electricity, asking nothing, and giving more than
science ever before conferred on the human race.

The Home Journal of October 20th, 1886, contained a paper which
possesses some interest as having been written at the time Mr. Keely
was using what he called a "Liberator," which enabled him to dispense
with the use of water; but he was obliged to return to his former
method soon after.



Etheric Vibration.

The late editor of the New York Home Journal, noticing the preceding
paper, which appeared in Lippincott's Magazine, asks:--"But is not
this new force too mighty to be managed by mere earthly instruments,
such as iron, copper, or lead? It is the key force, the one that
presided over the creation of these very metals, and can it reasonably
be expected to be caged and fettered by them? Can the bubble withstand
the onset of the wave, of which it is a mere drift?"

When lightning was first drawn from the clouds by Franklin, did it
occur to any man living to predict that electricity (which Keely
defines as a certain form of atomic vibration) could be stored, to
use at will as a motive power? If atomic vibration can be made to
serve the purposes of mechanics, why not etheric vibration?

But let Keely answer for himself. Some years since he wrote as
follows:--"In analyzing theoretically the mechanical standard necessary
for a solution of the philosophy of 'Etheric Vibration,' and the
systematic mechanism to produce a rotating circle of etheric force,
I must admit that the phenomenon, as presented to myself, by seeming
accident, after almost a lifetime of study, still partially holds
itself to my understanding as paradoxical. After constructing many
mechanical devices in my vain attempts to come more closely to what I
term a radiaphonic vibratory position, with microphonic adjustments,
I have only been able to reach a few true and standard positions,
which I can satisfactorily analyze. There is but one principle
underlying all, and this principle is the key to the problem."

Keely continues with an explanation of the mechanism of his generator,
which he invented and constructed for the multiplication of vibrations,
under the disturbance of equilibrium by mediums of different specific
gravities--air as one, water as the other. He has since abandoned
the generator for a vibratory machine which he calls a "liberator,"
in which no water is used to develop the force: the disturbance of
the equilibrium being effected by a medium thoroughly vibratory in
its character. The vapour which Keely produces from this liberator is
perfectly free from all humidity, thus giving it a tenuity which he
had never been able to reach before, and of a character most desirable
for the perfect and high lines of action. In the various improvements
which Keely has made in his mechanism, feeling his way in the dark as
it were, he sometimes speaks of having "stupidly stumbled over them,"
of "seeming accident," or "seeming chance," where another would call
it "inspiration." "Providence sends chance, and man moulds it to
his own design." The improvement upon the generator was conceived by
Keely during his desperate struggles to effect a simultaneous action
between the molecular and atomic leads--an action that was absolutely
essential for the full line of continuation. This shorter and simpler
way of reaching his desired end was suggested, in part, to him by a
quotation from some one of our scientific writings, made in a letter
that he received. I am not sure about this quotation, but I think it
was: "Nature works with dual force, but at rest she is a unit."

"In the image of God made He man," and in the image of man Keely
has constructed his liberator. Not literally, but, as his vibrophone
(for collecting the waves of sound and making each wave distinct from
the other in tone when the "wave-plate" is struck after the sound
has died away) is constructed after the human ear, so his liberator
corresponds in its parts to the human head.

But to return to the question asked in the Home Journal. "Can this
subtle force reasonably be expected to be caged and fettered by mere
earthly instruments? "This is the answer, as given by Keely himself:
"You ask my opinion regarding my ultimate success in the practical
use of etheric force. My faith is unbounded by doubts. The successful
result is as positive as the revolutions of our globe, and comes
under the great law which governs all nature's highest and grandest
and most sensitive operations."

Since Keely wrote the above lines he has had time to get discouraged,
if he could know discouragement; but he has conquered too many of
the stupendous problems, which barricaded his way in the past, not
to feel equally sanguine now of eventual success in his last problem,
viz. the attaining of continuity of action, which at the present time
seems all but within his grasp.

Some of his views may prove of interest at a time when his achievements
are beginning to be a little better understood. Gravity he defines as
transmittive inter-etheric force under immense etheric vibration. He
continues:--The action of the mind itself is a vibratory etheric
evolution, controlling the physical, its negative power being
depreciatory in its effects, and its positive influence elevating.

The idea of getting a power as tenuous as this under such control as to
make it useful in mechanics is scouted by all physicists. And no wonder
that it is so. But when the character of the velocity of etheric force,
even in a molecule, is understood, the mind that comprehends it must
succumb to its philosophy. To move suddenly a square inch of air, at
the velocity of this vibratory circuit, on full line of graduation,
and at a vibration only of 2,750,000 per second, would require a
force at least of twenty-five times that of gunpowder. Taking the
expansive force of gunpowder at 21,000 lbs. per square inch, it
would be 525,000 lbs. per square inch. This is incomprehensible. The
explosion of nitroglycerine, which has two and a half times less
vibrations per second, when placed on the surface of a solid rock,
will tear up the rock before disturbing the equilibrium of the air
above it. The disturbance takes place after the explosion. To induce
an action on a weight of only twenty grains, the weight of a small
bird-shot, with a range of motion of but one inch, giving it an
action of one million per second, would require the actual force of
two and a half tons per second; or, in other words, ten-horse power
per minute. Etheric vibration would move tons at the same velocity
when submitted to the vibratory circuit. Thus, the finer the substance
the greater the power and the velocity under such vibration.

The vapour from the liberator, registered at 20,000 pounds per square
inch, has a range of atomic motion of 1333 1/3 the diameter of the
atmospheric molecule, with constant rotary vibratory action. At
10,000 pounds, 666 2/3; at 5000, 333 1/3; at 2500, 166 2/3; at 1250,
83 1/3; at 625, 41 2/3. The higher the range of atomic motion the
greater is its tenuity, and the range is according to the registered
pressure. This rule cannot be applied to any other vapour or gas
at present known to scientists. The very evolution on the negative
shows a vacuum of a much higher order than was ever produced before,
thus confounding, to perfect blindness, all theories that have been
brought to bear upon the situation, in its analysis. The highest
vacuum known is 17 999999-1000000 pounds, or not quite 30 inches; but
by this process etheric vacuums have been repeatedly produced of 50
to 57 inches; ranging down to 30 inches, or 15 pounds. All operations
of nature have for their sensitizing centres of introductory action,
triple vacuum evolutions. These evolutions are centred in what I call
atomic triple revolutions, highly radiaphonic in their character,
and thoroughly independent of all outside forces in their spheres of
action. In fact, no conceivable power, however great, can break up
their independent centres. So infinitely minute are they in their
position that, within a circle that would enclose the smallest
grain of sand, hundreds of billions of them perform, with infinite
mathematical precision, their continuous vibratory revolution of
inconceivable velocity.

These triple centres are the very foundation of the universe, and the
great Creator has, in His majestic designs, fixed them indissolubly in
their position. Mathematically considered, the respective and relative
motion of these atomic triplets, gravitating to and revolving around
each other, is about one and one-third of their circumference. The
problem of this action, when reduced to a mathematical analysis
(presupposing taking it as the quadrature of the circle) would baffle
the highest order of mathematical science known to bring it to a
numerical equation.

The requirement of every demonstration is that it shall give sufficient
proof of the truth it asserts. Any demonstration which does less than
this cannot be relied upon, and no demonstration ever made has done
more than this. We ought to know that the possibilities of success are
in proportion as the means applied are adequate or inadequate for the
purpose; and, as different principles exist in various forms of matter,
it is quite impossible to demonstrate every truth by the same means
or the same principles. I look upon it as the prejudice of ignorance
which exacts that every demonstration shall be given by a prescribed
rule of science, as if the science of the present were thoroughly
conversant with every principle that exists in nature. The majority of
physicists exact this, though some of them know that these means are
entirely inadequate. Every revolving body is impressed by nature with
certain laws making it susceptible of the operation of force which,
being applied, impels motion. These laws may all be expressed under
the general term, "Forces," which, though various in their nature,
possess an equalizing power; controlling each other (as in the case
of the atomic triplets) in such a way that neither can predominate
beyond a certain limit. Consequently, these bodies can never approach
nearer each other than a fixed point: nor recede from each other beyond
another certain point. Hence, these forces are, at some mean point,
made perfectly equal, and therefore may be considered as but one force;
therefore as but one element. It matters not that other and disturbing
forces exist outside or inside the space these bodies revolve in,
because if this force must be considered as acting uniformly--applying
itself to each of these bodies in a way to produce a perfect equation
on all, it is as if this outside force were non-existing.

The true study of the Deity by man being in the observation of His
marvellous works, the discovery of a fundamental, creative law of
as wide and comprehensive grasp as would make this etheric vapour
a tangible link between God and man would enable us to realize,
in a measure, the actual existing working qualities of God Himself
(speaking most reverentially) as he would those of a fellow-man. Such
a link would constitute a base or superstructure of recognition,
praise, worship and imitation, such as seems to underlie the whole
Biblical structure as a foundation.--Keely.



Dr. Macvicar, in his theories of the bearing of the cosmical law
of assimilation on molecular action, says: "During this retreat of
matter into ether in single material elements or units of weight,
the molecules and masses from which such vaporization into the common
vapour of matter is going on, may be expected to be phosphorescent."

This surmise Keely has, over and over, demonstrated, as a fact; also
showing how gravitation operates as a lever: etheric wave motion:
concentration under vibratory concussion: and negative vacuous tenuity.

Mrs. F. J. Hughes, writing upon "Tones and Colours," advances theories
of her own, which correspond with those demonstrated by Keely. She
writes, in a private letter: "I firmly believe that exactly the same
laws as those which develop sound keep the heavenly bodies in their
order. You can even trace the poles in sound. My great desire is for
some philosophical mind to take up my views, as entirely gained from
the Scriptures; and I am certain that they will be found to be the
laws developing every natural science throughout the universe."

Thus men and women in various parts of the world who still hold to
their belief in and worship of God, are "standing on ground which is
truly scientific, having nothing to fear from the progress of thought,
in so far as it is entitled to the name of scientific--nay, are in
a position to lead the way in all that can be justly so called."









