Part I.

        Science is to know things.--Herodotus.

        Knowledge is developed by experience from innate ideas.--Plato.

        Truth is not attained through reflection, but through immediate
        intuition. "We neither originate thought nor its form.--Aryan
        Teachings.

        It may be said that if all things come from only one cause or
        internal source, acting within itself, then motion and matter
        must be fundamentally and essentially one and the same, and
        we may look upon matter as being latent force and upon force
        as being free matter.--Franz Hartmann, M.D.


John Worrell Keely--the discoverer of compound inter-etheric force,
as the result of more than twenty years of persistent effort to apply
this force to the operation of machinery has, at last, been enabled
to produce partial continuity of motion in his engine; but, up to
this time, he has not so mastered this subtle force as to control
reversions. The development of his various discoveries has been one
uninterrupted work of evolution, reaching, within the last year, he
thinks, the sphere of perfect vibratory sympathy, both theoretically
and practically. The proof of this is found in the fact that he now
transmits vibrations along a wire, connected at one end with the
vibratory machine which is the source of power, and at its other end
with the engine or cannon, as the case may be, which is operated by
such vibratory power. Until recently, comparatively speaking, Keely
stored force, as he generated it, in a receiver; and experiments were
made by him in the presence of thousands, at various times, for the
purpose of testing the operations of this force, liberated in the
presence of his audience and stored up in this small receiver. The
editor of the Scientific Arena thus describes what took place at one
of these exhibitions, when he was present:--"The confined vapour was
passed through one of the small flexible tubes to a steel cylinder
on another table, in which a vertical piston was fitted so that its
upper end bore against the underside of a powerful, weighted lever. The
superficial area of this piston was equal to one-half of a square inch,
and it acted as a movable fulcrum placed close to the hinged end of
the short arm of this lever, whose weight alone required a pressure
of 1500 pounds to the square inch against the piston to lift it.

"After testing the pressure by several small weights, added to that
of the lever itself, in order, to determine how much power had already
been accumulated in the receiver, the maximum test was made by placing
an iron weight of 580 pounds, by means of a differential pulley, on the
extreme end of the long arm of the lever. To lift this weight, without
that of the lever supporting it, would require a pressure against the
piston of 18,900 pounds to the square inch, counting the difference
in the length of the two arms and the area of the piston, which we,
as well as several others present, accurately calculated. When all was
ready, and the crowded gathering had formed as well as possible to see
the test, Keely turned the valve-wheel leading from the receiver to
the flexible tube, and through it into the steel cylinder beneath the
piston, and simultaneously with the motion of his hand the weighted
lever shot up against its stop, a distance of several inches, as if
the great mass of iron had been only cork. Then, in order to assure
ourselves of the full 25,000 pounds to the square inch claimed, we
added most of our weight to the arm of the lever without forcing the
piston back again.

"After repeating this experiment till all expressed themselves
satisfied, Keely diverted his etheric gas to the exciting work of
firing a cannon, into which he placed a leaden bullet about an inch
in diameter. He conveyed the force from the receiver by the same
kind of flexible copper tube, attaching one end of it to the breech
of the gun. When all was again in readiness he gave a quick turn to
the inlet valve, and a report like that of a small cannon followed,
the ball passing through an inch board and flattening itself out
to about three inches in diameter, showing the marvellous power and
instantaneous action of this strange vapour."

The difficulty encountered by Keely in his old generator of etheric
force grew out of the fact, in part, that the vaporic power produced
was so humid that he could not, when he attempted to utilize it, obtain
its theoretical value in work. This difficulty has been entirely
overcome by dispensing with the water which he used in liberating
etheric force, by his old generator; and, by this departure, he has
attained a success beyond that which was anticipated by himself,
when he abandoned his original line of experiment. [4]

Ignorant, indeed, of the nature of Keely's work must those men be
who accuse him of "abandoning his base" or "principle," each time
that he discovers his mistakes:--using them as stepping-stones to
approach nearer and still nearer to his goal. Reproaching him, even,
for keeping his own counsel, until certainty of success rendered
it prudent for him to make known that he had changed his field of
experiment from positive attraction to negative attraction.

Equally ignorant are those, who would wrench by force his secrets
from him before the time is ripe for their disclosure. Let us suppose
that Faraday, when he discovered radiant matter in 1816, had formed a
"Faraday Phospho-Genetic Radiant Company," to enable him to experiment:
fully cognizant of all that Crookes has since discovered, and had
taken for his base in experimenting the principle involved in Crookes's
discovery. Not succeeding at first, we will suppose that the Company
became clamorous for returns, and demanded that his secret principle
should be made public. Had he been driven into making it known, who
would have credited what Crookes is now able to prove? The effect
would have been upon the Faraday Company the same as if a balloon were
punctured just as it was soaring heavenward. The same with the Keely
Motor Company, had Keely obeyed the order of the Court in 1882, and
made his marvellous secret public. It would have collapsed. Therefore,
he has maintained his secret in the interests of the stockholders
of the Keely Motor Company with a firmness worthy of a Christian
martyr. The one person to whom alone Keely then disclosed it thought
him under a delusion, until he had demonstrated its soundness.

Charles B. Collier, Keely's patent lawyer, writes as follows,
concerning the difficulties attendant upon "the supposed duty" of
his client's imparting his "secrets," as ordered by the Court to do,
some time since:--

"If to-day, for the first time in your lives, you saw a harp, attuned
and being played upon, and the science of music was unknown to you,
you would hardly expect, without considerable time and study, to be
able to reproduce the harp, attune its strings in proper relation to
each other, and to play upon it so as to produce the harmonies which
you had listened to. Mr. Keely's work is analogous to the illustration
which I have presented, inasmuch as he is dealing with the subject
of sound, or acoustics, but in a much more involved form than as
applied simply for the production of harmonies for the delight of
the ear. Mr. Keely's engine is analogous to the mechanism of the
human ear, in the respect that it is a structure operated upon,
and its motion induced by vibration; and to the end of securing and
attaining, in and by it, uniformity or regularity of motion, there
must be perfect unison, or synchronism, as between it and his structure
which is the prime source of vibration. To attain this perfect unison
or synchronism, has involved unparalleled research and experiment
upon his part--experiments that have varied from day to day. No one,
in my opinion, who had not stood by his side, as his shadow, watching
every experiment, could have kept fully abreast of him. To pursue my
simile, I may say that his harp (engine) is not yet perfectly attuned
("graduated"); when it is so, it will produce nothing but harmony
(regularity of motion), and his work will be finished.

"At such time, I doubt not that he will be able to give to Mr. Boekel,
myself or another, the scale with which to reconstruct and attune
another apparatus so as to produce like results with it; but to go
over the ground that he has gone over, to explore the wilderness in
which he has been the pioneer, in other words, the study, to a full
understanding of them, of his experiments and researches, as recorded
in his writings and illustrated in the beautiful charts which he has
produced, will be a work rather for scientists than for mechanicians
or engineers."

Keely's "Theoretical Exposé" is in preparation for the press; and, when
these volumes are issued, we may look for a change of attitude towards
him in all men who hold themselves "ready to abandon, preconceived
notions, however cherished, if they be found to contradict truths;"
which, Herbert Spencer says, is the first condition of success
in scientific research. The Rev. J. J. Smith, M.A., D.D., tells
us that the only way the great problem of the universe can ever be
scientifically solved is by studying, and arriving at just conclusions
with regard to the true nature and character of force. This has
been Mr. Keely's life study; and he is able to demonstrate all that
he asserts.

Laurence Oliphant writes: "Recent scientific research has proved
conclusively that all force is atomic--that electricity consists
of files of particles, and that the interstellar spaces contain
substances, whether it be called ether or astral fluid (or by any
other name), which is composed of atoms, because it is not possible
to dissever force from its transmitting medium. The whole universe,
therefore, and all that it contains, consists of matter in motion,
and is animated by a vital principle which we call God.

"Science has further discovered that these atoms are severally
encompassed by an ethereal substance which prevents their touching
each other, and to this circumambient, inter-atomic element they have
given the name of dynasphere; but, inasmuch as has further been found,
that in these dynaspheres there resides a tremendous potency, it is
evident that they also must contain atoms, and that these atoms must in
their turn be surrounded by dynaspheres, which again contain atoms, and
so on ad infinitum. Matter thus becomes infinite and indestructible,
and the force which pervades it persistent and everlasting.

"This dynaspheric force, which is also called etheric, is conditioned
as to its nature on the quality of the atoms which form its
transmitting media; and which are infinite both in variety and in
their combinations. They may, however, be broadly divided into two
categories; viz. the sentient and the non-sentient atoms. Dynaspheric
force, composed of non-sentient atoms, is the force that has been
already mechanically applied by Mr. Keely to his motor; and which will
probably ere long supersede the agencies now used for locomotive,
projectile, and other purposes. When the laws which govern it come
to be understood, it will produce materially a great commercial and
industrial revolution....

"The most remarkable illustration of the stupendous energy of
atomic vibratory force is to be found in that singular apparatus in
Philadelphia--which for the last fifteen years has excited in turn the
amazement, the scepticism, the admiration, and the ridicule of those
who have examined it--called 'Keely's Motor'" ... "In the practical
land of its origin, it has popularly been esteemed a fraud. I have
not examined it personally, but I believe it to be based upon a sound
principle of dynamics, and to be probably the first of a series of
discoveries destined to revolutionize all existing mechanical theories,
and many of the principles upon which they are founded." ... "Those
who are sufficiently unprejudiced to connect the bearings of this
discovery, of what must be dynaspheric force, with phenomena which
have hitherto been regarded as supernatural by the ignorant, will
perceive how rapidly we are bridging over the chasm which has divided
the seen from the unseen."...

In 1882 a lady, conversing with Mr. Keely, said, "You have opened the
door into the spirit-world." He answered, "Do you think so? I have
sometimes thought I might be able to discover the origin of life." At
this time Mr. Keely had given no attention whatever to the occult
bearing of his discovery; and it was only after he had pursued his
researches, under the advantages which his small Liberator afforded
him for such experiments, that he realized the truth of this woman's
assertion. It was then, in 1887, that a "bridge of mist" formed itself
before him, connecting the laws which govern physical science with the
laws which govern spiritual science, and year by year this bridge of
mist has solidified, until now he is in a position to stand upon it,
and proclaim that its abutments have a solid foundation--one resting
in the material and visible world, and the other in the spiritual
and unseen world; or, rather, that no bridge is needed to connect
the two worlds, one law governing both in its needed modifications.

"The physical thing," writes a modern scientist, "which energizes
and does work in and upon ordinary matter, is a separate form of
matter, infinitely refined, and infinitely rapid in its vibrations,
and is thus able to penetrate through all ordinary matter, and to make
everywhere a fountain of motion, no less real because unseen. It is
among the atoms of the crystal and the molecules of living matter;
and, whether producing locked effects or free, it is the same cosmic
thing, matter in motion, which we conceive as material energy, and
with difficulty think of as only a peculiar form of matter in motion."

The President of the British Association, Sir Henry Roscoe, in his
address before that body, said: "In nature there is no such thing
as great or small; the structure of the smallest particle, invisible
even to our most searching vision, may be as complicated as that of
any of the heavenly bodies which circle round our sun." As to the
indivisibility of the atom, he asks this question: "Notwithstanding
the properties of these elements have been studied, and are now
known with a degree of precision formerly undreamt of, have the
atoms of our present elements been made to yield?" He continues:
"A negative answer must undoubtedly be given, for even the highest
of terrestrial temperatures, that of the electric spark, has failed
to shake any one of these atoms in two."

This is an error, for it is well known by those who are fully
acquainted with the principle involved in Keely's inventions that
the intense vibratory action which is induced in his "Liberator"
has accomplished what the retort of the chemist has failed to do,
what the electric spark has left intact, and what the inconceivably
fierce temperature of the sun and of volcanic fires has turned over to
us unscathed. The mighty Genii imprisoned within the molecule, thus
released from the chains and fetters which Nature forged, has been
for years the tyrant of the one who rashly intruded, without first
paving the way with the gold which he has since been accused of using
in experiments with reckless and wanton waste! For more than a score
of years has Keely been fighting a hand-to-hand fight with this Genii;
often beaten back by it, paralyzed at times, even, by its monstrous
blows; and only now so approaching its subjugation as to make it safe
to harness it for the work that is calling for a power mightier than
steam, safer and more uniform in operation than electricity; a power
which, by its might and beneficence, will ameliorate the condition
of the masses, and reconcile and solve all that now menaces our race:
as it was never menaced before, as has been said.

The structure of the air molecule, as believed in by Keely, is as
follows:--Broken up, by vibratory action, he finds it to contain what
he calls an atomic triplet. The position of a molecule, on the point
of a fine cambric needle sustains the same relation to the point of
the needle that a grain of sand sustains to a field of ten acres.

Although, as Sir H. Roscoe has said, "In nature there is no such thing
as great or small," the human mind cannot conceive such infinitesimal
minuteness. We will, then, imagine a molecule magnified to the size
of a billiard ball, and the atomic triplet magnified to the size
of three marbles, in the triangular position, within that molecule,
at its centre; unless acted upon by electricity, when the molecule,
the billiard ball, becomes oblate, and the three atoms are ranged
in a line within, unless broken up by the mighty force of vibratory
action. Nature never gives us a vacuum; consequently, the space within
the molecule not occupied by the atomic triplet must e filled with
something. This is where the Genii--"the all-pervading ether"--has
made its secret abode through untold æons, during which our world
has been in course of preparation for its release, to fulfil its
appointed task in advancing the progress of the human race.

Step by step, with a patient perseverance which some day the world
will honour, this man of genius has made his researches, overcoming
the colossal difficulties which have raised up in his path what
seemed to be insurmountable barriers to further progress: but never
before has the world's index finger so pointed to an hour when all
is making ready for the advent of the new form of force that mankind
is waiting for. Nature, always reluctant to yield her secrets, is
listening to the demands made upon her by her master, necessity. The
coal mines of the world cannot long afford the increasing drain made
upon them. Steam has reached its utmost limits of power, and does
not fulfil the requirements of the age. Electricity holds back, with
bated breath, dependent upon the approach of her sister colleague. Air
ships are riding at anchor, as it were, waiting for the force which
is to make aerial navigation something more than a dream. As easily
as men communicate with their offices from their homes by means of
the telephone, so will the inhabitants of separate continents talk
across the ocean. Imagination is palsied when seeking to foresee the
grand results of this marvellous discovery when once it is applied
to art and mechanics. In taking the throne which it will force steam
to abdicate, dynaspheric force will rule the world with a power so
mighty in the interests of civilization, that no finite mind can
conjecture the results.

In 1746, when Franklin's attention was drawn to the phenomena of
electricity, little more was known on the subject than Thales had
announced two thousand years before. Von Kleist in Leyden, Collinson
in London, and others in as widely-separated cities in Europe, were
experimenting in the same field of research. What our last century
has done toward subduing this tyrant which Franklin succeeded in
bringing down to earth, from the clouds, the next century will see
surpassed beyond man's wildest conjectures, should Keely's utilization
of this unknown force of nature bestow upon humanity the costless
motive power, which he anticipates it will. Reynolds predicted that
those who "studied the mysteries of molecular vibration would win the
victorious wreaths of successful discovery." After such discoveries
as Mr. Keely has made in this field of research, it matters not to
him whether he succeeds commercially or not. His work of discovery
commenced when, as a boy of twelve, he held the sea-shells to his
ear as he walked the shore and noted that no two gave forth the
same tone. From the construction of his first crude instrument,
his work of evolution progressed slowly for years; but within the
last five years he has made giant strides towards the "Dark Tower"
which is his last fortress to take. When he is ready, "Dauntless the
slug-horn to his lips" he will set; and the world will hear the blast,
and awaken from its slumber into new life.

Molecular vibration is thus seen to be Keely's legitimate field of
research; but more than once has he had to tear down portions of
the vibratory scaffolding which aided him in the building up of his
edifice of philosophy; therefore, he is ever ready to admit that
some of the present scaffolding may have to be removed. The charge
of "abandoning his base," recently brought against him by one of
the editors of The New York Times, could only have been made by one
who is utterly ignorant of the subject upon which he writes. Under
the heading "A Cool Confession," this editor asserts that Keely has
"given up the Keely Motor as a bad job," and that he admits that he
is a "bogus inventor" and a "fraud." This is not true.

What Keely does admit is that, baffled in applying vibratory force to
mechanics, upon his first and second lines of experimental research,
he was obliged either to confess a commercial failure, or to try a
third departure from his base or principle; seeking success through
another channel of experiment. While experimenting upon this third
line, until his efforts were crowned with success, he kept his secret
from all men; with the approbation of the one who furnished the money
for these experiments. There is a time when silence is golden; and the
charge made by the same editor that Keely had been "receiving money
from the Keely Motor Company on false pretences from the time that
he abandoned his original plans," could only have been made by one
who knows nothing of the facts of the case: for years have passed
away since the Keely Motor Company broke its contract with him,
and since it has furnished him with any money for his experiments.

But let Keely speak for himself in reference to his work:--

"In considering the operation of my engine, the visitor, in order to
have even an approximate conception of its modus operandi, must discard
all thought of engines that are operated upon the principle of pressure
and exhaustion, by the expansion of steam or other analogous gas which
impinges upon an abutment, such as the piston of a steam-engine. My
engine has neither piston nor eccentrics, nor is there one grain of
pressure exerted in the engine, whatever may be the size or capacity
of it.

"My system, in every part and detail, both in the developing of this
power and in every branch of its utilization, is based and founded
on sympathetic vibration. In no other way would it be possible to
awaken or develop this force, and equally impossible would it be to
operate my engine upon any other principle.

"All that remains to be done is to secure a uniform speed under
different velocities and control reversions. That I shall accomplish
this is absolutely certain. Some few years ago, I contemplated using
a wire as a connective link between two sympathetic mediums, to
evolve this power as also to operate my machinery--instead of tubular
connections as heretofore employed--I have only recently succeeded in
accomplishing successfully such change. This, however, is the true
system; and henceforth all my operations will be conducted in this
manner--that is to say, the power will be generated, my engines run,
my cannon operated, through a wire.

"It has been only after years of incessant labour, and the making of
almost innumerable experiments, involving not only the construction
of a great many most peculiar mechanical structures, and the closest
investigation and study of the phenomenal properties of the substance
"ether," per se, produced, that I have been able to dispense with
complicated mechanism, and to obtain, as I claim, mastery over the
subtle and strange force with which I am dealing.

"When my present process of adjustment is completed, the force, the
mechanism, and all that pertains to it, will be fully explained in a
theoretical exposition of the subject, with appropriate diagrams, which
I shall publish to the world; through which medium, and my patents,
when taken out, a knowledge of all that is required for its commercial
employment will be more easily acquired than is the necessary skill
required to enable one to safely operate a steam-engine.

"The power will be adapted to engines of all sizes and capacities,
as well to an engine capable of propelling the largest ship as to one
that will operate a sewing machine. Equally well and certain is it that
it will be adapted as a projectile force for guns and cannons of all
sizes, from the ordinary shoulder-piece to the heaviest artillery."....

When Keely obtained continuity of motion (for a time) in his engine
he thought that his last difficulty had been overcome: but, up to
the present time, he has not succeeded in governing its speed nor in
controlling reversions. He has, however, again reduced in size the
instrument with which he produces the force. From 1882 to 1884 the
"Generator" was a structure six feet long and correspondingly wide and
high; but, failing in his attempt to make an automatic arrangement
upon which its usefulness in mechanics depended, Keely found a
new standard for research in an experiment often made by himself,
but never before successful, which resulted in the production of
a machine in 1885 which he named a "Liberator"--not so large as a
lady's small round work-table. Continuing his labour of evolution
Keely within one year made such astonishing progress, from experiments
with this beautiful piece of vibratory mechanism, as to combine the
production of the power, and the operation of his cannon, his engine
and his disintegrator in a machine no larger than a dinner plate, and
only three or four inches in thickness. This instrument was completed
in 1886, up to which time his experiments had been conducted upon a
principle of sympathetic vibration, for the purpose of liberating a
vapoury or etheric product. His later experiments have been confined
to another modification of vibratory sympathy; and the size of the
instrument used now, '88, for the same purposes is no larger than an
old-fashioned silver watch, such as we see in Museum collections. The
raising of a lever with an apparent uplifting expansive force of
between 20,000 and 30,000 pounds to the square inch, the running of
the engine, the firing of the cannon, are conducted without one ounce
of pressure in any part of the apparatus, and without the production
or presence of what has been known as Keely's ether. The force is now
transmitted along a wire (of platinum and silver), and when the lever
is lowered there is no exhaustion, into the atmosphere of the room,
of any up-lifting vapour, as was always the case when the ether was
used in this experiment; nor is there any vapour impinging upon the
piston under the lever to raise it.

Keely has named this new modification of the one force in nature
"Negative Attraction," which to the uninitiated does not suggest as
much as it would had he called it "Negative Humbug."

The two forms of force which he has been experimenting with, and the
phenomena attending them, are the very antithesis of each other. Keely
does not feel the shadow of a doubt as to his eventual success in
producing engines of varying capacities; small enough, on the one hand,
to operate sewing machines with, and large enough, on the other hand,
to propel the largest ships that plough the seas. Every fact and
feature surrounding the case warrants the belief, notwithstanding the
incredulity of all who have not witnessed the progress of Mr. Keely,
step by step, that his success will be complete, and his work stand
as the most colossal example of the survival of the fittest, in
the process of inventive evolution. Cox says: "Not one of the great
facts which science now accepts as incontrovertible truths but was
vehemently denied by the scientists of its time:--declared to be a
priori impossible, its discoverers and supporters denounced as fools
or charlatans, and even investigation of it refused as being a waste of
time and thought." "History repeats itself," and Amiel's definition of
science gives the key to the incredulity of scientists in reference
to Mr. Keely's discovery; for if, as Amiel has said, "science is
a lucid madness occupied with tabulating its own hallucinations,"
it is not strange that men of science should refuse to investigate
what they consider the hallucinations of others.

It is an undisputed fact that "too much has been conceded to science,
too little to those sublime laws which make science possible." But
the one law which regulates creation, and to which all other laws
are made subservient, keeping in harmony the systems upon systems
of worlds throughout space, developing sound and colour, animal and
vegetable growth, the crystallization of minerals, is the hidden law,
which develops every natural science throughout the universe; and which
both Kepler and Newton anticipated would be revealed in our age. "You
can even trace the poles in sound," writes Mrs. F. J. Hughes, in her
work upon the "Evolution of Tones and Colours." The experiments made
by Mrs. Watts Hughes, at the annual Reception of the Royal Society,
and the  [5]Pendulograph writings by Andrew of Belfast, have a bearing
upon Keely's discovery; illustrating the workings of this hidden law
of nature.

Of the law of periodicity, Hartmann writes: "Its actions have long
ago been known to exist in the vibrations producing light and sound,
and it has been recognized in chemistry by experiments tending to
prove that all so-called simple elements are only various states of
vibration of one primordial element, manifesting itself in seven
principal modes of action, each of which may be subdivided into
seven again. The difference which exists between so-called single
substances appears, therefore, to be no difference of substance
or matter, but only a difference of the function of matter in the
ratio of its atomic vibration." It is by changing the vibrations of
cosmic ether that Mr. Keely releases this energy, and Dr. Kellner in
Austria produces electricity in the same way; while it is said that
a chemist in Prague produces magnetism; also Dr. Dupuy, of New York,
who has been for years experimenting in this field without meeting
with Keely's progressive successes.

Horace Wemyss Smith, in commenting upon the fact that, at the time
of Franklin's discovery, men in France, in Belgium, in Holland,
and in Germany were pursuing the same line of experiment, says that
there is something worthy of observation in the progress of science
and human genius, inasmuch as in countries far distant from each
other men have fallen into the same tracks, and have made similar
and corresponding discoveries, at the same period of time, without
the least communication with each other.

Laurence Oliphant's recent works give us the clue to an explanation
of this fact; and Lowe, in his "Fragments of Physiology," condenses
the answer in these words: "Man is not the governor and commander of
the created world; and were it not for superhuman influence constantly
flowing into created forms, the world would perish in a moment."

There are men in various parts of the world, unknown even by name to
each other, who tell us by "the signs of the times" that the season
of harvesting is approaching; the season for gathering the fruit,
which has been deferred, century after century, because mankind is not
yet ready, in the opinion of many, to share the fruit with one another.

It has been said that when Keely's vibratory force shall have taken
the place of steam-engines, the millions of working men who gain with
difficulty their daily bread by the work of their hands, will find
themselves without occupation. The same prediction was made in regard
to steam, but instead we find the city of Boston giving work to thirty
thousand men in one manufactory of boots and shoes by steam, in place
of the three thousand shoemakers who were all that were occupied in
this branch of labour in that city when the work was done by hand.

Dr. Kellner's colleague, Franz Hartmann, M.D., writing in reference
to Keely's discovery, says: "I have taken great interest in him ever
since I first heard of him in 1882. As gaslight has driven away,
in part, the smoky petroleum lamp, and is about to be displaced
by electricity, which in the course of time may be supplanted by
magnetism, and as the power of steam has caused muscular labour to
disappear to a certain extent, and will itself give way before the
new vibratory force of Keely, likewise the orthodox medical quackery
that now prevails will be dethroned by the employment of the finer
forces of nature, such as light, electricity, magnetism, etc."

When the time is ripe, these are of the true scientists who will
come to the front "to lead as progress leads," men who know how to
wait upon God, viz., to work while waiting; and to such the end is,
sooner or later, victory! "God never hurries." He counts the centuries
as we count the seconds, and the nearer we approach to the least
comprehension of His "underlying purpose" the more we become like
Tolstoi's labourer, who knew that the fruit was ripening for him
and his fellow-men, trusting implicitly in the superior wisdom of
his master.

No man, whose spiritual eyes have been opened to "discern the signs
of the times," can doubt that we are on the eve of revelations which
are to usher in the dawn of a brighter day than our race has yet
known; and no prophecy of this brighter day, foretold by prophets,
apostles, and inspired poets, was ever made in truer strains than in
these glorious lines of Elizabeth Barrett Browning:--


                Verily many thinkers of this age,
            Aye, many Christian teachers, half in heaven,
            Are wrong in just my sense who understood
            Our natural world too insularly, as if
            No spiritual counterpart completed it,
            Consummating its meaning, rounding all
            To justice and perfection, line by line,
            Form by form, nothing single nor alone;
            The Great Below clenched by the Great Above.




