CHAPTER III.

THE NATURE OF KEELY'S PROBLEMS.

1885 TO 1887.

            Too few the helpers on the road,
            Too heavy burdens in the load.

        When a movement is willed a current is sent forth from
        the brain.

                                            Sir James Crichton Browne.


In November 1884, Mr. Keely obtained a standard for progressive
research in the success of an experiment, which he had tried many times
before, without arriving at the result that his theories had led him
to expect. One of those present, at the time that this test was made,
afterwards wrote to Mr. Keely, to obtain an explanation of the dynamic
force which had been witnessed, causing a small globe to rotate when
two persons had taken hold of the rod together, with a firm grasp;
one of whom was standing on a circular sheet of metal, from which
piano wires stretched toward the globe, near enough to touch one of the
plates of glass which insulated the ball. Mr. Keely replied, "I cannot
describe it other than the receptive concussion of the two forces,
positive and negative, coming together, seeking their coincidents and
thus producing rotation by harmonious waves, not streams. You ask if
sound waves had anything to do with the motion of the globe? Nothing;
the introductory settings are entirely different. The ball ceased
to rotate when I took your left hand in my right hand, while with
our other hands holding the iron rod resting on the metal plate,
because the receptive flows became independent of the circular chord
of resonation as set up mechanically. The power of rotation comes on
the positive; and the power of negation breaks it up."...

Encouraged by this confirmation of his theories, Keely pursued his
researches with renewed vigour. At this time he wrote, "I am straining
every nerve to accomplish certain matters in a given time, working
from twelve to fourteen hours daily. Although in my illness I have had
some peaceful hours in thinking over the fascinating points associated
with the researches to which I am devoting my life, I have also had
some very stormy ones in reviewing the many unjust insinuations and
denouncements that have been heaped upon me by the ignorant and the
base-hearted. My one desire has been the acquisition of knowledge;
and, no matter how great the impediment thrown in my path, I will work
without ceasing to attain my end. After struggling for over seventeen
years, allowing scientists to examine my machinery in the most thorough
manner, and to make the most sensitive tests, denunciations have
multiplied against me. One charge is that I use sodium in my mercury,
in the vacuum test. I have thought that I would never again make any
effort to prove that I am honest; but I am working in a new lead,
and for the satisfaction of the few friends that I have I propose
to show my introductory evolutions, in proof of the negatization
of an etheric substance to produce vacuum. The mercury may be
delivered to me by an expert: I will operate from an open mercury
bath: using the most perfect mercury gauge obtainable, attached to
the same sphere that the column is operated from. Professor Rogers,
the highest authority we have, saw the operation of inducing these
etheric vacuums and pronounced the result wonderful. He said that
the scientific world would go down on its knees, if I produced only
one pound of vacuum under the conditions named. I showed from one to
fourteen lbs. during the evolutions.... As soon as I have been able
to combine all the positive and negative forces of etheric vibration
in the triple vibratory sphere-engine that I am now at work upon,
in short, as soon as I have completed a perfect, patentable machine,
then my labours will cease on the Motor line; and after my patents are
taken out, I will devote the remainder of my life to Aerial Navigation,
for I have the only true system to make it an entire success in the
vibratory lift and the vibratory push-process."

It will be seen that, at this stage, Keely had no idea of giving up
the engine; and was still as confident of ultimate success as in the
beginning. There is no doubt that, had not the time arrived when the
directing power of Providence led him away in quite another direction
from the line that he was then working upon, his system for Aerial
Navigation would have been lost to this century. "The heart of man
deviseth his way, but the Lord directs his steps."

About this time Keely met with an accident. Under date March 22nd,
he wrote, "It has been impossible for me to write, my right hand
and arm were so severely strained, but I have not been idle. I have
had time for reflection, and I have been setting up a key to explain
vibratory rotation. I have also a plan for a device to be attached to
the Liberator as an indicator to show when the neutral centre is free
from its intensification while operating. In this way the dangerous
influences will be avoided which present themselves on the extension
of the vibratory waves that operate the gun. All the introductory
details of the present engine are as perfect as is possible for the
first lead. It is in the form of a sphere, about thirty inches in
diameter and weighs 800 lbs. Yesterday saw the pure, positive action
of my new Liberator. Mr. Collier and his brother George were present,
and witnessed thirty expulsions, made by myself; after which I had
them produce the vapour, by imitating my manipulations; which they were
unable to do with the old generator. They were very much delighted. To
say that the last three weeks have been trying ones, is using
very mild language to express what I have suffered from accidents,
disappointments, etc., etc. I have been frozen in at my workshop;
and all things seemed to go wrong; but my present successes are as
an anchor, which I thank God for, who, in His bountiful goodness,
has carried me into a port of safety over tempestuous seas." Again,
under various dates, Keely wrote:--"Unbounded success has crowned my
new departure. I am now preparing new features that are necessary
as adjuncts to denote the true condition, as regards safety in my
different vibratory operations." "Without the aid sent me from on high
there would have been nothing left of the discovery mechanically; nor
would there now be a single foot-hold on which hope could rest for a
completion of the Keely Motor enterprise."... "I had an accident to
one of my registers this morning. It burst with a tremendous report,
shaking things up in a lively way, but no other damage was done beyond
that to the register."

"The draughts are nearly completed for the compound vibratory engine,
and next week the work will be commenced and pushed forward with all
possible speed. This is the machine for continuous operation. The
Liberator is as perfect as is possible; and, if the outside adjuncts
are in proper sympathy, my struggles will soon be at an end."... "All
things are verging into a condition of perfection through the aid
that I have received, but for which the science of vibratory etheric
force would, as far as my researches are concerned, have been lost
to the world. I feel that the world is waiting for this force; that
this advance in science is necessary to keep the proper equilibrium
in our age of progress."...

"There are moments in which I feel that I can measure the very stars,
which shine like Edens in planetary space; fit abodes for beings who
have made it the study of their lives on earth to create peace and
happiness for all around them. Is nature a mystery? No, God is in
nature. I do not believe in the line, 'God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform.' In my estimation, He moves in a very plain
and simple way, if we will open our hearts to the understanding of
His way. To the man who cannot appreciate the workings of nature,
chemically and otherwise, God's ways may appear mysterious; but when
he comes to know nature's works he will find simplicity itself in
its highest order of expression.

"Could I have one wish, as to science, gratified, I would ask to live
long enough to be able to appreciate even but one etheric variation
in planetary evolution. It might take fifty thousand years to attain
this knowledge, but what is that period of time when compared with
the cycles that have passed away since this earth existed? Yes, in one
sense, 'God does move in a mysterious way His wonders to perform.'"...

"The whirlpool of science has indeed engulphed me in its fascinating
vortex."...

"May 20th.--Yesterday was a day of trials and disappointments. It
seemed as if nothing would work right. After labouring six hours to
set my safety process, the first operation of the Liberator tore
the caps all to pieces. I replaced them by a set of duplicates,
and set the Liberator down to the low octaves, when everything
worked to a charm. Night was approaching, and I left the workshop
to get something to eat, returning about eight o'clock to re-conduct
experiments, in order to discover if possible the cause of the sudden
and most unexpected intensification. I followed up with great care
the progressive lines until I reached the tenth octave, and then
liberated a score of times, yet no variation on liberator. Next, I
made an attachment to my safety arrangement, and also to my strongest
resonator, to experiment on vibratory rotation with my shell; when,
within two minutes, it attained a frightful velocity: then I suddenly
retracted to the negative, bringing the velocity down from about 1500
per minute to 150. The operation was magnificent, lasting sixty-four
minutes, when a second intensification took place, demolishing two
safety-shells and one vibratory indicator. I was perfectly dumbfounded,
and unable to account for such a phenomenon. It was then near midnight,
but I had made up my mind not to discontinue until I had solved the
mystery. After an hour's reflection, I set up a new position on the
resonating wave plates in the forty resonating circuit on the base of
liberator; and got a result which for purity of uniformity surpassed
all experiments that I have ever made. I believe I have now struck
the root of this difficulty, and that I shall be able to master it;
and obtain continuity of action with perfect rotation."

"June 1st, 1885.--I am in a perfect sea of mental and physical strain,
intensified in anticipation of the near approach of final and complete
success, and bombarded from all points of the compass by demands and
inquiries; yet, in my researches, months pass as minutes. The immense
mental and physical strain of the past few weeks, the struggles and
disappointments have almost broken me up. Until the reaction took
place, which followed my success, I could never have conceived the
possibility of my becoming so reduced in strength as I am now. My
labours in the future will be of a much milder character; but, before
I again commence them, I must have a few days more of recuperation. I
was so absorbed in my researches that I forgot my duty to myself,
as regards the requirements of health, and I am now paying the
penalty. It has been misery to me to have absorbed so much more time
and capital than I anticipated; and without the heaven-sent aid which
I have received the world would have lost sight of me for ever."...

"In view of the unjust comments in certain journals, I intend to
withdraw entirely from all contact with newspaper men, to give no
more exhibitions after the one which closes the series, and to devote
all my time and energies to bringing my models into a patentable
condition. It is said that the New York reporters intended to denounce
me before witnessing my last experiments. Certainly utter ignorance
of my philosophy was displayed in their articles, but they were
like the viper biting on the file, and only hurt themselves: for
men who possess but a moderate degree of scientific knowledge have
denounced them, in turn, as the most ignorant men they had ever come
in contact with. They stated that I started with a power estimated
at over one million pounds pressure to the square inch on the head
of my liberator, a sheer absurdity. The rock I am standing on can
no more be moved by a whirlwind of such attacks than the atmospheric
disturbance of equilibrium emanating from a butterfly's wing in motion
could blow down the rock of Gibraltar. I enclose a newspaper cutting:
it was written by an engineer who has interested himself sufficiently
in my work to be able to thoroughly understand my position."...

"July 15th.--My researches teach me that electricity is but a
certain condensed form of atomic vibration, a form showing only the
introductory features which precede the etheric vibratory condition. It
is a modulated force so conditioned, in its more modest flows, as to
be susceptible of benefit to all organisms. Though destructive to a
great degree in its explosive positions, it is the medium by which the
whole system of organic nature is permeated beneficially; transfusing
certain forms of inert matter with life-giving principles. It is to
a certain degree an effluence of divinity; but only as the branch is
to the tree. We have to go far beyond this condition to reach the
pure etheric one, or the body of the tree. The Vibratory Etheric
tree has many branches, and electricity is but one of them. Though
it is a medium by which the operations of vital forces are performed,
it cannot in my opinion be considered the soul of matter."...

"My safety arrangements (governors and indicators) for liberating are
not working well; but I am labouring to attain perfection on these
devices, and I hope soon to have them all right."...

"I have extraordinary powers, it is true, and I must use them to
the best advantage; for I know they are the gift of the Almighty,
who will, I feel sure, carry me to the end of the work which He has
given me to accomplish."...

"I am positive that this year will terminate my struggles. My work is
all progressing satisfactorily, and I am pushing everything forward
as rapidly as possible."...

August 5th.--Mr. Keely wrote to one of his friends,--"I have met
with an accident to the Liberator. I was experimenting on the third
order of intensification, when the rotation on the circuit was thrown
down in the compound resonating chamber, which, by the instantaneous
multiplication of the volume induced thereby, caused an explosion
bursting the metal casing which enclosed the forty resonators,
completely dismantling the Liberator. The shock took my senses from
me for a few moments, but I was not even scratched this time. A part
of the wall was torn away, and resonators and vibrators were thrown
all over the room. The neighbourhood was quite lively for a time,
but I quieted all fears by telling the frightened ones that I was
only experimenting. I allowed everything to remain until Dr. Woods
and Mr. Collier had seen the effect of the explosion."

The orders of intensification for accelerating dissociation
would not be understood by any explanations that could be made, if
unaccompanied by the demonstrations witnessed by the late Professor
Leidy, Dr. Brinton, and others.

When the ether flows from a tube, its negative centre represents
molecular sub-division, carrying interstitially (or between its
molecules) the lowest order of liberated ozone. This is the first
order of ozone and is wonderfully refreshing and vitalizing to those
who breathe it. The second order, or atomic separation, releases a much
higher grade of ozone; in fact, too pure for inhalation, as it produces
insensibility. The third order, or etheric, is the one that has been
(though attended with much danger to the operator) utilized by Keely
in his carbon register to produce the circuit of high vibration that
breaks up the molecular magnetism which is recognized as cohesion.

The acceleration of these orders is governed by the introductory
impulse on a certain combination of vibratory chords, arranged for
this purpose in the instrument, with which Keely dissociates the
elements of water; and which he calls a liberator.

In molecular dissociation one fork of 620 is used, setting the chords
on the first octave.

In atomic separation, two forks: one of 620 and one of 630 per second;
setting the chords on the second octave.

In the etheric three forks: one of 620, one of 630, and one of 12,000,
setting the chords on the third octave.


Keely's Three Systems.

My first system is the one which requires introductory mediums
of differential gravities, air and water, to induce disturbance
of equilibrium on the liberation of vapour, which only reached
the inter-atomic position and was held there by the submersion of
the molecular and atomic leads in the 'generator' I then used. It
was impossible with these mediums to go beyond the atomic with this
instrument; and I could not dispense with the water until my liberator
was invented, nor reach the maximum of the full line of vibration. My
first system embraces liberator engine and gun.

"My second system of dissociation I consider complete, as far as the
liberation of the ether is concerned, but not sufficiently complete,
as yet, in its devices for indicating and governing the vibratory
etheric circuit, to make it a safe medium.

"My third system embraces aerial and sub-marine navigation. The
experimental sphere intended to test the combination of the positive
and negative rotation is nearly completed.

... "I have done everything that I could do to demonstrate the
integrity of my inventions, and I will never again allow my devices
to be submitted to examinations; not that I am afraid they will be
stolen, but I do not wish to have the construction of my improved
mechanical devices known until my patents are taken out. Nor will I
ever again make a statement, specifying the time when certain work
will be finished. If I thought to-morrow would end all my struggles
on this system, I would not say so. I have been a great sufferer from
my inability to keep my promises, fully believing in my power to keep
them, and now I must and will prove that all is right before I promise.

... "The work on the vibratory engine is progressing rapidly. I spend
an hour or two every day at the shop where my work is being done,
examining every part of it critically as it is being put together. The
safety arrangements which I am having attached to my liberator
will greatly improve it. Its operation will now be conducted with
a gum bulb instead of a violin bow, the pressure of which gives the
introductory chord of impulse that vitalizes the whole machine. The
chords will all be set in progressive sympathy from the first octave
to the fortieth....

"I have been writing out some of my theories as to sound and
odour. These two subjects have intensified me considerably of late,
on account of the peculiar position they occupy in their lines of
sub-division; as also the peculiar laws that govern them in their
dissemination. I see the time approaching when I will be able to write
up my system of the true philosophy of nature's grandest force, and
have at my control the proper apparatus to analyze and demonstrate
all the progressive links of transmittive sympathy from the crude
molecular to the high etheric."...

"December 17th, 1885.--The setting up of the circles for computing
the different lines of etheric chords, in setting the vibratory
conditions for continuity, requires close study. I feel convinced that
a perfect solution of my difficulties will follow when this part of
the work has been completed; and that, before many weeks have passed, a
revelation will be unfolded that will startle the world; a revelation,
so simple in its character, that the physicists will stand aghast,
and perhaps feel humiliated by the nature of their efforts in the past
to solve certain problems.... I find my chief trouble in chording up
the masses of the different parts composing the negative centres. The
negative centre is included in the one-third volume of shell or sphere,
starting from the neutral axis or point of suspension. This point of
suspension only becomes perfect when the rotation is established on the
sphere. One hundred revolutions per minute is all the velocity required
to neutralize the gravity of the central third with the velocity
of the vibratory circuit at one hundred thousand per second. Taking
all matters into consideration associated with the mechanical part
of the enterprise, the month of January ought to find all completed,
ready for sympathetic graduation. But I fear to be too sanguine when
I remember the loss of time and the interferences from exhibitions
to which I have been subjected in the past. I feel more and more the
great importance of devoting all my energies to the great task that
Divine Power has ordained me to perform."...

At the close of the year 1885, everything seemed to promise full
and complete success during the coming year. Mr. Charles Collier,
the patent lawyer, shared Keely's confidence in the near completion
of his "struggles." The stock-holders were enthusiastic, and the
stockbrokers were on the qui vive, anticipating a great rise in the
shares of The Keely Motor Company. Mr. Collier had written in August
to Major Ricarde-Seaver [1]: "The Bank of England is not more solid
than is our enterprise. My belief is that the present year will see
us through, patents and all."

The journals had ceased to ridicule, and some of them were giving
serious attention to the possibilities lying hidden in the discovery of
an unknown force. In 1886, Mr. William Walsh, editor of "Lippincott's
Magazine," accepted a paper on the subject, publishing it in the
September number. It was entitled Keely's Etheric Force.

This was the first article accepted by any Philadelphia editor, setting
forth Keely's claims on the public for the patience and protection
which the discoverer of a force in nature needs, while researching the
unknown laws that govern its operation. Up to this time Keely had been
held responsible for the errors made in the premature organization
of a Keely Motor Company, and the selling of stock before there was
anything to give in return for the money paid in by investors.









