CHAPTER IV.

SYMPATHETIC VIBRATORY FORCE, 1887.

        The teleological view was opposed to the mechanical, which
        regarded the universe as a collocation of mere facts without
        any further significance. The mechanical view looked backward
        to the antecedents of a phenomenon, and explained things
        by reducing them to their lowest terms; the teleological
        or philosophical view looked forward to the end or purpose
        which was being realized, which was the reason of the whole
        development, and in the deepest sense its cause. Mechanical
        explanation was an infinite progress, which could ultimately
        explain nothing; in the last resort, causæ efficientes pendent
        a finalibus. In defining the nature of the end which it thus
        asserted, philosophy had to wage unsparing battle against
        the naturalistic tendencies of our time.--(From a Review of
        Professor Seth's address delivered in Glasgow in 1891.)


In 1887, a series of articles appeared in The British Mercantile
Gazette, then edited by Mr. Arthur Goddard. The June number devoted
more than eight columns to the progress and present position of the
discoverer of Etheric Force.



To the Editor of the British Mercantile Gazette.

Sir,--Dr. Ziermann, a German writer, has said that a great deal of
sound sense and moral courage are required to introduce ideas which
will only be recognised as truth after the lapse of time. He adds,
"Nay, even to recognize their truth will require more understanding
than falls to the share of most men." The day will come, I think,
when your action in giving the pages of your journal to quotations
from Mr. Keely's papers on Etheric Physics and Etheric Philosophy,
will make known your claim to this 'understanding.' In the meantime,
you have, by your appreciation of his labours and your sympathy
in his trials, extended that assistance to the discoverer of this
newly-known force in Nature which is more powerful than any other
agent in inspiring to renewed efforts; after ridicule and calumny,
long continued, have done their worst towards depressing the vital
centres of nerve-force. When Mr. Keely has made known the law of
sympathetic association to the world, the full meaning of the words
"sympathy," "help," "consolation," will be better understood than they
are now. The most important discoveries, the most difficult problems
of research, the most arduous scientific labours have been achieved
by men who have battled with persecution and contempt at every step
of their progress; enduring all, as he has done, with patience; in
the full assurance that the glorious truths entrusted to him to reveal
will, in the end, be proclaimed for the advancement of the race. "The
nobler the soul," writes Ouida, "the more sensitive it is to the blows
of injustice." Cicero tells us that praise stimulates great souls
into greater exertions; and Plutarch said that souls are sensitive
to sympathy, to praise, and to blame, in exact proportions to the
fineness of their fibre. Mr. Keely proves this truth by actual tests,
as will be seen in time, to the satisfaction of all investigators.

Every branch of science, every doctrine of extensive application,
has had its alphabet, its rudiments, its grammar; indeed, at each
fresh step in the path of discovery, the researcher has to work out
by experiments the unknown laws which govern his discovery. Ignorant
himself, he builds up his knowledge upon a foundation which, uncertain
as it must be at first, becomes as secure as that of Gibraltar rocks
when, one by one, he has removed the misshapen stones of error, and
replaced them with the hewn granite blocks of truth. To attempt to
introduce scientists, without any previous preparation, to any new
system, no matter how solid its foundation, would be like giving
a book published in Greek to a man to read who had never before
seen its characters. We do not expect a complicated problem in the
higher mathematical analysis to be solved by one who is ignorant
of the elementary rules of arithmetic. Just as futile would it be
to expect scientists to comprehend the laws of etheric physics and
etheric philosophy at one glance.


       'There are some secrets which, who knows not now,
        Must, ere he reach them, climb the heapy Alps
        Of science, and devote long years to toil.'


Norman Lockyer, in his 'Chemistry of the Sun,' writes of molecules
that 'one feels as if dealing with something that is more like a
mental than a physical attribute--a sort of expression of free will
on the part of the molecules.' Herein lies one of the secrets of
Mr. Keely's so-called 'compound secret.' Again, Mr. Lockyer writes:
'The law which connects radiation with absorption, and at once enables
us to read the riddle set by the sun and stars, is, then, simply
the law of sympathetic vibration.' This is the very corner-stone of
Mr. Keely's philosophy--yes, even of his discovery.

It has been said that all great men who have lived, or who now live,
have been indebted for their knowledge to teachers or to books;
but all progress depends upon the use made of such knowledge when
acquired. In order to bear fruit, knowledge must be increased by
reflection, and by placing the mind in that attitude which brings into
play the powers of intuition; or, rather, placing it in the receptive
state which admits of the in-flowing of what is called inspiration.

Molecular vibration is Keely's legitimate field of research. In this
field his discovery was made, many years since; but it is only now,
within this year, that he has reached any approach to a solution of
the stupendous problems which have arisen barring and baffling all
progress, at times, towards the complete subjugation and control of
the force that he had discovered. Again and again has he invited the
attention of scientists to his discovery, from the commencement of
his researches; but the few scientists who condescended to accept his
invitations were so ignorant of the mysteries which they sought to
investigate--of 'the alphabet and rudiments' of etheric physics--that
they found it easier to accuse him of jugglery and of fraud than to
account for the phenomena that they witnessed. They addressed their
report to a public even more ignorant than themselves, if such a thing
could be possible, with the result of preventing other scientists,
who would have better understood the experiments, from examining into
Keely's claims, as the discoverer of an unknown force. A system of
doctrine can be legitimately refuted only upon its own principles,
viz., by disproving its facts, and invalidating the principles
deduced from them. It is, then, the facts, and not the opinions of
the ignorant or the prejudiced, which are of chief importance here,
as in all other questions of moment.

All those men who have witnessed the production of etheric force
and its application experimentally, during the exhibitions given at
various times, have, if capable of understanding such a marvellous
discovery as Keely has made, agreed to a man in bearing testimony,
at the time, that no known force could have produced such results
under the same conditions.

It is now three years since Keely invited certain English men of
science (experimenting in the same field where his explorations
commenced) to examine his Liberator; which was dismantled for the
purpose, and all its parts assembled for examination before being put
together for the production of etheric force, when these men refused
to visit his workshop, and it has been said that a Professor of the
University of Pennsylvania prevented the investigation by his assertion
that compressed air is the force used by Keely with which to dupe
his audiences. A schoolboy's knowledge of the change of temperature
always accompanying the compression of air would prevent such an
assertion from being made by anyone who had witnessed the operation
of the Liberator in the production and storage of etheric force,
during which there is not the slightest change of temperature. Had
these English scientists, with their knowledge of acoustics, been
present on the occasion referred to, no such groundless assertion
would have possessed any influence with either; and the world of
science would have sooner known and acknowledged the nature and the
worth of this great discovery.

Roget says that if we are to reason at all, we can reason only upon the
principle that for every effect there must exist a corresponding cause;
or, in other words, that there is an established and invariable order
of sequence among the changes which take place in the universe. The
bar to all further reasoning lies in the fact that there are men
who, admitting all the phenomena we behold are the effects of certain
causes, still say that these causes are utterly unknown to us, and that
their discovery is wholly beyond the reach of our faculties. Those who
urge this do not seem to be aware that its general application in every
sense would shake the foundation of every kind of knowledge--even that
which we regard as built upon the most solid basis. Of causation it
is agreed that we know nothing; all that we do know is that one event
succeeds another with undeviating constancy; and what do we know of
magnetism, electricity, galvanism, but such facts as have been elicited
by the labours of experimental enquirers, and the laws which have been
deduced from their generalization? Would it be considered a sufficient
reason for the absolute rejection of any of these facts--or a whole
class of facts--that we are still ignorant of the principle upon which
they depend, and that such knowledge is beyond our reach? Facts are
every day believed, upon observation, or upon testimony, which we
should be exceedingly puzzled to account for, if called upon to do
so. Every man who has passed the mere threshold of science ought to
be aware that it is quite possible to be in possession of a series of
facts, long before he is capable of giving a rational and satisfactory
explanation of them; in short, before he is enabled to discover their
causes. Also that he must classify his facts and construct hypotheses
before he can impart his experimental position to others. Many things
which were, for a long time, treated as fabulous and incredible
have been proved, in our age, to be authentic facts, as soon as
the evidence in support of them was duly subjected to the crucible
of scientific investigation. Take, for example, Professor Dewar's
researches in the cause, or origin, of meteoric stones. Fortunately
for his branches of research and experiment, he is possessed of that
philosophical spirit and energy which enables him to divest himself
of all prejudice, and, in constructing his theories, to welcome the
evidence of truth from whatever quarter it approaches. More than two
thousand years elapsed between the first record of the phenomenon, by
Anaxagoras, and Mr. Howard's observations in 1802, during which time
the fact was disputed most strenuously by many, while, in our time,
Professor Dewar's explanations of the same, upon intelligible and
satisfactory principles, have confirmed the statements made centuries
ago. How few the years, in comparison, since Keely's grand discovery
first broke upon his own mind, which he has devoted to experiment,
to invention, to the classification of facts, and the building up of
hypotheses, before reaching the goal of his desires. Men will marvel
at the shortness of the period when all that he has accomplished is
made known. The delays which have occurred in bringing before the
world the actual discovery of this primal force, from which all the
forces of nature spring, have been in part occasioned by the want
of that sympathy and appreciation which Keely would have received
from his fellow-men, had scientists believed him to be honest in his
claims. He would not then have been left in the merciless hands of
"a ring," which gave or withheld financial aid according as he could
be "thumbscrewed," into giving exhibitions for speculative ends on
the part of "the ring." These costly days of delay are now a thing
of the past. Keely's programme of work for the remainder of the year
embraces such exhibitions of his progress as can be given without
interfering with this programme.

Coleridge says in "Table Talk,"--"I have seen what I am certain I
would not have believed on your telling; and in all reason, therefore,
I can neither expect nor wish that you should believe on mine." It is
of all tasks the most difficult to procure any favourable reception
for doctrines which are objectionable only because they are deemed
to be incompatible with preconceived notions. It does not answer to
disturb the calmness of views now held by our most eminent physicists,
who seem to expect that nature will always accommodate her operations
to their preconceived notions of possibility, and adapt her phenomena
to their arbitrary systems of philosophy. We are all familiar
with the anecdote of the wise Indian potentate who imagined that
his informant was imposing upon his credulity when giving him an
accurate description of the steam-engine. Now what would be thought
of that philosopher who, in attempting to communicate an adequate
idea of the operation of the steam-engine, should content himself
with a mere description of its mechanism--of its wheels and levers,
and cylinders and pistons--keeping entirely out of view the moving
power--the steam; and ridiculing all investigation into the nature,
application, and phenomena of this power. Yet this is exactly what
microscopic observers of the animal economy call "absurd and useless
inquiry." The true springs of our organization are not these muscles,
these arteries, these nerves, which are described and experimented upon
with so much care and exactness. They are hidden springs, the action
of which are as miracles to those who have vainly tried to account
for the motion of the muscles at the command of the will; for the
power of vision, which places the human eye in intimate and immediate
connection with the soul--dependent as they are upon unknown laws,
assigned them by the great, omniscient and omnipotent Being by whom
they were originally created, and Who is the one source of all power.

Although in our present ordinary state of existence we are permitted to
see only "as through a glass darkly," ignorant of many of the powers
and processes of nature, as well as of the causes to which they are
to be ascribed, we are not, therefore, entitled to set limits to
her operations, and to say to her, "Hitherto shalt thou go, and no
further! "We must not presume, says Glanvill, to assign bounds to the
exercise of the power of the Almighty, nor are these operations and
that power to be controlled by the arbitrary theories and capricious
fancies of man. We are surrounded by the incredible--the seemingly
miraculous. Who would not ask for demonstration when told that a
gnat's wing, in its ordinary flight, beats many hundred times in a
second? But what is this, when compared to the astonishing truths
which modern optical inquiries reveal--such as teach us that the
sensation of violet light affects our eyes 707 millions of millions
of times per second in order to effect that sensation?

How strangely must they estimate nature, how highly must they
value their own conceits, who deny the possibility of any cause
of any effect, merely because it is incomprehensible. In fact,
what do men comprehend? What do they know of causes? When Newton
said that gravitation held the world together, he assigned no reason
why the heavenly bodies do not fly off from each other into infinite
space. The discoverer of etheric force is able to give the reasons for,
and the explanations of, the laws involved in all that he asserts; or,
rather, all that he propounds; for, with the true humility of wisdom,
he asserts nothing. Newton at first thought that he had discovered in
electricity the ether which he asserted pervades all nature, until,
by repeated experiments, he became convinced of the insufficiency
of that principle to explain the phenomena. Other philosophers have
speculated upon magnetism in the same way, and upon the similarity
between magnetism and electricity. Mr. Keely's experiments show that
the two are, in part, antagonistic, and that both are but modifications
of the one force in nature. There have been some physiologists who have
maintained that the nerves are merely the conductors of some fluid
from the brain and spinal cord to the different parts of the body,
and that this circulating fluid is capable of an external expansion,
which takes place with such energy as to form an atmosphere, or sphere
of activity, similar to that of electrical bodies. Dr. Roget observes
that the velocity with which the nerves subservient to sensation
transmit the impressions they receive at one extremity, along their
whole course, exceeds all measurement, and can be compared only to
that of electricity passing along a conducting wire. A comparison
with gravity would have been nearer the truth, though no computation
ever has been made, or ever can be made, between the flight of gravity
and of electricity, so infinitely swifter is the former.

Béclard almost completely demonstrated the truth of Roget's hypothesis
concerning the action of "the nervous fluid" by cutting a nerve
of considerable size, adjoining a muscle, which induced paralysis
in this part. Perceiving the contractile action reappear, when he
approached the two ends of the nerve to the distance of three lines,
he became convinced that an imponderable substance, a fluid of some
kind, traversed the interval of separation, in order to restore the
muscular action. By another experiment he demonstrated its striking
analogy to galvanic electricity. The late Professor Keil, of Jena,
also made some very interesting experiments of the same character, one
of which tends to demonstrate the susceptibility of the nervous system
to the magnetic influence, and the efficacy of the magnet in the cure
of certain infirmities. It was communicated by him to a meeting of
the Royal Society of London more than fifty years since. If we are
justified, then, in assuming the existence of this nervous fluid,
writes Colquhoun, in 1836, whether secreted by, or merely conducted
by the nerves, and of its analogy to the other known, active, and
imponderable fluids, and of its capability of external expansion, as
in the case of electricity, it does not appear to be a very violent
or unwarrantable proceeding to extend the hypothesis a little further,
and to infer that it is also capable of being transmitted or directed
outwards, either involuntarily or by the volition of one individual,
with such energy as to produce certain real and perceptible effects
upon the organism of another, in a manner analogous to what is known
to occur in the case of the torpedo the gymnotus-electricus, etc.

Should it be that Mr. Keely's compound secret includes any explanation
of this operation of will-force, showing that it may be cultivated,
in common with the other powers which God has given us, we shall then
recover some of the knowledge lost out of the world, or retained only
in gipsy tribes and among Indian adepts.

The effects of the law of sympathetic association, which Mr. Keely
demonstrates as the governing medium of the universe, find
illustrations in inanimate nature. What else is the influence which
one string of a lute has upon a string of another lute when a stroke
upon it causes a proportionable motion and sound in the sympathizing
consort, which is distant from it, and not perceptibly touched? It
has been found that, in a watchmaker's shop, the timepieces,
or clocks, connected with the same wall or shelf, have such a
sympathetic effect in keeping time, that they stop those which beat
in irregular time; and, if any are at rest, set those going which
beat accurately. Norman Lockyer deals with the law of sympathetic
association as follows:--"While in the giving out of light we are
dealing with molecular vibration taking place so energetically as
to give rise to luminous radiation, absorption phenomena afford no
evidence of this motion of the molecules when their vibrations are
far less violent."... "The molecules are so apt to vibrate each in
its own period that they will take up vibrations from light which
is passing among them, provided always that the light thus passing
among them contains the proper vibrations."... "Let us try to get a
mental image of what goes on. There is an experiment in the world of
sound which will help us."... "Take two large tuning-forks, mounted on
sounding-boxes, and tuned to exact unison. One of the forks is set in
active vibration by means of a fiddle-bow, and then brought near to
the other one, the open mouths presented to each other. After a few
moments, if the fork originally sounded is damped to stop its sound,
it will be found that the other fork has taken up the vibration,
and is sounding distinctly. If the two forks are not in unison,
no amount of bowing of the one will have the slightest effect in
producing sound from the other."

Although physicists know that this extraordinary influence exists
between inanimate objects as a class, they look upon the human organism
as little more than a machine, taking small interest in researches
which evince the dominion of mind over matter. Keely's experimental
research in this province has shown him that it is neither the electric
nor the magnetic flow, but the etheric, which sends its current along
our nerves; that the electric or the magnetic bears an infinitely small
ratio to that of an etheric flow, both as to velocity and tenuity; that
true coincidents can exist between any mediums--cartilage to steel,
steel to wood, wood to stone, and stone to cartilage; that the same
influence (sympathetic association) which governs all the solids holds
the same governing influence over all liquids; and again, from liquid
to solid, embracing the three kingdoms, animal, vegetable and mineral;
that the action of mind over matter thoroughly substantiates these
incontrovertible laws of sympathetic etheric influence; that the only
true medium which exists in nature is the sympathetic flow emanating
from the normal human brain, governing correctly the graduating and
setting-up of the true sympathetic vibratory positions in machinery
necessary to success; that these flows come in on the order of the
fifth and seventh positions of atomic subdivision, compound ether a
resultant of this subdivision; that, if metallic mediums are brought
under the influence of this sympathetic flow they become organisms
which carry the same influence with them that the human brain does
over living physical positions--that the composition of the metallic
and of the physical are one and the same thing, although the molecular
arrangement of the physical may be entirely opposite to the metallic on
their aggregations; that the harmonious chords induced by sympathetic
positive vibration permeate the molecules in each, notwithstanding,
and bring about the perfect equation of any differentiation that
may exist--in one, the same as in the other--and thus they become
one and the same medium [2] for sympathetic transmission; that the
etheric flow is of a tenuity coincident to the condition governing the
seventh subdivision of matter--a condition of subtlety that readily
and instantaneously permeates all forms of aggregated matter, from
air to solid hammered steel--the velocity of the permeation being the
same with the one as with the other; that the tenuity of the etheric
flow is so infinitely fine that any magnifying glass, the power of
which would enlarge the smallest grain of sand to the size of the
sun, brought to bear upon it, would not make it visible to us; that
light, traversing at the speed of 200,000 miles per second a distance
requiring a thousand centuries to reach, would be traversed by the
etheric flow in an indefinite fragment of a second.

These are some of the problems which Mr. Keely has had to solve before
he could adapt his vibratory machinery to the etheric flow. The true
conditions for transmitting it sympathetically through a differential
wire of platinum and silver have now been attained, after eight
years of intense study and elaborate experiment. The introductory
indications began to show themselves about two years ago, but the
intermissions on transmission were so frequent and so great as to
discourage Mr. Keely from further research on this line. Then came
one of those "inspirations" which men call "accident," revealing
to him "the true conditions" necessary to produce a sympathetic
flow, free of differentiation, proving conclusively the truth
of his theory of the law governing the atomic triplets in their
association. Differentiation, by compound negative vibration of their
neutral centres, causes antagonism, and thus the great attractive
power that aggregates them becomes one of dispersion or expansion,
accompanied by immense velocity of rotation, which carries its
influence through the whole volume of air, 230 cubic inches contained
in sphere, within its 33 1/3 chord of its circle of coincidence. By
this wire of platinum and silver the current of force is now passed
to run the vibratory disk, thus altogether upsetting the "compressed
air" theory of Professor Barker, Dr. Hall, and others of less note.

"In setting the conditions of molecular sympathetic transmission
by wire," writes Keely, "the same law calls for the harmonious
adjustment of the thirds, to produce a non-intermittent flow of
sympathy. Intermission means failure here. That differential molecular
volume is required, in two different mediums of molecular density,
to destroy differentiation of sympathetic flow, seems at first sight
to controvert the very law established by the great Creator, which
constitutes harmony--a paradoxical position which has heretofore
misled physicists who have propounded and set forth most erroneous
doctrines, because they have accepted the introductory conditions,
discarding their sympathetic surroundings. The volume of the neutral
centre of the earth is of no more magnitude than the one of a molecule:
the sympathetic condition of one can be reached in the same time as
the other by its coincident chord."

Thus it will be seen what difficulties Keely has encountered in his
persevering efforts to use the etheric flow in vibratory machinery. One
by one he has conquered each, attaining the transmission of the
etheric current in the same manner as the electric current, with
this one notable difference--that, in order to show insulation to the
sceptical, he passes the etheric current through blocks of glass in
running his vibratory devices.

When Keely's system is finished, then, and not until then, all that
is involved in his discovery will be made known to the world.




NOTE.

Five years after this paper on Etheric force was written, Dr. Henry
Wood, of Boston, wrote an article, which appeared in The Arena of
October, 1891, having the title Healing through Mind. Dr. Wood says:
"Truth may be considered as a rounded unit. Truths have various and
unequal values, but each has its peculiar place, and if it be missing
or distorted, the loss is not only local but general. Unity is made up
of variety, and therein is completeness. Any honest search after truth
is profitable, for thereby is made manifest the kingdom of the real....

"We forget that immaterial forces rule not only the invisible but
the visible universe. Matter, whether in the vegetable, animal, or
human organism, is moulded, shaped, and its quality determined by
unseen forces back of and higher than itself. We rely upon the drug,
because we can feel, taste, see, and smell it. We are colour-blind
to invisible potency of a higher order, and practically conclude that
it is non-existent."--Healing through Mind.









