CHAPTER XVII.

1891.

MORE OF KEELY'S THEORIES.--HIS TRADUCERS EXPOSED.

        It was in India that man first recognized the fact that
        force is indestructible and eternal. This implies ideas more
        or less distinct of that which we now term its correlation
        and conservation. The changes which we witness are in its
        distribution.--Professor Draper.

        "For all things that be not true, be lies."

        There is a principle in music which has yet to be
        discovered.--Sir John Herschel.


From the Chicago Tribune.

That was a happy inspiration which led the Quintet Club, of
Philadelphia, to pay a visit to the workshop of Keely a few weeks
ago. Its members had been told that the illustrious inventor had
employed the power of music to develop the wonderful forces of nature,
and evolve by a law of sympathetic vibrations a mighty energy through
the disintegration of a few drops of water. Naturally they were
anxious to go. They were familiar with the claim made by Paganini
that he could throw down a building if he knew the chord of the mass
of masonry, and wanted to know if it were possible that the dream of
the great violinist is realized at last.

So nearly as can be made out from the mysterious language of the
man of many promises, there is a harmony of the universe that is
controllable by the strains of music. Each of the molecules composing
a mass of matter is in a state of incessant oscillation, and these
movements can be so much changed by means of musical vibration that
the matter will be disintegrated, its constituent molecules fly
apart, and a propulsive force be generated similar to that which is
evolved by the touching of a match to a single grain of powder stored
in a magazine. He holds that matter is nothing but forces held in
equilibrium, and that if the equilibrium be once destroyed the most
tremendous consequences will ensue.

According to the report, he proved to the satisfaction of more than one
member of the club that he has already discovered the means of calling
out this force, and is able to partially control it. In their presence
he caused a heavy sphere to rotate rapidly or slowly, according to
the notes given by the instrument on which he played. The sphere was
so isolated as to prove that it could not be acted on by electricity
or in any other way than by the sound waves. He disintegrated water
into what he calls "etheric vapour" by means of a tuning fork and
a zither. The disintegration of only four drops of water produced a
pressure of 27,000 pounds to the square inch, and three drops of the
harmless liquid fired off a cannon "with a tremendous roar."

All this is wonderful--if true. And it is strangely parallel to the
most advanced lines of modern thought in a scientific direction, if not
coincident with them. There is the point. Is there a "thin partition"
dividing the wisdom of the schools from the insanity of Keely, or will
he yet prove his right to take rank among the greatest of earth's
inventors? If he can do what is at present claimed for him, doing
it honestly and without any hocus-pocus to beguile the fools, he has
already earned a title higher than that worn by any man of the age. If
he is simply cheating those to whom he exhibits his mechanism, he is
one of the biggest charlatans that ever drew breath, and ought to be
scouted accordingly. And here is the difficulty. The visit alluded to
is claimed to have been made on May 9th, or fully six weeks ago. Surely
if such results were achieved then, as reported by the Philadelphia
Inquirer, many others would ere this have been asked and permitted to
witness a repetition of the experiments, and the scientific world would
now be in a blaze of excited admiration of the man and his methods. But
nothing further is said about it. Keely is still plodding away in his
workshop, and the world is still rolling round in happy ignorance of
what he has done towards revolutionizing existing lines of thought and
modes of action. Surely something is radically wrong. The scientists
owe it to themselves as well as to the inventor to see to it that
this condition is not allowed to continue. They should appoint a
commission to investigate, and find out whether Keely is a genius
worthy of the highest honours and rewards that can be bestowed,
an arrant impostor, whose fittest place would be the penitentiary,
or a crank that ought to be put in a lunatic asylum. It is hard to
resist the conclusion that he is one or the other of these, and in
either case he is not getting his deserts. Let Keely be scientifically
investigated. He has been permitted to remain in obscurity too long
already. He should be reported on, no matter whether the result be
to raise a mortal to the skies or send an alleged angel down to the
depths of infamy as a life-long deceiver of his species."

[The Tribune is informed that the report was correct in every
particular, and that Professor D. G. Brinton, of the University of
Pennsylvania, has prepared a paper on the subject, and will publish it
when Mr. Keely is ready to have his system made known.--Ed. Inquirer.]

The writer of this article in the Chicago Tribune has expressed
the prevailing sentiment of our time, in regard to Keely, as far
as those are concerned who are in ignorance of the fact that Keely
has discovered an unknown energy, and is working out a system which
he must himself first learn, by researches into the laws of nature
governing it, before he can apply it to mechanics, or make it even
so much as understood by others.

The unprincipled journalist before alluded to, after failing in an
attempt to obtain admission to Mr. Keely's workshop, wrote a series
of articles for the press, recounting Keely's researching experiments
in 1889 and 1890, as then shown to Professor Joseph Leidy, Dr. James
Willcox, and others. This journalist, who professed to give woodcuts
of Keely's researching instruments, was entirely ignorant of the fact
that the experiments which he described had never once been repeated,
during the last eighteen months; Keely having taken up researches
on another line, as soon as he had gained sufficient control of the
force he was handling to cause the solid bronze weight weighing six
and three quarters lbs., to rise in the jar, rest midway, or remain
stationary at will. The "Generator," described by this journalist in
the Philadelphia Press of November 1st, 1891, never had any existence
beyond the journalist's brain and the woodcut. It was represented as
a square structure, "big and thick walled enough to hold a donkey
engine," whereas the true disintegrator (or improved generator) is
round, and about the size of the wheel of a baby's perambulator. This
form of generator Mr. Keely has been using for about three years;
suspending it from a staple in the ceiling, or against the wall,
when using it in the dissociation of the so-called elements of
water. Consequently, it was impossible for the force to be "conducted
from a reservoir eight or ten squares distance," as suggested by
this inventing journalist, who says that he "spent sleepless nights"
in devising the way in which the generator was operated by Keely:
asserting that "this extraordinary force was loaded like electricity
through a wire and discharged like steam through a pipe."

In a romance called "The Prince and the Pauper" these lines occur:
"For, look you, an it were not true, it would be a lie. It surely
would be. Think on't. For all things that be not true, be lies,--thou
canst make nought else out of it." Never were truer words written,
and equally true is it that, as another author has written, "If
the boy who cannot speak the truth, lives to be a man, and becomes
a journalist, he will invent lie after lie as long as he can get a
Journal to print them and to pay him for them." There are very few men,
who take up journalism in the spirit of a St. Beuve. Quite as few are
there who are competent to write, in any way, of Keely's discoveries
and all that they involve. Even among men of science, only one man
has been found who is able to comprehend Keely's theories, and to
handle them in a way to make them intelligible to others. S. Laing, in
"Modern Thought," says, "Science traces everything back to primeval
atoms and germs, and there it leaves us. How came these atoms and
energies there, from which this wonderful universe of worlds has
been evolved by inevitable laws? What are they in their essence,
and what do they mean? The only answer is, "It is unknowable. It is
behind the veil. Spirit may be matter, matter may be spirit." Keely's
researches have been of a nature which, grappling with these mysteries,
has brought them to the light. He tells us that spirit is the soul
of matter, and that no matter exists without a soul.



More of Keely's Theories.

The sympathetic conditions that we call mind are no more immaterial in
their character than light or electricity. The substance of the brain
is molecular, while the substance of the mind that permeates the brain
is inter-etheric, and is the element by which the brain is impregnated;
exciting it into action and controlling all the conditions of physical
motion, as long as the sympathetic equatative is in harmony, as between
the first, second, and third orders of transmission; molecular, atomic
and etheric. By this soul-substance is the physical controlled. In
order to trace the successive triple impulses, taking the introductory
one of sympathetic negative outreach, towards the cerebral neutrals,
which awakens the latent element to action, we find that mind may be
considered a specific order of inter-atomic motion sympathetically
influenced by the celestial flow, and that it becomes when thus excited
by this medium a part and parcel of the celestial itself. Only under
these conditions of sympathetic assimilation can it assert its power
over the physical organisms; the finite associated with the infinite.

The brain is not a laboratory. It is as static as the head of the
positive negative attractor, [21] until influenced by certain orders
of vibration, when it reveals the true character of the outreach
so induced. The brain is the high resonating receptacle where the
sympathetic celestial acts, and where molecular and atomic motion
exhibits itself, as according to the intensification brought to bear
upon it by the celestial mind flow.

The cerebral forces, in their control of the physical organism,
reveal to us the infinite power of the finer or spiritual fluid,
though not immaterial, over the crude molecular. The luminous, etheric,
protoplastic element, which is the highest tenuous condition of the
ether, fills the regions of infinite space, and in its radiating
outreach gives birth to the prime neutral centres that carry the
planetary worlds through their ranges of motion.

If the minds of all the most learned sages, of all time, were
concentrated, into one mind, that one would be too feeble, in its
mental outreach, to comprehend the conditions associated with the
fourth order of sympathetic condensation. The controversies of the
past in regard to the condensation of invisible matter prove this. The
chemistry of the infinite and the chemistry of the finite are as wide
apart, in their sympathetic ranges, as is the velocity of light from
the movement of the hour-hand of a clock. Even the analysis of the
visible conditions taxes our highest powers of concentration.

The question naturally arises, Why is this condition of ether always
under a state of luminosity of an especial order? Its characteristics
are such, from its infinite tenuity and the sympathetic activity
with which it is impregnated, that it possesses an order of
vibratory, oscillatory velocity, which causes it to evolve its own
luminosity. This celestial, latent power, that induces luminosity
in this medium, is the same that registers in all aggregated forms
of matter, visible and invisible. It is held in corpuscular embrace
until liberated by a compound vibratory negative medium.

What does this activity represent, by which luminosity is induced in
the high etheric realm? Does not the force following permeation by
the Divine Will show that even this order of ether, this luminiferous
region, is bounded by a greater region still beyond?--that it is but
the shore which borders the realm, from which the radiating forces of
the Infinite emanate: the luminiferous being the intermediate which
transfers the will force of the Almighty towards the neutral centres
of all created things, animate and inanimate, visible and invisible;
even down into the very depths of all molecular masses. The activity
of the corpuscles, in all aggregations, represents the outflow of
this celestial force, from the luminiferous track, towards all these
molecular centres of neutrality, and reveals to us the connecting link
between mind and matter. How plainly are we thus taught that God is
everywhere, and at the same time in every place. It gives us a new
sense of the omniscience and omnipresence of the Creator. In these
researches I am brought so near to the celestial conditions that my
pen is ready to fall from my hand while writing on this subject; so
more and more sensibly do I feel my abject ignorance of its depths....

These conditions of luminosity have no thermal forces associated
with them; although, paradoxically, all thermal conditions emanate
from that source. The tenuity of this element accounts for it. It is
only when these sympathetic streams come in conflict with the cruder
elementary conditions, either the molecular or atomic, that heat is
evolved from its latent state, and a different order of light from
the etheric luminous is originated, which has all the high conditions
of thermal force associated with it: the sun being the intermediate
transmitter. Thus is shown the wonderful velocity of these sympathetic
streams emanating from celestial space.

The sympathetic forces transmitted by our solar planet, to which
our earth is so susceptible, are continuously received from the
luminiferous realm; the sympathetic volume of which, as expended, is
constantly equated by the exhaustless will-force of the Creator. Had
the solar energy been subservient to what physicists ascribe it,
the sun would have been a dead planet thousands of centuries ago,
as also all planets depending upon it as an intermediate.

In fact, all planetary masses are sympathetic-transferring-mediums,
or intermediates, of this prime, luminous, dominant element. In the
vibratory subdivision of matter, as progressive evolution has been
analyzed, it is evident that these transfers of sympathetic force
extend beyond the limits of our orbital range, from system to system,
throughout the realms of space: these progressive systems becoming
themselves, after a certain range of sympathetic motion, sympathetic
intermediates, as included in the whole of one system, exemplified
so beautifully in the cerebral convolutions, with their connective
sympathy for each other; transferring as a whole on the focalizing
centre, from which it radiates to all parts of the physical organism,
controlling in all its intricate variety the sympathetic action,
of our movements.

"What is there that we really know?" asks Buckle. "We talk of the
law of gravitation, and yet we know not what gravitation is; we
talk of the conservation of force and distribution of forces, and we
know not what forces are." "The vibratory principles now discovered
in physics," says Hemstreet, "are so fine and attenuated that they
become an analogy to mental or cerebral vibrations." Let us see what
Keely's system of vibratory physics says of gravity, cohesion, etc.

What is Gravity?--Gravity is an eternal existing condition in etheric
space, from which all visible forms are condensed. Consequently,
it is inherent in all forms of matter, visible and invisible. It is
not subject to time nor space. It is an established connective link
between all forms of matter from their birth, or aggregation. Time is
annihilated by it, as it has already traversed space when the neutral
centres of the molecules were established.

Gravity, then, is nothing more than an attractive, sympathetic
stream, flowing towards the neutral centre of the earth, emanating
from molecular centres of neutrality; concordant with the earth's
centre of neutrality, and seeking its medium of affinity with a power
corresponding to the character of the molecular mass.

What is Cohesion?--Cohesion is sympathetic negative attraction. It
is the negative, vibratory assimilation, or aggregation, of the
molecules, acting according to the density or compactness of the
molecular groupings on their structures. The differing character
of molecular densities, or molecular range of motion, represents
differing powers of attraction. The lower the range of motions on
the molecular vibrations of these structures, the greater is the
attractive force that holds them together; and vice versâ.

What is Heat? Heat may be classed as a vibro-atomic element, not
exceeding 14,000 vibrations per second at its greatest intensity,
latent in all conditions of matter both visible and invisible. The
velocity of the sympathetic flows which emanate from our solar
world, the sun, coming into contact with our atmospheric medium,
liberates this element in all the different degrees of intensity that
give warmth to our earth. Light is another resultant; the different
intensities of which are produced according to the different angles
of this sympathetic projectment.

The light that emanates from a glow-worm is the resultant of the
action of the sympathetic medium of the insect itself on a centre
of phosphorescent matter, which is included in its structure. The
resultant of the two conditions are quite different, but they are
governed by the same laws of sympathetic percussion.

Radiation is the term used to express the reaching out of the thermal
element, after its liberation from its corpuscular imprisonment, to be
re-absorbed or returned again to its sympathetic environment; teaching
us a lesson in the equation of disturbance of sympathetic equilibrium.



Force.

"By what means is force exerted, and what definitely is force? Given
that force can be exerted by an act of will, do we understand the
mechanism by which this is done? And if there is a gap in our knowledge
between the conscious idea of a motion and the liberation of muscular
energy needed to accomplish it, how do we know that a body may not
be moved without ordinary material contact by an act of will?" These
questions were asked by Professor Lodge in his paper on "Time;" and
as Keely contends that all metallic substances after having been
subjected to a certain order of vibration may be so moved, let us
see how he would answer these questions. When Faraday endeavoured
to elaborate some of his "unscientific notions in regard to force
and matter," men of science then said that Faraday's writings were
not translatable into scientific language. The same has been said of
Keely's writings. Pierson says, "The very fact that there is about the
product of another's genius what you and I cannot understand is a proof
of genius, i.e., of a superior order of faculties." Keely, who claims
to have discovered the existence of hidden energy in all aggregations
of matter, imprisoned there by the infinite velocity of molecular
rotation, asserts that "physicists in their mental rambles in the
realm of analytical chemistry, analytical as understood by them, have
failed to discover the key-note which is associated with the flow of
the mental element;" that "they have antagonized or subverted all the
conditions," in this unexplored territory of negative research, which
he has demonstrated as existing in reference to latent energy locked in
corpuscular space. These antagonisms might have been sooner removed had
those physicists who witnessed some of Keely's experiments, while he
was still working blindfold as it were, in past years, not belonged
to that class of scientists "who only see what they want to see,
and who array facts and figures adroitly on the side of preconceived
opinion." Since the last meeting of the British Association, Keely,
in writing of some of the addresses delivered, says: "It delights me
to find that physicists are verging rapidly toward a region which,
when they reach, will enable them to declare to the scientific world
what they now deny; viz., that immense volumes of energy exist in all
conditions of corpuscular spaces. My demonstrations of this truth have
been ignored by them and now they must find it out for themselves. I do
not doubt that they will reach it in their own way. I accept Professor
Stoney's idea that an apsidal motion might be caused by an interaction
between high and low tenuous matter; but such conditions, even of
the highest accelerated motion, are too far down below the etheric
realm to influence it sympathetically, even in the most remote way. I
mean by this that no corpuscular action, nor interaction can disturb
or change the character of etheric vibrations. The conception of the
molecule disturbing the ether, by electrical discharges from its parts,
is not correct; as the highest conditions associated with electricity
come under the fourth descending order of sympathetic condensation,
and consequently its corpuscular realm is too remote to take any
part towards etheric disturbance. Hypothesis is one thing and actual
experimental demonstration is another; one being as remote from the
other as the electrical discharges from the recesses of the molecule
are from the tenuous condition of the universal ether. The conjecture
as regards the motion being a series of harmonic elliptic ones,
accompanied by a slow apsidal one, I believe to be correct.... The
combination of these motions would necessarily produce two circular
motions of different amplitudes whose differing periods might
correspond to two lines of the spectrum, as conjectured, and lead
the experimenter, perhaps, into a position corresponding to an
ocular illusion. Every line of the spectrum, I think, consists not
of two close lines, but of compound triple lines: though not until
an instrument has been constructed, which is as perfect in its parts
as is the sympathetic field that environs matter, can any truthful
conclusion be arrived at from demonstration."

It must be remembered that Keely claims to have demonstrated
the subdivision of matter in seven distinct orders: molecular,
intermolecular, atomic, inter-atomic, etheric, inter-etheric, reaching
the compound inter-etheric in the seventh order. In commenting further
upon the experimental researches of men of science to show whether
ether in contact with moving matter is affected by the motion of
such matter, Keely writes: "The motion of any matter of less tenuity
than the ether cannot affect it any more than atmospheric air could
be held under pressure in a perforated chamber. The tenuous flow of
a magnet cannot be waived aside by a plate of heavy glass, and yet
the magnetic flow is only of an inter-atomic character and far more
crude than the introductory etheric. The etheric element would remain
perfectly static under the travel of the most furious cyclone; it would
pass through the molecular interstices of any moving projectile with
the same facility that atmospheric air would pass though a coarse
sieve. Ether could not be affected by the motion of less tenuous
matter, but if the matter were of the same tenuous condition it would
sympathetically associate itself with it; consequently there would
be no motion any more than motion accompanies gravity.

In the same way that the mind flow induces motion on the physical
organism, sympathetic flows on molecular masses induce motion on
the molecular. The motion of the molecules in all vegetable and
mineral forms in nature are the results of the sympathetic force of
the celestial mind flow, or the etheric luminous, over terrestrial
matter. This celestial flow is the controlling medium of the universe,
and one of its closest associates is gravity.... The molecule is
a world in itself, carrying with it all the ruling sympathetic
conditions which govern the greatest of the planetary masses. It
oscillates within its etheric rotating envelope with an inconceivable
velocity, without percussing its nearest attendant, and is always
held within its sphere of action by the fixed gravital power of its
neutral centre, in the same sympathetic order that exists between
the planetary worlds. The dissociation of aggregated molecules by
intermolecular vibration does not disturb even to an atomic degree
these fixed neutral points. Each molecule contributes its quota to
the latent electrical force, which shows up by explosion after its
gathering in the storm clouds, and then it returns to the molecular
embrace it originally occupied. You may call this return, absorption;
but it gets there first during corpuscular aggregation, and comes from
there, or shows itself, during sympathetic disturbance of equilibrium.

There are three kinds of electricity, the harmonic and enharmonic,
which, with their leader, the dominant, form the first triple. Their
sympathetic associations evolve the energy of matter. The dominant
is electricity luminous, or propulsive positive. The harmonic, or
the magnetic, which is the attractive, with its wonderful sympathetic
outreach, is the negative current of the triune stream. The enharmonic,
or high neutral, acts as the assimilative towards the reinstatement
of sympathetic disturbance. In electric lighting, the velocity of
the dynamos accumulates only the harmonic current--by atomic and
inter-atomic conflict--transferring one two hundred thousandth of the
light that the dominant current would give, if it were possible to
construct a device whereby it could be concentrated and dispersed. But
this supreme portion can never be handled by any finite mode. Each
of these currents has its triple flow, representing the true lines
of the sympathetic forces that are constantly assimilating with
the polar terrestrial envelope. The rotation of the earth is one
of the exciters that disturbs the equilibrium of these sensitive
streams. The alternate light and darkness induced by this motion
helps to keep up the activity of these streams, and the consequent
assimilation and dissimilation. The light zone being ever followed
by the dark zone, holds the sympathetic polar wave constant in its
fluctuations. This fact may be looked upon as the foundation of the
fable that the world rests upon a tortoise. The rotation of the earth
is controlled and continued by the action of the positive and negative
sympathetic celestial streams. Its pure and steady motion, so free
from intermitting impulses, is governed to the most minute mathematical
nicety by the mobility of the aqueous portion of its structure, i.e.,
its oceans and ocean's anastomosis. There is said to be a grain of
truth in the wildest fable, and herein we have the elephant that the
tortoise stands on. The fixed gravital centres of neutrality, the
sympathetic concordants to the celestial outreach, that exist in the
inter-atomic position, are the connective sympathetic links whereby
the terrestrial is held in independent suspension. We cannot say that
this corresponds to what the elephant stands upon, but we can say,
"This is the power whereby the elephant is sympathetically suspended."



The Atom.

Question asked in Clerk Maxwell's memoirs: "Under what form, right,
or light, can an atom be imagined?" Keely replies, It eludes the grasp
of the imagination, for it is the introductory step to a conception
of the eternity of the duration of matter. The magnitude of the
molecule, as compared to the inter-atom, is about on the same ratio
as a billiard ball to a grain of sand; the billiard ball being the
domain wherein the triple inter-molecules rotate, the inter-molecules
again being the field wherein the atomic triplets sympathetically
act, and again progressively, in the inter-atomic field, the first
order of the etheric triplets begins to show its sympathetic inreach
for the centres of neutral focalization. It is impossible for the
imagination to grasp such a position. Inter-atomic subdivision
comes under the order of the fifth dimensional space in etheric
condensation. Atoms and corpuscules can be represented by degrees
of progressive tenuity, as according to progressive subdivision,
but to imagine the ultimate position of the atomic alone would be
like trying to take a measurement of immeasurable space. We often
speak of the borders of the infinite. No matter what the outreach
may be, nor how minute the corpuscular subdivision, we still remain
on the borders, looking over the far beyond, as one on the shore of
a boundless ocean who seeks to cross it with his gaze. Therefore,
philosophically speaking, as the atom belongs to the infinite and the
imagination to the finite, it can never be comprehended in any form
or light, nor by any right; for in the range of the imagination it
is as a bridge of mist which can never be crossed by any condition
that is associated with a visible molecular mass, that is, by mind
as associated with crude matter.



Sympathetic Outreach

is not induction. They are quite foreign to each other in
principle. Sympathetic outreach is the seeking for concordance
to establish an equation on the sympathetic disturbance of
equilibrium. When a magnet is brought into contact with a keeper,
there is no induction of magnetism from the magnet into the keeper. The
static force of the magnet remains unchanged, and the action between
the two may be compared to a sympathetic outreach of a very limited
range of motion. The sympathetic outreach of the moon towards the
earth, has a power strong enough to extend nearly a quarter of a
million of miles to lift the oceans out of their beds. This is not
the power of induction....

The sympathetic envelope of our earth owes its volume and its activity
entirely to celestial radiating forces. Reception and dispersion are
kept up by atomic and inter-atomic conflict, as between the dominant
and enharmonic.

Silver represents the 3rd, gold the 6th, and platina the 9th, in
their links of association, one to the other, in the molecular range
of their motions, when submitted to vibratory impulses.

If an introductory impulse, representing the sympathetic chord
of transmission, say B flat, or any other chord, be given to
a sectional transmitting wire, the molecular triple, that is
carried sympathetically along the path of such transmitter by the
differentiation induced, excites high sympathy with the polar
terrestrial stream. The polar terrestrial, being triune in its
character, requires a triune sympathizer to meet its differential
requirements: silver the harmonic, gold the enharmonic, and platina the
dominant. When this triple metallic condition is properly sensitized,
by any chord on the dominant, combined molecular, differentiated
action is induced; showing a condition approaching magnetism in
its development of related sympathy, without having the conditions
that are truly magnetic, as this term (magnetic) is understood by
all physicists.

Magnetism is not polar negative attraction, any more than polar
negative attraction is magnetism; for polar negative attraction shows
positive sympathetic outreach, of a high order; which is a condition
entirely foreign to magnetism.

Sympathetic negative attraction is not the resultant of electrical
sympathization, but it includes the full triune flow; the dominant
being the leader and associate of the celestial. The sympathetic
outreach, of negative attraction, is the power that holds the planetary
masses in their orbital ranges of oscillatory action. Magnetism has
no outreach, but it pervades all terrestrial masses--all planetary
masses. It is highly electrical in its character, in fact magnetism is
born of electricity; whereas negative attraction is not, but it has a
sympathetic outreach for magnetism. Magnetism is static. Sympathetic
negative attraction reaches from planet to planet; but electricity
does not, nor does magnetism. Sympathetic negative attraction is born
of the celestial, and impregnates every mass that floats in space:
seeking out all magnetic or electric conditions; and all these masses
are subservient to celestial outreach. All the magnets in the world
could not induce rotation, no matter how differentiated, but polar
negative attraction induces rotation.



Hydrogen.

The horizon of matter, which has been thought to rest over attenuated
hydrogen, may extend to infinite reaches beyond, including stuffs
or substances which have never been revealed to the senses. Beings
fashioned of this attenuated substance might walk by our side unseen,
nor cast a shadow in the noon-day sun.--Hudson Tuttle.

This supposition of itself admits that hydrogen is a compound. If
it were indivisible it would assimilate with the high luminous,
from which all substances are formed or aggregated. If hydrogen were
a simple it could not be confined. No molecular structure known to
man can hold the inter-luminous; not even the low order of it that
is chemically liberated. The word "attenuated" admits that hydrogen
is a compound. I contend that hydrogen is composed of three elements,
with a metallic base, and comes under the order of the second atomic,
both in vibration and sympathetic outreach.

Hydrogen exists only where planetary conditions exist: there it
is always present, but never in uninterfered space. There is much
celestial material that has never been revealed to the senses. My
researches lead me to think that hydrogen carries heat in a latent
condition, but I do not believe it will ever be possible to originate
a device that will vibrate hydrogen with a velocity to induce heat.

The word imponderable as applied to a molecule is incorrect. All gases
as well as atmospheric air are molecular in their structures. If
atmospheric air is subdivided, by atomic vibration, it merely
dissociates the hydrogen from the oxygen; neither of which, though
disunited, passes from the inter-molecular state; and not until
hydrogen is sympathetically subdivided in its inter-molecular structure
by inter-atomic vibrations can it assimilate with the introductory
etheric element. There is a wonderful variation of gravital sympathy
between the gaseous elements of compounds, all of which comes under
the head of molecular....

Under date of October 1st, 1891, Mr. Keely writes: I see no possibility
of failure, as I have demonstrated that my theories are correct in
every particular, as far as I have gone; and if I am not handicapped in
any way during the next eight months, and my depolarizer is perfect,
I will then be prepared to demonstrate the truth of all that I assert
in reference to disintegration, cerebral diagnosis, aerial suspension
and dissociation, and to prove the celestial gravital link of sympathy
as existing between the polar terrestrial and equation of mental
disturbance of equilibrium. It is a broad assertion for one man, and
'an ignorant man' at that, to make; but the proof will then be so
overwhelming in its truthful simplicity that the most simple-minded
can understand it. Then I will be prepared to give to science and to
commerce a system that will elevate both to a position far above that
which they now occupy.

Again, November 4th, Mr. Keely says: The proper system for the
treatment of cerebral differentiation is not yet known to the
physician of to-day. The dissimilarities of opinion existing,
with regard to any case, are confounding. When the true system
is recognized, the vast number of physical experimentalists, now
torturing humanity, will die a natural death. Until this climax is
reached, physical suffering must go on multiplying at the same ratio
that experimentalists increase. Molecular differentiation is the fiend
that wrecks the physical world, using the seat of the cerebral forces
as its intermediate transmitter. It is the devastating dragon of the
universe, and will continue to devastate until a St. George arises
to destroy it. The system of equating molecular differentiation is
the St. George that will conquer.

When my system is completed for commerce, it will be ready for science
and art. I have become an extensive night worker, giving not less
than eighteen hours a day, in times of intensification. I have timed
my race for life and I am bound to make it....

New York Truth, 15th May, 1890, in commenting upon Keely's claims to
have "annihilated gravity and turned the mysterious polar current
to a mill-race," continues: "I sincerely hope that Mr. Keely may
prove, AS FROM LATE DEVELOPMENTS HE IS LIKE TO DO, that the hidden
spirit of the Cosmos, which men call Deity, First Cause, Nature,
and other sonorous but indefinite names, has manifested itself to
him; that the music of the spheres is a truth, not an imagination,
and that vibration, which is sight, hearing, taste and smell, is in
serious verity, all else. The fable of Orpheus and Arion may have
a foundation in actual physics, the harmonies that move our souls
to grief or joy as music, may be the same as those that govern and
impel the stars in their courses, cause molecules to crystallize
into symmetry, and from symmetry into life. Who shall say? If the
accounts of Keely's late achievements be true, and they are honestly
vouched for by men of worth and note, then the secret is laid bare,
the core of being is opened out. In this age of dawning reason the
candle cannot always be hidden under a bushel; some enterprising hand
will lift the obstruction and let the light shine before men."

Two years have nearly passed away since this was written, during
which time Mr. Keely has been engaged in perfecting his system for
aerial navigation. He has, one by one, overcome all obstacles, and
so far gained control, of the mysterious polar current, that he has
been able to exhibit on the thirds, or molecular graduation of the
propeller of his air-ship, 120 revolutions in a minute; and on the
sixths, or atomic graduation, 360 revolutions in a minute. He still
has the etheric field to conquer; but those who know how many years he
has been making his mistakes stepping-stones in his upward progress,
surmounting obstacle after obstacle which would have dismayed a less
courageous soul, feel little doubt that he will "make the race," which
he has timed for life, and reach the goal a conqueror, notwithstanding
he is still so often "handicapped."

All those who had the privilege of witnessing Keely's researching
experiments, in the spring of 1890, when he first succeeded in raising
the metal weight, and who were sufficiently acquainted with the
laws of physics to understand the conditions under which the weight
was raised, pronounced the force by which it was affected to be an
unknown force. Had the weight been but a nail or a feather, lifted
under such conditions, physicists know that, after he has gained as
perfect control of it as we now have of steam, air-ships weighing
thousands of tons can be raised to any height in our atmosphere,
and the seemingly untraversable highways of the air opened to commerce.

This force is not, like steam or electricity, fraught with danger
in certain states to those who use it; for, after the molecular
mass of the vessel has been fitted to the conditions required,
its control becomes of such a nature that seemingly a star might as
soon go astray, and be lost to the universe, as for the aerial ship
to meet with an accident, unless its speed was pushed to that point
where gravity resumes its control. In fact, Keely asserts that there
is no known force so safe to use as the polar terrestrial force,
for when the celestial and terrestrial conditions are once set up,
they remain for ever; perpetual molecular action the result.

In using the word celestial, Keely refers to the air, in the same
sense that terrestrial refers to the earth.


        Wide through the waste of ether, sun and star
          All linked by harmony, which is the chain
        That binds to earth the orbs that wheel afar
          Through the blue fields of Nature's wide domain.

                                                    Percival.



From the New York Home Journal.


        THE SONG OF THE CARBONS. [22]

        A weird, sweet melody, faint and far,
          A humming murmur, a rhythmic ring,
        Floats down from the tower where the lenses are:--
          Can you hear the song which the carbons sing?

        Millions of æons have rolled away
          In the grand chorale which the stars rehearse,
        Since the note, so sweet in our song to-day,
          Was struck in the chord of the universe.

        The vast vibration went floating on
          Through the diapason of space and time,
        Till the impulse swelled to a deeper tone,
          And mellowed and thrilled with a finer rhyme.

        Backward and forward the atoms go
          In the surging tide of that soundless sea,
        Whose billows from nowhere to nowhere flow,
          As they break on the sands of eternity.

        Yet, through all the coasts of the endless All,
          In the ages to come, as in ages gone,
        We feel but the throb of that mystic thrall
          Which binds responsive the whole in one.

        We feel but the pulse of that viewless hand
          Which ever has been and still shall be,
        In the stellar orb and the grain of sand,
          Through nature's endless paternity.

        The smile which plays in the maiden's glance,
          Or stirs in the beat of an insect's wing,
        Is of kin with the north light's spectral dance,
          Or the dazzling zone of the planet's ring.

        From our lonely tower aloft in air,
          With the breezes around us, tranquil and free,
        When the storm rack pales in the lightning's glare,
          Or the starlight sleeps in the sleeping sea,

        We send our greeting through breathless space,
          To our distant cousins, the nebulæ,
        And catch in the comet's misty trace,
          But a drifting leaf from the tribal tree.

        The song we hum is but one faint sound
          In the hymn which echoes from pole to pole,
        Which fills the domes of creation's round,
          And catches its key from the over-soul.

        And when it ceases all life shall fail,
          Time's metronome shall arrested stand;
        All voice be voiceless, the stars turn pale,
          And the great conductor shall drop his wand.









