CHAPTER VII.

THE KEY TO THE PROBLEMS. KEELY'S SECRETS.

        Causa latet, vis est notissima.--Proverb.

        (The cause is hidden, the power is most apparent.)
        Electricity is in principle as material as water; so it
        appears, and Mr. Carl Hering has expressed the fact with
        much of clearness and force. He says, "It is a well-known
        fact that the quantity of electricity measured in coulombs
        never is generated, never is consumed, and never does grow
        less, excepting leakage. The current flowing out of a lamp is
        exactly the same in quantity as that going into it; the same
        is true of motors and of generators, showing that electricity
        of itself is neither consumed while doing work nor is it
        generated. After doing work in a lamp or motor, it comes
        out in precisely the same quantity as it entered. A battery
        is not able to generate quantity or coulombs of electricity;
        all it is able to do is to take the quantity which pours in at
        one pole, and sends out at the other pole with an increased
        pressure. Electricity, therefore, is not merely force (or
        a form of energy), but matter. It is precisely analogous to
        water in a water circuit....--The Court Journal.


The theory of Aristotle concerning heat, viz. that it is a condition of
matter, together with the dicta of Locke, Davy, Rumford, and Tyndall,
have been consigned of late by many to the tomb of exploded theories,
and are replaced by those of Lavoisier and Black, which make caloric an
actual substance. The Rev. J. J. Smith, M.A., D.D., tells us that the
only way the great problem of the universe can ever be scientifically
solved is by studying, and arriving at just conclusions with regard
to, the true nature and character of force. He maintains, in his
paper upon "The Unity and Origin of Force," that, as it is the great
organizer of matter, it must not only be superior to it, but also
must have been prior, as it existed before organization commenced,
and immanent always. Newton, who scoffed at Epicurus's idea that
"gravitation is essential and inherent in matter," asserted that
gravity must be caused by an agent acting, constantly, according to
certain laws. Heat, gravity, light, electricity, magnetism, chemical
affinities, are all different phases of the primal force discovered by
Keely, and all these forces, it is said, can be obtained from a single
ray of sunlight. "The evidence of unity or oneness even between the
physical, vital, mental, and spiritual is seen in the light of this law
of correlation," says Smith. "A great portion of our muscles contract
and relax in obedience to our wills, thereby proving that the mental
force can be, and is, in every such instance actually converted into
the muscular or the physical." Keely demonstrates the truth of this
assertion, claiming that "all forces are indestructible, immaterial,
and homogeneous entities, having their origin and unity in one great
intelligent personal will force."

The Duke of Argyll says:--"We know nothing of the ultimate seat of
force. Science, in the modern doctrine of conservation of energy,
and the convertibility of forces, is already getting something
like a firm hold of the idea that all kinds of forces are but
forms or manifestations of some one central force, issuing from
some one fountain-head of power." It is Keely's province to prove to
materialists--to the world--that this one fountain-head is none other
than the Omnipotent and all-pervading Will-Force of the Almighty,
"which upholds, guides, and governs, not only our world, but the
entire universe. This important truth is destined to shiver the
tottering fabric of materialism into fragments at no distant day."

Professor George Bush writes:--"The progress of scientific research, at
the present day, has distinguished itself not less by the wideness of
the field over which its triumphs have spread, than by the soundness
and certainty of the inductions by which it is sustained. It is
equally indisputable that we are approximating the true philosophy
which underlies the enlarged and enlarging spiritual experiences and
phenomena of the current age. That this philosophy, when reached,
will conduct us into the realm of the spiritual as the true region of
causes, and disclose new and unthought-of relations between the world
of matter and of mind, is doubtless a very reasonable anticipation,
and one that even now is widely, though vaguely, entertained."

The Egyptians worshipped Ra, their name for the sun, and Ammon,
the emblem of a mysterious power concealed from human perception. The
Supreme Being is the grand central spiritual sun, the source and centre
of all life, "whose revelation is traced in imperishable figures
of universal harmony on the face of Cosmos." "The outward visible
world is but the clothing of the invisible," wrote Coleridge. "The
whole world process, in its content," says von Hartmann, "is only a
logical process; but in its existence a continued act of will." Lilly
continues, "That is what physical law means. Reason and Will are
inseparably united in the universe, as they are in idea. If we will
anything, it is for some reason. In contemplating the structure of the
universe, we cannot resist the conclusion that the whole is founded
upon a distinct idea."

Keely demonstrates the harmony of this "distinct idea" throughout
creation, and shows us that "the sun is the visible effluence and
agent, earthward, of the Being without whose prior design and decree
there would be no order and no systematic rule on earth," as well
as that in "the universal ether" we find the link between mind and
matter. "There is more of heaven than of earth, in all terrestrial
things; more of spirit than of matter in what are termed material
laws." Lange, with prophetic tongue, says that this age of materialism
may prove to be but the stillness before the storm which bursts from
unknown gulfs to give a new shape to the world. Inch by inch, step by
step, physical science has marched towards its desired goal--the verge
of physical nature, says Alcott. When it was thought that the verge
was reached, that the mysteries which lay beyond were for ever barred
to mortals by the iron gate of death, then the discoveries of Faraday,
Edison, and Crookes pushed further away the chasm which separates the
confessedly knowable from the fancied unknowable, and whole domains
previously undreamt of were suddenly exposed to view. Not long since,
Canon Wilberforce asked Keely what would become of his discovery and
his inventions in case of his death before they became of commercial
value to the public. Keely replied that he had written thousands of
pages, which he hoped would, in such an event, be mastered by some
mind capable of pursuing his researches to practical ends; but in
the opinion of the writer, there is no man living who is fitted for
this work.

Diogenes of Apollonia identified the reason that regulated the world
with the original substance, air. Keely teaches that "the original
substance" is ether, not air; and that the world is regulated through
this ether by its Creator. There are many molecules which contain no
air--not one molecule that does not contain the one true "original
substance," ether.

Up to 1888 Keely was still pursuing the wrong line of research, still
trying to construct an engine which could hold the ether in "a rotating
circle of etheric force;" still ignorant of the impossibility of ever
reaching commercial success on that line. It was the end of the year
before he could be brought to entirely abandon his "perfect engine;"
and to confine himself to researches, which he had been pursuing
in connection with his repeated failures on the commercial line,
to gain more knowledge of the laws which govern the operation of the
force that, like a "Will-o'-the-wisp," seemed to delight in leading
him astray.

Up to this time his researching devices had been principally of his own
construction; but from the time that he devoted himself to the line
of research, marked out for him to follow, he was supplied with the
best instruments that opticians could make for him after the models
or designs which he furnished. If, from 1882 to 1888, he walked with
giant strides along the borders of the domain that he had entered,
from 1888 to the present time he has made the same progress beyond its
borders. From the hour in which he grasped "the key to the problem,"
the "principle underlying all," the dawn of "a new order of things,"
broke upon his vision, and he was no longer left at the mercy of the
genii whom he had aroused.



In July, 1888, the T.P.S. published the succeeding paper, which had
a wide circulation.



KEELY'S SECRETS. 1888.


