CHAPTER X.

1881-1891.

THE KEELY MOTOR BUBBLE. MACVICAR'S LOGICAL ANALYSIS.

        For it is well known that bodies act upon one another by
        the attraction of gravity, magnetism, and electricity; and
        these instances show the tenour and course of Nature and make
        it not improbable that there may be more attractive powers
        than these. For Nature is very consonant and comfortable to
        herself.--Sir Isaac Newton.


The Scotch author, Macvicar, from whose "Sketch of a Philosophy" has
been compiled "Ether the True Protoplasm," published this year in the
New York Home Journal, says in his "Enquiry into Human Nature," written
in 1852, "Modern science is certainly on the way to the discovery that,
so far as is cognizable by us, throughout the whole universe the same
laws are at work and regulate all things. The mécanique céleste of
mind is still waiting its Newton to disclose them to us."

Looking upon the discoverer of etheric force as the Newton, whose
coming was forecast by Macvicar, it is satisfactory to see that Keely,
in his field of research, eventually adopted the methods which his
forerunner advocated nearly forty years ago; but not until after
many years of blind grappling with the mechanical difficulties which
he encountered, in his efforts to control the unknown Genii, which
he himself declares that he stumbled upon in quite another field
of research. Keely was experimenting in 1875 on what he called
a hydro-pneumatic-pulsating-vacuo engine, when, "accidentally,"
the first evolution of disintegration was made. The focalization of
this quadruple force, acting on one general centre of concentration,
produced partial molecular subdivision, resulting in a pressure of some
three thousand pounds per square inch. Mr. Keely was himself amazed
at this evidence of the energy which he had evoked, and at once turned
his attention to researching its nature, with the result that he came
to the conclusion that he had partially resolved the gaseous element
of water by crude molecular dissociation. This was his first step,
and the necessary introductory one, towards the elimination of ether;
but at that time, to use his own words, he had not the remotest idea of
the etheric element proper. Since then he has constructed innumerable
machines to subdivide or dissociate the molecular; but it was not until
he had instituted certain acoustic vibratory conditions that he began
to realize the magnitude of the element that he is now controlling
with his vibratory disintegrator. Yet, even this instrument was only
the stepping-stone towards polar-sympathetic-negative-attraction.

In 1878 Mr. Keely conceived and constructed an instrument which he
called a "vibratory lift," and, while experimenting on the improvised
multiplication by this medium, he had occasion to put a piece of
marble, weighing twenty-six pounds, on a steel bar to hold it in
place, when then and there his first discovery of the disintegration
of mineral substance took place. From that time progressive research
of the most arduous nature has brought him to his present standard
in vibratory physics. In the winter of 1881-82, when threatened
with imprisonment by the managers of the Keely Motor Company for not
disclosing his secret to them, which then would have been like pricking
a bubble, he destroyed his vibratory lift and other instruments that
he had been years in perfecting. At this time so hopeless was Keely,
that his plans were made to destroy himself, after destroying his
devices. At this critical juncture he received unexpected aid. Again,
in 1888, before he was taken to a felon's cell in Moyamensing Prison
by decree of Judge Finletter for alleged contempt of court, he broke
up his vibratory microscope, his sympathetic transmitter, and some
devices, which have taken much of his time since to reconstruct. It
would seem to be incomprehensible that a man who believes he has been
specially endowed by Providence to convey great truths to the world,
should have destroyed instruments which were the result of the labour
of many years of research; but Schopenhauer tells us that genius
possesses an abnormally developed nervous and cerebral system that
brings with it hyper-sensibility, which in union with intensity of
will-energy, that is also characteristic of genius, occasions quick
changes of mood and extravagant outbursts. Schopenhauer also explains
why it is that men of genius are ignored by the age in which they
appear:--"The genius comes into his age like a comet into the paths
of the planets, to whose well-regulated and comprehensible order its
entirely eccentric course is foreign. Accordingly he cannot go hand
in hand with the existing regular progress to the culture of the
age, but flings his works far out on the way in front (as the dying
Emperor flung his spear among the enemy), which time has first to
overtake. The achievement of the man of genius transcends not only the
power of achievement of others, but also their power of apprehension;
therefore they do not become directly conscious of him. The man of
talent is like the marksman who hits a mark the others cannot hit;
the man of genius is like the marksman who hits a mark that the sight
of others cannot even reach." In one sense this truth applies to all
men, for, says Cicero, no man is understood excepting by his equals
or his superiors.

Admitting all that has been said of the difficulties attendant upon
the comprehension of a genius by the age in which he lives, it does
not require genius to understand the blunders which, perpetrated
by the managers of the prematurely organized Keely Motor Company,
have placed Mr. Keely, as well as themselves, in false positions with
the public; leaving him since the winter of 1880-81 to bear the whole
burden of the infamy brought about by their having offered stock for
investment which could possess no tangible existence in the shape
of property until the laws governing the unknown force that he was
handling had been studied out and applied to mechanics in a patentable
machine. To those informed that this company ceased to hold annual
meetings as far back as 1881 it will be a matter of surprise to hear
that, sitting up in its coffin, seven or eight years after its burial,
it called another annual meeting, and that now its managers are again
applying the thumb-screw, as in past years; pressing their claims and
threatening a suit for obtaining money under false pretences, unless
Mr. Keely renounces his plan of progressive research, and gives his
time to the construction of engines for the Keely Motor Company. This
requirement, as was said in 1881, of a similar effort, is as sensible,
under existing conditions, as it would be to require Keely to devote
his time to growing figs on thorn trees. It is from the "Minority
Report to the Stockholders of the Keely Motor Company from the Board of
Directors" (made by a member of that board in 1881, John H. Lorimer),
that the material is gleaned for disclosing facts which it is due
to Mr. Keely should now, since this last attempt to intimidate him,
be given to the public. The stock of that company is not lessened
in value by the mismanagement of its officers and directors; for
Mr. Keely's moral obligations to its stockholders are as sacred to
him as if the company had not long since forfeited its charter. When
Mr. Keely became financially independent of the company last March,
speculation in the stock of that company received its death blow,
and the "Keely Motor Bubble" burst, leaving to the stockholders all
that ever had any tangible existence in the shape of property in a
more valuable position than it had ever been before. Mr. Lorimer is
a gentleman of Scotch birth, who was elected a director of the Keely
Motor Company in 1881, and who resigned in 1882, because he was "unable
to carry the enterprise," and unwilling to fall in with the policy of
the old directors. Before resigning, he set himself to studying the
position of affairs with a view to forming for the Board a definite
plan of action which ordinary business principles would justify.

This course resulted in a thoroughly business-like letter to Mr. Keely
in which, under nine heads, Mr. Lorimer set down the conclusions he
had reached as to the cause of the difficulties that had culminated
in a threatened law suit, and Mr. Keely was ordered to ask that a
special meeting of the Board should be called at once, to consider any
proposition he should see fit to make towards settling the question
whether he should proceed with the company's work or be permitted
to defer it, as he so much desired, until he had fully developed the
adaptations of his power already known to him or hereafter possible
of discovery by him. Mr. Lorimer added:--"And now, in conclusion,
I may say to you that the above deductions from the history of your
motor are the result of patient and laborious inquiry on my part,
and I am truly at a loss to understand how, or in what manner, other
than that herein suggested, you can honourably vindicate your position;
and as no one I have met connected with the enterprise, or personally
acquainted with you, hesitates for an instant in crediting you with
the most unswerving integrity, I have no hesitation in offering the
above suggestions for your consideration; and I trust you will so
far adopt them as to enable the active portion of your friends to
bring the organization rapidly into harmonious accord with you in
the development of what all seem to think is the greatest wonder of
our civilization, the early completion of which will lift you to the
highest pinnacle of fame as a scientist, and make them co-dispensers
with you of the God-given wealth of which you hold the key." The date
is 10th of February, 1881.

This letter was followed by another dated February 11th, in which
Mr. Lorimer submitted certain conclusions, arrived at after meeting
in New York with several members of the Board of Directors, one of
which reads:--"It seems to be generally understood that without your
hearty co-operation and good will, the company cannot realize value
upon any existing contracts, or any they may hereafter make with you."

At this time Mr. Lorimer states that he had the opportunity presented
of studying, semi-officially, the very peculiar man whose genius held
his friends so spell-bound that they lost their power (if such they
possessed) to adapt business methods to the enterprise. "To meet him
socially in his shop," Mr. Lorimer writes, "after his day's work, was,
I think, invariably to be impressed with his earnestness, honesty of
purpose, and above all, with confidence in his knowledge of the plane
of science he was working in (acoustics), and, at the same time to
be impressed with the folly of basing calculations for the government
of the business details of the organization upon the statements made
by him while contemplating the possible result of his researches."

With the hopeful spirit of an inventor, Mr. Keely always anticipated
almost immediate mechanical success, up to the hour in which he
abandoned the automatic arrangement that was necessary to make his
generator patentable. From that time his line of perspective extended,
and he began to realize that he had been too sanguine in the past. He
had been like a man grappling in the dark with a foe, the form of
which had not even presented itself to his imagination; but when,
in 1884, Macvicar's work on the structure of ether came like a torch
to reveal the face of his antagonist, what wonder that he, with the
enthusiasm of Paracelsus, felt his


        ... "fluttering pulse give evidence that God
        Means good to me, will make my cause His own;"


and, as in 1881, again rashly bound himself anew, by fresh promises,
made to those who had the power to give or to withhold the sinews
needed in the warfare he was waging?

To return to the report. During the negotiations which followed,
facts in the history of the company were developed which convinced
Mr. Lorimer that Mr. Keely was totally unable to measure time, or
define his plans, because of the ever-changing results attained by
him, in researching the laws governing the force he was trying to
harness. At this time the treasurer of the company was proposing to
bring over from New York to Philadelphia a number of capitalists
to witness an exhibition of the production of the force, in order
to dispose of 500 shares at 25.00 dollars a share. To this plan
Mr. Lorimer objected, writing to the treasurer, "I fear that you would
be putting yourself in a false position with the friends you might
induce to take stock at the figures named," and Mr. Keely himself
at first refused to give the exhibition, but upon the application
of the thumb-screw, kept in readiness, it took place. At this time
Mr. Lorimer wrote to the president of the company, "If Keely gives
us the benefit of his discoveries, it will require all our energies
to guide our enterprise; and, on the other hand, if he dies or is
forestalled, it will need all our care and attention to take care
of our reputations.... The fact that the Board has some delicate and
important work to perform, brings us to the question, Are we properly
organized to perform our part? If we are, let us show it by our acts,
and, if not, let us act like men, worthy the important trust before
us. If I am overestimating the character and importance of this
work, you can show it to me; and per contra, if I am correct, you
can and will accept the responsibilities of the position you hold,
no matter how unpleasant, no matter how irksome, if understood by
you and honourably supported by us."

Mr. Lorimer then prepared this summary, or analysis of the situation.



SUMMARY.

26th July, 1881.


"First.--The existence of a discovery or invention which from
evidences of its adaptability (when complete) to the industrial
arts and sciences, may be esteemed the most valuable discovery
of civilization in modern or in ancient times, inasmuch as it
revolutionizes all known methods of generating power.

"Second.--The retention by the discoverer and inventor of all the
secrets whereby these discoveries can be utilized by the public, thus
making their future existence, so far as the Keely Motor Company is
concerned, depend entirely upon his life and goodwill.

"Third.--The existence of a corporated company, organized for the
purpose of furnishing funds for the development and completion of the
discovery, and for the final control of certain specified inventions,
in certain specified localities.

"Fourth.--The contracts under which the above-mentioned control of
certain inventions is vested in the Keely Motor Company, being mere
evidences of intention, have no real value until the inventor has
received his patents and verified the contracts by transfer of the
same to the company.

"Fifth.--If any conflict should arise between the company and the
inventor, in which the latter felt justified in withholding the
transfer, the existing contracts might be a good foundation to build
litigation upon but not good for investment in.

"Sixth.--The uncertainty of the future of the enterprise, as thus
indicated, must of necessity invite speculative management; and while
speculation under some circumstances is legitimate and laudable,
under other conditions it may become illegitimate and reprehensible.

"Seventh.-- The existence of a speculative management in Keely Motor
affairs has, of necessity, developed two interests--one which holds
that the completion of the discovery in all its possible grandeur
should ever be the sole object of its management, and the other,
believing that on account of the human uncertainty of the completion
of the invention, they are in duty bound to make quick recoveries
on their investments, so that they may be safe financially, in the
event of a failure by Keely to perfect his inventions."



It is not necessary to pursue this summary farther, as the manner in
which Mr. Lorimer has set down the facts already given, makes clear the
nature of the conflicting interests that brought about the antagonism
which he attempted to subdue, bringing such a spirit of fairness and
justice into his efforts as must have crowned them with success,
supported as he was by Mr. Keely, had it not been that those who
advocated following a policy which, at best, aimed no farther than
at the recouping of losses to themselves, were in the majority. It
was at this time that Mr. Keely manifested his willingness to assume,
on the one hand, all the responsibility of the proper development of
his discovery; or, on the other hand, all the disgrace accompanying
failure by his offer to purchase a controlling interest in the stock,
fifty-one thousand shares of which, in order to prevent speculation,
he agreed to lock up for five years, and to give the company a bond
restraining him from negotiating or parting with a single share of it
in that time, the stock to be paid for as soon as certain deferred
payments had been made to him. This proposition of Mr. Keely to the
Board of Directors, October 25th, 1881 (and laid upon the table by a
large majority as unworthy of consideration), was made from his earnest
desire to control the presentation of his life's work to the world
in a just and honourable way; having recognized, with Mr. Lorimer,
the utter impossibility of reconciling the numerous interests created
by mistakes of himself and the mismanagement of the Board, unless he
could thus obtain the power to deliver an unencumbered enterprise to
the world. In the opinion of Mr. Lorimer, during the negotiations which
he conducted between the management and Mr. Keely, the latter was the
only one who had manifested any consistency or strength of purpose,
so far as the facts gave evidence, which were brought before him, of
the history of the company. When the validity of the contracts made
with Mr. Keely while he was president, or director of the company, were
disputed, he was called upon to resign, which he did; and yet no steps
were taken to ascertain the value of the existing contracts, which
had all been made with him while he was both president and director,
and which were therefore illegal. Proceedings in equity were commenced
against Mr. Keely, by the Committee of the Board of Directors having
the matter in charge, late in the year 1881, while Mr. Lorimer's report
was still in the hands of the printer. "The spectacle of a Board of
thirteen Directors, composed of business men," writes Mr. Lorimer,
"claiming that they have been foiled in their business calculations
by a man whose mind has been so thoroughly absorbed in researching
the problems presented by his wonderful discoveries that he could
not possibly compare with any of them in business tact, is truly
a phenomenon which is not easy of explanation on any hypothesis,
but the one that their visions of prospective wealth have been so
overpowering as to undo their prudence; and then having in due process
of time discovered their error, it certainly is an edifying spectacle
to see them now trying to throw all the blame on one poor mortal wholly
absorbed in his inventions, and by these efforts disturbing that mental
equilibrium of both the inventor and themselves, which is absolutely
necessary to ultimate success. When boys, in early summer, pick unripe
fruit and eat it, because of their unwillingness to await the ripening
thereof, they sometimes suffer acutely for their haste. Yet no one
ever thinks of punishing the tree because of their sufferings; nor
is it deemed necessary to justice to preserve the fruit of the tree,
when ripe, for the sole use of the impatient ones as a recompense for
their early sufferings! So it has been with the Keely Motor Company;
undue haste to gather the golden fruit that was to come from it, has
led to a great deal of suffering financially among a few impatient
believers. Still it does not seem to me to be wise to curse the
inventor, or his inventions because he has not given us the fruit
when we expected it would be ripe."...

The effort to force Keely to divulge his secrets failed, for at
that time he had nothing of a practical nature to divulge, and though
possessing no business qualifications, he was too shrewd to cut off any
of his resources for supplies, necessary to enable him to persevere
in his efforts to attain some practical result, as he surely would
have done, had he said, "I know very little more than you know of
the laws governing the force I have discovered. I can only control
their operation by experimental research, and the more time that
is wasted in building engines, until I have made myself acquainted
with these laws, the longer will you have to wait for your golden
fruit." Mr. Keely was no more able at that time to give the faintest
idea of the present stage of his researches than Professor Leidy or
Dr. Wilcox could now, after witnessing the experiments in sympathetic
attraction, write out a clear formulation of its governing law, and
an inductive substantiation of it. Even were it possible, no reader
could understand it because the discovery made by Mr. Keely is not
in accordance with any of the facts known to science. Mr. Keely's
experiments in disintegrating water prove that incalculable amounts
of latent force exist in the molecular spaces; but in the opinion
of scientists, molecular aggregation is attended with dissipation
of energy, not with absorption of energy. If the men of science are
right, then there must be an absolute creation of energy, for only by
admitting its absorption in aggregation, could molecular dissociation
supply the force witnessed. Keely, of course, denies any creation
of energy, claiming only that he can produce an indefinite supply by
the expenditure of an infinitesimally small amount of energy. Every
new discovery necessitates a new nomenclature. The vocabulary coined
by Mr. Keely, to meet his requirements in formulating his hypotheses
into theories as he progresses, conveys as little meaning to those
who read his writings, as the word "electricity" conveyed 200 years
ago. Professor Crookes remarked that reading Mr. Keely's writings was
like reading Persian without a dictionary. Another learned professor
said that they seemed to him to be composed in an unknown tongue, so
profoundly unintelligible had he found the extracts sent to him. One
must be familiar with Mr. Keely's instruments and their operation,
in order to comprehend even the nature of his researches.

An author of philosophical works, who was present at some experiments
illustrative of varying chords of mass, and whose theories had
not been in unison with those of Mr. Keely on that subject, sat
for some time after the demonstration with his eyes fixed upon the
floor, wearing as serious an expression of countenance as if he were
looking on the grave of his most cherished views. The first remark
that he made was, "What would Jules Verne say if he were here?" The
rotation of the needle of a compass, the compass placed on a glass
slab and connected with the transmitter by a wire, 120 revolutions in
a second, had the same effect upon the scientists present, one of awe;
so completely were they transfixed and unable to form a conjecture
as to the mysterious influence from any known law of science. There
was only one professor present, a very young man, who ventured the
whispered suggestion of concealed mechanism under the pedestal; and
as Mr. Keely soon after had occasion to wheel the pedestal across the
room, showing that it was not stationary, and could have no concealed
connection within or without, the young professor took up another
line of conjecture. As Macvicar says, it has grown to be the fashion,
to a marvellous extent, to give predominance in education to physical
and mathematical studies over moral and mental. Hence a very general
and growing prepossession in favour of material nature. Astronomy,
natural philosophy, chemistry, natural history, geology, these and
the like are in our day held to be everything. He continues:--

Now, all these branches of study, however various in detail, agree
in this, that they exclude the conception of a true self-directive
power from the field of thought. They offer for consideration nothing
but figures, movements, and laws. And thus they tend to form the
popular mind to the habit of looking for figures, movements, and laws
everywhere, and for rejecting all other conceptions as intruders. But
of all such other conceptions, there is nothing so difficult and so
intractable, under physical modes of investigation, as self-directive
power. It therefore runs a great risk of being rejected, and thus
the mind, from its first training, having been in physics, carrying
out here, as it usually does everywhere, its first love into all its
after thoughts, shuts up the student surreptitiously with materialism
as his philosophy. Thus it is easy to see how materialism should
come to be a current opinion, when the popular education runs all
in favour of physical pursuits. But if philosophy must yield to the
demands of the logical faculty for an extreme simplicity, unity,
identity, at the fountain-head of nature, it were more logical to
regard those phenomena and laws named physical, such as the laws of
motion, elasticity, gravitation, etc., as manifestations, when existing
under certain limiting conditions, of substances or beings which have
also in them, when not so limited, and when existing under certain
conditions, ability to manifest self-directive power. That every body
is compounded, constituted, or made up of molecules, is universally
agreed. Every body is therefore a fit subject for analysis. But when
any body is submitted to analysis in reference to its mere corporeity
or bodily nature, that is, its extension and impenetrability, what do
we ultimately arrive at? Do we not, in reference to the attribute of
extension, arrive at particles, of which the physical limit is that
they have at least ceased to be extended, and are but mere points
in space? And as to the attribute of impenetrability, what do we in
the last analysis arrive at, but the idea of a substance that can
resist the intrusion into its place of other similar substances,
and, therefore, ultimately, a centre of force. And thus, under a
logical analysis, which must be admitted to be legitimate, it may
be maintained that a body or chemical element resolves itself into a
system of centres of force balancing each other at certain distances,
and thus rendering the whole molecule or mass extended, as body is
known to be. The elements of body, therefore, are things of which
these attributes are to be affirmed in the first instance, that
they possess unextended substance and extensive power. But, if so,
do they not touch upon the confines of the spiritual world to say
the least? asks Macvicar; and the Newton whom he anticipated would
give a mécanique céleste to mankind, solves the problem, answers the
question by his discovery of the cerebellic stream or will-flow.

Body and spirit, one at the fountain-head, when rising into
existence, form, as it were, the first breath of creation; for,
as Sir Wm. Thompson says: "Life proceeds from life and from nothing
else." They are the opposite poles of being and constitute the two
principles by the harmonious interweaving of which the beautiful
system of creation is constituted, and its economy worked out. Such a
view, far from being contrary to the canons of science, is even the
necessary complement of science. That unity, which is the last word
of science, must always include two objects, existing in contrast
after all. The law of couples, of opposites, of reciprocal action
between two contrasted yet homogeneous and harmonizing elements, each
of which opens a field for the other, and brings it into action, is
of universal extent. In the organic world, also, no less than in the
purely physical and chemical, all is framed according to the same law
of couples. In the sphere of sensibility, in like manner, everything
turns on the antagonism of pleasure and pain, and in the moral sphere
of good and evil. Nor is the world of pure intellect exempt from this
law, but on the contrary displays its influence everywhere. Hence faith
and sight, identity and difference, finite and infinite, objective and
subjective, space and time, cause and effect, the world of realities
and the world of ideas. In a word, every system of thought and of
things, when complete, present as its basis two co-ordinate elements,
the reciprocals of each other; or one parted into two reciprocally,
and by the harmonious antagonism of both the beautiful web of nature
is woven. If we are to be consistent, mind and matter ought always to
be viewed as distinct, and the opposite poles of being; inertia, or
unvarying submissiveness to the laws of motion being the characteristic
of the one; self-directive power the characteristic of the other.

The universal analogy of science sanctioned Macvicar in the
characteristic he thus arrived at as that of animated nature, for if
inertia, or the obedience to pressures and impulses from without,
be the characteristic of matter, then that which is needed as the
other term to complete the couple is just what has been insisted
on, viz., self-directive power, the power to cause pressures and
impulses. Here is shown the symmetrical relation in which this power,
when viewed as the characteristic of the whole animal kingdom (which
plainly points to man, and culminates in human nature), places the
animal in relation with the vegetable and the mineral kingdoms. Of
minerals or crystals, the characteristic is simply self-imposing
or self-concreting power. They are, so to speak, merely insoluble
seeds without an embryo. To this, self-developing power is added in
plants, and forms their acknowledged characteristic. While of animals
the characteristic, according to the view here advanced (the same
seed-producing, self-developing, powers continuing) is self-directive
power superadded. This relationship between these three kingdoms of
nature is as homogeneous and symmetrical as is necessary to appear
to be legitimate, and is a true expression of the order of nature.

Granting these two principles, the inert and the self-directive, the
necessary and the free, we obtain the materials for a universe, without
disputing the fact of human liberty and bringing into suspicion even
the possibility either of morality or immorality. If man be really
free as well as under law, in this union of body and spirit, then in
human nature heaven and earth truly embrace each other; and no reason
appears why, as the ages roll on, our own free thought may not have
the run of the universe.... What study then can be more replete with
interest, what researches can possess more of fascination, than those
which Mr. Keely's discoveries are preparing the way for?

The discoveries of Mr. Keely (demonstrated--as he is now prepared
to demonstrate them) cannot be disputed, though his system may
be called in question. With the humility of genius, he calls his
theories hypotheses, and his hypotheses conjectures. The solidity
of the principles, as laid down by himself, cannot be decided upon
by others until he has brought to light the whole system that grows
out of them. But it is time the public should know that the odium
thrown upon him by the Keely Motor Company, he does not deserve. It is
time that the Press should cease its sneers, its cry of "Crucify him,
crucify him!" morally speaking, and extend to him that discriminating
appreciation of his work and encouragement which the New York Home
Journal, Truth, Detroit Tribune, Chicago Herald, Toledo Blade,
Atlanta Constitution, The Statesman, and Vienna News have been the
first to do. Let the Press contrast the past history of science with
the present position of Keely, as Professor Dewar has done. Only such
a man who knows from experience the labour, the difficulties, the
uncertainties, attendant upon researching unknown laws of nature is
able to appreciate all that is now being concentrated in the single
life of one man. It is time that capitalists should step from their
ranks to protect Keely from the selfish policy of the managers of
a speculative company, which has long since forfeited all claims
upon him, to continue mechanical work for it, even admitting that it
ever possessed that right; and, more than all else, it is time that
science should send her delegates to confer with the broad-minded
men who have had the courage to give testimony, without which Keely
could not have stood where, this year, he stands for the first time,
fearless of threats, pursuing his researches on his own line, to
acquire that knowledge of the laws governing his discoveries by
which alone he can gain sufficient control of machinery to insure
financial success. Meanwhile, are there no men who are able to feel
an interest (without reference to commercial results) in a discovery
which sweeps away the débris of materialism as chaff is swept before
a whirlwind?--giving indisputable proof that, as St. Paul teaches, "we
are the offspring of God; "or, as Aratus wrote, from whom he quoted:--


               "From God we must originate,
                Not any time we break the spell
                That binds us to the ineffable.
                Indeed, we all are evermore
                Having to do with God: for we
                His very kind and offspring be:
                And to His offspring the benign
                Fails not to give benignant sign."


From New York Truth, 3rd July, 1890.

"I think it is safe, for even the most conservative and pig-headed of
scientists, to admit that Keely, the contemned, the scoffed at, the
derided, the man whom every picayune peddler called charlatan because
he could not harness the hitherto undiscovered forces of ether in less
time than one might hitch up a mule, is the most original and the most
straightforward of inventors, and that in his own good time he will
give to the world a power that will throw steam and electricity into
disuse, open the realms of air as a public highway for man, and send
great ships careering over ocean with a power developed by sound. His
theory of etheric vibration is now conclusively established, and it is
only a question of time and material that delays its use as a servant
to man. The fact is patent, so that he who runs may read, but the ox
must have the yoke, the horse the collar, the engine the cylinder, and
the dynamo the coil, ere they can work their wonders. While Keely was
hampered by mere tradesmen, who only looked to the immediate recoupment
of their outlay, men more anxious for dividends than discoveries, he
could do little save turn showman, and exhibit his partial control of
the harmonies of nature as springs catch woodcocks, and was forced to
open his crude contrivances to divert the eternal will of the cosmos
to work-a-day uses, that he might coax from the greed and credulity
of mere mammon-worshippers the sorely grudged means to continue his
exploration of the infinite. His genius was prisoned in a test tube,
and only let out to play monkey tricks before muddle-headed merchants,
who could see the effect, but not the means, and so the greatest
discovery of the age was turned into a raree show, and the eternal
music of the spheres was set, figuratively speaking, to play tunes
to attract custom like a barrel organ before a dime museum."









