CHAPTER XIX.

LATENT FORCE IN INTERSTITIAL SPACES--ELECTRO-MAGNETIC
RADIATION--MOLECULAR DISSOCIATION.

(By John Ernst Worrell Keely.)

        The atom is infinitely divisible.--Arthur Schopenhauer.

        For thou well knowest that the imbecility of our understanding,
        in not comprehending the more abstruse and retired causes of
        things, is not to be ascribed to any defect in their nature,
        but in our own hoodwinkt intellect.--P. 6, A Ternary of
        Paradoxes.--Van Helmont.

        The advance of science, which for a time overshadowed
        philosophy, has brought men face to face once more with
        ultimate questions, and has revealed the impotence of science
        to deal with its own conditions and pre-suppositions. The needs
        of science itself call for a critical doctrine of knowledge
        as the basis of an ultimate theory of things. Philosophy
        must criticize not only the categories of science but also
        the metaphysical systems of the past.--Prof. Seth.


Latent Force.

Science, even in its highest progressive conditions, cannot assert
anything definite. The many mistakes that men of science have
made in the past prove the fallacy of asserting. By doing so they
bastardize true philosophy and, as it were, place the wisdom of God
at variance; as in the assertion that latent power does not exist
in corpuscular aggregations of matter, in all its different forms,
visible or invisible.

Take, for example, gunpowder, which is composed of three different
mediums of aggregated matter, saltpetre, charcoal, and sulphur,
each representing different orders of molecular density which,
when associated under proper conditions, gives what is called an
explosive compound. In fact it is a mass which is made susceptible
at any moment by its exciter fire, which is an order of vibration,
to evolve a most wonderful energy in volume many thousands of times
greater than the volume it represents in its molecular mass. If it be
not latent force that is thus liberated by its exciter, a mere spark,
what is it? Are not the gases that are evolved in such great volume and
power held latent in the molecular embrace of its aggregated matter,
before being excited into action? If this force is not compressed
there, nor placed there by absorption, how did it get there? And by
what power was it held in its quiescent state? I contend that it was
placed there at the birth of the molecule by the law of sympathetic
etheric focalization towards the negative centres of neutrality with a
velocity as inconceivable in its character as would be the subdivision
of matter to an ultimate end. Again, what is the energy that is held
in the molecular embrace of that small portion of dynamite which by
slight concussion, another order of vibration, evolves volumes of
terrific force, riving the solid rock and hurling massive projectiles
for miles? If it is not latent power that is excited into action, what
is it? Finally, what is held in the interstitial corpuscular embrace
of water, which by its proper exciter another form of vibration,
is liberated showing almost immeasurable volume and power? Is not
this energy latent, quiet, until brought forth by its sympathetic
negative exciter? Could the force thus evolved from these different
substances be confined again, or pressed back and absorbed into the
interstitial spaces occupied before liberation, where the sympathetic
negative power of the Infinite One originally placed it? [25]

If latent force is not accumulated and held in corpuscular aggregations
how is it that progressive orders of disintegration of water induce
progressive conditions of increased volume and of higher power? I
hold that in the evolved gases of all explosive compounds, dynamite
or any other, there exists deeper down in the corpuscular embrace of
the gaseous element, induced by the first explosion, a still greater
degree of latent energy that could be awakened by the proper condition
of vibration; and still further on ad infinitum. [26]

Is it possible to imagine that mere molecular dissociation could show
up such immense volumes of energy, unassociated with the medium of
latent force?

The question arises, How is this sympathetic power held in the
interstitial corpuscular condition?

Answer.--By the incalculable velocity of the molecular and atomic
etheric capsules, [27] which velocity represents billions of
revolutions per second in their rotations. We shall imagine a sphere
of twelve inches in diameter, representing a magnified molecule
surrounded by an atmospheric envelope of one sixteenth of an inch
in depth; the envelope rotating at a velocity of the same increased
ratio of the molecule's magnification. At the very lowest estimate
it would give a velocity of six hundred thousand miles per second,
or twenty-four thousand times the circumference of the earth in
that time. Is it possible to compute what the velocity would be,
on the same ratio, up to the earth's diameter?[#2] It is only under
such illustrations that we can be brought even to faintly imagine the
wonderful sympathetic activity that exists in the molecular realm. An
atmospheric film, rotating on a twelve inch sphere at the same ratio as
the molecular one, would be impenetrable to a steel-pointed projectile
at its greatest velocity; and would hermetically enclose a resisting
pressure of many thousands of pounds per square inch. The latent force
evolved in the disintegration of water proves this fact; for under
etheric evolution, in progressive orders of vibration, these pressures
are evolved, and show their energy on a lever especially constructed
for the purpose, strong enough for measuring a force over three times
that of gunpowder. We shall continue this subject a little farther,
and this little farther will reach out into infinity. The speculations
of the physicists of the present age, in regard to latent energy,
would neutralize the sympathetic conditions that are associated with
the governing force of the cerebral and the muscular organism. The
evolution of a volition, the infinite exciter, arouses the latent
energy of the physical organism to do its work; differential orders
of brain-force acting against each other under dual conditions. If
there were no latent energy to arouse sympathetically, there would
be no action in the physical frame; as all force is will-force.

All the evolutions of latent power in its varied multiplicity of action
induced by its proper exciters, prove the connecting link between
the celestial and the terrestrial, the finite and the infinite. (See
Appendix I.)

There would be no life, and therefore no action in aggregated matter,
had the latent negative force been left out of it.

If a bar of steel or iron is brought into contact with a magnet, the
latent force that the steel or iron is impregnated with is aroused,
and shows its interstitial latent action by still holding another
bar. But this experiment does not give the most remote idea of the
immensity of the force that would show itself on more progressive
exciters. Enough alternate active energy could be evolved, by the
proper sympathetic exciter, in one cubic inch of steel to do the work
of a horse, by its sympathetic association with the polar force in
alternate polarization and depolarization.

This is the power that I am now getting under control (using the
proper exciters as associated with the mechanical media) to do
commercial work. In other words, I am making a sympathetic harness
for the polar terrestrial force: first, by exciting the sympathetic
concordant force that exists in the corpuscular interstitial domain,
which is concordant to it; and secondly, after the concordance is
established, by negatizing the thirds, sixths, and ninths of this
concordance, thereby inducing high velocities with great power by
intermittent negation, as associated with the dominant thirds.

Again: Take away the sympathetic latent force that all matter is
impregnated with, the connective link between the finite and the
infinite would be dissociated, and gravity would be neutralized;
bringing all visible and invisible aggregations back into the great
etheric realm.

Here let me ask, What does the term cohesion mean? What is the
power that holds molecules together, but electro-magnetic negative
attraction? What is the state that is brought about by certain
conditions of sympathetic vibration, causing molecules to repel each
other, but electro-magnetic radiation?

It must not be understood that the character of the action of the
latent force liberated from liquids and gases is the same, in its
evolution, as that of the latent force existing in metals. The former
shows up an elastic energy, which emanates from the breaking up of
their rotating envelopes; increasing, at the same time, the range
of their corpuscular action: thus giving, under confinement, elastic
forces of an almost infinite character. By liberation from the tube
it is confined in, it seeks its medium of concordant tenuity with a
velocity greater than that of light.

In metals, the latent force, as excited by the same sympathizer,
extends its range of neutral sympathetic attraction without corpuscular
rupture, and reaches out as it were to link itself with its harmonic
sympathizer, as long as its exciter is kept in action. When its exciter
is dissociated, its outreach nestles back again into the corpuscular
embrace of the molecular mass that has been acted upon. [28]

This is the polar sympathetic harness, as between metallic mediums
and the polar dominant current,--the leader of the triune stream of
the terrestrial flow. (See Appendix II.)

The velocity of the sympathetic bombarding streams, towards the centres
of neutrality, in the corpuscular atoms, during sympathetic aggregation
of visible molecular masses (in registering the latent force in their
interstitial spaces), is thousands of times greater than that of the
most sensitive explosives. An atmospheric stream of that velocity
would atomize the plate of an ironclad, if brought to bear on it.

If the evolution of the power of a volition be set down as one, what
number would that represent in the power evolved by such volition on
the physical organism? To answer this we must first be able, mentally,
to get down to the neutral central depths of the corpuscular atoms,
where gravity ceases, to get its unit; and in the second place we
must be able to weigh it as against the force physically evolved.

How true, "the finer the force the greater the power!" and the
greater is the velocity, also; and the more mathematically infinite
the computation.

Yet all these conditions of evolution and concentration are
accomplished by the celestial mind force, as associated with
terrestrial brain matter.

The first seal is being broken, in the book of vibratory philosophy:
the first stepping-stone is placed toward reaching the solution of
that infinite problem,--the source of life.



Theory of Vibratory Lift for Air-Ships.

All molecular masses of terrestrial matter are composed of the
ultimate ether,--from which all things originally emanated. They
are sympathetically drawn towards the earth's centre, as according
to the density of their molecular aggregation, minus their force or
sympathetic outreach towards celestial association. In other words,
the celestial flow as controlling terrestrial physical organisms.

The sympathetic outflow from the celestial streams reaches the infinite
depths of all the diversified forms of matter. Thus it is seen that the
celestial flow which permeates, to its atomic depths, the terrestrial
convolutions of all matter, forms the exact sympathetic parallel to
the human brain-flow and the physical organism,--a perfect connective
link of controlling sympathy, or sympathetic control. Under certain
orders of sympathetic vibration, polar and anti-polar, the attractive
sympathies of either stream can be intensified, so as to give the
predominance to the celestial or to the terrestrial.

If the predominance be given to the celestial, to a certain degree,
on a mass of metal, it will ascend from the earth's surface, towards
the etheric field, with a velocity as according to the dominant
concentration that is brought to bear on the negative thirds of its
mass chords, by inducing high radiation from their neutral centres,
in combination with the power of the celestial attractive.

The power of the terrestrial propulsive and celestial attractive to
lift; and these conditions reversed, or the celestial propulsive and
the terrestrial attractive, to descend. Associating these conditions
with the one of corpuscular bombardment, it is evident to me with what
perfection an air-ship of any number of tons weight can, when my system
is completed, be controlled in all the varied movements necessary for
complete commercial use at any desired elevation, and at any desired
speed. It can float off into atmospheric space as gentle in motion
as thistle-down, or with a velocity out-rivalling a cyclone. [29]



Electro-Magnetic Radiation.

If the persistency of our vision could be reversed, so as to have the
power to follow the track of the molecule's oscillations under a high
condition of vibratory acceleration, associated with the assisting
power of the finest instruments known at present in scientific
research, it would not help us to determine the period of time
wherein the sympathetic actions in nature are propagated. Therefore,
we cannot, with any degree of certainty, establish a foundation whereon
observation, so associated, is reliable. (Theoretically explained in
'Soul of Matter.')

As far as my researches have gone, I find that there is but
one condition approaching reliability; and that is in computing
the intermittent periodic disturbances along a nodal vibratory
transmitter--the nodes of gold, silver and platina--a fixed number
placed at such different distances, along its line, as to take up
and equalize (by a certain order of vibratory transmissions) the
chord masses of the nodal interferences between the triple metals
of which the nodes are composed, and also the acoustic introductory
impulse of whatever chord is set. This will determine the rate of
their accelerated molecular oscillation, so induced beyond their
normal standard, and give us some definite figures in the computing
of vibrations, thousands of billions of times more than those of light.

Light is induced by electro-magnetic percussion emanating from the
ether, and in its action represents the plane of magnetism. In fact it
is the plane of magnetism when under polarization. [30] Some scientific
theories of the past have taught us that electricity and magnetism are
one and the same thing. Sympathetic vibratory philosophy teaches that
they are two distinct forces of one of the triune sympathetic family.

I will try to make comprehensible the computation of the number
(even to infinity) of the corpuscular oscillations, induced on
the introductory ninths, over their normal standard. The molecules
of all visible masses, when not influenced by surrounding acoustic
vibratory impulses, move at a rate of 20,000 oscillations per second,
one third of their diameters. We have before us one of these masses;
either a silver dollar, a pound weight, a horse-shoe, or any other
metallic medium, which I associate to one of my nodal transmitters,
the other end of which is attached to the clustered thirds (or third
octave) of my focalizing neutral concentrator. Another transmitter,
of gold, silver and platina sections, is attached to the sixth cluster
of same disk, the other end of which is connected to resonating sphere
on my compound instrument: all of which must be brought to a state
of complete rest. Then, a slight tap, with a vulcanite rubber hammer
on the chladna resonating disk, will accelerate the 20,000 molecular
oscillations to 180,000 per second,--an increase of nine times the
normal number. The nine nodes each touching the extreme end, next
the mass operated upon, in this arrangement; silver, gold, platina,
make up the nine. When I associate the seventh, I start with gold
and end with platina; always on the triplets. Silver represents the
lowest introductory third, gold the next, and platina the highest. If
we start with a gold node, the multiplication on oscillation will
be nine times nine, or 81 times the 20,000; which is 1,620,000 per
second. Each node represents one wave length of a certain number
of vibrations when shifted along the transmitter, over the section
representing its opposite metal. The shifting of the gold one over
the silver extreme section will hold the corpuscular range of the
mass velocity at 1,620,000 per second: the introductory chord being
set at B, third octave. It requires an accelerated oscillation on
the molecules of a soft steel mass, at that chord, of a transmissive
multiplication of the full nine, in order to induce a rotary action on
the neutral centre indicator of focalizing disk; which by computation,
means, per second, 156,057,552,198,220,000 corpuscular intermittent
oscillations to move the disk 110 revolutions per second. This only
represents the multiplication on the first nodal dissociator of
the ninth. The second transition, on same, would mean this number
multiplied by itself, and the residue of each multiplication
by itself 81 times progressively. This throws us infinitely far
beyond computation, leaving us only on the second of the full ninth,
towards reaching the sympathetic corpuscular velocity attending the
high luminiferous. I have induced rotation up to 123 revolutions per
second on a neutral indicator that required billions of vibrations
per second to accomplish; but even this vibration represents only a
minute fraction of the conditions governing the sympathetic vitality
which exists in the far luminous centres.

The interposition of hydrogen gas between soap-film, of the
differential diameters of thirds, illuminated by a solar ray in
whose focus a quiescent prism is set posteriorly--the prism to be
adjusted at the proper distance and angle, to throw the seven colours
through the film enclosing the hydrogen in a way that will give the
bow an arch of three feet--will register deep down, inaudible tones
or sounds, and indicate their different conditions by the dissolving
and re-dissolving of certain of the colours of such arch. To conduct
such experiments properly necessitates, first, a location as nearly
isolated from all extraneous audible sounds as is possible to get;
and second, a pedestal of the lowest vibrating material, the base of
it set deep in the earth, to arrange the instruments upon; and third,
a room of the highest resonating qualities to enclose them. Under
such conditions the inaudible sounds emanating from the operator,
would have to be neutralized by a negative device to get at the proper
conditions while under his manipulation. Thus the hidden inaudible
world of sounds could be shown up, as the microscope shows up to the
eye the hidden invisible forms of nature.

The condition of the mechanical requirements necessary to conduct
successfully the line of research that I am now pursuing, will never
be properly appreciated until the beauty of this system is shown up
under perfect control for commercial use.

I have spoken elsewhere of the almost infinite difficulties of getting
into position, to hold hydrogen gas in suspension between soap-film
a proper period of time, to conduct these experiments. The setting of
the other parts of the apparatus is quite easy in comparison. All wave
propagations, electro-magnetic or otherwise, by being thus reflected
can be measured in regard to the time of their propagation; all of
which are introductorily subservient to the luminiferous ether. The
theory put forward by "men of science," in regard to electro-magnetic
forces shows that they are misled by the imperfection of their
instruments. They are trying to measure the infinite by the finite;
necessitating terms of avoidance, to the instantaneous propagation of
nature's sympathetic evolutions, of the same nature as the one advanced
in the assertion that force does not exist in the interstitial embrace
of all matter.

Maxwell's theory is correct that the plane of polarized light is the
plane of the magnetic force. The sympathetic vibrations associated
with polarized light constitute the pure coincident of the plane
of magnetism. Therefore, they both tend to the same path, for both
are inter-atomic, assimilating sympathetically, in a given time,
to continue the race together; although one precedes the other at
the time of experimental evolution. The time is approaching when
electro-magnetic waves with an outreach of two feet will be produced,
having an energy equal to that now shown up on the magnet when it is
about to kiss its keeper; and showing a radiating force too stupendous
for actual measurement.

I have already shown, to a certain point, the power of this radiation,
by breaking a rope that had a resisting strain of over two tons,
which was attached to the periphery of a steel disk, twelve inches in
diameter, moving at the slow rate of one revolution in two minutes; its
molecular structure vitalized with 42,800 vibrations per second. There
was no retardation while breaking the rope, and no acceleration when
it was broken. This experiment has been repeated scores of times,
before scores of visitors who came to my laboratory for the purpose
of seeing it.

A computation of the conditions, already shown up in part, proves
conclusively that the power of an electro-magnetic wave at an outreach
of ten inches would be, if properly developed, equal to a lifting
force of 36,000 pounds on a disk but three inches in diameter. Ten
of such on the periphery of a vibratory disk, 36 inches in diameter,
would represent 360,000 pounds actual lift at one revolution per
minute. Perfect depolarization at one hundred times per minute would
represent 360,000,000 pounds, lifted twelve times per minute, or 1000
horse power in the same time. An excess of 100 extra revolutions,
under the same conditions, would mean 2000 horse power per minute.

By this new system, to perfect which I am now devoting all my time
and my energies, dynamos will become a thing of the past, eventually;
and electric lighting will be conducted by a polar negative disk,
independent of extraneous power to run it, other than that of
sympathetic polar attraction, as simple in its construction, almost,
as an ordinary type-writing machine.



Answers made in Letters from Mr. Keely, to Questions asked of Him.

Light incident to any body that absorbs or reflects it does not
press upon it. The radiometer of Professor Crookes's invention is not
operated by the pressure of light, but by corpuscular bombardment on
the reflecting side of its vanes.

You have called my attention to the receding movement in the metal
silver, which it assumes when the flow of an alternating current
from an electro-magnet, in front, is thrown upon it. This does not
prove that light presses upon it to induce that movement. It moves
by inter-atomic bombardment of some 800 millions of corpuscular
percussions a second; or, more truly, by inter-sympathetic
vibrations. If a homogeneous disk of gold, silver and platina,
in proper proportions, were made the medium of interference, the
resultant action would be startling in showing up the movement of
molecular antagonistic thirds. The movement would be very erratic and
gyroscopic. If the same disk were used or an intermediate transmitter
to a negative focalizer, or in other words a polar radiator only
one of which is in existence, by a nodal wire of gold, silver and
platina, the effect on the disk at the negative terminus would be
to set into action the latent force held in its molecular embrace,
and would cause it to sympathetically adhere to the focalizer, with
a power that would make it practically inseparable.

Professor Fitzgerald's lecture on electro-magnetic radiation shows
that scientific men are beginning to realize, and that fairly,
the truths appertaining to the new philosophy. The professor admits
that electricity and magnetism are of differential character, and
he is right. The progressive subdivision, induced on molecules by
different orders of sympathetic vibration, and the resultant conditions
evolved on the inter-molecule and inter-atom, by introductory etheric
dispersion, prove that the magnetic flow of itself is a triple one,
as is also the electric. Again, the professor says that electricity
and magnetism would be essentially interchangeable if such a thing
existed as magnetic conduction, adding: 'It is in this difference
that we must look for the difference between electricity and
magnetism.' Thus you see how plain it is that progressive scientists
are approaching true science. The rotation of the magnetic needle,
as produced in my researching experiments, proves conclusively that
the interchange spoken of, in Professor Fitzgerald's lecture, is a
differentiated vibratory one, in which the dominant and enharmonic
forces exchange compliments with each other, in a differential way;
thus inducing rotation, in other words polarization and depolarization.

The transmission of sympathetic atomic vibration, through a triple
nodal transmitter, induces an inter-atomic percussion, that results
in triple atomic subdivision, not oscillating across the diameter
of the atom, but accelerating to an infinite degree the atomic film
that surrounds it and at the same time extending the vibratory range
of the atom far enough to set free the gaseous atomic element.



Molecular Dissociation.

If our sight could reach into the remote depths of the interstitial
spaces which exist between the molecular ranges, and observe their
wonderful action, in their oscillating motion, to and from each other,
as guided by the Infinite in their sphere of vibrating action--could we
comprehend the astonishing velocity of their gaseous capsules, combined
as it is with the accompanying acoustic force, we would be, as it were,
paralyzed with amazement. But we would then only be bordering on the
still more remote depths of the interstitial atomic realm, stretching
far down towards the neutral depths of the inter-atomic; and again,
still farther to the borders of its etheric neutral radiating centre.

If our earth were to be submitted to the force governing the rotative
action of the molecule, in its gaseous envelope, and its oscillatory
range of motion were in the same ratio to the differential magnitude of
each, the force of the vibration induced by its atmospheric surrounding
would, in a short time, disintegrate its full volume, precipitating
it into a ring of impalpable inter-molecular dust, many thousands
of miles in diameter. If brought face to face with such conditions
we could better understand the mighty and sympathetic force which
exists in the far remote domain of the molecular and atomic embrace.

The question arises, how and by what means are we able to measure
the velocity of these capsules and the differential range of
their vibratory action? Also, how can we prove beyond dispute the
facts relating to their sympathetic government? By progressive
disintegration; this is the only way; and it is accomplished by the
proper exciters of vibratory focalization; the introductory acoustic
impulses which negatize their molecular, inter-molecular, atomic and
inter-atomic media of neutral attractions, towards their focalized
centres of sympathetic aggregation.

I hold that the sympathetic neutral flow which exists in this remote
region is the latent power that, under the disintegration of water,
is liberated; showing immense volume and infinite pressure. The
same condition of latent power exists in metallic masses and,
paradoxical as it may seem, exerts its force, under the proper
exciter, only in a negative attractive way, while in water in a
positive one. In minerals under liberation this latent power seeks
its medium of tenuous equilibrium, leaving behind an impalpable dust,
that represents molecular dissociation.

In order to get at the conditions which govern and give introductory
impulses to that peculiar force which acts on the sympathetic medium
that associates matter with matter, inducing magnetic antagonisms,
it will be necessary to explain the triune conditions that govern
sympathetic streams; as also the triune conditions of corpuscular
association.

All forces in nature are mind forces: magnetic, electric,
galvanic, acoustic, solar, are all governed by the triune streams of
celestial infinity; as also the molecular, inter-molecular, atomic,
and inter-atomic. The remote depths of all their acoustic centres
become subservient to the third, sixth, and ninth position of the
diatonic, harmonic and enharmonic chords; which, when resonantly
induced, concentrate concordant harmony, by reducing their range of
corpuscular motion, drawing them as if towards each other's neutral
centre of attractive infinity.

The sympathetic acoustic exciters, or impulses, are: 1st. the
third diatonic; 2nd. the harmonic sixths neutralizing affinity;
3rd. the enharmonic ninths--positive acceleration, which induces
infinite trajective velocity from neutral centres; in other words,
neutral radiation.

Every molecule in nature represents, without variation, the same
chord. Variations that show up in the mass chord of different
visible aggregations, are accounted for by the non-uniformity of
their molecular groupings. If all were molecularly homogeneous,
the chord masses of all structures would be perfectly alike in their
resonant impulses.

When the triple introductory impulse is transmitted towards the
mass to be sensitized, it subserves the molecular concordant thirds
and antagonizes the discordant sixths extending the range of their
oscillating paths; and thus induces the highest order of repellent
antagonism towards the centre of neutral equilibrium.

We will now follow out, in their progressive orders, the conditions
necessary to give to these acoustic introductory impulses the power, as
transmitted through the proper media, to induce molecular dissociation.

First: If I wish to disturb and bring into action the latent force
held in the embrace of any molecular mass, I first find out what the
harmonic chord or note of its mass represents; and as no two masses are
alike, it would seem to necessitate an infinite number of variations
to operate on different masses; but such is not the case. All masses
can be subserved to one general condition by the compound mechanical
devices which I use for that purpose. We will suppose that the mass to
be experimented upon, when chorded, represents B flat. Then, first,
the negative radiating focalizing bar on the disk is liberated from
its dampening rod, and associated with the magnetic defocalizing
one. There are seven ranges of bars in all.

(See symbol representing sympathetic transmissive chord of B flat,
third octave on third diatonic.)

The seven assemblings are in this order:


                          Electro               Harmonic
               Dominant   Magnetic   Diatonic   Enharmonic.
               Negative
               3rd.                  6ths.                 7ths.

    I.   II.   III.       IIII.      IIIII.     IIIIII.    IIIIIII.

                       Twenty-eight in number.



The second step is to liberate, according to symbolic meaning, second
harmonic bar on sixths, or neutralizing one, and third, enharmonic
ninths, which is the one counting from negative sevenths. Now all is
in readiness for the transmissive nodal wire, one end of which must be
attached to the magnetic dispersing ring, over the negative-sevenths
cluster, and the other end to the high polar negative attractor. Then,
one end of a transmitting wire, of very fine proportions of gold,
silver and platina, is connected to the resonating sphere, and the
other end to the mass to be experimented upon. I then give to the
syren a rotatory impulse of a velocity to indicate the concordant
of the mass attached. If the introductory settings are all right,
the neutral centre indicator will rotate with high velocity: and
a single tap on the chladna wave-plate is all that is necessary to
induce pure evolution.

Either attraction or dispersion can be induced on any mass by setting
the instrument to the proper triple introductory positions, towards
the mass chords it represents, either positive or negative.

This system of evolution might be expressed as disintegration induced
by the intensified oscillations of inter-atomic-electro-magnetic waves.

How plainly this principle of harmonic sympathetic evolution indicates
the structural condition of the atom as one of wonderfully complex
form; as also is the progressive step toward it in the molecular and
inter-molecular field.

During the effect induced by disintegration of molecular mineral
masses, there is no molecular collision when forced asunder from their
radiating centres of neutrality. Their atomic and inter-atomic centres
seek their media of tenuous affinity in the far borders of the etheric
field, leaving all metallic masses, that are associated with them,
behind in their virgin form.

Keynote of electric-magnetic sympathy, transmissive combinations,
3rds, on the subdivision of first octave B flat, diatonic. 6ths,
on same subdivision of 3rds, octave harmonic; and 9ths, on the same
subdivision of 6ths, octave enharmonic.

I find that there is no medium in the range of vibratory philosophic
research, that is as unerringly exact, towards the centre of
sympathetic attraction, as the negative attractive influence of a
certain triple association of the metallic masses of gold, silver
and platina. In fact they are as accurate indicators of the earth's
terrestrial sympathetic envelope, and its triple focalized action
towards the earth's neutral centre, as the magnet is an indicator
of the diversion of the attractive flow of the dominant current of
the electric stream. Although much has been written on the subject,
the conditions attending the continuous flow of the magnet remains
a problem that has never been solved by any other theory. Yet the
solution is very simple when harmonic vibratory influence is brought
to bear upon it.

The harmonic attractive chord, thirds, induces a nodal interference
on that third of the triune combination of the terrestrial envelope,
that is immediately associated with this medium of interference, and
moves towards the negative pole of the magnet, then flows through
it to re-associate with the full triune combination, through the
positive, thus:--


    Dominant
    Harmonic
    Enharmonic

    The triune stream; one current of which is diverted from the
    Dominant, flowing in at the Negative end of the magnet; and
    out to join the triune terrestrial stream at the Positive end.


The continuous flow of the magnet is merely a diversion of that
portion of the terrestrial envelope that electricians have never
controlled. This third current, of this triune stream, has never been
subdivided and only slightly diverted towards the negative pole of
the magnet, flowing unbrokenly back to associate sympathetically
with the full triune combination of the earth's negative neutral
force. [31] Thus the problem is solved of the continuous and
never-ending force of the magnet, in carrying its load without any
diminution of its energy. There is no influence, as yet known, that
can break up its line of sympathetic flow as associated with the
triune combination. Polarization and de-polarization, in its action,
is nodal negative interference, intermittently excited, inducing
differential disturbance of polar sympathetic equilibrium.

The attractive power, evolved by a magnet in sustaining its load,
is no evidence that it is molecularly attractive: for, under the
influence of the dominant current of the electric stream, the range
of its molecular mass is not extended; but by the action induced in
atomic vibration, the latent, or undisturbed power, that is locked
up in its atomic embrace, is put into sympathetic action, and evolves
the force that is recognized as magnetic. When its exciter is removed,
it returns to atomic recesses to remain perfectly latent, until again
brought into action by its proper exciter.

When a steel unmagnetized bar is associated with a magnetized one, the
latent force in the unmagnetized one is sympathetically brought into
action, associating itself to the magnetic one, without depreciating
the power of it one iota. Dissociation and association between the
two bars can go on indefinitely with the same result.

The suspension and propelling of an atmospheric navigator of any
number of tons weight, can be successfully accomplished by thus
exciting the molecular mass of the metal it is constructed of; and
the vibratory neutral negative attraction evolved, will bring it into
perfect control, commercially, by keeping it in sympathy with the
earth's triune polar stream. There is enough of this latent power
locked up in the embrace of the iron ore, that is contained in our
planet, which, if liberated and applied to proper vibratory machinery,
would furnish force enough to run the commercial power of the world:
leaving millions of times more to draw upon, as the needs increase. The
velocity of the vibration governing the flow of the magnetic stream,
comes under the head of the first inter-atomic, and ranges from
300,000 to 780,000 vibrations per second; the first order above odour
permeating the molecules, of the glass plate of the compass (with the
same facility that atmospheric air would go through an ordinary sieve
through which it passes), to arouse sympathetically in the needle
the concordant condition that harmonizes with its own. The course of
this sympathetic flow is governed by the full harmonic chord; and,
consequently, moves in straight lines; thus transmitting its sympathy
free of molecular interferences.

The order of vibration associated with the transmission of odour
acts by sympathetic negative interference; and, consequently, moves
in circles, with a velocity of 220,000 per second, at least.

If in any way the circle of its rotatory diameter could be reduced
to that of its corpuscular structure, then a bottle containing an
odorous substance, though sealed as hermetically as an Edison-light
bulb, could no more confine its corpuscles than an open chimney the
smoke ascending from the fire burning at its base.

The sympathetic influence of the terrestrial envelope gets its
introductory impulse from the infinite depths of the earth's neutral
centre. This impulse radiates in undulating lines far enough into
etheric space to become sympathetically associated with the etheric
(or Infinite) under the same conditions that associate the mental with
the physical organism of man. We can define man's molecular condition
in its physical organism as the earth, and its connective link with the
convolutionary cerebral centres as the Infinite etheric domain. Thus,
we have, represented in the planetary masses moving in etheric space,
the same conditions of governing rule as exists between the mental
and physical forces.

With this medium it is plain to see how simply God works, as well as
mysteriously, His wonders to perform; the mental forces kept vitalized
from the great store-house of the etheric realm; and, in controlling
the physical, the deficit caused thereby renewed and kept balanced
by the power of its sympathetic concordant receptiveness.

Any visible molecular mass of metal can be so impregnated by triple
orders of sympathetic vibration as to give it the same sympathetic
transmissive qualities that exist in the mental forces, which make
such mass subservient to either the attractive or repulsive conditions
of terrestrial sympathy.

Gravity is nothing more than a concordant attractive sympathetic
stream flowing towards the neutral centre of the earth. This force
is inherent in all visible and invisible aggregated forms of matter,
from the very birth of a planet, around whose centre the molecules
cluster by the sympathetic affinity which is thus induced. If these
conditions had always maintained a neutral position in etheric space,
no planet would ever have been evolved. These conditions have been
fixed by the Infinite. These rotating neutral centres, set in celestial
space, have been endowed with the power of rotation to become their
own accumulators. It is through the action of these sympathetic forces
of the Infinite etheric realm that planets are born, and their volume
of matter augmented.

If we pick up an object, we feel a resisting power in it which
physicists call gravity; but they do not explain what gravity is. It
is simply a sympathetic flow, proceeding from the molecular centres
of neutrality; which flow is concordant with the earth's neutral
centre of same, seeking this medium of its affinity with a power
corresponding to the character of its molecular mass. There is no
actual weight in the molecules of the mass of which the earth is
composed. If the sympathetic negative polar stream that flows towards
the neutral centre of the earth were cut off from it, the earth's
molecular mass would become independent, and would float away into
space as would a soap-bubble filled with warm air.

The gravital flow comes, in this system, under the order of the
sympathetic concordant of the 9ths, and belongs to that third of the
triune combination called polar propulsive.

Magnetism is polar attraction.

Gravity is polar propulsion.

Both magnetism and gravity can be accelerated by the proper medium
of sympathetic vibratory influences.


A Conjecture.

If we take into proper consideration the sympathetic affinity that
exists between the centres of the cerebral convolutionary organism,
and the polar terrestrial forces, as linked to the celestial, or
Infinite, the harmonizing effects they have on the normal brain,
and the antagonistic negative bombardment of these streams on
the abnormal one, is it not possible, by the diversion of pure,
sympathetic streams, to antagonize abnormal conditions, by concordant
or magnetic polar sympathetic mechanical exciters, and thus to induce
pure normal equilibrium of its corpuscular mass?--which means perfect
mental restoration.









