CHAPTER VIII.

1888.

HELPERS ON THE ROAD, AND HINDERERS.

                            Blindfolded and alone we stand,
                            With unknown thresholds on each hand:
                            The darkness deepens as we grope,
                            Afraid to fear, afraid to hope.
                            Yet this one thing we learn to know
                            Each day more surely as we go:
                            That doors are opened, ways are made,
                            Burdens are lifted, or are laid
                            By some great law unseen and still
                            Unfathomed purpose to fulfil.
                                          "Not as I will."


The next "helper on the road" was an Austrian nobleman, the Chevalier
Griez de Ronse, who printed a series of papers on Keely's discoveries
in a journal in Vienna, then owned by him--The Vienna Weekly News. One
of these articles mentions that the attention of Englishmen of science
had been drawn to Keely's claims, in regard to having imprisoned the
ether, by Professor Henri Hertz's experiments in ether vibrations
at the Bonn University. "Keely, like the late Dr. Schuster," says
The Vienna Weekly News, "claims on behalf of science the right to
prosecute its investigations until a mechanical explanation of all
things is attained. The public are still but the children of those
who murdered Socrates, tolerated the persecution of Galileo, and
deserted Columbus. This remark is now illustrated by the imprisonment
with felons last month of Inventor Keely in Moyamensing Prison,
Philadelphia, where Judge Finletter committed him for contempt of
court, without the shadow of an excuse in the opinions of men who
had followed the proceedings against him.

Under the heading, "Keely's Sunday in Jail," says a Philadelphia
journal, Inventor Keely spent a quiet Sunday in Moyamensing Prison. The
outside iron doors of his cell were thrown open, when the religious
services of the morning began. The imprisoned inventor listened with
deep interest. The soft peals of the organ and the melody of the choir,
singing "Nearer, my God, to Thee," floated into the narrow cell. Keely
sat near the grated door while the minister read selections from the
Scriptures and preached his sermon. While the inventor was resting
in his cell, during the afternoon, a number of persons made inquiries
at the "Untried Department." They were all told that no one could be
admitted on Sunday, but a young man with a pallid face lingered. He
told the gate-keeper that he was an inventor himself, and had been
waiting for eight years for a patent from Washington; adding that,
when he read of Keely's commitment, he was reminded of Galileo who
was thrown in a dungeon because he said, "The world moves."

The following day Keely was released by order of the Judges of the
Supreme Court. His imprisonment exalted him, instead of degrading
him as "the unjust judge" hoped to do; drawing the sympathies to him
of all men who know what it is to be "persecuted for righteousness'
sake;" of all men, in all parts of the world, who are truth-loving,
justice-loving men.

The Keely Motor Company should learn a lesson in this
experience. Tyndall said, long since, that the community that severs
itself from great discoveries, that merely runs after the practical
application without reference to the sources of a discovery, would
by-and-by find itself at the end of its tether. This has been verified
in the fate of the Keely Motor Company, which was organized for the
purpose of reaping financial benefit from Keely's grand discovery
of an unknown force before his "work of evolution," in obtaining
mechanical results, had fairly commenced. This company has thrown
upon the discoverer's shoulders the burden of its stock-jobbing
operations, until Keely is looked upon by men of science, as well
as by men ignorant of the A B C of science, as a man working for
personal ends; instead of, as he should be regarded, a Prometheus
seeking to give to his fellow-men a costless motive force; and who,
whether he succeeds financially or not, is entitled to the admiration
of all who believe, with Browning, that "effort, not success, makes
man great." If the Keely Motor Company managers would profit by this
lesson, they will in future seek to find, among scientific men of
world-wide renown, some one man, broad enough in mind to care nothing
for the ridicule of the ignorant, who will investigate the nature of
Keely's discoveries, as demonstrated by his experiments, instead of
inviting reporters to witness the demonstrations, in their efforts
"to boom the stock" of their company, by a reporter's accounts of
the marvels he has witnessed. For years Keely had nothing to show,
beyond the generation of the force, the production of a 30 lb. vacuum
and the discharge of a gun. When once his giant mind had grasped
the knowledge, which again by seeming chance was imparted to him,
he made colossal strides across that unknown tract, the boundaries
of which others are now but beginning to explore. Colonel Le Mat was
no false prophet, Le Figaro was no untrustworthy herald, when the
announcement was made by this French inventor to Monsieur Chevreul,
and by this French journal to the public on the 1st day of September,
1888, that the chain which holds the aerial ship to the earth would
be broken asunder by Keely's discovery. The nineteenth century holds
in its strong arms the pledge, that sooner or later the aerial navy,
so long waited for, will traverse the trackless high roads of space
from Continent to Continent.

It has been supposed by many, Dr. Franz Hartmann among the number,
that it requires Keely himself, or another person constituted like
him, to set his machinery in motion. Therefore, it has been reasoned
that the commercial success of an engine is only possible in case
Keely is himself the engineer; or if another man possessing the same
seemingly abnormal power could be the engineer. For this reason,
says Dr. Hartmann, it is impossible for Keely to instruct any one in
his method, so as to enable that one to do what he does. There has
been ground in the past for such a statement, it is true, but not
now. Keely asserts that when his system is completed, the knowledge
of all that is needed for its commercial employment will be more
easily acquired than is the necessary skill demanded to enable one
to safely operate a steam-engine. When Dr. Hartmann's opinion was
made known to Keely, he replied, "Dr. Hartmann's whole conception,
in regard to other men being unable to control the operations of my
inventions on the sympathetic attractive system, is as incorrect as
would be the same conception in reference to operating an electric
battery by anyone but its inventor."

Let anyone imagine the years on years of research that would have been
necessary before Gilbert (who, after Thales, discovered electricity)
could have perfected a system which would have enabled men to
accomplish all that is accomplished in our age, with electricity as
a motive power. Keely's labours would be better understood by those
who accuse him of "always promising, and never performing," under
such a conception. The inventor must be sanguine of success; he must
day by day think that he is on the eve of perfecting his invention,
in order to keep up his courage to persevere to the end; otherwise,
how could he work, year after year, in the face of obstacle after
obstacle that seems, each one, to be insurmountable? After Keely's
imprisonment when, among the men who knew that he was incapable of
fraud, there was one so incensed by Keely's repeated failures to
perfect his engine that he had said he "hoped to live to see Keely
rotting in a gutter," Mr. R. Harte wrote: "And now that it has been
proved in a hundred ways and before thousands of persons competent to
judge of the merits of Keely's claims, that he has really discovered
previously unknown forces in nature, studied them, mastered some of
their laws, invented and is perfecting researching apparatus that will
make his discoveries of practical application in numerous ways--now
that he has actually done this, how does the world treat him? Does
Congress come forward with a grant to enable him to complete his
marvellous work? Do men of science hail him as a great discoverer,
or hold out the hand of fellowship? Do people do honour to the man
whose sole entreaty to them will be to receive from his hands a
gift a thousand times more precious to them than steam engine or
dynamo? It is a literal fact that if Keely fell exhausted to-day,
in the terrible struggle he has so long maintained, his failure to
establish his claims would be received with a shout of malignant
delight from nearly every lecture-hall, pulpit, counting-house and
newspaper office in the so-called civilized world. The world has hardly
ever recognized its benefactors until it has become time to raise a
statue to their memory, 'in order to beautify the town.' Jealousy,
stupidity, the malignity which is born of conscious inferiority, are
at this moment putting in Keely's road every impediment which law and
injustice can manufacture. Two hundred years ago he would have been
burned, a century since he would have probably been mobbed to death;
but thank God we are too civilized, too humane now to burn or mob
to death those who make great discoveries, who wish to benefit their
fellow-men, or whose ideas are in advance of their age--we only break
their hearts with slander, ridicule, and neglect, and when that fails
to drive them to suicide, we bring to bear upon them the ponderous
pressure of the law, and heap upon them the 'peine forte et dure' of
injunctions, and orders, and suits, to crush them out of a world they
have had the impertinence to try to improve, and the folly to imagine
they could save from suffering, without paying in their own persons
the inevitable penalty. Had it not been for the obligations incurred by
Keely, in accepting the aid of the Keely Motor Company--in other words,
had scientists, instead of speculators, furnished him with the means
necessary to carry on his work of evolution, the secrets which he has
so carefully guarded would now have been public property, so little
does he care personally for financial results. As it is, those who
have witnessed his beautiful experiments in acoustics and sympathetic
vibration were often too ignorant to comprehend their meaning, and,
consequently, even after expressing gratification to him, went away
from his workshop to denounce him as a Cagliostro; while others,
competent to judge, have refused to witness the production of the
ether, as Sir William Thomson and Lord Raleigh refused, when they were
in America a few years since. The company here mentioned has been a
thorn in the inventor's side ever since it was organized. It has been
'bulled and beared' by greedy speculators, in whose varying interests
the American newspapers for years have been worked, the results of
which the inventor has had to bear. For many years the Company has
contributed nothing towards Keely's expenses or support, and in the
opinion of many lawyers it is virtually dead. How far it is entitled
to his gratitude may be gathered from the fact, as stated, that 'when
Mr. Keely abandoned his old generator of etheric force, baffled in
his attempts to wrest from nature one of her most carefully guarded
secrets, harassed by his connection with the Keely Motor Company,
some of the officers and stockholders of which had instituted law
proceedings against him, which threatened him with the indignity
of imprisonment, he destroyed many of his marvellous models, and
determined that, if taken to prison, it should be his dead body and
not himself.

"Those who argue, if Keely had really obtained knowledge which
contributes towards making man master of the material world, that
science would hail the glad tidings with great joy, know but little
of modern science and its votaries. An Anglican bishop never ignored
a dissenting preacher with more dignified grace than the professor
of orthodox science ignores the heterodox genius who has the audacity
to wander beyond the limitations which 'received opinion' has placed
upon the possibilities of nature. The fact is that men of science have
persistently ignored, and know absolutely nothing about, the great
department of nature into which Keely penetrated years ago, and in
which he has now made himself at home. Not long ago a Fellow of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh, Major Ricarde-Seaver, went to Philadelphia
to convince himself as to the nature of Keely's discovery. He returned,
saying that Keely was working with, and had the apparent command over
forces, the nature, or even the very existence, of which was absolutely
unknown to him, and, so far as he is aware, to modern science.

"Beyond disintegration lies dispersion, and Keely can just as easily
disperse the atoms of matter as disintegrate its molecules. Disperse
them into what? Well,--into ether, apparently; into the hypothetical
substratum which modern scientists have postulated, and about whose
nature they know absolutely nothing but what they invent themselves,
but which to Keely is not hypothesis, but a fact as real as his own
shoes; and which ether, indeed, seems to be 'the protoplasm of all
things.' As to the 'law of gravity,' it appears in the light of
Keely's experiments, but one manifestation of a law of very much
wider application--a law which provides for the reversion of the
process of attraction in the shape of a process of repulsion.

"While Major Ricarde-Seaver, F.R.S., [6] was in Philadelphia, Keely, by
means of a belt and certain appliances which he wore upon his person,
moved single-handed, a 500 horse-power vibratory engine from one
part of his shop to another. There was not a scratch on the floor,
and astounded engineers declared that they could not have moved
it without a derrick, the operation of which would have required
the removal of the roof of the shop. Of course it is but a step in
advance of this to construct a machine which, when polarized with a
'negative attraction,' will rise from the earth and move under the
influence of an etheric current at the rate of 500 miles an hour,
in any given direction. This is, in fact, Keely's 'air ship.'

"When the history of his discoveries and inventions come to be written
there will be no more pathetic story in the annals of genius than that
of John Worrell Keely. The world hereafter will find it hard to believe
that in the last quarter of the 19th century a man with an insight
into the secret workings of nature, and a knowledge of her subtler
forces, which, whenever it is utilized, will relieve mankind from
much of the grinding toil that now makes bitter the existence of the
vast majority, that such a man should have been left unaided, because
in all the ranks of science there was not found one man capable of
understanding his colossal work--because in all the ranks of religion
there was not found one man able to realize the enlarged conception of
Deity immanent in Keely's great thoughts--because in all the ranks of
commerce, of speculation, of literature, of art, there was not found
one man large enough, generous enough, unselfish enough, to furnish
money for a purpose that did not promise an immediate dividend."

Again in 1888, more than ever was Keely held up to ridicule by all
those men who possess the instinct of the brute to hound down its
prey, and his supporters came in for their share of abuse. Among
this class, or of it, were men so ignorant of Keely's claims,
and of the object of his researches, that they represented him as
"a seeker of the impossible," a "perpetual motion crank," throwing
upon his character other odium which the speculating managers of
"The Keely Motor Company" were justly responsible for. One of these
communications alone is enough to show the quality of the weapons
used against him. It appeared in The New York Daily Tribune.



THE KEELY MOTOR CRAZE.

A Donkey-Cabbage Race.

HOW MUCH LONGER WILL THE CLEVER JUGGLER BE ABLE TO DELUDE HIS VICTIMS?

To the Editor of "The Tribune."

Sir,--The success with which Keely has deluded his victims by
appealing to their credulity with a mystery, and to their cupidity
with a promise of "all the kingdoms of the earth," which would not be
of greater value than the monopoly of infinite power without cost,
which he dangles before their astonished vision, makes him and his
antics subjects of unusual interest. His last performance appears to be
an issue of 5,000,000 dols. of new stock representing a new discovery
veiled in mystery, which is to far outstrip his former one, on which
5,000,000 dols. of stock was issued and is now held by his dupes. Two
of these new millions are to go to the old holders as a compensation
to them for their disappointment in not realizing perpetual motion
under the old discovery; two more to go to Keely to be sold to the
public; and the remaining one million is in the treasury to be sold
for the benefit of Keely and the others, half and half.

For fifteen years the donkey has been ridden by Keely with the cabbage
on a pole held just in front of his hungry mouth, and now the donkey
is told that the cabbage after all is only sham, but that the new
cabbage is real, and if he will only consent to run fast enough and
far enough he certainly will reach it and grow fat.

It would seem that the donkey ought to pause and consider before he
begins another fifteen-year race after perpetual motion, and it is here
proposed to assist him in his reflections by a few facts. More than
fifteen years ago Keely made himself known to the public by exhibiting
an apparatus in which a great pressure was manifested, which, he said,
resulted from the discovery by him of a new force the nature of which
was his secret. Several people, as usual, were astonished at the show,
and bought and paid for shares in the patent which was promised. To
give colour to the pretence, Keely applied for a patent before 1876,
but did not assign to the purchasers their shares; whereupon some of
them protested against the issue of the patent unless their shares
were recognized in the grant. The Patent Office replied to these
protests that it could not recognize the rights claimed unless there
was a written assignment filed in the office, which the claimants did
not have. The Commissioner, however, called upon Keely to furnish a
"working model" of his invention, which, of course, he could not do,
and his application was rejected. The specification and drawings of
this apparatus show a very silly form of the common perpetual motion
machine, of which there are thousands. It was open to the public for
some years, when, under a new rule of the office, it, along with all
other rejected applications, was withdrawn from inspection; but it is
in the office, together with the protests of those who had paid Keely
for a share in it. I examined it years ago, and informed Mr. Lamson,
and others of Keely's stockholders, of it. Mr. Lamson told me that he
had charged Keely with deception, because he had always said that he
never had applied for a patent, and that Keely explained it by saying
that he had purposely concealed his invention from the Patent Office
in that application to which he had made oath.

Keely, however, finding the perpetual motion trick profitable,
extended his operations and became well known to many influential
people by his exhibitions. In the winter of 1875-76 he produced two
metallic spheres, one about thirty inches in diameter, hung like
an ordinary terrestrial globe, which, he said, would revolve with
a force equal to two horse-power, and would continue to run when
once started as long as the Centennial Exhibition should be open,
and until the thing was worn out by friction. In starting it Keely
used to have a blackboard in the room, on which he would write a few
figures in chalk in the presence of his dupes, and would say that at
a certain time the globe would start--and it did, and would revolve
as long as the lookers-on remained to see it. Keely pretended to
explain this phenomenon by a string of unintelligible jargon; but the
point of it all was that he said the thing ran in consequence of its
internal mechanical arrangement--or, in other words, that by combining
pieces of metal in a certain way power was generated without any other
expense than that required to construct the apparatus. Naturally he
refused to show the interior construction which did the miracle;
but if his statements were true, it existed inside of that globe,
and could be produced indefinitely with the result of producing an
indefinite amount of horse-power without current expense.

The stock about this time rose to a great price--about 600 per
cent.--as it well might if this ball was an "honest ghost." Some of
the stockholders had sense enough to see that if Keely's story were
true, nothing more could be desired, for it must at once supersede
coal and all other means of producing power, and its novelty could
not be doubted. It was in effect, "all the kingdoms of the earth,"
which Satan once offered. But, on the other hand, if Keely's story
were not true, then he was simply an impostor who had been defrauding
the stockholders out of their money; and they demanded of Keely
that he should proceed at once to patent this miraculous machine,
which could create power by a peculiar-shaped hole in a sphere of
iron. Of course Keely refused to comply with this reasonable request,
and many of his stockholders sold out and left him; since which time
the stock has gradually declined down to the present time, when its
value is admitted to be nothing.

In view of these facts the curious question is why the donkey goes
on any further. The revolving ball is a fact known to hundreds of
the stockholders. It is either a real cabbage capable of feeding
the donkey with a perpetual feast, like the widow's cruse of oil,
or it is only a sham such as any good mechanic could construct
and operate as Keely did. Why doesn't the donkey balk and insist on
biting into the cabbage? If it is real the Keely stock is worth untold
millions. It would put an end to steam engines and electric batteries
for ever. One of those balls in the corner of a room would make all
the heat and light which could be used, and have power to sell; and
all that would be needed would be to learn Keely's cabalistic signs
on the blackboard in order to make it start, and to stop it when it
had done enough. But if the ball is only a trick, then, of course,
Keely could be sent to prison, and his victims could close their
accounts and be sure that they would lose no more by him.

Without going any further into the history of this remarkable delusion,
which is full of similar tricks too numerous to mention now, it seems
clear that these facts ought to be used to bring to an end in one
way or the other the Keely craze.


Edward N. Dickerson.

New York, Nov. 30, 1888.



It is difficult to understand how anyone could concoct and put together
such a tissue of fabrications as this, when the sole foundation for
such a tissue lay in the fact that it was at this juncture that Keely
made the announcement that he had proved the uselessness of building
engines to employ the ether as a motive power; which could only be
used as the medium for the power which he had discovered, namely,
a condition of sympathetic vibration, associated both positively and
negatively with the polar stream.

The statement made of the issue of new stock is absolutely untrue. The
revolving globe was never created to be "the source of power," and the
representation of the manner in which the globe was made to revolve,
and that Keely affirmed he could produce with it "an indefinite
amount of horse power without current expense," is denied. The
suggestion that Keely could be sent to prison was welcomed by those
who eventually acted upon it, with the result that Judge Finletter
committed Keely to Moyamensing Prison, for contempt of court, but
not for fraud. Mr. Keely, at that time, wrote of those who called
him a perpetual motion seeker:--"I console myself by thinking that
if they were not ignorant of the grand truths which I am devoting my
life to develop into a system, they could never bring forward such
an absurd charge. Perpetual motion is against nature, and it is only
by following nature's laws that I can ever hope to reach the goal I
am aiming to reach."

The Supreme Court reversed and set aside the order of the court
committing Keely for contempt, and released him from custody, upon
the writ of habeas corpus taken out on his behalf, within three days
of his commitment.

The Chief Justice, in delivering his opinion, made some remarks
which fully vindicated Mr. Keely's character. After alluding to the
proper procedure which ought to have been taken in the court below,
the Judge continued:--

"Instead of so proceeding, a commission of experts was appointed to
examine the defendant's machine, and the order of April 7th was made,
by which the defendant, in advance of any issue, was not only required
to exhibit his machine, but also to operate it and explain the mode
of its construction and operation, although it clearly appeared that
it would require considerable expense to clean the machine, put it
together and operate it. The defendant appears to have been willing
to exhibit it, and in point of fact did so. That he might have been
compelled to do so at a proper stage of the case is conceded. But
to make an order not only to exhibit it, but to operate it, the
practical effect of which was to wring from him his defence in advance
of any issue joined, was an improvident and excessive exercise of
Chancery powers. We are of opinion that the order was improvidently
made. It follows that the learned court had no power to enforce it
by attachment. The relator is discharged."


It was in this year, 1888, that a woman, interested in all branches of
science, who had proved to her own satisfaction the value to humanity,
as well as to science, of Keely's discoveries, was deprived of legal
and maternal rights on account of the delusions that she was very
generally believed to be under. A journalist, wishing to obtain
information concerning Keely's work, called upon this woman, by
appointment, and at the close of the interview said,--

"May I venture to ask you if it is true that you have furnished
Mr. Keely with large sums of money as rumour declares; and that you
have invested largely in the stock?"

"Were I not glad of the opportunity to answer this question in justice
to Mr. Keely, I might have said that this is a subject which is of
no interest to the public; but I have heard the amount estimated as
nearly 100,000l. too often not to be willing to have the truth made
known. What I have given to Mr. Keely has been saved by economies
in my expenses; and, if not given to him, would have been given to
others; as I believe in those who have the most doing all that lies
in their power for those who have less. In regard to investments in
Keely Motor stock, I have bought no stock excepting to give away."

"There is one other question I should like to ask you," said our
representative, "Is Mr. Keely a spiritualist? I use the word in its
ordinary sense. Does he claim that he has bridged the gulf between
the finite and the infinite?"

"When Mr. Keely first commenced his wonderful investigations he would
have scouted the idea of being in any way whatever associated with
so-called spiritualism, but of recent years, and especially during
the last few months, he has made such startling progress that he now
admits--as I told him a long time ago he would come to admit--that
if not in actual experiment, at least in theory he has passed into
the world of spirit."

The interview being ended, our representative took his departure, after
expressing his thanks for the information so willingly given. How far
this lady's anticipations of the inventor's success will be realized,
or how far her confidence in his integrity is justified, we must leave
our readers to judge for themselves. The whole subject is enveloped in
much mystery, but it is full of interest, and if half that is narrated
of Mr. Keely be true, he is indeed a wonderful man!--The Tatler.









