CHAPTER XX.

1892.

PROGRESSIVE SCIENCE--KEELY's PRESENT POSITION.

(A Review of the Situation.)

        This amount of repetition to some will probably appear to be
        tedious, but only by varied iteration can alien conceptions
        be forced on reluctant minds.--Herbert Spencer.

        The researches of Lodge in England and of Hertz in Germany give
        us an almost infinite range of ethereal vibrations.... Here
        is unfolded to us a new and astonishing world,--one which
        it is hard to conceive should contain no possibilities of
        transmitting and receiving intelligence.... Here also is
        revealed to us the bewildering possibility of telegraphy
        without wires, posts, cables, or any of our present costly
        appliances.... As for myself, I hold the firm conviction that
        unflagging research will be rewarded by an insight into natural
        mysteries, such as now can rarely be conceived.--Professor
        Wm. Crookes, M.R.A., F.R.S., &c.

        Vibratory Philosophy teaches that "in the great workshop of
        Nature there are no lines of demarcation to be drawn between
        the most exalted speculation and common-place practice, and
        that all knowledge must lead up to one great result; that of
        an intelligent recognition of the Creator through His works."

            "Facts are the body of science; speculation is its soul."


It has been said that there is nothing more sublime in the history
of mind than the lonely struggles which generate and precede
success. After the admission made by Professor Rücker, M.A., at the
last meeting of the British Association, that the ether may be "the
material of which all matter is composed," and that "we may, perhaps,
be able to use and control the ether as we now use and control steam,"
there would seem to be grounds for hoping that Keely's "lonely and
prolonged struggles" to utilize in mechanics the ether product which
he obtains from his method of dissociating the elements of water,
will be more universally recognized and appreciated than they have yet
been. Discovery may be unsought and instantaneous, but the inventions
for utilizing discoveries may be, and generally are, the work of years.

Keely first imprisoned the ether in 1872, when its existence was
denied; or, if admitted by a few, it was called "the hypothetical
ether." In 1888, Professor Henri Hertz discovered and announced,
in the Revue des Deux Mondes, that the ether is held in a state of
bondage in all electro-magnetic engines. Not until this fact had been
made known, were there any scientific men, with one notable exception,
who were willing to admit it was possible that Keely might also have
"stumbled over" the manner of effecting its imprisonment.

The nature of Keely's researches, and the length of time in which he
has been absorbed by the necessary dead-work, attendant upon research
before a discovery can be utilized, may be gathered from a letter
recently written by Mr. C. G. Till, of Brooklyn, New York:--

"In Keely's early struggles, somewhere about twenty years ago, I
became acquainted with him, and helped him then to the best of my
ability. Indeed I may say that I was god-father to his discovery;
for I was with him when the idea first entered his head that he
could combine steam and water to run an engine. At that time he made
a crude machine, which he actually ran for some time; and this was
the original model of the Pneumatic-Pulsating-Vacuo-Engine, in the
operation of which he discovered his present force. From that day to
this he has been in pursuit of some method as a medium to use what
he calls his etheric force with. That he has actually discovered a
new force there is not a shadow of doubt. In those days I have known
him to sell and pawn everything of value in his house to obtain means
to continue his investigations with the money thus acquired; and I am
sure that he will eventually give to the world the greatest boon that
has been received by it since the advent of Christianity," etc., etc.

It has been very generally thought that Keely is pursuing the ignis
fatuus of perpetual motion. No greater mistake could have been
made. The genuineness of his claims as a discoverer rests upon
a correct answer to the question, "Is hydrogen gas an element or
a compound?"

Science, as Herodotus said, is to know things truly: but science
tells us that hydrogen is a simple, that the atom is not divisible,
and that latent energy is not locked in the interstitial spaces of
all forms of matter from their birth or aggregation. Keely's system
of Vibratory Physics refutes these canons of science. How absurd
must seem the idea to many that the schools can be wrong, and that
Keely, who has been branded by some of these schools as an impostor,
should be right: but time will show whether Keely's discoveries have
"come to stay." The history of the past shows us that science has
never been infallible; that like Christianity she unfolds her truths
progressively. Keely teaches that an unknown potency is held in the
atom's tenacious grasp, until released by an introductory impulse
given by a certain order of vibration, depending upon the mass-chord
of the aggregation; which impulse so increases the oscillation of
the atoms as to rupture their etheric capsules. All great truths hold
germs potential of ever-increasing growth. It took half a century for
the "Principia" of Newton to overcome the contempt that was showered
upon it; and now progressive science is overshadowing Newton's vast
attainments. In his giant mind was born the hypothesis that the ether
is the cause of light and gravity. Keely has been teaching for years,
that ether is the medium of all force. For every effect science
requires an efficient cause. Hence, when Faraday found no definite
knowledge in exact sciences to satisfy him on certain points he was
led into speculative science, or the preliminary reaching after truths
which we feel must exist by reason of certain effects that come under
our observation, analogous to already known laws:--"reduced facts
lie behind us; speculative ones lie before us;" and without these
latter science could make no progress. Faraday was only speculating
when he said: "Thus either present elements are the true elements;
or else there is the probability before us of obtaining some more
high and general power of nature even than electricity; and which,
at the same time, might reveal to us an entirely new grade of elements
of matter, now hidden from our view and almost from our suspicion."

Faraday's keen perception and acute practical judgment, were never
better exemplified than in Keely's discovery of Negative Attraction;
the laws governing which he is still researching; theorizing that it
is the energy which controls the planetary masses in their advance
toward each other, and in their recession from each other,--the
energy which lifts the seas and the oceans out of their beds, and
replaces them once in twenty-four hours; in other words, explaining
the mystery of the action of gravity.

Had Faraday lived longer he might have anticipated Keely in one of
his discoveries; for he certainly was on the road to it, in the views
of force and matter which he held that were not in accordance with
the accepted views of his time; and which were then set aside as
"wild speculations," by the physicists who complained of his "want
of mathematical accuracy," of his "entertaining notions altogether
distinct from the views generally held by men of science," who
continued their experimental researches on their own lines.

In 1885, before Keely's scientific explorations had taught him that
no engine can ever be constructed by which the ether can be used and
controlled, as we now use and control steam, he wrote, in a letter to a
friend, "I shall not forestall an unproved conclusion, but fight step
by step the dark paths I am exploring, knowing that, should I succeed
in proving one single fact in science heretofore unknown, I shall in
so doing be rewarded in the highest degree. In whatever direction the
human mind travels it comes quickly to a boundary line which it cannot
pass. There is a knowable field of research, bordered by an unknown
tract. My experience teaches me how narrow is the strip of territory
which belongs to the knowable, how very small the portion that has
been traversed and taken possession of. The further we traverse this
unknown territory, the stronger will become our faith in the immovable
order of the world; for, at each advancing step, we find fresh fruits
of the immutable laws that reign over all things,--from the falling
apple, up to the thoughts, the words, the deeds, the will of man:
and we find these laws irreversible and eternal, order and method
reigning throughout the universe. Some details of this universal method
have been worked up, and we know them by the names of 'gravitation,'
'chemical affinity,' 'nerve-power,' &c. These material certainties are
as sacred as moral certainties.... The nearest approach to a certainty
is made through harmony with nature's laws. The surest media are
those which nature has laid out in her wonderful workings. The man
who deviates from these paths will suffer the penalty of a defeat,
as is seen in the record of 'perpetual motion' seekers. I have been
classed with such dreamers; but I find consolation in the thought
that it is only by those men who are utterly ignorant of the great
and marvellous truths which I have devoted my life to demonstrate
and to bring within reach of all. I believe the time is near at
hand when the principles of etheric evolution will be established,
and when the world will be eager to recognize and accept a system
that will certainly create a revolution for the highest benefits
of mankind, inaugurating an era undreamed of by those who are now
ignorant of the existence of this etheric force." These views which
have guided Keely in all his researches cannot be made known to any
just, discerning mind without an accompanying perception of the gross
way in which he has been misrepresented by his defamers; as well as
some appreciation of the scientifically cautious manner in which he
has pursued his investigations, since he abandoned his efforts to
construct an engine that would hold the ether in rotation.

At the present time Keely is concentrating his efforts on the
perfecting of his mechanical conditions to that point where, according
to his theories, he will be able to establish, on the ninths, a
sympathetic affinity with pure, polar, negative attraction, minus
magnetism. In his own opinion he has so nearly gained the summit,
or completion of his "graduation," as to feel that he holds the key
to the control of the infinitely tenuous conditions which lie before
him to be conquered, before he gains mastery of the group of depolar
disks that he is now working upon. Twenty-six groups are completed,
and when the twenty-seventh and last group is under equal control,
Keely expects to establish a circuit of vibratory force, for running
machinery: both for aerial navigation and for terrestrial use. If
this result be obtained, Keely will then be in a position to give his
system to science; and to demonstrate the ever-operative immanence of
the Infinite builder of all things of whom our Lord said, "My Father
worketh hitherto, and I work."

In commercial use Keely expects that when the motion has been once
set up, in any of his machines, it will continue until the material
is worn out. It is this claim which has caused Keely to be classed
with perpetual-motion seekers.

For years Keely has been trying to utilize his discoveries for
the material and moral advantage of humanity: and yet he feels,
as Buckle has said of the present acquirements of science, that the
ground only is broken, that the crust only is touched. The loftiest
pinnacle which has been reached by the men who are foremost in their
constructions of the method by which the one source of all energy works
in the material world, is too insignificant a position to obtain
even an outlook towards the vast realm that Keely figuratively
describes as the infinite brain; or the source from which all
"sympathetic-leads" emanate, that connect mind with matter. Realizing
that all conditions of matter are but as vain illusions, he never
falters in his determination to reach after the hidden things of God,
if haply he may find them. Even the goal which he seeks to attain
lies, in his own estimation, on the outermost border of this crust;
and well he knows that it never can be reached in any other way than
by principles of exact science and by pursuing a path that is at all
times lighted by reason.

Believing that "the horizon of the world of matter, which has been
thought to rest over hydrogen, extends to infinite reaches, including
substances which have never been revealed to the senses," he knows how
unfathomable is the ocean that lies beyond, and like Newton compares
himself to one who is gathering pebbles on its shore.

Science, which has ever been interested both in the infinitely small
and infinitely great, has in our age dropped the only clue that can
guide through the obscure labyrinth which leads into depths of nature
lying beyond the knowledge of our unaided senses.

The evolution of the human race, says Nesbit, has passed from the
physiological into the psychological field; and it is in the latter
alone that progress may be looked for.

This is the realm into which Keely's efforts, to give to the world
a costless motive power, have slowly conducted him through the black
darkness of the region in which he has been fighting his way, for a
score of years, in behalf of true science and humanity.

Lord Derby has said that modern science, on its popular side, is
really a great factory of popular fallacies; that its expounders in
one decade are kept busy refuting the errors to which the preceding
decade has given currency. There is hardly a branch of science, he
says, susceptible of general and wide-reaching conclusions, which
might not be revolutionized by some discovery to-morrow.

If Keely is able to establish his theories, physical science will have
to abandon the positions to which she clings, and forced to admit that
there exists a purity of conditions in Vibratory Physics unknown in
mechanical physics, undreamed of even in philosophy; for he will then
be in a position to demonstrate the outflow of the Infinite mind as
sympathetically associated with matter visible and invisible.

Of this philosophy Professor Daniel G. Brinton has said, "It is
so simple, beautiful and comprehensive in its vibratory theory
that I hope it will be found experimentally to be true. To me all
commercial and practical results, motors, air-ships, engines, are of no
importance by the side of the theoretical truth of the demonstrations
of this cosmic force. As soon as Dr. Koenig is prepared to report
on the purely technical and physical character of the experiments,
I shall be, in fact I am, ready to go into full details as to their
significance in reference to both matter and mind. It will be enough
for me if Dr. Koenig is able to say that the force handled by Keely
is not gravity, electricity, magnetism, compressed air, nor other
of the well-known forces. Let him say that, and I will undertake
to say what the force is." Tests were made last year by Dr. Koenig
and Dr. Tuttle, a Baltimore physicist, in the presence of other men
of science with the most sensitive galvanometer belonging to the
University of Pennsylvania, all of whom were satisfied that no known
force had been detected.

The abstract of Keely's philosophy, written by Dr. Brinton, has made
Keely's theories intelligible for the first time. Each new discovery
necessitates a new vocabulary; and Keely's writings are obscure
because of his new nomenclature. When Faraday's ideas differed from
those held by the authorities of his time, they were pronounced to
be "untranslatable into scientific language;" and as was then said
of Faraday, so can it now be said of Keely, with equal truth, that,
working at the very boundaries of our knowledge, his mind habitually
dwells "in the boundless contiguity of shade" by which that knowledge
is surrounded.

The brain of an Aristotle was needed to discern and grasp Keely's
meaning, to interpret and define it. Dr. Brinton never touches a
subject without throwing light upon it, and his penetrating mind
perceived the ideas to be defined in all their relations. His keen
logical acumen separated and classified them in their order, in a true,
sound, and scientific manner. In the words of Sir James Crichton
Browne, who heard Professor Brinton read this abstract in London,
"Professor Brinton's synopsis is an able, lucid and logical paper."

Now that such distinguished men are interesting themselves in
Keely's discoveries, there is no longer any danger of their being
lost to science; nor to commerce, if his life is spared. The action
of Dr. Pepper (Provost of the University of Pennsylvania) in January,
1891, gave Keely all the protection that he then needed in order to
continue his researches up to the completion of his system.

Professor Dewar of the Royal Institution of Great Britain, whose
Cambridge duties prevented him from keeping the engagement made for
him to visit Mr. Keely's workshop in December, 1891, is now compelled
to wait, until notified that Keely is in a position to demonstrate
his theories, as it is desirable that he should not be interrupted
in the critical work that is at present engrossing him, at times
eighteen hours out of the twenty-four. But although Keely has not
instructed anyone in his method of disintegrating water, to obtain
the ether, which he uses as the medium of the polar force, he does
not withhold the principle by which he obtains it. Sir John Herschell
said, "There is a principle in the science of music that has yet to be
discovered." Pythagoras taught that the principle which underlies the
harmonies of music, underlies the motion of the heavenly bodies. It is
this principle which Keely has discovered; but until he has utilized
it in mechanics, he has nothing more to sell than Sir Isaac Newton
had when he discovered gravity, as Professor Fitzgerald has said.

Discovery and invention are walking side by side in our age, the
glorious scientific age of the world. Never before have they so
linked themselves together, working for humanity; and it is but
natural that those savants who have seen no demonstrations of the
force Keely is handling should regard with apathy claims, which,
if established, would sweep away like chaff before a whirlwind,
some of the canons of their schools. In fact, this apathy is a
great improvement upon the active persecution of the learned men
who hurried Copernicus and Galileo to prison, and established the
Inquisition to deal with heretics in science as well as heretics in
religion. Commerce rushed Keely into a dungeon; science looking on
in approval; notwithstanding that conjectures of the most celebrated
modern member of its school supported Keely's teachings. Galileo
was brought before the Inquisition; the tribunal pronounced him a
deluded teacher and a lying heretic. They intended to subject him to
the severest torture and death. Galileo was old, and felt that he
could not endure such a terrible death. He knelt on the crucifix,
with one hand on the Bible, and renounced all. When he arose,
however, it is reported that he whispered to one of the attendants,
"The earth does move for all that." Sir Isaac Newton has written of
the possibility of discovering unknown forms of energy, in Nature,
in these strong words: "For it is well known that bodies act upon one
another by the attractions of gravity, magnetism and electricity,
and these instances show the tenor and course of nature and make
it not improbable that there may be more powers of attraction than
these. For Nature is very consonant and conformable to herself."

All progress of whatever kind would be put back, if it were in the
power of bigots to arrest its triumphal march, as they have done in
the past, but the evolution of the human race remains in the hands
of the Infinite One, who never fails to open up new paths when the
farther development of humanity requires it. All systems may be said
to have descended from previous ones. "The ideas of one generation
are the mysterious progenitors of those in the next. Each age is the
dawn of its successor; and in the eternal advance of truth,


           'There always is a rising sun,
            The day is ever but begun.'"


Religious and scientific reformation have always gone hand in hand,
says Dr. Lowber. In fact, religious science is superior to any
other science. As Christianity is the pure religion which contains
the truth of all the rest, so it is the highest of the sciences,
for it represents the development of the highest faculty of the
human nature. Religion develops manhood as nothing else will, and
Christianity represents the highest culture to which it is possible
for man to attain....

The system, now being evolved and worked out to demonstration by Keely,
restores, by religious science, the faith of which materialistic
science has been robbing the world, thus confirming Dr. Lowber's
assertions that materialists will never be able to reduce all natural
and spiritual forces to mere vibratory action of matter; and that
the reformatory movement in philosophy, which characterizes our age,
will continue until all the sciences point to God and immortality.

A writer in Galignani's Messenger, March 2, 1892, says: "When the
nineteenth century closes, the most marvellous period ever known to
man will be stored away in Time's granary. Can the twentieth century
by any possibility be more productive, more fertile, more prolific of
wonders than its predecessor? The face of the world has been changed;
space has been annihilated; science puts 'a girdle round about the
earth in forty minutes.' We may be almost excused if we are tempted
to believe that the serpent's promise is fulfilled in our persons, and
we are as gods. Alas for human complacency! Perhaps our descendants a
thousand years hence will look upon us as pigmies. Be that as it may,
the past and the present are ours, with their achievement, and we
believe we shall hand down to posterity a goodly heritage."

The New York Home Journal, of the week before Christmas, 1892,
points out, in its leader, the road on which this advance in the
cause of humanity may be made. The writer, Mr. Howard Hinton, says:
"The spirit of the salutation, 'A Merry Christmas,' lies in the desire
that peace and goodwill shall reign among men, nor, if we may trust
the intimations of the latest science, will this universality of good
wishing be without avail in effecting its own accomplishment. For, as
we are told by the wise men of science, every thought, every mental
impulse of ours, sets in motion, in that realm of ether which it
is said interfuses all coarser forms of matter, certain vibrations,
corresponding in force to their cause, which have power to communicate
themselves to other minds favourably conditioned to receive them,
and so excite in them like thoughts and impulses.

"And are not common observation and individual experience in accord
with this suggestion of science? Do we not say at times that a
certain thought is in the air, revealing itself contemporaneously
to many widely separated minds without any recognizable means of
communication? And do we not sometimes find a noble, or it may be an
ignoble, impulse breaking out in a community with a suddenness and
universality that would seem to transcend all the ordinary forms of
the contact of mind with mind? Perhaps, too, this theory of vibratory
communication through an ethereal medium may explain, in part at least,
that 'Welt-Geist,' that 'Spirit of the Age,' of which the philosophers
discourse so bravely.

"Again, there are times--if the experiences and observations of
sensitive minds have any worth--when a general spirit of expectancy
seems to be awakened, as if the world were on the eve of some new
and epoch-making revelation of science, or some new enthusiasm of
regenerative impulse. Are we not now, at this hour, in this mood
of silent expectancy, thrilled with an indefinable awe of what the
brooding life of the world is maturing for the sons of men?--sensitive,
perhaps, to ethereal vibrations that have not yet accumulated force
for expression in conscious thought or for the definite determination
of our hearts' desires?

"This may be fanciful. It may be simply that we are beginning to
perceive that physical science has reached a stage of development
when some new and more central truth, some profounder generalization,
is needed to give further impulse to its essential progress. It may
be that we are becoming aware that the conditions of society are
such that some new unifying motive, some new enthusiasm of humanity
is needed for its salvation; and that therefore we wait in expectancy
for what--knowing that there can be no let nor hindrance in the onward
movement of life--we feel in our hearts must come.

"And yet does not this sense of expectancy seem to communicate itself
from mind to mind by some other means than that of oral or written
expression, and to touch with more or less force even minds that are
free from these intellectual anticipations? Are there not certain
intellects at the fore-front of the world's progress, and certain
hearts filled above the ordinary measure with the love of mankind,
who are thus centres of power, from whom spread ever widening
circles of vibratory emanations that gradually involve all minds in
a common thought and all hearts in a common purpose? 'Many men of
many minds.' Yes, truly; but there is the one mind of humanity that
thinks and thinks, and alone has the power to externalize its thought
as part of the world's history, while all purely individual thought
is blown finally into the abyss of the Absolute Nothing.

"But it is not only the great souls that thus move and shape the
world. We are all, in various degrees, centres and distributors
of the ethereal force, so far as we are in touch with its waves of
vibration. We can all make our thoughts, if they are one with the
thought of humanity, and our desires, if they are one with the heart
of humanity, felt by our fellows in extending circles of effluence
till finally the very clods of human kind know the stirrings of a
new life and wake to the higher reality as from a dream.

"And if individually we can thus set in movement this ethereal medium,
how must not this movement be quickened and extended when collectively
we give utterance to some great thought and heart's desire, announcing
it in song and prayer and merry-making. Hence the use and potency of
the great festivals, the best and sweetest of which is the Christmas
festival that we are now about to celebrate--the Evening Star of the
year that is passing, the Morning Star of the new."









