CHAPTER XIV.

VIBRATORY PHYSICS.--THE CONNECTING LINK BETWEEN MIND AND MATTER.

        The elements of Nature are made of the will of God.--Hermes
        Trismegistus.

        Newton and Faraday have indicated how force instead of
        leaping over nothing, acting at a distance, is transmitted
        consecutively through the ethereal substance.

        We must become as little children, not presuming to think of
        causes efficient, or causes final; for these are things we
        cannot grasp; but reverently and patiently waiting until,
        like a revelation, the hidden link between the familiar
        and the unfamiliar flashes into our mind, and thus an
        additional step is gained in the endless series of successive
        generalizations.--The Rev. H. W. Watson, F.R.S., President
        of the Birmingham Philosophical Society.

        All truth comes by inspiration.--Scripture.

        There is but one Deity, the Supreme Spirit: he is of the same
        nature as the soul of man.-- Vedic Theology.

        As for truth it endureth and is always strong, it liveth and
        conquereth for evermore.--Esdras.

        Everything happens according to the will of God and has
        its appointed time, which can neither be hastened nor
        avoided.--Mohammed.


In the paper of the Rev. H. W. Watson, on "The Progress of Science,
its Conditions and Limitations," he tells us that every thinking man
recognizes the subjective Self and the objective non-Self, and that
this non-Self, so far as it manifests its existence through the senses,
is the object of investigation of natural philosophers; but he admits
that their investigations have not bestowed upon modern science any
results to justify the language of causation. Universal gravitation
is declared to be a vast generalization, telling us that there is
no more, but yet just as much, of mystery in the whole sequence of
astronomical phenomena, as in the most humdrum processes of every-day
experiences. The unfamiliar has been explained by the familiar, and
both remain in their original mystery. The mystery, attendant upon
gravitation, Kepler prophesied would be revealed to man in this age:
and the cautious and inductive investigations which Keely has been
pursuing, since 1888, have enabled him to demonstrate that the unknown
force, which for fifteen years had baffled all his skill, is the same
condition of sympathetic vibration which controls nature's highest and
most general operations:--the identical force which Faraday divined
when he wrote, in 1836: "Thus, either present elements are the true
elements, or else there is the probability before us of obtaining
some more high and general power of nature even than electricity,
and which at the same time might reveal to us an entirely new grade
of the elements of matter, now hidden from our view and almost from
our suspicion."

It was good advice given by the late Professor Clifford,--"Before
teaching any doctrine wait until the nature of the evidence can
be understood." But without attempting to teach Keely's system of
vibratory physics, we may look into some of his views, notwithstanding
the fact that, whatever truths there may be in them, they are
approached from such a different standpoint, than that of the platform
of mechanical physics, that it is utterly impossible to bring them
into any definite relations with each other. [13] Dr. Gérard, of Paris,
in his work on "Nervous Force," writes of this founder of a new system
of philosophy: "The force discovered by Keely appears to me to be so
entirely the counterpart of what passes primarily in the brain cells
that we see in him but a plagiarist of cerebral dynamics--that is, he
has had but to copy the delicate human mechanism to make a wonderful
discovery; probably, the greatest the world has ever known. The word
plagiarist has no deprecatory meaning as applied to the great American
inventor, for he must possess an extraordinary power of assimilation
to read so fluently the open book of nature, and to be able wisely
to interpret her admirable laws: it is, therefore, with profound
admiration that I here render homage to this man of science."

Dr. Gérard's work treats of the production of electricity in the nerve
centres, and its accumulation in storage. He says that fifty years
ago it would have been difficult to explain this fact intelligently;
but thanks to the scientific progress of the period, everyone now knows
how electricity is produced, and how applied, to use in lighting our
houses. He continues: "Let us say, then, in few words, how matters
stand, for it will serve to illustrate how it is with our brain, the
mechanism of which is precisely the same--only that our apparatus is
much more perfect and much less costly.

"A dynamo-electric machine is placed at any given spot; its object,
being put in action, is to withdraw from the earth its neutral
electricity, to decompose it into its two conditions and to collect,
upon accumulators, the electricity thus separated. As soon as the
accumulators are charged, the electricity is disposable; that is,
our lamps can be lighted. But what is marvellous in all this is that
the forces of nature can be transformed at will. Should we not wish
for light, we turn a knob and we have sound, heat, motion, chemical
action, magnetism. Little seems wanting to create intelligence,
so entirely do these accumulated forces lend themselves to all the
transformations which their engineer may imagine and desire. But let
us consider how greatly superior is our cerebral mechanism to all
invented mechanism. In order to light a theatre we require a wide
space, a dynamo-electric machine of many horse-power, accumulators
filling many receptacles, a considerable expense in fuel, and clever
mechanicians. In the human organism these engines are in miniature,
one décimêtre cube is all the space occupied by our brain; no wheels,
no pistons, nothing to drive the apparatus, we suffice ourselves. In
this sense, each of us can say, like the philosopher Biaz:--Omnia
mecum porto. Our cerebral organ not only originates motion, heat,
sound, light, chemical actions, magnetism; but it produces psychic
forces, such as will, reasoning, judgment, hatred, love, and the
whole series of intellectual faculties. They are all derived from
the same source, and are always identical to each other, so long as
the cerebral apparatus remains intact. The variations of our health
alone are capable of causing a variation in the intensity and quality
of our productions.

"With a maximum of physical and moral health, we produce a maximum of
physical and moral results. Our manual labour and our intellectual
productions are always exactly proportionate to the integrity of
our mechanism."

Dr. Gérard has, it will be seen, grasped the same truth that Buckle
enunciated in his lecture, The Influence of Women on the Progress of
Knowledge, when he affirmed that not one single discovery that had ever
been made has been connected with the laws of the mind that made it:
declaring that until this connection is ascertained our knowledge has
no sure basis, as "the laws of nature have their sole seat, origin,
and function in the human mind." This is the foundation stone of
vibratory physics, that all force is mind force.

All the forces of nature, writes Keely, proceed from the one governing
force; the source of all life, of all energy. These sympathetic flows,
or streams of force, each consists of three currents, harmonic,
enharmonic, and dominant; this classification governing all orders
of positive and negative radiation. The sympathetic flow called
"Animal Magnetism" is the transmissive link of sympathy in the fourth,
or inter-atomic, subdivision of matter. It is the most intricate of
problems to treat philosophically; isolated as it is from all approach
by any of the prescribed rules in "the orthodox scheme of physics." It
turns upon the interchangeable subdivision of inter-atomic acting
agency, or the force of the mind. The action of this etheric flow,
in substances of all kinds, is according to the character of the
molecular interferences which exist in the volume of their atomic
groupings. These interferences proceed from some description of atomic
chemical nature, which tend to vary the uniformity of structure
in the atomic triplets of each molecule. If these groupings were
absolutely uniform there would be but one substance in nature, and
all beings inhabiting this globe would be simultaneously impressed
with the same feelings and actuated by the same desires; but nature
has produced unlimited variety. Science, as yet, has not made so much
as an introductory attempt to solve this problem of "the mind flow,"
but has left it with the hosts of impostors, who always beset any
field that trenches on the land of marvel.

Professor Olive Lodge, in his address before the British Association,
at Cardiff, said: "Let me try to state what this field is, the
exploration of which is regarded as so dangerous. I might call
it the borderland of physics and psychology. I might call it the
connection between life and energy; or the connection between mind
and matter. It is an intermediate region, bounded on the north by
psychology, on the south by physics, on the east by physiology, and
on the west by pathology and medicine. An occasional psychologist
has groped down into it and become a metaphysician. An occasional
physicist has wandered up into it and lost his base, to the horror of
his quondam brethren. Biologists mostly look at it askance, or deny
its existence. A few medical practitioners, after long maintenance
of a similar attitude, have begun to annex a portion of its western
frontier.... Why not leave it to the metaphysicians? I say it has
been left to them long enough. They have explored it with insufficient
equipment. Their methods are not our methods; they are unsatisfactory
to us, as physicists. We prefer to creep slowly from our base of
physical knowledge; to engineer carefully as we go, establishing
forts, constructing roads, and thoroughly exploring the country,
making a progress very slow but very lasting. The psychologists from
their side may meet us. I hope they will; but one or the other of us
ought to begin...."

In America, we have Buchanan and many others investigating in this
field; and Dr. Bowne, the orthodox Dean of the Boston University,
in his answer to Herbert Spencer, answering the question,
"What is Force?" tells us: "Not gravitation, nor electricity,
nor magnetism, nor chemical affinity, but will, is the typical
idea of force. Self-determination, volition is the essence of the
only causation we know. Will is the sum-total of the dynamic idea:
it either stands for that or nothing. Now science professes itself
unable to interpret nature without this metaphysical idea of power. The
experiments made by Professor Barker and others, which are said to
establish the identity of heat and mental force, really prove only
a correlation between heat and the nervous action which attends
thinking. Nervous action and heat correlate, but the real point is
to prove that nervous action and mental force correlate. This has
never been done."

"The concept of will," says Arthur Schopenhauer, "has hitherto commonly
been subordinated to that of force; but I reverse the matter entirely,
and desire that every force in nature be thought of as will. It
must not be supposed that this is mere verbal quibbling and of no
consequence: rather it is of the greatest significance and importance."

Thus it will be seen that the field which Professor Lodge, with rare
courage, invited his fellow-physicists to enter and bring with them
their appropriate methods of investigation (unless these philosophers
are astray) may prove to be "the immense and untrodden field" which
Buckle said must be conquered before Science can arrogate to herself
any knowledge of nature's laws that is not purely empirical. A
little reflection will enable the average mind to see in the signs
of the times a tendency to movements on a grander scale, such as are
involved in the higher view which Keely is himself now taking since
his researches have extended beyond the order he was pursuing when
he was thinking only of mechanical success.

Man's progress has been so enormous that nothing too extravagant can be
imagined for the future, when once psychical investigation is conducted
as proposed by Professor Lodge; who is trying to unravel the mystery
as to what force is, and by what means exerted. There is something
here not definitely provided for in the orthodox scheme of physics;
but Keely's themes explain this mystery. "Luminiferous ether," he
writes, "or celestial mind force, a compound inter-etheric element,
is the substance of which everything visible is composed. It is the
great sympathetic protoplastic element; life itself. Consequently,
our physical organisms are composed of this element. This focalizing,
or controlling media, of the physical, has its seat in the cerebral
convolutions; from which sympathetic radiation emanates. This
sympathetic outreach is mind flow proper, or will force; sympathetic
polarization to produce action; sympathetic depolarization to
neutralize it. Polar and depolar differentiation, resulting in
motion. The true protoplastic element sympathetically permeates all
forms and conditions of matter; having, for its attendants, gravity,
electricity, and magnetism; the triple conditions born in itself. In
fact, it is the soul of matter; the element from which all forms of
motion receive their introductory impulse."

Not long since, Mr. Keely was congratulated upon having secured
the attention of men of science, connected with the University of
Pennsylvania, to his work of research. Now, you will be known as
a great discoverer, not as Keely the motor-man, said one of the
professors present. Keely answered, I have discovered so little,
in comparison with what remains to be discovered, that I cannot call
myself a discoverer. Another of the professors present took Keely by
the hand and said, You are a great discoverer.

Had the discoverer of this unknown force not been dependent upon a
company, "a ring," for funds to pursue his investigations, scientists
would have better understood the nature of this work at an earlier
stage of his experimental research; but following close upon Keely's
production of the latent force carried in all forms of aggregated
matter, he became entangled in the meshes of an organization that
cared nothing for science, and a great deal for the wealth which,
it was seen by practical business men, must sooner or later accrue
as the result of a costless motive power. In other words, those who
interested themselves in Keely's discoveries were interested solely
in their marketable value; or if there chanced to be one who was
not so interested, that one was not of sufficient influence in the
scientific world to be able to induce capitalists to come forward and
contribute towards saving the discovery to this age, by protecting
the discoverer from the persecution that he was subjected to from
those who had the management of the commercial affairs of the company.

Aratus, the poet of Cilicia, the author of "Phenomena," wrote, "We
are the offspring of God;" and St. Paul, quoting Aratus, continued,
"In Him we live and move and have our being." From that hour,
down the blood-stained path of the age to the present, there have
been men, spiritually endowed, who have taught that He who created,
commands and governs, the universe, sustains it by the power of His
will; and that were it not for the celestial streams of radiation,
this superhuman influence, constantly flowing into all created forms,
the universe would pass out of existence, would perish in a moment. So
well did Macvicar, the great Scotch divine, understand this conception
of Deity, that he wrote, "The nearer we ascend to the fountain-head of
being and of action the more magical must everything inevitably become;
for that fountain-head is pure volition. And pure volition as a cause
is precisely what is meant by magic; for by magic is merely meant a
mode of producing a phenomenon without mechanical appliances--that is,
without that seeming continuity of resisting parts and that leverage
which satisfy our muscular sense and our imagination, and bring the
phenomenon into the category of what we call 'the natural;' that is,
the sphere of the elastic, the gravitating; the sphere into which the
'vis inertiæ' is alone admitted."

We call this the sphere of the natural; but, when we come to
higher workings of natural laws, with which we are not familiar, we
designate them as "supernatural;" and scientists witnessing some of
Keely's experiments, like those of overcoming gravity, of rotation
of the needle of a compass, [14] of the disintegration of water,
etc., and not believing in any workings of laws unknown to them,
followed in the footsteps, still unobliterated, of the narrow-minded,
bigoted persecutors of Galileo; and have denounced Keely as "a
modern Cagliostro." When men of more extended research have been
on the eve of investigating for themselves they have, until 1889,
been deterred from doing so by the representations made to them
that Keely was "using compressed air to humbug his audiences." Until
Professor Leidy and Dr. Willcox gave their attention to Mr. Keely's
claims as the discoverer of a new form of energy, the way was not
open for Mr. Keely to disclose his conjectures, his hypotheses and
his theories. Regrettable as this fact has seemed to be, it is now
seen that any previous revelation of his discovery, other than to
scientists, might have been premature; so little did Keely himself
know, until within two years, of the developments he has at last
reached in his work of evolution. The time was not ripe for the
disclosure.

It is a canon of science that molecular aggregation generally involves
dissipation of energy. On the contrary, for more than fifteen years
Keely has demonstrated that all molecular aggregation is attended
with an absorption of energy; relieving by vibratory power the latent
force held in a few drops of water and showing thereby a pressure of
from ten to fifteen tons per square inch; claiming that resultant
development of any force and of all forces is only accomplished by
conditions that awaken the latent energy carried during molecular
aggregation. It is conceded by those most conversant with the nature
of Keely's discoveries that he must either create force, or liberate
latent energy. As Omnipotence alone creates, it follows that science
must be wrong in two of her most fundamental laws; one relating to the
indivisibility of the atom; the other to the dissipation of energy in
molecular aggregation. This, Keely establishes in the one experiment
of disintegration of water, releasing from three drops the latent
energy carried, during and from the time of molecular aggregation,
and showing a pressure of fifteen tons to the square inch. Therefore,
it is not "a waste of time and thought" to give attention to Keely's
theories, and to investigate from the standpoint of vibratory physics,
instead of setting limits to the operations of Nature and the power
of the Almighty from the narrow platform of mechanical physics.



Keely's Theories.

The action of Nature's sympathetic flows, writes Keely, regulates the
differential oscillatory range of motion of the planetary masses as
regards their approach toward and recession from each other. These
flows may also be compared to the flow of the magnet which permeates
the field, existing between the molecules themselves, sensitizing
the combined neutral centres of the molecules without disturbing,
in the least, the visible molecular mass itself. In the planetary
masses--balanced as it were in the scales of universal space, like
soap-bubbles floating in a field of atmospheric air--the concentration
of these sympathetic streams evolves the universal power which
moves them in their oscillating range of motion to and from each
other. This sympathetic triple stream focalizes and defocalizes
on the neutrals of all such masses; polarizing and depolarizing,
positive and negative action, planetary rotation, etc., etc. It is
thus that all the conditions governing light, heat, life, vegetation,
motion, are all derived from the velocity of the positive and negative
interchange of celestial sympathy with the terrestrial.

Every harmonious condition of Nature's evolutions is governed by one
incontrovertible law; that of concordant assimilative harmony. This
concordant key is the ruling one over all the antagonistic,
negative, discordant ones; the one that diverts the disturbance of
sympathetic equilibrium to one general concentrative centre for
redistribution. Harmony concentrates, harmony distributes. The
focalizing point of concordant sympathetic concentration is the
percussive electric field, where the velocity of its sympathetic
streams rebounds with a power that throws them far out into universal
space; and so far beyond their equative centre of equilibrium as to
bring them in sympathy with the universal attraction of the combined
neutral centres of all planetary masses.



Sympathetic Streams which Control the Action and Reaction of all
Visible Forms of Matter.

What is light and heat, and how are they evolved? and why are they
so intensely perceptible as emanating from the solar world?

Light and heat, considered theoretically, belong to the highest orders
of the phenomenal. They can only be accounted for by the velocity
of sympathetic streams, as interchangeable to and from centres of
negative and attractive focalization. In considering the velocity
of vibration, as associated with the projection of a ray of light,
to be at least one hundred thousand billions per second, it is easy
to account for the origin and demonstration of these two elements by
the action of celestial sympathetic streams.

1st. Light and heat are not evolved until the force of the vibratory
sympathetic stream, from the neutral centre of the sun, comes into
atomic percussive action against the molecular atmosphere or envelope
of our planet. The visibility of the planets can only be accounted
for in this way, some in a great degree, some in less. Innumerable
thousands, it may be, remain invisible to us by not having the
conditions surrounding them, and associated with them, which favour
the atomic and molecular antagonistic friction necessary to make
them visible. The velocity of a steel ball passing through the
atmospheric envelope, at a speed of thousands of billions times
less than an etheric sympathetic stream, would be dissipated into
vapour in an indefinite period of a second of time. Light and heat,
in a certain sense, are one and the same; light giving heat, and heat
giving light. The whole mystery, as associated with their evolution,
is explained by the bombardment of the sympathetic etheric stream
on the dense portion of the molecular, in seeking the sympathetic,
concordant, neutral centre of the planetary mass that surrounds the
point of focalization.

The positive and negative interchange of this true sympathetic stream
keeps intact the magnetic force of the polar envelope of the earth;
making it, as it were, a great magnet of itself. The fact of this
magnetic force being universally present, on and in our planet,
proves the immeasurable speed and power of etheric sympathetic
interchange. Thus it is that, from the velocity of these sympathetic
rays, the earth's standard of heat and light is evolved and kept in
balance. This interchange of sympathetic radiation, between the solar
world and its system of planets, equates the sympathetic volume by
the reception of the full amount expended on sympathetic distribution;
thus showing the never-ending restoration of equilibrium by the same
medium that disturbs it during intermittent sympathetic action. There
are very many facts in vibratory physics which prove that the volume
of heat, supposed by many to emanate from the sun, if concentrated
upon a centre of the volume represented by the sun, would give enough
focal force, if projected upon the system of planets that is under
its control, to vaporize them in one month's time. A ray of heat one
billion times greater than the whole volume of the sun represents
could not pass through the dark vacuous boundaries which lie between
us and the sun without being neutralized and absorbed.



What is Electricity?

Electricity is the result of three differentiated sympathetic
flows, combining the celestial and terrestrial flows by an order of
assimilation negatively attractive in its character. It is one of
Nature's efforts to restore attractive differentiation. In analyzing
this triple union in its vibratory philosophy, I find the highest
order of perfection in this assimilative action of Nature. The
whole condition is atomic, and is the introductory one which has
an affinity for terrestrial centres, uniting magnetically with the
Polar stream; in other words, uniting with the Polar stream by neutral
affinity. The magnetic or electric forces of the earth are thus kept
in stable equilibrium by this triune force, and the chords of this
force may be expressed as 1st, the dominant, 2nd, the harmonic,
and 3rd, the enharmonic. The value of each is, one to the other,
in the rates of figures, true thirds. E flat--transmissive chord or
dominant; A flat--harmonic; A double flat--enharmonic. The unition of
the two prime thirds is so rapid, when the negative and the positive
conditions reach a certain range of vibratory motion, as to be compared
to an explosion. During this action the positive electric stream
is liberated and immediately seeks its neutral terrestrial centre,
or centre of highest attraction.

The power of attractive vibration of the solar forces is the great
coincident towards which the terrestrial-magnetic-sympathetic flow
is diverted. This force is the celestial current that makes up
the prime third of the triple association. It also induces aqueous
disintegration and thermal concentration, the two prime conductors
towards this coincident chord of sympathy with itself. Without this
aqueous disintegration there would be no connective link between the
celestial and terrestrial. There would exist nothing but a condition
of luminous radiation on the order of the aurora--a reaching out for
the concordant without any sympathetic diversion to create unstable
equilibrium of terrestrial magnetism. In fact, under such a condition,
the absence of the sun on one side, or the absence of water on the
other, the magnetic or electric force would remain in a stable state
of equilibrium, or the highest order of the chaotic. Disturbance
of equilibrium and sympathetic equation constitute the dual power
that governs all the varied forms of life and motion which exist
terrestrially, of which the electric or magnetic is the prime mover
and regulator. All electrical action, no matter of what character,
has its sympathetic birth by the intervention of that current
of the triune flow, which I call the dominant, with the Polar
harmonic current; all sympathetic flows being composed of three
currents. They become associative one with the other only near
the junction of terrestrial interference. The great vacuous field
which exists between the planetary ranges holds this portion of
the etheric flow free of all antagonism, molecularly or otherwise,
till the associative point is reached; so wonderfully planned by
the Great Creator, for instant electric evolution and assimilation
with terrestrial centres of attraction. I call this intervention,
atomic-inter-molecular and molecular density. The combination of
the action of the triune sympathetic-celestial stream with the same
intervening medium induces heat and light, as the resultant of these
corpuscular conflictions with sympathetic celestial and terrestrial
focalized centres of neutral radiation. I do not recognize electricity,
nor light, nor heat as coming from the sun. These conditions, according
to my theories, emanate from atomic and inter-atomic interference
on induced molecular vibration, by sympathetic etheric vibration,
the celestial-attractive being the prime mover. In my estimation
this is not at all phenomenal; it is only phenomenal as far as the
knowledge of its action in mechanical physics is concerned. Physicists
have been working in the wrong direction to lead them to associate
themselves with Nature's sympathetic evolutions. [15] The expression
"Electricity attracts at a distance" is as bad as, if not worse than,
the "microbe of the magnet." Clerk Maxwell seems, when theorizing
on sound transmission by an atmospheric medium, not to have taken
into consideration the philosophy attending the phenomena of the
origination of electric streams in celestial space. Light is one of
the prominent evolved mediums in electric action, and is evolved by
corpuscular bombardment induced by sympathetic streams acting between
the neutral centres of planetary masses, all of which are under a
condition of unstable equilibrium. These unstable conditions were
born in them, and were thus designed by the Architect of Creation
in order to perpetuate the connective link between the dispersing
positive and the attractive negative. The action that induces this
link I call sympathetic planetary oscillation.



Attraction, Propulsion, &c.

The action of the magnetic flow is dual in its evolution, both
attractive and propulsive. The inclination of the plane on which the
subtle stream moves, either to the right or to the left, has nothing to
do with positive or negative conditions. The difference in conditions
of what is called, by electricians, positive and negative electricity,
is the difference between receptive and propulsive vibrations. They
can be right or left receptive, or right or left propulsive. The
positive vibrations are the radiating; the negative vibrations are
the ones that are attracted toward the neutral centre.

The negative-sympathetic polar stream is the magnetic flow proper,
and it is in sympathetic coincidence with the second atomic flow; the
electric current is the first and second order of atomic vibration,
a dual force, the flow of which is too tenuous to displace the
molecules. It can no more do so than the flow from a magnet can
displace the molecules of a glass plate when it is passed under it. The
flow from a magnet is too fine to disturb the plate molecules, but
passes as freely between them as a current of air would through a
coarse sieve.

Like poles do not repel each other, simply because there is a perfect
sympathetic equation between them; the same in unlike poles. If a
differentiation of 33 1/3 against 100 is established between them,
whether like or unlike, they become attractive to each other. They
become repellent after differentiating them, 66 2/3 of the one against
100 of the other, by sympathetic vibration.

Taking into consideration even the introductory conditions of the
etheric stage, etheric vibration has proved to me that the higher the
velocity of its rotating stream the greater is its tendency towards the
neutral centre or centre of sympathetic coincidence. Were it otherwise,
how could there ever be any planetary formations or the building up
of visible structures? If a billiard ball were rotated to a certain
velocity, it would separate in pieces, and the pieces would fly off
in a tangent; but if it were a ball of ether, the higher the velocity
of rotation the stronger would be the tendency of its corpuscules to
seek its centre of neutrality, and to hold together.

It is not a magnetic force that is borne on the etheric atom which
gives it its power to draw to it streams of coincidence. The magnet
is only susceptive to certain aggregated forms of matter; iron,
for instance, and its preparations.

All moving bodies of visible matter produce heat as according to
their velocity. The flow of gases only induces thermal reduction from
molecular friction. By this term it must not be understood that the
molecules actually come in contact, and rub against each other. There
is no pressure, however great, that can cause molecular contact. The
area of the volume of the molecule can be reduced by enormous
pressure, and the tension thus brought to bear on their rotating
envelopes induces heat. The heat thus induced is a positive proof of
the wonderful velocity of the etheric envelope. If the molecules were
dead--which is an infinite impossibility--to sympathetic vibration,
and without a rotatory envelope if all the pressure possible to
conceive were brought to bear upon them, it would not induce the
slightest thermal change.



Energy.

Energy is a sympathetic condition inherent in all forms of aggregated
matter, visible and invisible. It is ever present, in its latent
condition, and is aroused by the sympathetic disturbers of its
equilibrium. By this conservation it becomes transferable. The
sympathetic correlation of will-force in the cerebral convolutionary
centres transfers its energy to the physical organism.

Bring a steel rod in contact with a magnet, and the latent energy in
the rod is brought into action without its becoming impregnated by
its magnetic exciter. Energy is an infinite latent force. If it did
not exist it could not be generated. Consequently, there would be no
energy to lose nor to conserve. The volume of latent energy in the
etheric domain never increases nor ever grows less. It will remain
the same, as yesterday to-day and for ever.



Inaudible Vibrations.

Nature has established her sympathetic concordants from the birth of
the neutral centres of the planets. This is gravity; therefore gravity
is fixed, inherent. There is no flight of gravity. The difference in
the condition of the sympathetic nerve centres, and the variations in
the chord aggregation of the masses, as established in the man or woman
at birth, constitutes the molecular condition of the individual. The
molecular state of animals, vegetables, and minerals, depends upon
the aggregation of their chord centres. It is impossible to make two
coins from one die the same in its molecular aggregation. The mere
picking up of a coin and replacing it causes billions of molecules to
be lost. This produces a change in the chord of mass of the coin. As
this fact has only been developed by persistent progressive research,
it is quite easy to comprehend the nature of the difficulties that
lie in the way of perfecting devices for the guidance of artificers
and mechanics, whereby they can bring a proper vibratory action
into play to induce positive sympathetic transmission. In order to
transmit my knowledge by demonstration it will be necessary to have
much more perfect instruments than those crude devices which I first
constructed for my researches. One of my perfected instruments shows
to the eye, in the molecular effects produced by a certain order
of vibration, when the chord of harmony is established between two
neutral centres. Another, when connected with the sympathizer, denotes
accurately, by the colour of a certain sound or combination of sounds
the number of vibrations that are necessary to induce certain effects
of mechanical combinations.

Inaudible vibrations are tested by the magnetic needle and sound
colours. Every gaseous molecule is a resonator of itself and
is sensitive to any and all sounds induced, whether accordant or
discordant. At the normal density of the atmosphere we hear a volume
of sound, focalized by the combined association of every molecule
brought under sound influence. When we reduce the atmospheric volume
of a chamber to 50/100, then the ear is sensitive to the reduction
of the acoustic force evolved on the same ratio, and so on, until
sound becomes inaudible. This inaudibility to our organ of hearing is
no proof whatever of any reduction of the acoustic force evolved on
the introductory impulse given to the bell. It is only a proof that
the number of the molecules left for the acoustic force to act upon
has been so reduced by increasing the vacuum, that the concentration
of sound from the diminished number cannot be heard. The ear is not
susceptible to the acoustic force emanating from one molecule, nor
even from the concentration of one hundred millions of billions of
molecules. The highest vacuum that can be induced, taking but a cubic
inch in volume to act upon, will leave a residual number of molecules
one hundred billion times as great as the above given number, and yet
be perfectly inaudible when all their acoustic forces are focalized.

The audible has been conquered in my instruments to that extent which
brings me into sympathetic contact with the inaudible, the vitalized
conditions of which as regards sympathetic union with the terrestrial
are the pure and only essentials necessary towards establishing the
sensitive link, between the instrument and terrestrial chord-masses,
in order to run sympathetic machinery. But there is still before me a
vast region to be explored before the keystone of this sympathetic arch
is set in position to carry the high order of sympathetic transfer that
I aim at. I have every reason to hope that when I have mastered these
mechanical difficulties I shall be able to control this most subtle of
Nature's forces. When this is done, the commercial engine will soon
follow. There is no truer nor quicker way to reach that end than the
one I am now pursuing. My obligations on this line once fulfilled,
I shall be at liberty to turn my attention to the consideration
of the mental forces associated with the physical, and in fact the
solution of the mechanical problem is one and the same in principle,
as is the physical and mental. When one is solved all is solved. The
convolutions which exist in the cerebral field are entirely governed
by the sympathetic conditions that surround them.


   "The force which binds the atoms, which controls secreting glands,
    Is the same that guides the planets, acting by divine commands."


All abnormal discordant aggregations in these resonating convolutions
produce differentiation to concordant transmission; and according
as these differentiations exist in volume, so the transmissions
are discordantly transferred, producing antagonism to pure physical
action. Thus, in motor ataxy, a differentiation of the minor thirds of
the posterior parietal lobule produces the same condition between the
retractors and exteriors of the leg and foot, and thus the control of
the proper movements is lost through this differentiation. The same
truth can be universally applied to any of the cerebral convolutions
that are in a state of differential harmony to the mass of immediate
cerebral surroundings. Taking the cerebral condition of the whole mass
as one, it is subservient to one general head centre; although as many
neutrals are represented as there are convolutions. The introductory
minors are controlled by the molecular; the next progressive third by
the atomic; and the high third by the etheric. All these progressive
links have their positive, negative, and neutral position. When we
take into consideration the structural condition of the human brain, we
ought not to be bewildered by the infinite variety of its sympathetic
impulses, inasmuch as it unerringly proves the true philosophy
that the mass-chords of such structures are governed by vibratory
etheric flows. There is no structure whatever--animal, vegetable,
or mineral--that is not built up from the cosmic ether. Certain
orders of attractive vibration produce certain orders of structure;
thus the infinite variety of effects; more especially in the cerebral
organs. Discordance cannot exist in the molecule proper. Discordance in
any mass is the result of differentiated groups induced by antagonistic
chords, and any differentiated mass can be brought to a condition of
harmony or equation by proper chord media, and an equated sympathy
produced whether the mass be metal or brain.

There is good reason for believing that insanity is simply a condition
of differentiation in the mass-chords of the convolutions, which
creates an antagonistic molecular bombardment towards the neutral
or attractive centres of such convolutions. This may be compared
to a knot on a violin string. As long as this knot remains, it is
impossible to elicit, from its sympathetic surroundings, the condition
which transfers pure concordance to its resonating body. Discordant
conditions (i.e., differentiation of mass) produce negatization to
coincident action. Pure sympathetic concordants are as antagonistic to
negative discordants as the negative is to the positive; but the vast
volume the sympathetic holds over the non-sympathetic, in ethereal
space, makes it at once the ruling medium and re-adjuster of all
opposing conditions, when properly brought to bear upon them....

Josiah Royce is right as regards correspondent sympathetic association
between two conditions. If concordance can be established, even of
unlike states, no matter whether it be of the high tenuous forces
of nature, gases with liquids, liquids with solids, solids with
gases, the structural conditions can be perfectly adverse. Their
neutral centres are the focalized seat of sympathetic concordance
for controlling any differentiation that may exist outside, or
in the mass that surrounds them. Certain orders of vibration can
reach these centres and establish a concordant flow of sympathy,
independent of any and all mass antagonism; in other words, certain
orders of sympathetic vibratory transmission can correct and equate
all differentiation that may exist between physical organisms and
their cerebellic flows. Discord is disease. Harmony is health.--Keely.



The Standard calls attention to the fact that Lord Rosebery has pointed
out how fast mental disease of one form or another is growing among
the population of London--so fast that a new asylum, containing 5000
patients, must be built every five years. "This," said his lordship,
"is a penalty of civilization."

When we take into consideration the effect upon the nerves, in
sensitive organizations, of living in the vicinity of railways, more
especially of the elevated railways in cities, the incessant jarring
vibrations which are communicated to houses, even from underground
railways, to say nothing of the piercing shrieks of the steam whistle,
is it to be wondered at that mental disorders and nervous diseases
are on the increase? With this increase of the most terrible form of
affliction, the remedy will follow; for our necessities are known to
One who "with a Father's care and affectionate attention supplies
the wants, as they arise, of the worlds which lie like children in
His bosom." Sympathetic Vibratory Physics will, in due time, make
known the curableness of many disorders now considered incurable.

On this subject Mr. Keely writes:--Every disease that the physical
organism is subject to has its connective link in the cerebral
domain; where it unerringly telegraphs, as it were, its molecular
differentiations, through the spinal dura mater or physical sympathetic
transmitter, and vice versâ back again. The sympathetic communication,
as between the physical and mental forces, shows up truthfully the pure
conditions that govern the celestial and terrestrial link of sympathy,
as between the finite and the Infinite in planetary suspension. The
whole system governing the suspension of the innumerable planetary
masses,--the infinite certainty and harmony of their eccentric and
concentric evolutions and revolutions, in their orbital and oscillating
ranges of motion,--the triune sympathetic streams of Infinity that
permeate their molecular masses--focalizing and defocalizing on
their neutral centres of attraction--are all subservient to that
Great Ruling Power: Mind-Flow. There is not a grain of sand, nor an
invisible corpuscule of floating matter, that does not come under
the same rule that governs the most mighty of planets....


    "All's love, yet all's law."


As the offspring of God, only by living in love and harmony can we
fulfil the law and maintain health and happiness, either individually
in family life, or collectively in our intercourse with the world. As
Goethe taught:--


    Let the God within thee speak,
    Love all things that lovely be,
    And God will show His best to thee.









