CHAPTER XXI.

FAITH BY SCIENCE: THE DAWN OF A NEW ORDER OF THINGS.

        "All for each and each for all."

        God will take account of the selfishness of wealth, and His
        quarrel has yet to be fought out.--Rev. F. Robertson.

        All the great things of time have been done by single men, from
        Judas Maccabeus down to Cromwell. We hear the age spoken of as
        degenerative because of the vast accumulations of wealth. But
        wealth may be a power for beneficence, as great brains may be,
        and we have no more reason for regretting large fortunes than
        large heads. No doubt to secure a perfect equality of all
        people we need small heads, and small heads or empty heads
        go with empty purses. By no other means can you level us. So
        also by wealth the world has been moved, and will continue
        to be moved. Can we consecrate money power to humanity, as
        we do mind power? We do not see why not. And in our judgment
        anyone who does not feel the change that is going on must
        be blind. It is not legislation that will produce a moral
        revolution, but a new enthusiasm. The future holds for us
        a grand enthusiasm of this sort--a moralization of property
        and possession.--Social Science in Science Siftings.

        A wave of unrest seems to be passing over the world. Uneasiness
        prevails on every side. We walk gingerly as though on the
        edge of a precipice. Discontent is spreading everywhere. The
        struggle between capital and labour threatens to reach
        unheard-of proportions.... What is the meaning of the general
        restlessness? What are its causes? Is the world growing old
        and effete? Is the human race worn out? Is this generation
        incapable of the great achievements of the past? Does its
        materialism clog its powers and prevent its progress? Is
        the world going wrong for want of an ideal? A people which
        does not believe in its lofty mission will never accomplish
        it. Science has made gigantic strides in our days; but have
        its discoveries added much to the sum of human happiness? It
        has contributed to our material comfort in various ways, but
        it has not done much for the federation of the world. The
        great growth of luxury is not a good, but an evil, if it
        rob us of our belief in our great destiny and if it weaken
        our endeavour. If "the time is out of joint," is it not
        possible that worship of wealth is responsible for it? "He
        who makes haste to be rich shall not be innocent." Ours is
        emphatically the age in which men "make haste to be rich,"
        without much regard to the means. Capital has profited unduly
        at the expense of labour; employers have attained to fortune
        too quickly for the welfare of the employed. Commerce has
        forsaken the path of safety to indulge in rash and reckless
        speculation. Businesses have been converted into companies
        more for the benefit of vendors and financial houses than for
        the public. Company promotion has been carried to reckless
        lengths, and schemes for getting rich rapidly--schemes of
        the South Sea bubble order--have multiplied in every part
        of the civilized world. The Nemesis has come in the shape
        of restlessness, discontent, paralysis of trade, strikes,
        disorganization of finance, demoralization of Bourses, and
        general insecurity. It is a fact proved countless times in
        history that whenever a national need is felt, a man is raised
        up to supply the want.--Galignani's Messenger.

        The first seal is being broken in the book of vibratory
        philosophy; the first stepping-stone is placed toward
        reaching the solution of that infinite problem, the origin
        of life.--John Ernst Worrell Keely, 1890.

        The seals are opened, as it were, under the sign Leo--as
        believing that such an age is coming on in which prophecy may
        be fulfilled that the earth be filled with the knowledge of
        the Lord, which shall cover it with wisdom and understanding
        in the deep mysteries of God.--Jane Lead, 1699.

        Evils bear in themselves the causes of their own
        extirpation. Providence is bringing the old order of things
        to a close in order to provide place for something better
        and higher.--Julian Hawthorne.


Professor Rowland, in his paper on the "Spectra of Metals," which
he read at Leeds, says that the object of his research is primarily
to find out what sort of things molecules are, and in what way they
vibrate. The primary object of Mr. Keely's researches has been to find
out all that he could about the laws that control vibrations, and on
this line of research he made his discoveries, as to "what sort of
things molecules and atoms are, and in what way they vibrate." One of
the editors of the Times, in London, in January, 1891, wrote out this
question for Keely to answer:--"What impulse led you primarily into the
research of acoustic physics?" Keely replied, "An impulse associated
sympathetically with my mental organism from birth, seemingly, as
I was acutely sensible of it in my childhood. Before I had reached
my tenth year, researching in the realm of acoustic physics had a
perfect fascination for me; my whole organism seemed attuned as if
it were a harp of a thousand strings; set for the reception of all
the conditions associated with sound force as a controlling medium,
positive and negative; and with an intensity of enjoyment not to be
described. From that time to the present, I have been absorbed in this
research, and it has opened up to me the laws that govern the higher
workings of nature's sympathetic, hidden forces; leading me gradually
on to the solution of the problem relating to the conditions that
exist between the celestial and terrestrial outreaches, viz., polar
negative attraction." Another question asked by the same editor:
"What is the main difficulty to be overcome before completing the
system for commercial benefit?" Answer: "The principal difficulty
rests in equating the thirds of the thirds of the transmitters (i.e.,
the gold, silver, and platina sections, of which the transmitting
wires are composed) to free them of molecular differentiation. The
full control of this force can never be accomplished, until pure
molecular equation is established between the nodal interferences
(that result in their manufacture) and the chord mass of their
sectional parts. When this has been done, the chasm between the
alternation of the polar forces, which now exists, preventing the
inducing of polar and depolar conditions, will be bridged over and
commercial benefits at once established as the result. The devices
for inducing these conditions, primarily, are perfect: but the pure,
connective link on transmission has to be equated, before continued
mechanical rotation and reversion can be attained."

As has already been said, Keely's researches have all been on the
line of vibrations; and it was while pursuing them that he "stumbled
over," to use his own words, the inter-atomic subdivision of the
molecule, which released the Geni that for years thereafter was his
master. Keely's attention not having been turned to molecules and
atoms, he was not able, in the earliest years of his discovery of
the existence of a "force of nature more powerful and more general
even than electricity," to form any opinion as to the origin of the
force. He was as one who, in the thick darkness of an underground
labyrinth, found himself face to face with a giant, whose form even he
could not see to lay hold of in a death grapple; but when a germ of
the knowledge that he needed fell on his mind, he was quick to seize
it, and the acorn grew into an oak. Here again, to use his own words:
"I was as a boulder resting on the summit of a mountain, until an
introductory impulse was given to start it on its course; then rushing
onwards and carrying all before it, when the goal is reached its
concussion will produce the crash that will awaken a sleeping world."

Priestley proclaimed it as his belief that all discoveries are made by
chance; but Providence sends chance, and the man of genius is he who is
able to improve all opportunities and mould them to his own ends. In a
discovery, says Edison, there must be an element of the accidental,
and an important one too; discovery is an inspiration, while an
invention is purely deductive. The story of the apple dropping from
the tree, and Newton starting with a species of "Eureka," he rejects
absolutely. Maintaining that an abstract idea or a natural law may,
in one sense, be invented, he gives it as his opinion that Newton did
not discover the theory of gravitation, but invented it; and that he
might have been at work on the problem for years, inventing theory
after theory, to which he found it impossible to fit his facts. That
Keely claims to have discovered an unknown source of energy has not
seemed to disturb the equilibriums of some of the men of science who
have witnessed the demonstrations of the force, as much as that he
should have invented theories in regard to the operation of the laws
that control it. For a man who had lived more than half a century
without troubling himself as to the existence of molecules and atoms
to suddenly awaken to the knowledge of their existence, and to invent
theories as to "what sort of things they are and how they vibrate,"
was sufficient proof, in their eyes, that he invented his discovery;
but men who are, in thought, reaching out into unknown realms, are
the very men who are most likely to lay hold of a discovery;--as did
Bell, who, speculating upon the nature of sound, filed an invention
for his telephone before he discovered that articulate speech could be
conveyed along a wire. It was in the same way that Keely, speculating
upon the nature of vibration, was led into the field of invention; and
while experimenting with one of his inventions, he suddenly stepped
into that great unknown territory which lies beyond the horizon of
ordinary matter. It took him nearly a score of years to find out where
he was. Years of experiment followed before he was able to summon
the Geni at will; for when his lever first registered a pressure
of 2000 lbs., while subjecting water to the action of multiplied
vibrations, he had no idea how to proceed, as far as the number of
vibrations were concerned, to repeat the operation. Commencing at
a certain point, he increased the vibrations day by day until, six
years later, he was able to effect the dissociation at will. But at
that time Mr. Keely had too much mechanical work to do to give any
of his time to theorizing. He was in the clutches of a speculating
Keely Motor Company, whose cry was, "Give us an engine!" and day
and night this toiler fought his way in the underground labyrinth,
thinking only of a commercial engine. It was not until Macvicar's
"Sketch of a Philosophy" fell into Mr. Keely's hands that he realized
he had imprisoned the ether. This was in 1884, and, four years later,
in 1888, Professor Hertz of Bonn announced that we were using the
ether, without knowing it, in all electro-magnetic engines. By this
time Keely's researches in vibratory physics had led him well on
his way in the construction of hypotheses as to "what sort of things
molecules are, and in what way they vibrate." An hypothesis treats
a supposed thing as an existing thing, for the purpose of proving,
by experimental demonstration, whether the supposition is correct
or not. At a critical juncture, Mrs. J. F. Hughes (a grand-niece of
Charles Darwin), hearing of Keely's researches, became interested in
his work; and her book on "The Evolution of Tones and Colours" was
sent to Mr. Keely. An expression used by Mrs. Hughes in that work,
brought a suggestion to Mr. Keely. The veil of darkness was rent
asunder which had enveloped him in what he called "Egyptian blackness,"
and from that time he worked no longer in the dark.

Pythagoras taught that the same law which underlies harmonies underlies
the motion of the heavenly bodies, or, as Mrs. Hughes has expressed it,
"The law which develops and controls harmony, develops and controls
the universe." Mr. Keely, nothing daunted by the vast extent, the
stupendous "outreach" of the domain, the boundary line of which he
had thus crossed, concentrated all his energies upon "the situation;"
thinking thereafter, not alone of the interests of commerce as before,
but of the developing of a system, which he could give to science in
the same hour that he should hand over, to those whose thoughts were
only on financial gain, the inventions that our age is demanding,
in the interests of humanity, with the stern voice of the master
necessity; a voice that never fails to make itself heard in "the voice
of the people." Experiment after experiment justified his hypotheses,
and converted them into theories. To keep pace with the wants of
humanity, invention must now walk side by side with philosophy. It took
half a century for the "Principia" of Newton to tread down the contempt
and opposition that its publication met with; and now progressive
knowledge is overshadowing Newton's vast attainments. Faraday, after
discovering electro-magnetic conditions, as related to latent or
hidden energy, did not pursue his researches far enough to establish
a theory as to the mode of transference of magnetic force, though, in
some of his speculations on the line of force, he hit upon truths now
advanced in Keely's theories. The physicists of Faraday's time could
not reach up to him. They complained of his "obscurity of language,"
of his "want of mathematical precision," of his "entertaining notions
regarding matter and force altogether distinct from the views generally
held by men of science." It is not then to be wondered at that modern
physicists took up lines of research more in accordance with their
own views. The experiences of one age are repeated in another age;
and the same charges that were brought against Faraday are now brought
against Keely; coupled with shameful attempts to prove him to be "a
fraud;" a man "living upon the credulity of his victims;" "a modern
Cagliostro;" "an artful pretender." The question is often asked, "Is
he not an ignorant man?" Yes, so ignorant, that he knows how ignorant
he is; so ignorant, that he asserts with Anaxagoras, that intelligent
will is the disposer and cause of everything; and not satisfied with
asserting this great truth, he has devoted the remnant of his days
to finding out and demonstrating how this cause operates throughout
nature. But ignorant as Keely has always confessed himself to be, he
knows more of the mysterious laws of nature which hold the planets
in their courses and exert their dynamic effect upon the tides,
more of the "shock effect" which, brought to bear upon molecules,
causes their disruption and supplies the fine fluid thus liberated,
that extends the "shock effect," as Frederick Major has conjectured, to
the atoms that compose them. Ignorant as Keely is, he knows that "out
of the strife of tremendous forces which is ever going on in nature,
is born a creation of law and harmony;" that from atomic recesses to
the farthest depth there is naught but "toil co-operant to an end,"
that "all these atoms march in time, and that it is no blind cause
which originates and maintains all." Admitting his ignorance, Keely
claims with Dr. Watson that "the many who are compelled to walk should
not scoff at those who try to fly." All who agree in believing that
"the advance of the modern school of natural philosophy affords no
justification for the intolerant and exclusive position taken by
certain physicists," will be ready to examine Keely's theories,
in the light of his demonstrations, even although they have been
stigmatized as fallacies. Science owes large obligations to many
fallacious theories.

Canon Moseley has said that the perfecting of the theory of epicycles
is due to the astrologers of the middle ages; and that but for them the
system of Copernicus would have remained a bare speculation, as did
that of Pythagoras for more than two thousand years. In the same way
that astrology nurtured astronomy, chemistry was cradled by alchemy.

Keely welcomes criticism of his theories, and is able to answer all
who come to him with criticisms in a proper spirit. To quote one of
his own expressions, "as far as a physical truth is concerned I never
throw up the sponge for any one." Of Professor Crookes, Keely wrote
quite recently: "Your friend is wrong in saying that I dabble in
chemical heresies. There must be some misunderstanding on his part,
for I have never asserted that nitrogen is a necessary constituent
of water. I only said that, after a thousand experiments had been
conducted, there was a residual deposit, in one of my tubes, of a
resinous substance that showed nitrogenous elements, which I could
not account for. I consider Professor Crookes one of the greatest of
discoverers, and, when he understands my system, he will be one of
the first to endorse it."

A philosophical journalist says of the force discovered by Keely,
that "it is harder to believe in than either steam or electricity,
because it has no visible manifestation in nature. It does not rise
in white clouds from every boiling kettle, or flash with vivid light
in every thunderstorm. It does not show itself in the fall of every
loosened body to the earth, like gravitation, nor can it be discovered,
like oxygen, by chemical investigation. If it exists at all, it is
in a form entirely passive, giving no hint of its presence until it
is brought out by the patient investigator, as the sculptor's chisel
brings out the beautiful statue from the shapeless mass of marble.

"Working thus entirely in the dark, with an intangible, imponderable,
invisible something whose nature and attributes are all unknown,
and whose characteristics differ essentially from those of any
other known force, what wonder if the inventor's progress is slow
and his disappointments many? Mr. Keely may be deceived, or he may
have discovered an actual force which he is unable to harness; but
the fact that he is very slow in perfecting whatever discovery he
may have made is no proof that he has not made a very great one.

"Far be it from us to say in this age of scientific marvels, that
any proposition whatever is impossible of accomplishment; but while
we wait for Mr. Keely to make his alleged discovery public, before
we become enthusiastic over it, we would not set it down as a fraud
and the reputed discovery as a humbug. It is the nature of inventors
to be enthusiastic and to think that they are on the eve of success
when, in fact, a great deal remains to be done.

"Especially is this the case in the development of a hitherto unknown
force. James Watt had a comparatively straight road to travel from his
mother's tea-kettle to his first steam-engine, but it took him many
years to traverse it. More than a lifetime elapsed after Franklin drew
electricity from a cloud before Morse sent it over a telegraph wire,
and Morse himself worked for years to make it available for business
purposes; while men are still constantly finding new adaptations of the
mysterious force of which that was the first practical application."

But, as Frederick Major has said, "Science at present is too full of
its own erroneous theories to accept or even notice theories outside of
science, until practically proved, and probably not even then unless
they can foist them upon the public as partially their own." These
words are not applicable to all men of science. There are some,
among those most eminent, who, in the spirit of true science, are
quite prepared for other roads to knowledge than those of our three
hundred years old induction school. The late Professor W. K. Clifford,
F.R.S., was one of those men who, in their earnest desire for "truth
at any cost," was ready to advance in every direction open to him. No
"fear of a false step" held him back. He did not belong to the category
of philosophical sceptics whom Dr. Stoney has so well classified as
damping all advance, unless it can be carried on, from the beginning,
under such conditions of perfection as are impossible in the early
stages of every discovery and of almost every inquiry. Professor Stoney
has well described Keely's method of work in these remarks: "In the
scientific method of investigating the validity of our beliefs, we take
our existing beliefs as our starting point, or a careful selection of
those which are fitted to enable us to advance. After the legitimate
consequences of these have been worked out, the inquirer finds himself
in a better position to return and test the validity of the bases on
which he proceeded. After these revisions, and such corrections as
he finds possible, he makes a step of a like kind farther forward:
after which another revision and another advance. Thus real progress
is accomplished. Probabilities acquire strength and accumulate; and
in the end a state of mind is attained replete with knowledge of the
realities within and around us. The sea of knowledge on which man
makes his brief voyage is for the most part unfathomable. He cannot
hope, except near shore, to measure the whole depth, and thus attain
philosophical certainty. But the scientific student may diligently use
such a sounding line as he possesses--that of probability--and with it
explore wide expanses under which there are no rocks nor shoals within
the utmost depth that he can plumb, and over which he may securely
sail. Compare this with the situation of the philosophical sceptic,
groping among rocks along the shore, and not venturing beyond the
shallow margin which he can probe with his little pole."

Professor Clifford struck out boldly in this unfathomable ocean of
knowledge, when he admitted the infinite divisibility of the atom,
which is one of the bases of Keely's theories. And how exquisitely
did his penetrating vision pierce the mists of materialism when he
wrote:--"Every time that analysis strips from nature the gilding that
we prized, she is forging thereat a new picture more glorious than
before, to be suddenly revealed by the advent of a new sense whereby
we see it--a new creation, at sight of which the sons of God shall
have cause to shout for joy. What now shall I say of this new-grown
perception of Law, which finds the infinite in a speck of dust,
and the act of eternity in every second of time? Shall I say that
it kills our sense of the beautiful, and takes all the romance out
of nature? And, moreover, that it is nothing more than a combining
and reorganizing of our old experiences; that it never can give us
anything really new; that we must progress in the same monotonous way
for ever. But wait a moment. What if this combining and organizing
is to become first habitual, then organic and unconscious, so that
the sense of law becomes a direct perception? Shall we not then be
really seeing something new? Shall there not be a new revelation of
a great and more perfect cosmos, a universe fresh-born, a new heaven
and a new earth? Mors janua vitæ, by death to this world we enter
upon a new life in the next. Doubtless there shall by-and-by be
laws as far transcending those we now know as they do the simplest
observation. The new incarnation may need a second passion; but,
evermore, beyond it is the Easter glory."

In these words there is the true ring of divinely inspired prophecy
to those who know of the pure philosophy which Keely's system
unfolds; teaching the "wondrous ways of Him who is perfect in
knowledge." Professor Clifford was one of those whom Ernest Renan has
classified as scouts in the great army, who divine beforehand that
which becomes ere long patent to all. In their rapid and venturesome
advance they catch sight before the others of the smiling plains
and lofty peaks. The student of nature has been compared to a hound,
wildly running after, and here and there chancing on game, universal
exploration, a beating up of the game on all sides, that and that
only is the sole possible method. And this is the spirit of those who
pursue their researches in a scientific frame of mind: while those
who enter the field in a sceptical mood, are indisposed to step out
of the beaten track where they feel sure of their footing.

They have no ambitions to meet the fate of the trilobites in Professor
Clifford's amusing apologue. "Once upon a time--much longer than six
thousand years ago--the Trilobites were the only people that had eyes;
and they were only just beginning to have them. Some of the Trilobites,
even, had as yet no signs of coming sight. So that the utmost they
could know was that they were living in darkness, and that perhaps
there was such a thing as light. But at last one of them got so far
advanced that when he happened to come to the top of the water in
the daytime he saw the sun. So he went down and told the others that
in general the world was light, but there was one great light which
caused it all. Then they killed him for disturbing the commonwealth;
but they considered it impious to doubt that in general the world was
light, and that there was one great light which caused it all. And
they had great disputes about the manner in which they had come to
know this. Afterwards, another of them got so far advanced that when
he happened to come to the top of the water, in the night-time, he
saw the stars. So he went down and told the others that in general
the world was dark, but that, nevertheless, there were a great number
of little lights in it. Then they killed him for maintaining false
doctrines; but from that time there was a division amongst them,
and all the Trilobites were split in two parties, some maintaining
one thing and some the other, until such time as so many of them had
learned to see that there could be no doubt about the matter that
both of the savant Trilobites were right."

Bacon has compared the mind of man to a prisoner in a cave with his
back to the light, who sees only shadows of the events passing outside.

Dr. Stoney, in his paper on "Natural Science and Ontology," frames a
working hypothesis, which leads up to Keely's theory, that "the laws
of the universe are the laws of thought." "This is a very different
thing," says Dr. Stoney, "from saying that they are the laws of
human thought. The laws of human thought bear to them the same small
proportion which the laws of the action of the wheels of a watch upon
one another bear to the entire science of dynamics.... Natural science
is thus, as it were, the study of an ever-changing shadow cast in a
special and very indirect way by the mighty march of actual events."

"The history of philosophy," writes Ernest Renan, "should be the
history of the thoughts of mankind. Hence we must look upon philology,
or the study of ancient literatures, as a science having a distinct
object, viz., the knowledge of the human intellect."

The philologist and the chemist, because of the results of the
researches of the one, and of the nature of the researches of the
other, are the students who are best able to comprehend the discoveries
of Keely. "It is the characteristic and the pride of modern science to
attain its most lofty results only through the most scrupulous methods
of experiment, and to arrive at the knowledge of the highest laws of
nature, its hands resting on its apparatus. If the highest truths can,
as it were, emanate from the alembic and the crucible, why should they
not equally be the result of the study of the remains of the past,
covered with the dust of ages? Shall the philologist who toils on
words and syllables be less honoured than the student of chemistry
labouring in his laboratory? It is impossible to guess beforehand what
may result from philological researches, any more than one can know,
in digging a mine, the wealth it may contain. We may be on our way to
the discovery of a new world. Science always presents itself to man as
an unknown country. The most important discoveries have been brought
about in a roundabout way. Very few problems have been deliberately
grappled with at the outset, 'taken at the core.' There is nothing
more difficult to foretell than the importance with which posterity
will invest this or that order of facts; the researches that will be
abandoned, the researches that will be continued. In looking for one
thing one may stumble upon another; in the pursuit of a mere vision,
one may hit upon a magnificent reality."

When a result has been attained, it is difficult to realize the trouble
its attainment has cost, says Ernest Renan in "The Future of Science."

Of this nature have been the researches of the present distinguished
Professor of Chemistry in the Royal Institution; leading him into a
discovery, the great importance of which the future alone can unfold.

Professor Dewar's brilliant success in producing liquid oxygen will be
remembered by all who had the privilege of witnessing it last year, on
the occasion of the celebration of Faraday's Centenary. Its production
is attended with the greatest difficulties; so great that Professor
Dewar even felt doubts as to his being successful in his attempt at
that time, which made his complete success all the more gratifying
to him. When produced, it is difficult to hold and difficult to
manipulate; but nothing daunted by these difficulties, Professor Dewar
continued his researches, subjecting it to tests which no mind less
penetrating than his own would ever have thought of, with the result
that, most unexpectedly to himself, he has "hit upon a magnificent
reality." The ordeal to which, with consummate skill, he subjected
this unstable fluid, disclosed its marvellous affinity for the magnet;
and iron is now no longer able to claim the distinction which it has
hitherto enjoyed, of monopolizing the affections of the magnet. Sir
Robert Ball, LL.D., F.R.S., in commenting upon this important and most
interesting addition to our knowledge of the properties of oxygen,
says:--"Seeing that water, which is so largely composed of oxygen,
is not attracted by a magnet, it might certainly have seemed unlikely
that a liquid which was nothing but pure oxygen should be affected
to any noteworthy degree. I suspect, however, that Professor Dewar
must have had some sagacious reason for anticipating that the magnet
would treat liquid oxygen with much more attention than it bestowed
on water. At all events, whether he expected it or not, the result as
described was of the most extraordinary character. The liquid oxygen
was vehemently attracted by the great magnet; it seems to have leaped
from the vessel, to have clung round the poles, and continued to adhere
to them until it had all evaporated and resumed the form of gas. The
appreciation of this discovery will be shared not alone by chemists,
but by all who are interested in the great truths of nature."

When Mr. Keely fell upon his discovery of an unknown force, he had not
the faintest conception of the infinite extent, nor of the nature, of
the territory he had invaded. Step by step he has been led on through
years of patient and persistent research, yet even now feeling that
he has but lifted one corner of the veil of the goddess of nature,
and that a lifetime is too short to do more than this. The physicists
whom Keely, in the earlier years of his discovery, invited to confer
with him as to the origin of the force which was generated by the
disintegration of water, preferred rather to pronounce him an impostor,
after witnessing his demonstrations, than to admit that such results
should have escaped the penetration of their all-powerful methods. "It
indicates," says Dr. Watson, "a mistaken apprehension of the basis of
our own so highly valued system of inquiry, that we should arrogate to
it absolute exclusiveness, and deride, as though they were searchers
after proved impossibilities, all those who choose to make the trial
whether truth may be sought by any method besides our own."

History repeats itself, but on new planes. It is not those who are
mighty in their own eyes whom Providence chooses as instruments to
reveal new truths to the world when the needs of humanity require
"a new order of things." The evolution of the human race is slow but
sure. If in one century some backward steps are taken, in the next with
giant strides all is regained that seemed to have been lost. Each age
answers the need of its own time. "The condition of mankind, during
the last quarter of the fifteenth century, bore some curious analogies
to its state at present," writes Julian Hawthorne, under the heading,
"The New Columbus." "A certain stage or epoch of human life seemed to
have run its course and come to a stop. The impulses which had started
it were exhausted. Once more, it seems, we have reached the limits of
a dispensation, and are halted by a blank wall. There is no visible
way over it, nor around it. We cannot stand still; still less can we
turn back. What is to happen? What happens when an irresistible force
encounters an impenetrable barrier? That was the question asked in
Columbus' day, and he found an answer to it. Are we to expect the
appearance of a new Columbus to answer it again? What Columbus can
help us out of our dangers now? The time has come when the spirit
of Columbus shall avouch itself, vindicating the patient purpose of
Him who brings the flower from the seed. Great discoveries come when
they are needed; never too early nor too late. When nothing else will
serve the turn, then, and not till then, the rock opens and the spring
gushes forth. Who that has considered the philosophy of the infinitely
great and of the infinitely minute can doubt the inexhaustibleness of
nature? And what is nature but the characteristic echo of the spirit of
man? A prophet has arisen, during these latter days, in Philadelphia,
who is commonly regarded as a charlatan; but men, cognizant of the
latest advances of science, admit themselves unable to explain upon
any known principles the effects he produces."



"What we are to expect is an awakening of the soul; the rediscovery
and rehabilitation of the genuine and indestructible religious
instinct. Such a religious revival will be something very different
from what we have known under that name. It will be a spontaneous
and joyful realization by the soul of its vital relations with its
Creator. Nature will be recognized as a language whereby God converses
with man. The interpretation of this language, based as it is upon an
eternal and living symbolism, containing infinite depths beyond depths
of meaning, will be a sufficient study and employment for mankind for
ever. Science will become, in truth, the handmaid of religion, in that
it will be devoted to reporting the physical analogies of spiritual
truths, and following them out in their subtler details. Hitherto
the progress of science has been slow, and subject to constant error
and revision. But as soon as physical research begins to go hand in
hand with moral or psychical research it will advance with a rapidity
hitherto unimagined, each assisting and classifying the other.

"The attitude of men towards one another will undergo a corresponding
change. It is already become evident that selfishness is a colossal
failure.... Recent social theorists propose a universal co-operation,
to save the waste of personal competition. But competition is a
wholesome and vital law; it is only the direction of it that requires
alteration. When the cessation of working for one's livelihood takes
place, human energy and love of production will not cease with it,
but will persist and must find their channels. But competition to
outdo each in the service of all is free from collisions, and its
range is limitless. Not to support life, but to make life more lovely,
will be the effort; and not to make it more lovely for one's self
alone but for one's neighbour. Nor is this all.

"The love of the neighbour will be a true act of divine worship,
since it will then be acknowledged that mankind, though multiplied
to human sense, is in essence one; and that in this universal one,
which can have no self-consciousness, God is incarnate.

"The divine humanity is the only real and possible object of mortal
adoration, and no genuine sentiment of human brotherhood is conceivable
apart from its recognition. But, with it, the stature of our common
manhood will grow toward the celestial. Obviously, with thoughts and
pursuits of this calibre to engage our attention, we shall be very
far from regretting those which harass and enslave us to-day. Leaving
out of account the extension of psychical faculties, which will
enable the antipodes to commune together at will, and even give us
the means of communicating with the inhabitants of other planets,
and which will so simplify and deepen language that audible speech,
other than the musical sounds indicative of emotion, will be regarded
as a comic and clumsy archaism,--apart from all this, the fathomless
riches of wisdom to be gathered from the commonest daily objects and
outwardly most trivial occurrences, will put an end to all craving
for merely physical change of place and excitement. Gradually the
human race will become stationary, each family occupying its own
place, and living in patriarchal simplicity, though endowed with
power and wisdom that we should now consider god-like.... We have
only attempted to indicate what regions await the genius of the new
Columbus; nor does the conjecture seem too bold that perhaps they
are not so distant from us in time as they appear to be in quality."

If we turn, from this seemingly Utopian forecast, to the matter-of-fact
utterances of Ernest Renan, we will find that he anticipates
nothing less as the destiny of humanity, than the perfecting of it
as a unity. Asserting that the nineteenth century is preparing the
way for the enfranchisement of the mind, he proceeds logically to
show how this evolution is to be brought about, strong in the faith
that Providence will not fail in its design to secure the ultimate
happiness of the human race. To quote, at length, from Renan:--"It
is the law of science, as of every human undertaking, to draw its
plans on a large scale, and with a great deal that is superfluous
around them. Mankind finally assimilates only a small number of the
elements of food. But the portions that have been eliminated played
their part in the act of nutrition. So the countless generations that
have appeared and disappeared like a dream, have served to build the
great Babel of humanity which uprises toward the sky, each layer of
which means a people. In God's vast bosom all that lived will live
again, and then it will be true to the very letter that not a glass
of water, not a word that has furthered the divine work of progress
will be lost. That is the law of humanity; an enormous and lavish
expenditure of the individual; for God only sets Himself the large,
general plan; and each created being finds subsequently in himself
the instincts which make his lot as mild as possible. All help to
accelerate the day when the knowledge of the world shall equal the
world, when the subject and the object having become identified, God
will be complete. Philosophy up till now has scarcely been anything
but fancy, a priori, and science has only been an insignificant
display of learning. As for us, we have shifted the field of the
science of man. We want to know what his life is, and life means
both the body and the soul; not placed facing one another like clocks
that tick in time, not soldered together like two different metals,
but united into one two-fronted phenomenon which cannot be divided,
without destroying it. It is time to proclaim the fact that one sole
Cause has wrought everything in the domain of intellect, operating
according to identical laws, but among different surroundings.

"The lofty serenity of science becomes possible only when it
handles its imperturbable instrument with the inflexibility of
the geometrician, without anger and without pity. True science, the
complete and felt science, will be for the future, if civilization is
not once again arrested in its march by blind superstition and the
invasion of barbarism, in one form or another. But it is contended
that the inferiority of the philosophy of science consists in its
being accessible to the small minority. This is, on the contrary,
its chief title to glory, showing us that we should labour to hasten
the advent of the blessed day in which all men will have their place
in the sunshine of intelligence, and will live in the true light of
the children of God. It is the property of hope to hope against hope,
and there is nothing which the past does not justify us in hoping
from the future of humanity. Perfect happiness, as I understand it,
is that all men should be perfect. I cannot understand how the opulent
man can fully enjoy his happiness while he is obliged to veil his face
in presence of the misery of a portion of his fellow-creatures. There
can only be perfect happiness when all are equal, but there will
only be equality when all are perfect. Thus we see that it is
not a question of being happy; it is a question of being perfect;
a question of true religion, the only thing which is serious and
sacred. Inequality is legitimate whenever inequality is necessary for
the good of humanity. Rights create themselves like other things. The
French Revolution is not legitimate because it has taken place, but
it took place because it was legitimate; the freeing of the negroes
was neither achieved nor deserved by the negroes, but by the progress
in civilization of their masters. Right is the progress of humanity;
there is no right in opposition to this progress, and, vice versâ,
progress legitimizes everything. Never, since the origin of things, has
human intelligence set itself so terrible a problem as the one which
now menaces our age. Upon the one hand, it is necessary to preserve
the conquests already secured for civilization; while upon the other,
all must have their share in the blessings of this civilization. It
took centuries to conceive the possibility of a society without
slavery. The traveller who looks only at the horizon of the plain,
risks not seeing the precipice or the quagmire at his feet. In the
same way, humanity when looking only to the distant object is tempted
to make a jump for it, without regard to the intermediate objects
against which it may not improbably dash itself to pieces. Socialism
is, therefore, right to the extent of discerning the problem,
but solves it badly; or rather socialism is not yet possible of
solution. Reforms never triumph directly; they triumph by compelling
their adversaries to partially adopt them in order to overcome them. It
might be said of reforms as of the crusades: 'Not one succeeded: all
succeeded.' As one sees the tide bringing the ever-collapsing waves
upon the shore, the feeling aroused is one of powerlessness. The wave
arrived so proudly, and yet it is dashed to pieces against the sand,
and it expires in a feeble career against the shore which it seemed
about to devour. But, upon reflection, one finds that this process
is not as idle as it seems; for each wave, as it dies away, has its
effect; and all the waves combined make the rising tide against which
heaven and hell would be powerless. Humanity, when it is fatigued,
is willing to pause; but to pause is not to rest. The calm is but
an armistice and a breathing space. It is impossible for society to
find calm in a state when it is suffering from an open wound such as
that of to-day. The age is oppressed by this inevitable and seemingly
insoluble problem. We barricade ourselves in one party, in order not
to see the reasons of the other side. The conservatives are wrong,
for the state of things which they uphold, and which they do right
to uphold, is intolerable. The revolutionists are wrong; for it is
absurd to destroy when you have nothing to put in place of what you
destroy. At these epochs, doubt and indecision are the truth; the man
who is not in doubt is either a simpleton or a charlatan. Revolutions
must be made for well-ascertained principles, and not for tendencies
which have not yet been formulated in a practical manner. They are
the upheavals of the everlasting Enceladus turning over when Etna
weighs too heavily upon him. It is horrible that one man should be
sacrificed to the enjoyment of another. If it were merely a question
of self-indulgence, it would be better that all should have Spartan
fare, than that some should have luxuries and others go hungry; but,
as long as material ease is to a certain extent the indispensable
condition of intellectual perfection, the sacrifice is not effected
for the enjoyment of another individual, of the luxuries of life,
but it is made upon behalf of society as a whole. A society is
entitled to what is necessary for its existence, however great may
be the apparent injustice resulting for the individual. It is the
idea of the ancient sacrifice--the man for the nation. If the object
of life were but self-indulgence, it would not be unreasonable that
each one should claim his share, and from this point of view any
enjoyment which one might procure at the expense of others would be in
reality an injustice and a robbery: but the object of life, the aim
of society, should be the greatest possible perfecting of all. The
State is neither an institution of police, as Smith would have it,
nor a charity bureau and a hospital as the Socialists would have
it. It is a machine for making progress. In the state of things which
I should like to see, manual labour would be the recreation of mental
labour. The immense majority of humanity is still at school: to let
them out too soon would be to encourage them in idleness. Necessity,
says Herder, is the weight of the clock which causes all the wheels
to turn. Without the idea of progress, all the ideas of humanity are
incomprehensible. We must keep our machines in order, if we would bring
down paradise upon earth; and paradise will be here below when all have
their share in light, perfection, beauty, and therefore in happiness.

"It matters little whether the law grants or refuses liberty to
new ideas, for they make their way all the same; they come into
existence without the law, and they are all the better for this than
if they had grown in full legality. When a river which has overflown
its banks pours onward, you may erect dykes to arrest its progress,
but the flood continues to rise; you may work with eager energy and
employ skilful labourers to make good all the fissures, but the flood
will continue to rise until the torrent has surmounted the obstacle,
or until, by making a circuit of the dyke, it comes back by some other
way to inundate the land which you have attempted to protect from it."

These are the advanced views of Ernest Renan, who still sees nothing
before us but a fresh cataclysm, a general upheaval and chaos, terrible
disturbances when human intelligence will be checkmated, thrown off
the rails so to speak, by events as yet unparalleled. We have not yet
suffered sufficiently, he says, to see the kingdom of heaven. When a
few millions of men have died of hunger, when thousands have devoured
one another, when the brains of the others, carried off their balance
by these darksome scenes, have plunged into extravagancies of one
kind and another, then life will begin anew. Suffering has been for
man the mistress and the revealer of great things. Order is an end,
not a beginning; but out of respect for the rights of bears and lions
are we to open the bars of a menagerie? Are these beasts to be let
loose upon men? No, for humanity and civilization must be saved at
any cost. But these problems, which make up the capital question of
the nineteenth century, are, in a speculative sense, insoluble; they
will be solved by brute force, says Renan. The crowd behind is ever
pressing forward; those in the foremost ranks are toppled over into
the yawning gulf, and when their bodies have filled up the abyss,
the last comers pass over on the level.

But let us suppose that what pseudo-science has wrested from us,
true science is ready to restore; ready to offer all that Renan
himself tells us is necessary to open the way for the elevation of
the people, by giving all men a share in the delights of education;
thus widening the basis of the brotherhood of humanity, and making
room for all at the banqueting-table of knowledge, enabling men to be
"perfect in their measure," for "absolute equality is as impossible
in humanity as it would be in the animal reign. Each part is perfect
in the hierarchy of the parts when it is all that it can be, and does
well all that it ought to do."

Let us suppose that true science offers confirmation of all that
revelation has taught of the attributes of the Creator of all things,
reiterating the promise of a time when this knowledge shall be spread
over the face of the whole earth and made known to all men. Let
us imagine that, in addition to the opening of these floodgates of
knowledge, the time is drawing near when machinery, unknown now, will
be employed to help the workman in his task, and abridge his hours of
labour, leaving leisure for the cultivation of his mind. Aristotle
has told us what would be the result, "if every instrument could
work of its own accord, if the spindles worked of themselves, if the
bow played the violin without being held, the contractors could do
without workmen and the masters without slaves." Man would so master
nature that material requirements would no longer be the supreme
motive, and human activity would be directed towards the things of
the mind. In such a state of existence men of intelligence would
"conquer the infinite."

We are living in a period of wondrous revelations of the power of God,
and the crowning discovery of this epoch promises the fulfilment of
Scripture prophecy in a dispensation of harmony and peace, that will
restore to mankind that measure of faith in God and immortality, which
can alone give strength "to endure the evil days without feeling the
weight of them" that lie between the present time and the realization
of our hopes for the perfection of humanity. With the knowledge
that lies in this new revelation of the power of the All-Mighty, no
hopes seem chimerical or Utopian. We shall all be as gods, when the
fulness of the love of God and the power of God is made known to, and
understood by, all men. Tossing as we are in a seething whirlpool of
scepticism, threatened as are the nations with dangers on all sides,
if we were bereft of our God, as the leading lights of science would
have us believe, there would be no hope for humanity. But though
the anchor of ancient faiths has been swept away by materialism,
the sheet-anchor of faith by science has been let down from heaven,
as it were in our hour of peril, for the saving of the peoples:
teaching as often before that the world lies in the bosom of God,
like a child in its mother's arms, who with watchful solicitude
ministers to its wants as they arise.

Religion as revealed to us by our Holy Master, Jesus Christ, is to
know and to love the truth of things. When this religion is understood
and practised, then, and not before, will the earth be full of the
knowledge that it is God who is, and that all the rest only appears to
be. If anarchy and disorder would but wait for this time to arrive,
no devastating cataclysms, no destroying whirlwinds, will come as
forerunners to prepare the way, as in the past, for progress. The
light now dawning will usher in "the new order of things," and we
may expect that an era of material prosperity will soon set in,
such as the world has never dreamed of; arresting the outbreak of
barbarism which seems near at hand. There are some who contend that
this revelation of an unknown force will, in the hands of anarchists,
put back the progress of civilization and enlightenment for centuries;
there are others who proclaim that it will take the bread from the
mouths of the hungry and swell the sums amassed by capitalists. But
history shows that discovery heralds progress, and walks with it hand
in hand. With the costless and unlimited power which will be made
available, in every direction where power is required, all works
of improvement will be carried out on a far grander scale than has
ever been anticipated. The great polar stream, with its exhaustless
supply of energy, places at our disposal a force as harmless as the
current that draws its keeper to the magnet. We have but to "hook
our machinery on to the machinery of nature," and we have a safe
and harmless propelling and controlling force, the conditions of
which when once set up remain for ever, perpetual molecular action
the result. Another step made toward the conquering of the material
world which must precede the advent of the reign of the spirit.

Schlegel foresaw that the only hope for a brotherhood of humanity lay
in the thorough religious regeneration of the State and of science, and
that through these combined powers the underlying purpose of Eternal
Mind is to be made known, covering the earth with the knowledge of
God as the waters cover the beds of the seas, obtaining a complete
triumph for Christianity.

It would fill with despair the hearts of those who are working
to bring about this end (so slow, so retrograde at times does the
evolution seem to be) did they not know that they have an Invincible
Power working with them.

History has again repeated itself, and truth has once more had its
birth in a stable. A star has arisen in the West which heralds to all
races what the Star of Bethlehem heralded in Judea, viz. the coming
of the time when the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of
the Lord. There are both Magi and shepherds now, as of old, who have
watched for the rising of this star, and who were the first to behold
the gold and crimson light of the approaching dawn; in which Faith,
which modern science has crucified and laid away in its sepulchre,
will have its resurrection and dwell on earth for evermore--the
tabernacle of God with men.









THE DAWN.

Dante called his lifetime, "The time of my debt."


        I.

        Have I not paid my debt, O God,
          What have I left to give?
        Yet blest my life in rendering all
          To help the nations live
        In harmony, in peace, in love,
          As nations all will be,
        When knowledge true shall cover earth
          As waters cover sea.

        II.

        Nailed to the cross are all my hopes--
          Thou hast not spared me aught:
        But raised thereby above the world
          Its treasures count as naught:
        Empty its titles and its show,
          Its honours and its fame;
        Better the love of God to know
          Than riches, rank, or name.

        III.

        Two avenues there are, 'tis said,
          From paltry passions vile,
        From all calamities of earth,
          From artifice and wile.
        Science and Art their votaries lead
          From quicksands and from shoal;
        Their guiding torches held aloft
          Will light us to our goal.

        IV.

        When ended this--my "time of debt"--
          'Tis only Thou canst know;
        But when the longed-for quittance comes
          I stay not here below.
        Till then give me the torch of Art
          To light my pathway drear,
        Let Science lift my thoughts to Thee,
          My lonely hours to cheer.

        V.

        And when my life-long debt is paid--
          My soul from body free--
        No bondage can enslave me more,
          For I shall go to Thee.
        Hasten the hour when summons comes,
          To take me to my home;
        Here have I lived an exile's life,
          An exile forced to roam.

        VI.

        The face of love was turned from me
          When most I felt its need,
        And in the wilds my feet were set
          To plough and sow the seed.
        Ashes and tears to me were given;
          I sat not by the way,
        With folded hands to make lament,
          But laboured day by day.

        VII.

        Thou hast not dealt one useless blow,
          What time I worked in field:
        Each tear of blood, each hour of toil,
          Increased the harvest yield;
        And now the furrows all are ploughed,
          If I have paid my debt,
        By waters still, in paths of peace,
          Thou wilt my footsteps set.

        VIII.

        Æons may pass before my hopes
          For earth are all fulfilled;
        But let "the dawn" approach, I pray,
          Before my lips are stilled!
        And let true knowledge cover earth
          As waters cover sea--
        Knowledge of truth, knowledge of love,
          Knowledge, dear God, of Thee!

        IX.

        I wait the music of the spheres,
          The rhythmic pulse of earth,
        Which, when Death's angelus doth ring,
          Announce immortal birth:
        In that blest home beyond the veil
          No discord rends the air
        The law of harmony prevails
          And love reigns everywhere.









CONCLUSION.

KEELY'S PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY.

        Mr. Keely begins with sounds whose vibrations can be known
        and registered. I presume that the laws of ratio, position,
        duality, and continuity, all the laws which go to mould the
        plastic air by elastic bodies into the sweetness of music,
        will also be found ruling and determining all in the high
        silence of interior vibrations, which hold together or shake
        asunder the combinations that we call atoms and ultimate
        elements.--The Science of Music. D. C. Ramsay. Edited by the
        Rev. John Andrew. Marcus Ward & Co.

        What Keely has discovered in physics, I am in some measure
        credited with discovering in metaphysics: this is nothing
        strange, according to this philosophy, which shows that many
        people may divine the same original truth at the same time
        by means of the etheric element which connects the Deity, the
        source of all truth, with all His creatures.--Preface to Vera
        Vita; or, the Philosophy of Sympathy. David Sinclair. Author
        of A New Creed. Digby, Long & Co., London.


Abstract of Keely's Physical Philosophy in its main features up to
the point of practical application; by Professor Daniel G. Brinton,
of the Pennsylvania University; subject to modifications and additions
when Keely has made public his system.


The fundamental conception of the Universe is force manifesting itself
in rhythmical relations.

This definition is exhaustive, including both thought and extension,
matter and mind. The law for the one is the law for the other. The
distinction between them is simply relative, i.e. quantitative,
not qualitative.

The rhythmic relations in which force acts are everywhere, under all
conditions, and at all times, the same. They are found experimentally
to be universally expressible by the mathematical relations of thirds.

These threefold relations may be expressed with regard to their
results as,--


          I. Assimilative.
         II. Individualizing.
        III. Dominant or Resultant.


From these three actions are derived the three fundamental



LAWS OF BEING.

I. Law of Assimilation: every individualized object assimilates itself
to all other objects.

II. Law of Individualization: every such object tends to assimilate
all other objects to itself.

III. Law of the Dominant: every such object is such by virtue of the
higher or dominant force which controls these two tendencies.

Applying these fundamental laws to an explanation of the universe,
as it is brought to human cognition, all manifestations of force may
be treated as modes of vibrations.

The essential differences give rise to three modes of vibration:--

I. The Radiating: called also the "Dispersing," the "Propulsive,"
the "Positive," and the "Enharmonic."

II. The Focalizing: called also the "Negative," the "Negative
Attractive," the "Polarizing," and the "Harmonic."

III. The Dominant: called also the "Etheric," or the "Celestial."

These, it will be noted, correspond to the three laws of being. It is
not to be understood that any one of these three modes of vibration
can exist independently. Each by itself is called a "current," and
all three must be present in every "stream" or "flow" of force. The
relations of the currents in every flow are expressible in thirds,
and it is experimentally demonstrable that the relation of the three
are in the order named: as 33 1/3 : 66 2/3 : 100.

The evolution of what is called "matter" from the different modes
of vibration is through the action of the second law, that of
focalization, or "negative attraction," or "negative affinity."

Where the vibrations under this mode meet, and are maintained in a
state of mutual affinity or equilibrium, there is established what
is called a "neutral centre," or, as otherwise expressed, "a centre
of sympathetic coincidence."

The terms "neutral attraction," "neutral affinity," "negative
attraction," or "polar negative attraction," are employed to express
the property of a mode of vibration to direct its components towards
such centre.

As no current or flow of force can be composed of one mode of
vibration only, but must always be composed of three modes uniting in
varying thirds, we have 1 × 2 × 3 = 6 as the total possible forms of
sympathetic coincidence, or, to speak in ordinary terms, there can
be six; and six only, possible forms of individualized being. These
are what Keely calls the six orders of atomic subdivision, or orders
of vibratory motion, and he names them as follows:


          I. Molecular.
         II. Inter-molecular.
        III. Atomic.
         IV. Inter-atomic.
          V. Etheric.
         VI. Inter-etheric.


In this list the forms of matter are arranged in the mathematical
sequence of the rapidity of the oscillations of their constituent
members; the proportion being proved by experiment to be as follows:
for the molecular orders:


            1 : 3 : 9 : 27 : 81 : 243.


This arithmetical progression changes in the atomic orders to a
geometrical progression as follows:


            3 : 9 : 81 : 6561 : 43046721, etc.


This same method of progression is believed to hold in all the orders
of vibrations above the molecular, and soon passes into mathematical
infinity.

Actually, however, all matter of which we are capable of cognition
through the medium of our senses is in one of three forms of
aggregation:


          I. Molecular.
         II. Atomic.
        III. Etheric.


in each of which the controlling mode of vibration is respectively,


          I. The Enharmonic.
         II. The Harmonic.
        III. The Dominant.


But it must be understood that each of these modes is a positive and
real constituent of every atom and molecule.

It will be seen that as every form of material aggregation is to be
considered as a "neutral centre of attraction," where the vibratory
force of all three orders are held in "sympathetic coincidence," that
is, in balanced activity or harmonized motion, and not by any means
cancelled or mutually destroyed, there is no diminution of force,
but only temporary suspension of its radiating or propulsive activity
or expression.

This is the foundation of Keely's doctrine of "latent force," and
of the indefinite power which can be obtained by breaking up the
harmonious balance or equation of forces of every mode, which exists
in every "neutral centre," that is to say in every mass of matter.

Insomuch as every mass of matter consists thus, in fact, of vibrations
in harmonic equilibrium, related by simple proportions of thirds,
it follows that every mass of every description stands in harmonic
relation to every other mass. This is, in part, what is meant by
the sympathy of all forms of matter and of motion; and it is through
the study of the methods of increasing or diminishing this sympathy
that we reach practical results in this field of research. At present
this is best accomplished by resonance; that is, through the harmonic
vibrations created by musical instruments, bringing out the acoustic
world as the microscope reveals the hidden visual world.

Every visible or tangible mass of matter must be regarded as an
aggregation of molecules; the molecules being the true centres of
the equated forces of "neutralized attraction."

These molecules have been experimentally proved by Keely to be
formed of all three modes of vibration; the proof being that they
respond to all three modes when subjected to the tests of compound
concordant impulses.

When in that state of neutral aggregation which we know as matter,
each molecule is in perpetual oscillation, the range of the oscillation
being one-third of the molecule, and its rapidity 20,000 oscillations
in a second.

It is through the disturbance of this oscillatory equilibrium, by
means of resonant impulses, that Keely alters the relations of the
vibratory impulses which constitute matter. This he does by striking
the same chord in three octaves, representing the third, sixth,
and ninth of the scale.

Of these, the sixth reduces the range of molecular vibrations or
oscillations; and, by thus bringing nearer to each other the neutral
centres, increases solidification.

The ninth extends the range of molecular oscillation, and thus tends
to give greater tenuity to the mass. It induces "trajectile velocity"
from neutral centres, or "neutral radiation." Experiment shows
that molecular dissociation does not take place until the molecule
attains an oscillation approaching, if not fully reaching two-thirds
of its diameter. This can be effected by means of the action of the
"enharmonic" or "radiating" current applied to the mass, after its
molecules have once been disturbed by an "introductory impulse;"
that is, by the musical note above mentioned.

The third represents the "dominant," and when brought under control
of a harmonic resonant impulse induces a complete rearrangement of
the modes of vibration and oscillation; in other words, will transform
the mass either into its component initial forces, or into some other
form of matter.

It is the study of the dominant to which Keely has devoted his recent
researches. He aims to control the power he evolves by altering the
dominant or etheric mode of vibration in the triplicate flows of force.

As all molecules and masses are mere centres of harmonized vibrations,
temporarily held in suspension by simple laws identical with those of
resonance, it follows that these centres can be broken up or divided
by certain orders of vibration impinging upon and disturbing them.

It is a familiar fact that a cord in vibration tends to produce a
similar vibration in a cord placed near it. This property belongs
to all vibrations, whether resonant or not, and they exert it in
proportion to the "order" to which they belong. The distance in space
to which this power extends, or can be extended, is what is called
"the sympathetic outreach" of the current or flow.

In this manner we have "sympathetic negative attraction," and
"sympathetic positive propulsion," with reference to the "outreach"
of the third or dominant current of the stream, which is allied to
the order of etheric vibrations.

Each molecule of a given mass of matter represents the same harmonic
chord or note in its oscillatory motion. The "chord of the mass" is,
therefore, the chord of every molecule of the mass.

But as the condition of absolutely stable equilibrium is theoretical
only, and does not exist in nature, the chord of the mass is constantly
changing. Yet we must learn to control this "chord of the mass" by
resonant induction, if we would gain command of the molecular forces.

Keely believes he has solved this problem, by the invention of a
mechanical device which brings the chords of all masses within the
conditions of a few simple acoustic tests.

The range of molecular oscillation is affected differently in different
substances when submitted to the same vibratory impulse, and these
ranges can be measured.

In the three metals, silver, gold, and platina, we obtain the
proportions----3 : 6 : 9 :--As this is the primary relation of the
modes of vibration, a wire made of these three metals is peculiarly
adapted to transmit concordant impulses; and nodes made of these
substances placed upon a wire, transmitting resonant vibrations,
indicate, by the different orders of vibration induced in them,
the rate of oscillations of the atomic constituents.

The phenomenon of rotation arises from the harmonic interaction of
the dominant and enharmonic elements of the flow: in other words,
the first and third, the third and ninth, etc.; those whose vibrations
bear the proportions to each other 33 1/3 : 100.

A practical example of rotation is a wheel in revolution on its
axis. This is force in its commercial or economic aspect. To accomplish
this result by molecular vibratory action, we must gain control of
the "negative attractive" or "enharmonic" current of the triple flow,
and the problem is then solved up to any limit of power.









APPENDIX I.


More than four centuries B.C., Leucippus and his disciple
Democritus--who expounded the atomic theory of his master--introduced
the doctrine of indivisible atoms, possessing within themselves a
principle of energy. Democritus, it is said, travelling in search of
wisdom, visited the Gymnosophists of India (who, by leading ascetic
lives, thought they could effect a reunion of the spiritual nature
of man, with the divine essence of Deity), and in so doing incurred
the risk of being deprived of the rites of sepulture by his "waste
of patrimony," there being a law in Abdera to that effect.

Anaxagoras, Heraclitus, Empedocles and other philosophers, had taught
that matter was indefinitely divisible, but Leucippus and Democritus
were the first to assert that these particles or atoms were originally
destitute of all qualities except form and energy; and they are,
therefore, called the originators of the atomic philosophy; which is
the basis of Keely's system of sympathetic physics.

Sympathetic physics teaches that light is an etheric evolution,
propagated by sympathetic conflict between celestial and terrestrial
outflows: solar tensions as against terrestrial condensation. True
luminosity cannot be induced in any other way. The high order of triple
vibration, that induces (progressively) molecular and intermolecular
separation, shows luminous results which, when thus mechanically
produced, are virtually on a small scale, a facsimile of nature's
operations. "All such experiments that I have made," writes Keely,
"resulted in vortex motion invariably, both sympathetically and
otherwise. Vortex motion follows nature in all corpuscular action.

"The undulatory theory, regarding light, I have not been able to
reconcile myself to, as anything but hypothetical. The conditions
which govern electro-magnetic radiation, disprove the theory in many
particulars. The vortex action induced in space, by the differential
conflict between the low and high tenuous, shows up results that
harmonize with the conditions accompanying the dissociation of
hydrogen and oxygen, in disintegrating water: viz., vortex action of
the highest order, but peripheral only. If it were not so, the ether
could not be held in suspension, neither in the molecular nor atomic
envelopes. Undulatory effects are produced by certain conditions of
sound; and by other conditions quite opposite effects. In organ pipes,
of a certain calibre, very sensitive waves occur at intervals; as
according to the character of the sound evolved; but on a combination
of resonators composed of brass tubes of more than nine in number, a
wave of sound, induced by certain chords passing over them, produces
high vortex action of the air enclosed in them. The vibration of
tuning forks induces alternate conditions of the air that surrounds
them, if in open atmosphere; but quite a different action presents
itself when the forks are exercised in resonating tubes, set to
thirds of the mass chord they represent. Then high vortex action is
the instant result. Vibrators cannot be set promiscuously in tubes,
and get such results, any more than a musician can render a musical
composition on the violin before tuning it. The conditions under which
light is evolved negatize whatever is associated with undulation, as
this word is understood by physicists. Aqueous undulations there are,
but not etheric undulations.

"The mighty forces latent in corpuscular matter, by which we
are surrounded, are all held in oscillating vortex action by the
Infinite Designer of workings hidden from us, until the time is ripe
for their disclosure. This latent, registered power interchanges
sympathetically with the celestial radiating streams, whereby light,
heat, electricity, magnetism and galvanic action are propagated in
their different orders, vitalizing all nature with their life-giving
principles. When this great scientific and religious truth has been
made known, and established by demonstration, all controversy as to
the source of energy will be for ever silenced. If I am the chosen
instrument to develop this knowledge, and to make known the conditions
which surround this pure truth, it is only that I may hand the key
to those who will use it to enter the doorway that opens into the
inaudible, and thus gain an insight into the now invisible region
of the operation of Nature's most powerful governing forces, in the
control, over terrestrial mind by celestial matter."









APPENDIX II.


The flow of electricity, as set down in Keely's system, is governed
by triple conditions: 1st. the dominant or high vibratory; 2nd. the
sub-dominant or low vibratory; 3rd. the harmonic or undulatory; in
combination one flow. Keely writes:--"When electrical experts can
construct a mechanical device whereby the low vibratory conditions
of the sub-dominant can be assimilated to the harmonic undulatory, by
thirds, they will be able to run their dynamos without any extraneous
appliances. An introductory impulse, on a certain order of vibration,
being all that would be required to give the sub-dominant a concordant
relation to the dominant; which would more effectually operate
the dynamo than any number of steam-engines; allowing the harmonic
stream to be the governor. This concordance, as towards the dominant,
would only excite its sympathetic action in a way that would divert
the ruling conditions of the two, without being submitted to the
destructive effects of the dominant current. I think many lives will be
lost before such a position is attained. Tesla has reached out almost
to the crest of the harmonic wave, leaving all electrical explorers
far behind him. It is only when such a condition is reached that the
true value of electrical lighting will be understood, and extraneous
power dispensed with; but, in my opinion, the present conditions for
transferring power will remain unaltered, in the use of electricity,
for generations.

"There is but one position to arrive at, that will redeem the many
failures of the past decade, in attempts to find an economizing medium
for commercial benefit in regard to power; and that position will be
attained when the polar sympathetic harness is completed, which will
give to the world the control of the polar forces."

In reply to the question, "What do you include in the polar
forces?" Keely answers, "Magnetism, electricity, and gravital sympathy;
each stream composed of three currents, or triune streams, which
make up the governing conditions of the controlling medium of the
universe: the infinite ninths that I am now endeavouring to graduate
to a sympathetic mechanical combination, will, if I succeed, close
my researches in sympathetic physics, and complete my system. These
sympathetic streams from celestial space, percussing on the dense
atmospheric environment of our earth, by their infinite velocities,
wrest from their atomic confinement the latent energies which we call
heat and light."

Question.--And where do these sympathetic conditions or streams of
force have their origin?

Answer.--'So God created man in His own image, in the image of God
created He him: male and female created He them,' Genesis i. 27. All
sympathetic conditions, or streams of force, are derived (if we dare
to make use of such a term in speaking of Deity) from the cerebral
convolutions of the Infinite: from the centre of the vast realm of
the compound luminous. From the celestial intermediate, the brain
of Deity, proceed the sympathetic flows that vitalize the polar
terrestrial forces."--Keely.









APPENDIX III.


Some faint idea of the infinite patience which the nature of Keely's
work requires may be gained by a knowledge of his process of converting
straight tubes into resonating rings. The tubes, in sections long
enough to form a semicircle, are passed between triple rollers,
which are set to give them a slight bend. They are then fastened to
a bed-plate, and a steel ball, the exact diameter of the interior of
the tube, is passed into it and forced through it. It is then passed
between the rollers again; which are set so as to slightly increase
the curvature, and again the interior of the tube is corrected by
the steel ball. This process is intermittently continued until the
semicircle is reached. Each process of bending and correcting requires
over two hours. Eighty bends are sometimes necessary for the completion
of the full circle. When the two semicircles, which form the circle,
are finished, they are placed in a steel mould and kept under hydraulic
pressure for two or three days, to correct any lateral deflection which
has taken place in bending them. They are then taken out of the moulds
and screwed rigidly to a face-plate, and joined together by a solder
of refined brass and silver. Next they are placed in a hot sand bath
of sufficient volume to require seventy-two hours to cool down. This
corrects the differentiation in their molecular groupings. They are
then submitted to a vibratory flow from the sympathetic negative
transmitter, until their intonation, by percussion, represents a pure
unmixed chord. The indicator, attached to the rings, denotes when
this condition is attained. They are then centred on a steel shaft
and rotated at the rate of 2000 revolutions per minute, surrounded
by the triple circuit ring. If the indicator, on the circuit ring,
should vary five degrees on a subdivision of 8000, the process
for correcting has to be repeated until the variations are reduced
to three; which is near enough to be considered perfect, inasmuch
as the circular resonator will then hold the neutral focalization
intact during the graduation of the full ninths, or triple triplets,
for sympathetic association to polar negative attraction.

Professor Dewar's recent brilliant achievements, in his line of
experimental research, not only have an important bearing upon one
of the greatest problems of modern science, but upon the science of
the future, as forecast by Keely.

Thermal radiation (and its negative, cold), the field of Professor
Dewar's researches, in Keely's system comes below the first atomic;
while celestial sympathetic radiation comes as the fountain head;
the compound inter-etheric, from which all aggregated matter springs,
the governing force of all aggregations. If there were no sympathetic
radiation from the great celestial centre, space would be void of
suspended, or floating, earthy and gaseous matter; consequently,
planetary worlds would never have had their birth and growth.

The suggestion of Professor Dewar, that an increase in low temperatures
might lead to the liquefying of hydrogen, is an admission that
hydrogen may be a compound; for no simple can ever be condensed into
a visible form. Keely's experimental researches have proved, to his
own satisfaction, that all known gases are compounds, inasmuch as,
when the intensity which accompanies sympathetic vibration, in his
process, is brought to bear upon any gas, it submits to dissociation.

The low temperatures with which Professor Dewar is dealing cause
molecular motion to cease; but the matter thus experimented upon is
not "dead matter" after this cessation of motion. Nothing can rob
matter of the latent energy which it contains; water is not robbed
of it by being frozen. The oxygen and hydrogen still occupy their
relative positions and conditions, without depreciation of their
vitality. Were water dead matter when frozen, its molecular activity
could not be restored by elevating its temperature. Matter can never
be robbed of its soul by any conditions of intensity of heat nor of
cold that could be brought to bear upon it.

When Professor Dewar uses the term "dead," in regard to matter,
it is purely in reference to the present orthodox theory of heat
energy. Take the analogy of a tuning fork or a bell; both are dead,
so far as sound is concerned, if they are not in vibration;--they
can be examined at rest or in motion, but science has not yet been
able to do the same thing with those general motions of a molecular
nature called heat. This is what Professor Dewar means by the term
"dead," knowing well that the molecular activity can return alike to
the fork or the molecule; only the energy must be supplied from some
other source. Such are the conditions with which orthodox science is
dealing, without acknowledging Deity as the fountain head of all force.

Not until Professor Dewar has witnessed the dissociation of hydrogen
will he be able to judge of the truth of the claim, that for nearly
twenty years Keely has been researching the nature of the product
of this dissociation: leading him to define and classify force and
energy very much as Grant Allen has done in his heretical work,
on this subject, published by Longmans & Co., in 1887.

James B. Alexander, in his book on "The Dynamic Theory," [32] makes
this distinction between Force and Energy:

"Energy is simply the motion of material bodies, large or small. Force
is the measure of energy, its degree or quantity.... The ether is
the universal agent of Energy, and the medium in all motion and
phenomena. It may with propriety be called the Soul of Things."









TO JOHN ERNST WORRELL KEELY.

"Palmam qui meruit ferat."


    Prized secret of aerial space
      Is thine! Not firmly caught
    Without long years of patient toil--
      Of more than giant thought.

    Unfaltering thy steadfast faith,
      In all its wise control,
    'Mid insults, taunts and sneers, enough
      To crush the bravest soul.

    Such the ordeal on the paths
      Of Stephenson, Daguerre,
    Of Fulton, Goodyear, Morse, to which
      They gave no heed nor care.

    Like them still fearless thou hast toiled
      With heart and will intense,
    Until discovery now brings
      Its grandest recompense.

    Displaced all powers known, before
      This force of latest birth;
    So great no mind can comprehend--
      No being born of earth.

    We hail thee, revolutionist
      From every point of view;
    For from the marvels thou hast wrought
      Science must start anew.

    Longed-for-attainment now is grasped,
      Thy cherished hopes to bless;
    And near at hand stands thy reward
      In laurel crowned success!

                Anonymous, in Cincinnati Illustrated News.









NOTES

[1] This electrician took the first box of stored electricity from
Paris to Sir William Thomson (now Lord Kelvin) in Edinburgh; and as
early as in 1884 he had convinced himself that Keely had grounds for
his claims as a discoverer of an unknown force in nature.

[2] The stretching of a catgut chord over a resonator set to the
chord of B flat is precisely the same in its resultant issue as the
steel wire set over the same resonator.

[3] In Latin "circulator" means "quack."

[4] Keely was obliged to return to his former method soon after,
for in overcoming one difficulty he found a more obstinate one to
contend with.

[5] A system of Pendulums tuned to swing the various ratios of the
musical scale, form a "Silent Harp" of extraordinary interest. This
"Silent Harp," D. C. Ramsay, of Glasgow, has shown to his students of
harmony for many a year. A pen, placed by means of a universal-jointed
arrangement between any two pendulums of this "Silent Harp," so
as to be moved by a blend of their various motions, writes, with
all the precision of gravitation, a portrait of the chord which two
corresponding strings of a sounding harp would utter to the ear. This
spiral writing is a Pendulograph; exquisite forms such as no human
hand could trace.

[6] By his advocacy of Keely's claims, as a discoverer, Major
Ricarde-Seaver had reason to fear that he would lose his election to
membership of the Athenæum Club in London; as he was notified by Sir
William Thomson (who had proposed him for membership in or about the
year 1873) that such would probably be the case. The members however,
rallied in force and, led by one of the Major's oldest friends Prince
Lucien Buonaparte, he was elected by an overwhelming majority.

[7] The Philadelphia Inquirer of March 30, 1890, copied this article
from Anglo-Austria, headed "The Keely Motor: some observations on
the invention from a foreign publication."

[8] From the Evening Telegraph, Philadelphia, April 13th, 1890: headed
"Professor Leidy's Adherence to the New Force."

[9] From Lippincott's Magazine, July, 1890. Edited by J. M. Stoddart.

[10] Quotation from one of Keely's letters in 1885.

[11] The steam engines of the world now represent the work of
1,000,000,000 men, or more than double the working population
of the earth, whose total population is about 1,500,000,000
inhabitants. Steam has accordingly trebled man's working power,
enabling him to economize his physical strength while attending to
his intellectual development. Our race, which seems to have reached
its limit of physical development, is ready to enter upon the foretold
stage of psychical evolution.

[12] Carried out in the taking of the forts one after another during
our civil war, which other generals had been unable to do.

[13] The paper which Mr. J. F. Nisbet was commissioned to write,
in behalf of this discoverer's claims on the world for patience,
while pursuing his researches (and paid in advance for writing),
illustrates the truth of this assertion. Mr. Nisbet's essay, entitled
"The Present Aspect of the Molecular Theory, or Mr. Keely's Relations
to Modern Science," closes with these lines:--"If science looks askance
at Mr. Keely's professions, therefore, it has its reasons for doing
so. These reasons, as I have shown, are not mere prejudices. In more
than one line of inquiry they have, what seems to be, a substantial
basis of fact, which must be explained away before Mr. Keely's theory
of 'etheric force' can commend itself to the mind of the impartial
observer."

Fortunately, for the interests of science and of humanity, the
threatened prosecution of Mr. Keely (for obtaining money under false
pretences) was checkmated by Provost Pepper's action, early in January,
before Mr. Nisbet wrote to America that he could not commence his paper
until he had received more information; sending a series of questions
to be answered by Mr. Keely. The superficial character of the essay
will be seen, when printed, as well as that Mr. Nisbet promised more
than he was able to perform when he accepted the cheque in order to
enable him to devote time to the writing of a paper, for an influential
quarter, which it was hoped would enlist public sympathy in Keely's
behalf. But that power which is mightier than the sword, in putting
down error and injustice, has hitherto turned its weapons against Keely
(with some rare exceptions) as Mr. Nisbet did in his essay.--C.J.M.

[14] This is effected by polarization and depolarization, and the
rotation of a non-magnetic needle by molecular differentiation:
both needles revolving about 120 times in a second.

[15] Electricians are now admitting that, in electric currents the
energy does not flow through, or along the wire, itself; but is
actually transmitted by the ether vibrations outside of the wire,
just as in Keely's experiments, running his musical sphere with a
fine "thread" of silk, the energy is not transmitted through the
sewing-silk, which acts only as the medium that makes the transfer
of energy in this way possible; though not itself transferring it.

[16] See "Jacob Böhme, his Life and Teaching; or, Studies in
Theosophy," by Dr. Hans Lassen Martensen.

[17] The apparent comprehension of Keely's discovery by Mr. Nisbet,
was what led the compiler of this work to apply to him for help, in
making known the nature of the researches which Keely is pursuing,
at the time that Keely was threatened with imprisonment, in 1890,
for obtaining money under false pretences.

[18] Mr. Keely explains the energy he is handling to be a condition of
sympathetic vibration, associated with the Polar stream of our planet,
positively and negatively.

[19] Mr. B. (not Browne) was afterwards discovered to be an inventing
journalist, who had been "disappointed of gain," and whose statements
concerning Dr. Leidy had to be corrected.

[20] Professor Dewar's visit to Keely's workshop has been delayed
until he goes to America as Royal Commissioner this year.

[21] One of Keely's researching instruments.

[22] The universal physical law of molecular vibration is finely
illustrated in the carbon pencils of the electric arc light used
in some of the largest lighthouses. The molecular stir set up in
the armatures of the dynamo machines by rapid magnetization and
demagnetization is transmitted to the carbon points of the lantern,
and reappears as a distinct musical tone.

[23] It will be a matter of interest to those who have given attention
to the laws of heredity to know that John Ernst Worrell Keely is a
grandson of a German composer, Ernst, who led the Baden-Baden orchestra
in his day; and that Keely's experiments in vibration had their origin
in his knowledge of music, and were commenced in his childhood.

[24] See "Untrodden Ground in Astronomy and Geology."

[25] There are some paradoxical conditions shown up in the
disintegration of water which require further research to get at the
solution. In disintegrating, say five drops of water in a steel bulb
of two cubic inches volume of atmospheric air, the force generated
by the triple order of vibration, when weighed on a lever, shows ten
tons pressure per square inch. In using the same number of drops in
the same bulb, and associating it with a tube of two hundred cubic
inches, the result is the same in the force developed per square inch
as is shown on the volume of the one of two cubic inches. The solution
of this problem seems to rest in the fact that the gaseous element
thereby induced even in minute quantities, must possess the property
of exciting atmospheric air to that extent as to force it to give up,
to quite an extended degree, the latent energy that is held in its
corpuscular depths. This introductory medium seems to act on the air in
the same manner that a spark of fire acts on a magazine of gunpowder.

[26] The ether is the capsule to the molecules and atoms all the way
up to the perfect stream of structural ether.

[27] A volume of pure ether equivalent to the atmospheric displacement
caused by our Earth, could be compressed and absorbed in a volume of
one cubic inch, by the velocity and sympathetic power of the etheric
triple flows, focalizing toward the neutral centre, at the birth of
the molecule.

[28] This is what Keely terms "sympathetic outreach."

[29] A facetious journalist commenting on this paper reprints its
last paragraphs as "the only part that is perfectly lucid to the
lay mind," continuing:--"We trust Keely will continue to bombard
his corpuscles until he accomplishes it. And when he does, all other
scientific men of this or any other age will sink by comparison into
insignificance. Let no man say he cannot do it. Mr. Keely, the world
is still waiting for you."

[30] Platina wires the thickness of a fine hair associated with each
of the nine nodal beads, and concentrated towards a general centre
of localization, attaching the other end of the wires to the focal
centre, will determine, by the magnetic conduction, the number of
corpuscular oscillations per second induced by a thought, either
positive or negative, in the central centres. These are the only
conditions--those of magnetic conduction--whereby the evolution of
a thought can be computed in regard to its force under propagation,
as against the amount of latent energy set free to act as induced by
such thought on the physical organism.

[31] It is always interesting to trace the germ of a scientific idea,
hypothesis, or established truth. A writer in La Lumière Electrique,
vol. xlv., has drawn attention to the fact that Descartes gave a
theory of magnetism, in 1656, which resembles the modern conception
of lines of stress in the ether. He considers that all magnets
are traversed by a subtle fluid which flows out at the North Pole,
and curving round, in the ether, re-enters at the South Pole, thus
completing the circuit. Some of the greatest doctrines of science
have recurred again and again, like the motif of a piece of music,
until they finally assume a definite shape and become a working part
of human progress; as will be seen when Keely's system is recognized.

[32] "The Dynamic Theory of Life and Mind." The Housekeeper Press,
Minneapolis, Minn.









