CHAPTER XI.

VIBRATORY SYMPATHETIC POLAR FLOWS.--KEELY'S CONTRIBUTIONS TO SCIENCE.

                "Evermore brave feet in all the ages
                  Climb the heights that hide the coming day,--
                Evermore they cry, these seers and sages,
                  From their cloud, 'Our doctrines make no way.'
                All too high they stand above the nations,
                  Shouting forth their trumpet-calls sublime,
                Shouting downwards their interpretations
                  Of the wondrous secrets born of Time."

        ... Who can say what secrets the now unread 'fairy tales of
        science' may have to tell to those who live in this later
        age?--The Globe.


The question has often been asked, "How much energy does Keely
expend in the production of the force he is handling?" or again,
"Can Keely show that a foot-pound of vibratory sympathy can be more
easily developed from the resources of nature, than a foot-pound of
good honest work?"

In the economy of nature profit and loss must balance in mechanical
conditions; but Keely is not dealing with mechanical physics. There
is an immense difference between vibratory physics, in which field
Keely is researching, and mechanical physics. The consumption of coal
to expand water for the production of steam power, in the operation of
engines, cannot be compared to a force which is yielded in sympathetic
vibration or by sympathetic flows. In mechanical physics, no matter
what the nature of the force may be, its production must necessarily
be accompanied by a corresponding expenditure of force in some form
or other. The amount of force covered by a human volition cannot be
measured, yet it produces the wonderful effects that are exhibited
on the human frame in its overt actions. Something like this is the
difference between sympathetical and mechanical force. The force of
will cannot be multiplied by mechanical means, making it give pound
for pound. This would annihilate both the mental and the physical,
were it possible.

In his researches, Mr. Keely, who is dealing entirely with VIBRATORY
SYMPATHETIC and POLAR flows, is hopeless in regard to convincing
the scientific world of the value of his discoveries until he has
compelled its attention by commercial success. To the question,
"What does the supply cost in dollars and cents, per horse-power
developed?" he answers, "It costs nothing more after the machinery
is made, than the vibratory concordant impulse which associates it
with the polar stream." The twanging of a taut string, the agitation
of a tuning-fork, as associated with the resonating condition of
the sympathetic transmitter, is all that is necessary to induce the
connective link, and to produce this "costless motive power." As
long as the transmitter is in sympathy with the sympathetic current
of the triune polar stream, the action of the sympathetic instrument
or engine continues.

Again, mechanical conservation of energy is one thing; sympathetic
conservation is another, and we cannot expect Keely will reveal what
he has discovered concerning the forces that he is dealing with
until he has himself acquired that full knowledge of their action
which will protect the rights of those who are interested in the
"dollars and cents" part of "the enterprise."

Macvicar said that "if extreme vicissitudes of belief on the part of
men of science are evidences of uncertainty, it may be affirmed that
of all kinds of knowledge none is more uncertain than science;" but
slow as mankind is in the progress of discoveries bearing upon unknown
laws of nature, men of science are still slower in recognizing truths
after they have been discovered and demonstrated. Two centuries
elapsed between the discoveries of Pythagoras and their revival
by Copernicus. Tycho Brahe opposed the Pythagorean system until
his death; Galileo, adopting it and demonstrating it in all its
purity, suffered for his support of it at the hands of bigots. And so
history now repeats itself. Were it possible to convince scientists
en masse of the grandeur of Keely's work, they would protect him
from the interruptions and law-suits which have so retarded his
progress that now it looks very much as though he would never be
permitted to complete his system. The world is full of inventors,
but there is but one man able to unfold, to this age and generation,
the wonderful mysteries attendant upon vibratory physics, while there
are thousands who, when a mastery of the principle has been gained,
can invent machinery to apply it to commercial uses. Macvicar asks,
"Who that goes so far as to make a question of all, or almost all, the
data of common sense can legitimately refrain from making it a question
whether the laws of phenomena which men of science discover may not
be laws of thinking, merely imposed upon nature as her laws? Nay, who
can refrain from admitting with Kant that they can be nothing more?"

As a suggestion to those interested in psychological researches I
will mention that Keely has copied nature in all his instruments
from the Vibrophone, which is fashioned after the human ear, up
to the Disintegrator, in which the neutral centre represents the
human heart. With the system which Keely is unfolding to us we may
well say, with Buckle, "A vast and splendid career lies before us,
which it will take many ages to complete. As we surpass our fathers,
so will our children surpass us. Waging against the forces of nature
what has too often been a precarious, unsteady, and unskilled warfare,
we have never yet put forth the whole of our strength, and have never
united all our faculties against our common foe. We have, therefore,
been often worsted, and have sustained many and grievous reverses. But,
even so, such is the elasticity of the human mind, such is the energy
of that immortal and godlike principle which lives within us, that we
are baffled without being discouraged, our very defeats quickening our
resources, and we may hope that our descendants, benefiting by our
failures, will profit by our example, and that for them is reserved
that last and decisive stage of the great conflict between man and
nature, in which advancing from success to success, fresh trophies
will be constantly won; every struggle issuing in a conquest, and
every battle ending in a victory."

The force discovered by Keely--no, the force revealed to him--will rule
the earth with an influence mighty in the interests of humanity. The
completion of his system for science and commerce will usher in the
dawning of a new era.

While our leading men of science are everywhere occupying themselves
with the mysteries of electro-magnetic radiation, with the action
of the ether, with the structure of the molecule, the instruments
with which they are researching are, in comparison with those which
Keely has invented, for his researches, like the rudest implements
of the savage, compared to those developed by modern civilization. A
discussion has recently been carried on in one of our Reviews, as to
whether the energy which feeds the magnet comes from the atmosphere,
from gravity, from solar rays, or from earth currents. Nothing is more
simple than Keely's explanation, as proved by his demonstrations. The
energy of the magnet comes from the polar stream; and, though the
introductory impulse is so slight that it cannot be weighed any
more than can the flow of the mind, yet, if kept up for years, it
could not be computed by billions of tons in its effect. The magnet
that lifts pounds to-day, if the load of the armature is gradually
increased day by day, will lift double the amount in time. Whence
comes this energy? Keely teaches that it comes from sympathetic
association with one of the triune currents of the polar stream,
and that its energy will increase as long as sympathetic flows last,
which is through eternity.

The physicist tells you that "you cannot make something out of
nothing;" that "in the economy of nature profit and loss must balance;"
that "no matter what the nature of the force may be, its production
must necessarily be accompanied by a corresponding expenditure of
force in some form or other," etc., etc. But, in the prodigality of
nature, this energy flows, without measure and without price, from the
great storehouse of the Infinite Will. From the sympathetic portion
of the etheric field, all visible aggregations of matter emanate,
and on the same order that molecular masses of all living organisms
are vitalized by the sympathetic flow from the brain.

"Our most learned men," said Buckle, "know not what magnetism is,
nor electricity, nor gravity, nor cohesion, nor force." Keely shows
us, by mechanical means, what magnetism is. By neutralizing or
overcoming gravity, he proves to us that he understands its nature;
electricity he declares to be a certain form of atomic vibration;
and, in the disintegration of quartz, he demonstrates that cohesive
force, like gravity, is an ever-existing force, holding together all
molecular masses by the infinite velocity of its vibrations; which,
were these vibrations to cease for one instant, would fall apart,
molecules and atoms, and return to the ether in which they originated.




KEELY'S CONTRIBUTIONS TO SCIENCE. [9]

        An infinitely subtle substance, out of which all other
        substances are constituted, in varying forms, passes back again
        into simplicity. The same principle underlies the harmonies
        of music and the motion of heavenly bodies.--Pythagoras.

        One of the most arduous problems is that of energies
        acting at distances. Are they real? Of all those that appear
        incontrollable, one only remains, gravitation. Will it escape
        us also? The laws of its action incline us to think so. The
        nature of electricity is another problem which recalls us
        to the condition of electric and magnetic forces through
        space. Behind this question arises the most important problem
        of all, that of the nature and properties of the substance
        which fills space,--the ether,--its structure, its motion, its
        limits, if it possesses any. We find this subject of research,
        day by day, predominating over all others. It seems as though
        a knowledge of ether should not only reveal to us the nature of
        that imponderable substance, but will unveil to us the essence
        of matter itself and of its inherent properties, weight and
        inertia. Soon the question set by modern physics will be,
        "Are not all things due to conditions of ether?" That is
        the ultimate end of our science; these are the most exalted
        summits to which we can hope to attain. Shall we ever reach
        them? Will it be soon? We cannot answer.--Prof. Henri Hertz,
        in La Revue Scientifique, October 26, 1888.


In the long delay attendant upon the application to mechanics of the
unknown force which John Ernest Worrell Keely has discovered in the
field of vibration, the question is often heard, "What has Keely
done?" with the remark, "He has never done anything; he is always
promising to do something, but he never keeps his promises."

Let us see what Keely, in his researches, has done for science;
although, as yet, he has done nothing for commerce.

We are quick to forget the experiences of history, which show what
a length of time has invariably elapsed between the discovery of a
new force and its use in mechanics. Watt commenced his experiments
on the elastic force of steam in 1764, obtaining about forty pounds
total pressure per square inch. (It has been stated that it was thirty
years before he succeeded in perfecting his safety-valve, or governor,
which made it possible to use steam without running great risks.) Fifty
years later, in 1814, the first steam locomotive was built; but it was
not until 1825 that the locomotive was used for traffic--travelling
at a speed of from six to eight miles in an hour. Keely commenced his
experiments with ether in the winter of 1872-73, showing a pressure of
two thousand pounds per square inch. It does not look now as though
half a century would elapse before Keely's discovery will supersede
steam in travel and traffic. In experimenting with ether, he has shown,
from time to time, since 1873, a pressure of from twenty thousand to
thirty-two thousand pounds per square inch; but he was occupied many
years in his researches before he obtained sufficient control over
the ether to prevent the explosions which made wrecks of his machines,
bursting iron and steel pipes, twelve inches in circumference, as if
they were straws. He has now arrived at a stage in his experimental
research in which he can, without danger of explosions, exhibit to
scientists such manifestations of an unknown force as to place him
before the world where he would have stood many years ago, had it not
been for the calumnious attacks of those men of science who found it
easier to denounce him than to account for the phenomena which they
witnessed in his workshop.

Professor Ira Remsen, in his "Theoretical Chemistry," writes, "As
regards the cause of the phenomena of the motion of the heavenly
bodies, we have no conception at the present day. It is true we say
that these phenomena are caused by the attraction of gravitation;
but, after all, we do not know what pulls these bodies together."

Let us see what Keely knows on this subject?

1st. After a lifetime of research into the laws governing vibrations,
which develop this force, Keely is able to demonstrate partial control
of the power that he has discovered,--a power which he believes
to be the governing medium of the universe, throughout animate and
inanimate nature, controlling the advance and recession of the solar
and planetary masses, and reigning in the mineral, the vegetable,
and the animal kingdom, according to the laws that rule its action in
each, as undeviatingly as it governs the motions of the earth itself,
and of all the heavenly bodies in space.

Keely calls this power, which he is endeavouring to apply in mechanics
for the benefit of mankind, "sympathetic negative attraction,"--it
being necessary to use the word "attraction," as no other word has
yet been coined to take its place.

2nd. He has determined and written out a system of the vibratory
conditions governing the aggregation of all molecular masses, as to
their relation sympathetically one to the other, stating the conditions
to be brought about in order to induce antagonism or repellent action,
disintegration, etc.; but he has not yet been able to control the
operation of his Disintegrator so as to use it with safety to the
operator, for mining purposes, etc.

3rd. He has proved by demonstration that the subdivision of matter
under different orders of progressive vibration evolves by such
subdivision entirely new and distinct elements, too multiple
to enumerate. He has systematized the proper vibratory chords,
progressively, from the introductory molecular to the inter-etheric,
embracing seven distinct orders of triple subdivision. He has
elaborated a system of inducing sympathetic negative attraction on
metallic masses, with great range of motion, and instant depolarization
of the same, by vibratory change of their neutral centres. Keely
controls the transmission of these sympathetic streams by a medium
of high molecular density, viz., drawn wires of differentiated
metals, gold, silver, platinum, German silver, etc. In some recent
experiments he took apart, for inspection of its interior construction,
the instrument which he has invented for the production of the force,
cutting the wires with which he had operated in sympathetic attraction
and propulsion, and distributing the fragments to those who were
present, among whom was Professor Leidy, to whom the Geological
Society of London has awarded the Lyell Medal, and the Academy of
Sciences of France the Cuvier Prize.

4th. Keely has discovered that all sympathetic streams, cerebellic,
gravital, magnetic, and electric, are composed of triple flows; this
fact governing all the terrestrial and celestial orders of positive
and negative radiation. In gravity it would be more correct to speak
of triple connective links, as there is no flow of gravity.

5th. Keely has discovered and was the first to demonstrate that
electricity has never been handled; that it is in principle as
material as is water; that it is not merely a force or a form of
energy,--that it is matter; and that what we call electricity,
and have diverted for commercial use in electric lighting, is but
one of the triune currents, harmonic, enharmonic, and diatonic,
which are united in pure electricity; that the enharmonic current
seems to be sympathetically and mysteriously associated with the
dominant current; and that the dominant current can no more be brought
under control than can the lightning itself. The diversion of the
dominant current would mean destruction to any mechanical medium
used for that purpose, and death to the operator. The intense heat
evolved by the electric stream Keely attributes to the velocity of
the triple subdivision at the point of dispersion, as each triple
seeks its medium of affinity. Sudden unition induces the same effect;
but demonstration shows that the concentration of this triple force
is as free of percussion as is the breath of an infant against the
atmosphere; for the three currents flow together as in one stream, in
the mildest sympathetic way, while their discharge after concentration
is, in comparison to their accumulation, as the tornado's force to
the waft of the butterfly's wing. The enharmonic current of this
triple stream, Keely thinks, carries with it the power of propulsion
that induces disturbance of negative equilibrium; which disturbance
is essential to the co-ordination of its flow, in completing the,
triune stream of electricity. When this fluid is discharged from
the clouds, each triplet or third seeks its terrestrial concordant,
there to remain until that supreme law which governs disturbance
of equilibrium again induces sympathetic concordant concentration,
continuing to pass through its evolutions, positively and negatively,
until the solar forces are expended.

"My researches have proved to me," writes Keely, "the subtle and
pure conditions of the power of negative attraction and positive
propulsion."

6th. These same researches have enabled Keely to pronounce
definitely as to the nature of what is recognized as gravity, an
ever-existing, eternal force, coexistent with the compound etheric,
or high luminous, entering into all forms of aggregated matter at
their birth. Keely thinks that gravity is the source from which all
visible matter springs, and that the sympathetic or neutral centre of
such aggregation becomes at birth a connective concordant link to all
neutral centres that have preceded it and to all that may succeed it,
and that disturbance of equilibrium, like gravity, is an ever-existing
force. His researches in the vibratory subdivision of matter have
revealed to him some of the mysteries of the hidden sympathetic
world, teaching that "the visible world," as Coleridge wrote, "is
but the clothing of the invisible world;" that "true philosophy,"
as Professor George Bush said, "when reached will conduct us into the
realm of the spiritual as the true region of causes, disclosing new
and unthought-of relations between the world of matter and of mind."

Professor Thurston writes, in the January number of the North American
Review, "We are continually expecting to see a limit reached by the
discoverer, and by the inventor, and are as constantly finding that
we are simply on a frontier which is being steadily pushed further
and further out into the infinite unknown. The border-land is still
ahead of us, constantly enlarging as we move on. The more we gain,
the more is seen to be achievable."

All planetary masses Keely calls terrestrial, showing in his writings
that the beauty of the celestial concordant chords of sympathy
forming the harmonious connective link, in what may be denominated
"the music of the spheres," is seen in the alternate oscillating range
of motion between the planetary systems; for at a certain range of the
greater distance, harmony is established, and the attractive forces
are brought into action, under the command, "Thus far shalt thou go,
and no further." Then in the return towards the neutral centres, when
at the nearest point to each other, the opposite or propulsive force
is brought into play; and "thus near shalt thou come, and no nearer;"
advancing and receding under the celestial law of etheric compensation
and restoration, as originally established by the Great Creator.

7th. Keely has constructed instruments by which he is endeavouring
to determine the nature of the triune action of the polar terrestrial
stream, or envelope, as regards its vibratory philosophy. He is seeking
to demonstrate its sympathetic association with the celestial stream,
or luminiferous track,--the compound etheric field, from which all
planetary masses spring. He considers the electric stream to be one
of the triune sympathetic streams which help to build up, in their
order of triple concentration, the high vitality of the polar stream,
or, more correctly, the magnetic-electric terrestrial envelope,
without which all living organisms would cease to exist. He classes
the cohesive force of molecular masses as the dominant order of the
electric stream, the molecule owing its negative attractive quality
to the magnetic element.

In Keely's beautiful experiments in antagonizing the polar stream,
recently given before men of science, he has copied in his instruments
the conditions which Nature has established in all her terrestrial
ranges,--conditions necessary in order to equate a state of sympathetic
disturbance for the revitalization of what is continually being
displaced by negative dispersion. These mechanical conditions are
principally differential vibratory settings on molecular aggregations
of the metallic masses of gold, silver, and platinum.

8th. He has discovered that the range of molecular motion in all
quiescent masses is equal to one-third of their diameters, and that
all extended range is induced by sound-force, set at chords of the
thirds which are antagonistic to the combined chords of the mass of
the neutral centres that they represent, no two masses being alike,
and that at a certain increased range of molecular motion, induced by
the proper acoustic force, the molecules become repellent, and that
when the sympathetic centres are influenced by a vibration concordant
to the one that exists in themselves, the molecules become attractive;
that the repellent condition seems to take place at a distance of about
ten of the diameters of the molecules, this distance representing the
neutral line of their attractive force, or the dividing line between
the attractive and the repellent. Beyond this line, perfect triple
separation takes place; inside of it, perfect attractive association
is the result.

The force which Mr. Keely uses in running machinery is the sympathetic
attractive,--the force which, according to his theories, draws the
planets together; while in his system of aërial navigation, should
he live to perfect it, he will use a negation of this force,--the
same that regulates the motion of the planets in their recession
from each other. It is the sympathetic attractive force which keeps
the planets subservient to a certain range of motion, between their
oscillations. If this condition were broken up, the rotation of planets
would cease; if destroyed at a given point of recession, all planets
would become wanderers, like the comets; if destroyed at another given
point, assimilation would take place, as two bullets fired through
the air, meeting, would fuse into one mass. Nature has established her
sympathetic concordants from the birth of the neutral centres of the
planets, in a manner known only to the Infinite One. This is gravity.

"The music of the spheres" is a reality. "The finer the power
the greater the force." Thus, the inaudible atomic, etheric, and
inter-etheric sounds, which control and direct the harmony of the
movements of the celestial universe, are the most powerful of all
sounds. If our faculty of hearing were a hundred billions of times
intensified, we might be able to hear the streams of light as plainly
as we now hear the sighings of the wind.

Again, to answer the often-asked question, "What has Keely done?"

9th. He has broken joints of his fingers and thumbs, he has broken
his ribs, he has had his left side paralyzed for weeks, he has lost
the sight of one eye for months, in his hand-to-hand fight with the
genii that he has encountered, and cannot completely subdue until
he has effected the condition of polarization and depolarization
which is necessary for the control of rotation and reversions in his
commercial engine. An illness of nine weeks followed his abandonment
of water in disintegrating; and he was obliged to return to its use,
to avoid the percussion that was induced by the rapid vibration of the
atmospheric air. To illustrate: if a bullet is fired at a man through
a vessel of water a foot thick, the bullet is flattened out without
injuring the man; while if nothing intervenes the man is killed.

The question naturally arises, "Are not the forces with which Keely
is dealing of too subtle a nature to be harnessed to do the daily
work of the world?" Even were it so, the fascination attendant upon
his researches would prevent him from abandoning them; but his faith
in his ability to accomplish all that he has undertaken to do for the
Keely Motor Company and for others is equalled only by the persistent
energy which, in the face of gigantic obstacles, of cruel obloquy, of
baffled endeavours, leads him to persevere to the end. He believes that
the successful result is as positive as are the continued revolutions
of our globe, under the great law which governs all Nature's highest,
grandest, and most sensitive operations. And when has Nature ever
revealed a force save to permit man to subjugate it for the progress
of our race?

Another question often heard is, "Why does not Keely make known his
discoveries?"

10th. He has written three treatises to explain his system, the titles
of which are as follows:--

I. Theoretical Exposé or Philosophical Analysis of Vibro-Molecular,
Vibro-Atomic, and Sympathetic Vibro-Etheric Forces, as applied to
induce Mechanical Rotation by Negative Sympathetic Attraction.

II. Explanatory Analysis of Vibro-Acoustic Mechanism in all its
Different Groupings or Combinations to induce Propulsion and Attraction
(sympathetically) by the Power of Sound-Force; as also the Different
Conditions of Intensity, both Positive and Negative, on the Progressive
Octaves to Ozonic Liberation and Luminosity.

III. The Determining Principle of Matter, or the Connective Link
between the Finite and the Infinite, progressively considered from the
Crude Molecular to the Compound Inter-Etheric; showing the Control of
Spirit over Matter in all the Variations of Mass-Chords and Molecular
Groupings, both Physical and Mechanical.

If these treatises were read from the first page to the last, by men
of science, they would not at present be any better understood than
were Gilbert's writings in his age, author of "De Magnete."

Newton was indebted to Gilbert for his discovery of the so-called law
of gravitation. Keely defines gravity as transmittive inter-etheric
force under immense etheric vibration, and electricity as a certain
form of atomic vibration. When Gilbert, court-physician to Queen
Elizabeth, announced his discovery of electricity, he was asked by
his compeers of what use it was. No one dreamed then of it as a motive
power. He replied, "Of what use is a baby? It may develop into a man
or a woman, and, although we cannot make any use of electricity now,
the world may in time find out uses for it." Just as little understood
would Keely's writings be now on sympathetic negative attraction as
were Gilbert's writings then on electricity and magnetism. Men found
no sense in the words "electric" and "electricity," although derived
from the Greek root for amber. The same fault is found with Keely
for coining new words which no one understands.

"Every branch of science, every doctrine of extensive application,
has had its alphabet, its rudiments, its grammar: at each fresh step in
the path of discovery the researcher has had to work out by experiment
the unknown laws which govern his discovery." To attempt to introduce
"the world"--even scientists--to any new system without previous
preparation would be like giving a Persian book to a man to read who
knew nothing of the language. As has been said, we do not expect a
complicated problem in the higher mathematical analysis to be solved
by one who is ignorant of the elementary rules of arithmetic. Just as
useless would it be to expect every scientist to comprehend the laws
of etheric physics and etheric philosophy after having witnessed
Keely's experiments. The requirement of every demonstration is
that it shall give sufficient proof of the truth that it asserts. A
demonstration which does less than this cannot be relied upon, and no
demonstration ever made has done more. The success of a demonstration
is in proportion as the means applied are adequate or inadequate. As
different principles exist in various forms of matter, it is quite
impossible to demonstrate every truth by the same means or the same
principles. It is only the prejudice of ignorance which exacts that
every demonstration shall be given by a prescribed canon of science;
as if the science of the present were thoroughly conversant with
every principle that exists in nature. Yet physicists exact this,
though they must know its inadequacy.

Mr. Keely does not expect more from scientists than that they should
withhold their defamatory opinions of him until they have witnessed
his demonstrations and acquainted themselves with his theories. Yet,
notwithstanding Professor Crooke's psychical researches and Professor
Rücker's experiments in molecular vibration, demonstrating that
molecules seem to have a "mental attribute, a sort of expression of
free will," physicists still look upon the human organism as little
more than a machine, taking small interest in experiments which evince
the dominion of spirit over matter. Keely's researches in this province
have shown him that it is neither the electric nor the magnetic flow,
but the etheric, which sends its current along our nerves; that the
electric and magnetic flows bear but an infinitely small ratio to the
etheric flow, both as to velocity and tenuity; that true coincidents
can exist between any mediums,--cartilage to steel, steel to wood,
wood to stone, and stone to cartilage; that the same influence,
sympathetic association, which governs all the solids holds the same
control over all liquids, and again from liquid to solid, embracing
the three kingdoms, animal, vegetable, and mineral; that the action of
mind over matter thoroughly substantiates the incontrovertible laws of
sympathetic etheric influence; that the only true medium which exists
in nature is the sympathetic flow emanating from the normal human
brain, governing correctly the graduating and setting-up of the true
sympathetic vibratory positions in machinery, necessary to commercial
success; that these flows come in on the order of the fifth and seventh
positions of atomic subdivision, compound inter-etheric sympathy a
resultant of this subdivision; that if metallic mediums are brought
under the influence of this sympathetic flow they become organisms
which carry the same influence with them that the human brain does
over living physical positions, and that the composition of metallic
and that of physical organisms are one and the same thing, although
the molecular arrangement of the physical may be entirely opposite
to the metallic on their aggregations; that the harmonious chords
induced by sympathetic positive vibration permeate the molecules in
each, notwithstanding, and bring about the perfect equation of any
differentiation that may exist--in one the same as in the other--and
thus they become one and the same medium for sympathetic transmission;
that the etheric, or will-flow, is of a tenuity coincident to the
condition governing the seventh subdivision of matter, a condition
of subtlety that readily and instantaneously permeates all forms of
aggregated matter, from air to solid hammered steel, the velocity
of the permeation being the same with the one as with the other;
that the tenuity of the etheric flow is so infinitely fine that a
magnifying glass, the power of which would enlarge the smallest grain
of sand to the size of the sun, brought to bear upon it would not
make its structure visible to us; and that, light traversing space
at the speed of two hundred thousand miles per second, a distance
requiring light a thousand centuries to reach would be traversed by
the etheric flow in an indefinite fragment of a second.

11th. Keely has given such proof of genius as should bring all
scientists who approach him into that attitude of mind which would
lead them to receive without prejudice the evidence of the truth of
the claims he offers.

Genius has been defined as an extraordinary power of synthetic
creation. Another definition of the man of genius is, the man who
unceasingly cultivates and perfects such great natural aptitudes
and facilities as he has been endowed with at his birth. No man has
ever lived on this earth who, according to these qualifications,
so deserved to be known and acknowledged as a man of genius as John
Worrell Keely. History will determine whether he is a man of genius or
"a charlatan," as some scientists still persist in calling him. It is
easier, as has been said, to accuse a man of fraud than to account
for unknown phenomena. A system of doctrine can be legitimately
refuted only upon its own principles, viz., by disproving its facts
and invalidating the principles deduced from them. Abercrombie said
that the necessary caution which preserves us from credulity should
not be allowed to engender scepticism,--that both of these extremes
are equally unworthy of a mind which devotes itself with candour to
the discovery of truth.

"We must not decide that a thing is impossible," says Lebrun, "because
of the common belief that it cannot exist; for the opinion of man
cannot set limits to the operations of Nature, nor to the power of
the Almighty. He who attempts to hold up to contempt a scientific
subject of which he is profoundly ignorant has but small pretensions
to the character of a philosopher." Galileo said, after pronouncing
his abjuration, "E pur si muove" ("But it does move"). What signified
to him the opinion of men, when Nature confirmed his discovery? Of
what value were their prejudices or their wisdom in opposition to her
immutable laws? Kedzie, speculating upon the nature of force, writes,
"Molecules and masses act precisely as they are acted on; they are
governed by the iron instead of the golden rule. They do unto others as
others have done unto them. Whence comes this energy? Not from atoms,
but from the Creator, in the beginning."

The Duke of Argyll says, "We know nothing of the ultimate seat of
force. Science, in the modern doctrine of the conservation of energy
and the convertibility of forces, is already getting something like
a firm hold of the idea that all kinds of forces are but forms
or manifestations of some one central force, arising from one
fountain-head of power."

12th. Keely's researches have taught him that this one fountain-head
is none other than the omnipotent and all-pervading Will-Force
of the Almighty, which creates, upholds, guides, and governs the
universe. "The whole world-process,"  says Von Hartmann, "in its
context is only a logical process; but in its existence it is a
continued act of will."

Lilly says, "This is what physical law means. Reason and will are
inseparably united in the universe as they are in idea. If we will
anything, it is for some reason. In contemplating the structure
of the universe, we cannot resist the conclusion that the whole is
founded upon a distinct idea." Keely holds to the harmony of this
"distinct idea" throughout creation, and he demonstrates by vibratory
machinery that all forces are indestructible, immaterial, homogeneous
entities, having their origin and unity in one great intelligent
personal will-force.

Were it not for this will-force eternally flowing into all created
forms, the entire universe would disappear. As the workman employs
his instrument to accomplish his designs, so Omnipotence may be said,
in all reverence, to regulate His systems of worlds through and by
the vibratory ether which He has created to serve His purpose. Well
did Hertz reason when he wrote, "Soon the question set by modern
physics will be, 'Are not all things due to conditions of ether?'" He
had never heard of the toiler on this side of the Atlantic, when,
after his own discovery, in 1888, that ether was imprisoned and
used in every electro-magnetic engine, without this fact having
been even so much as suspected by a single scientist, he wrote, in
the Revue Scientifique, "We have gained a greater height than ever,
and we possess a solid basis which will facilitate the ascent, in the
research of new truths. The road which is open to us is not too steep,
and the next resting-point does not appear inaccessible. Moreover,
the crowds of researchers are full of ardour. We must therefore welcome
with confidence all the efforts that are being made in this direction."

Keely has found no "resting-point" in his researches of a
lifetime; and, instead of being "welcomed with confidence" by his
fellow-researchers in science, he has suffered at their hands more
than will ever be known by his detractors. Keely's discoveries would
have died with him, through the calumnies of these same scientists,
as far as demonstration was concerned, had not a company been formed,
in the early days of his inventions, which for many years furnished
him with the necessary funds, expecting almost immediate financial
success. The sneers of men of science crying "Charlatan," the
ridicule of the public press, and the denunciations of the ignorant
have been mighty factors in debasing the value of the shares of the
company. The courage, faith, and contributing capacity of nearly
all the stockholders have given out; and it is fortunate that now
Mr. Keely's work of evolution has at last reached the point where
he is able to convince those scientists of his integrity whose minds
are broad enough to conform to what Herbert Spencer has said is the
first condition of success in scientific research,--viz. "an honest
receptivity, and willingness to abandon all preconceived notions,
however cherished, if they be found to contradict the truth."

Keely may be said to have spent years of his valuable time in giving
exhibitions whereby to raise the funds needed for his scientific
researches. Again and again has he taken apart his various machines,
to show their interior construction to the sceptical; and what this
means, in the attendant delay, will be better understood when he has
made known how slight a thing, by the laws of sympathetic association,
may retard his progress for days, even for weeks.

Take, for example, his last experience with his preliminary commercial
engine, to which, before he had completed his graduation, he was
induced, in November 1889, to apply a brake, to show what resistance
the vibratory current could bear under powerful friction. A force
sufficient to stop a train of cars, it was estimated, did not interfere
with its running; but under additional strain a "thud" was heard,
and the shaft of the engine was twisted.

The engine should not have been submitted to such a test until
after the differentiation had been equated, and perfect control
in reversions established. And yet, so often has Keely made what
seemed to be disasters an advantage in the end, it is possible that
the interruption and delay may enable him to produce a perfect engine
sooner than he would have done on this model. The world will never know
how many mechanical difficulties Keely has conquered before attaining
his present degree of success, in which he thinks he has mastered all
that pertains to the principle of the force that he is dealing with,
so far as necessary for commercial purposes, the difficulties that he
still has to contend with being merely the minor ones of mechanical
detail. The fact that so much of Mr. Keely's success, in conducting
his experiments when giving exhibitions, depends upon the complete
perfection of his instruments, is one of the strongest arguments that
could be advanced in proof of the genuineness of his claims. Has any
one ever heard of a performer in legerdemain who, after assembling an
audience to witness his tricks, announced that something was wrong
with his conjuring apparatus and that he was unable to exhibit his
dexterity? Feats of legerdemain can be performed, night after night,
year in and year out, without any hitch on the part of the operator;
but all who are conversant with the failures attendant upon a certain
order of experiments, as for instance in the liquefying of oxygen gas,
will be able to appreciate the uncertainty which characterizes the
action of Mr. Keely's instruments at times.

It is only by progressive experimental research that knowledge of
the laws governing Nature's operations can be gained, and a system
evolved to perpetuate such knowledge. The hypothesis of to-day must
be discarded to-morrow, if further research proves its fallacy. Is
it not, then, another strong argument in favour of Keely's integrity
that, confessing ignorance of the laws that govern the force he has
discovered, he has plodded on through all these years, experimenting
upon its nature, with instruments of his own invention, which from
their delicate and imperfect construction are uncertain in their
operations, until he has so improved the defective machine as to make
it a stepping-stone, by which he ascends to perfection? Take the
imperfect comparison of a ladder: no workman can attain the summit
in one effort; he must mount step by step.

To quote from Keely's writings, "The mathematics of vibratory etheric
science, both pure and applied, require long and arduous research. It
seems to me that no man's life is long enough to cover more than the
introductory branch. The theory of elliptic functions, the calculus
of probabilities, are but pygmies in comparison to a science which
requires the utmost tension of the human mind to grasp. But let us wait
patiently for the light that will come, that is even now dawning." [10]

On the 28th of May, 1889, Mr. Keely's workshop was visited by
several men interested to see and judge for themselves of the
nature of his researches. Among them were Professor Leidy, of
the University of Pennsylvania, and James M. Willcox, author of
"Elemental Philosophy." After seeing the experiments in acoustics,
and the production, storage, and discharge of the ether, Mr. Willcox
remarked that no one who had witnessed all that they had seen in
the line of associative vibration, under the same advantages, could
assert any fraud on the part of Keely without convicting himself of
the rankest folly. These gentlemen met Mr. Keely with their minds open
to conviction, though with strong prejudices against the discovery
of any unknown force. They treated him as if he were all that he
is, keeping out of sight whatever doubts they may have had of the
genuineness of his claims as a discoverer; and, in the end, all who
were present expressed their appreciation of his courtesy in answering
the questions asked, and their admiration of what he has accomplished
on his unknown path. In doing this, they were simply doing justice
to him and to themselves,--to that self-respect which leads men to
respect the rights of others, and to do unto others as they would be
done by. Had they questioned Keely's integrity, or betrayed doubts of
his honesty of purpose, he would at once have assumed the defensive,
and would have informed them that he has no wish to conduct experiments
for scientists who are ready to give their opinions of his theories
before having heard them propounded, or of his experiments before
witnessing them. When Keely's system of "sympathetic vibration"
is made known ("sympathetic seeking" Mr. Willcox would call it),
it will be seen how sensitive Mr. Keely's instruments are to the
vibrations caused by street-noises, to vibrations of air from talking
in the operating room, to touch even, as well as why it is that,
although he is willing to take apart and explain the construction
of his instruments in the presence of investigators, he objects to
having them handled by others than himself, after they have been
"harmonized," or "sensitized," or "graduated."

Mr. Keely is his own worst enemy. When suspected of fraud he acts
as if he were a fraud; and in breaking up his vibratory microscope
and other instruments which he had been years in perfecting, at
the time he was committed to prison in 1888, he laid himself open
to the suspicion that his instruments are but devices with which he
cunningly deceives his patrons. Yet these same instruments he has,
since their reconstruction, dissected and explained to those who
approached him in the proper spirit. It is only when he has been
subjected to insulting suspicions by arrogant scientists that he
refuses to explain his theories, and to demonstrate their truth,
as far as it is in his power to do so. "Keely may be on the right
track, after all," remarked an English scientist, after Prof. Hertz
had made known his researches on the structure of ether; "for if we
have imprisoned the ether without knowing it, why may not Keely know
what he has got a hold of?"

Norman Lockyer, in his "Chemistry of the Sun," confirms Keely's
theories when he writes, "The law which connects radiation with
absorption and at once enables us to read the riddle set by the sun
and stars is, then, simply the law of 'sympathetic vibration.'"

"It is remarkable," says Horace W. Smith, "that in countries far
distant from each other, different men have fallen into the same tracks
of science, and have made similar and correspondent discoveries,
at the same period of time, without the least communication with
each other." So has it been in all periods of progress and in all
branches of science, from the discoveries of Euclid and Archimedes
down to those of Galileo and Descartes and Bacon, and, in later days,
of Gilbert and Newton and Leibnitz, then Franklin and Collison and
Von Kliest and Muschenbröck; and now Keely and Hertz and Depuy and
Rücker and Lockyer are examples. Never has a discovery leading to
a new system been begun and perfected by the same individual so far
as Keely is doing; but, as Morley has said, "the representative of
a larger age must excel in genius all predecessors."

The application of his discovery to the service of humanity is the
aim and end of Keely's efforts; his success means "vastly more than
the most sanguine to-day venture to predict," promising "a true
millennial introduction into the unseen universe, and the glorious
life that every man, Christian or sceptic, optimist or pessimist,
would gladly hope for and believe possible." (Thurston.)

Not the least among the ultimate blessings to our race which Keely's
discovery foreshadows is the deeper insight that it will bestow into
the healing power of the finer forces of nature, embracing cures of
brain and nerve disorders that are now classed with incurable diseases.

Only a partial answer has been given to the question, "What has Keely
done for science?" But enough has been said to convey some idea of
the subtle nature of the force he is dealing with, and of the cause
of the delays which have again and again disappointed the inventor,
as well as the too sanguine hopes of immediate commercial success
which have animated the officers and stockholders of "The Keely Motor
Company." Keely has no secret to wrest from him. Instead of "Keely's
Secret," it should be called "Nature's Secret;" for the problem has
still to be worked out, the solution of which will make it "Keely's
Secret;" and until this problem is fully solved to the inventor's
satisfaction for commercial application, Keely has no secret that he
is not willing to disclose, as far as it is in his power to do so.









