CHAPTER IX.

1889-1890.

KEELY SUPPORTED BY DISTINGUISHED MEN OF SCIENCE. AERIAL NAVIGATION.

        Is not ether infinitely more rare and more subtle than air,
        and exceedingly more elastic and more active? Does it not
        easily penetrate all bodies? And is it not by its elastic
        force diffused through the universe?--Sir Isaac Newton.


In 1889 a series of short articles were written, which, for the
first time, made known to the public that Keely had theories which
he was able to sustain by mechanical demonstration: and once more
an attempt was made to have men of science acquaint themselves with
the theories, and witness the demonstrations. Capitalists also
were appealed to, to convince themselves of the existence of an
unknown force, and of Mr. Keely's honesty in his efforts to control
it for commercial purposes; money being required to enable him to
complete his researches for science, and to protect him from those
who were harassing him in such a way as to impede his progress at
every step. The appeal to capitalists might as well have been made
to stone walls; but among the men of scientific and philosophical
attainments who were invited, the late Professor Joseph Leidy, M.D.,
of the Pennsylvania University, and James M. Willcox, Ph.D., author
of "Rational Philosophy," and other works, accepted the invitation
and attended a series of Keely's researching experiments. For years
Mr. Keely's experiments were confined to the production of the force;
the raising of a lever; the firing of a cannon; and the showing of a
vacuum greater than had ever been produced. Since 1888 he has pursued
his researches on a line which enabled him to show uninterrupted
progress year after year: so that now he never repeats his experiments;
but, discarding or improving his researching instruments, after he has
gained the results which his theories lead him to expect, he continues
his investigations, thereafter, from the solid basis which he has
attained by those researches. The result of the attention given by
Professor Leidy and Dr. Willcox is best set down in their own words:--


"April 8th, 1890.

"After having had the opportunity of witnessing a series of experiments
made by Mr. John Keely, illustrative of a reputed new motor power,
it has appeared to me that he has fairly demonstrated the discovery
of a force previously unknown to science. I have no theory to account
for the phenomena observed, but I believe Mr. Keely to be honest in
his attempt to explain them. His demonstrations appear to indicate
great mechanical power, which, when applied to appropriate machinery,
must supersede all ordinary appliances.

"Joseph Leidy."


"Philadelphia, April 8th, 1890.

"After having witnessed, on several occasions and under favourable
circumstances, Mr. Keely's experiments in what he terms sympathetic
vibration, I am satisfied that he has made new and important
demonstrations in physical science. He has made manifest the existence
of natural forces that cannot be explained by any known physical laws,
and has shown that he possesses over them a very considerable control.

"James M. Willcox."


Shortly after these announcements were made public, with the consent
of the writers, Anglo-Austria contained two papers on the subject,
from which, principally, the article on Etheric Philosophy is taken.

S. Zolver Preston, in his "Physics of the Ether," says: "A quantity
of matter representing a total mass of only one grain, and possessing
the normal velocity of the ether particles, that of a wave of light,
encloses a state of energy represented by upward of one thousand
millions of foot tons. Or the mass of one single grain contains an
energy not less than that possessed by a mass of 70,000 tons, moving
at the speed of a cannon ball (1200 feet per second); or, otherwise,
a quantity of matter, representing a mass of one grain, endued with the
velocity of the ether particles, encloses an amount of energy which,
if entirely utilized, would be competent to project a weight of 100
tons to a height of one mile and nine-tenths of a mile."

Etheric philosophy has a scientific basis in fact; and in the light
of Keely's progressive demonstrations, his views are no longer
abnormal to the scientific mind which is willing to admit the
possibility of a discovery in which it has had no part. To discover
an unknown power is one thing; to subjugate it is quite another
thing. The one may be stumbled over; the other can only be attained
after laborious investigation. No one who has followed Keely in his
"dead work," during the last ten years, can doubt that he has been,
and still is, dealing with the same force which, as Professor Hertz
has disclosed to us, is already imprisoned, without our knowledge,
in electro-magnetic engines. If thus, unknowingly, it has been made
the servant of man, in machinery not especially constructed for its
use, may it not also have been imprisoned by one who is adapting his
inventions to its special requirements? Keely demonstrates, with
what he calls vibratory machinery, that all corpuscules of matter
may be subdivided by a certain order of vibration, thus showing up
new elements; and having demonstrated what he asserts, by releasing
the various orders of ether from the suspension in which it is always
held in our atmosphere, he has answered the sceptical demand "Give us
some bread." It has been said that as men penetrate deeper and deeper
into a knowledge of the wonderful laws which govern the universe they
may find mysterious forces which remain still undiscovered. Keely's
discoveries promise to burst upon the world of science as the one
mighty and complete revelation of the universe. There are more things
in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in the materialistic science
of our age, or in our philosophy. "All we have cognizance of around
us are results, the causes of which are supersensuous. Of the nature
which we behold around us, the cause is supernatural."

The Reverend Albert H. Plumb, of Roxbury, Mass., who has followed
Mr. Keely's efforts, to obtain control of the unknown force which he
discovered more than twenty years ago, up to his present successful
demonstration before scientists, says: "Neither theological science
nor any department of physical science, as it lies in the divine
mind, is exactly expressed in any human system; yet no knowledge is
to be decried nor despised, least of all in the highest realms of
thought. The agnostic makes the mistake of confounding exhaustive
knowledge with positive knowledge in declaring both unattainable. We
can know positively that a thing is, if not how or why it is. As
Gladstone says, 'Our hands can lay hold of truths which our arms
cannot embrace. We can apprehend what we cannot comprehend.' If Keely
should die, I fear no one could understand his writings. Every day we
read of distinguished men dying. The other day a man carried with him
into the grave his secret for the cheap production of aluminium. No
one man entrusted by Providence with high interests has a right
to allow a possibility of their sinking back, perhaps for ages,
into the void of the unknown. Why not confine attention strictly to
making the discovery practically intelligible to others, and thus
securing to mankind the first steps by which the new force is evoked
and controlled, and leave to later leisure the subtler relations of
this power to the divine mind and to life?"

For years Mr. Keely did "confine attention" to efforts to prove his
discovery by practical methods, without making any advance; and it was
not until he was led into the spiritual or philosophical bearings of
his discovery that he himself gained "practically intelligible" ideas
of its nature. To Dr. Macvicar's "Sketch of a Philosophy," from which
Mrs. Moore compiled "Ether the True Protoplasm," and to Mrs. Hughes'
book on the evolution of tones and colours, Mr. Keely is indebted for
the pregnant germs which, falling from their writings upon his mind,
took him from the line of experiment which he was pursuing, into the
only line of research which can lead to scientific and commercial
success. The hour in which he reaches one he reaches both; nor can
one be gained without the other being gained. This should teach us
that, though "the heart of man deviseth his way, the Lord directeth
his steps." God never hurries, and He chooses His own instruments,
employing them after a manner that is inscrutable to us, in our weak
impatience for results. Admitting the truth of all that Dr. Plumb
has said, but understanding fully the impossibility of directing
Mr. Keely's steps, until he himself gains more control of the force
that he has discovered, we must "wait upon the Lord," who is revealing
to him "the deep mysteries of Creation." In the meantime, those in whom
narrowness of mind has not caused stubbornness will hold themselves
in readiness to prove all things and hold fast to the truth. We do
not easily believe what is beyond our own knowledge, but faith in the
claims of Keely as a discoverer, if not as an inventor, is steadily
increasing. The following from a foreign publication about the Keely
Motor will be of interest to all who have watched the progress of
that enterprise. The correspondent writes:--"In the following brief
article I purpose placing the latest aspect of Mr. Keely, perhaps
the best abused man in America, and his investigations before the
readers of Anglo-Austria;" continuing,--

"Under the heading of 'The Keely Motor Again,' Invention, of London,
on October 19th, printed a communication, mentioning the leading
scientist of America, Dr. Leidy, of the University of Pennsylvania,
as supporting Mr. Keely's claims as a discoverer of an unknown force,
as follows:--Dr. Leidy having expressed the wish that Professor
Barker should again visit Mr. Keely and witness the experiments
which had convinced himself that Keely had discovered a new force,
has received the following letter:--


"909, Walnut Street, Philadelphia, October 4, 1889.

"Dr. Leidy. Sir,--Referring to our conversation of a few days since,
and the suggestion of another visit to the workshop of Mr. Keely,
by Professor Barker, I would say that I have presented the matter to
Mr. Keely and he acquiesces in what I stated to you. That is to say, if
Dr. Barker desires to visit Mr. Keely's workshops again, and will make
this known to him in writing or through yourself, for the purpose of
further observation and of having confirmed or removed from his mind,
as the case may be, the conclusions or impressions arrived at by him,
and published in the columns of the Ledger, of this city, in 1878;
and on condition that he will, if his further observations satisfy
him that he did injustice to Mr. Keely, forthwith publish that fact
through the same channel, the Ledger: he being, of course, at full
liberty to confirm by further publication his previous condemnation,
if satisfied with the correctness of that conclusion; then Dr. Barker
will be cordially received by Mr. Keely, and a series of experiments
will be conducted for him at an early day, say, Saturday, 12 inst. And
in the event of the engagement being made, I shall request the pleasure
of your presence, and that of Dr. McCook. I leave the matter in your
hands for such action as you in your wise discretion may think proper
to take. Very truly yours,

"Charles B. Collier."


Nothing could be fairer than Mr. Keely's proposal, and the result of
Professor Barker's visit will be watched for with the keenest interest
by all scientists on both sides of the Atlantic. [7]


"Professor Barker, after due consideration, concluded not to accept
the invitation, and declined it on October 11th, suggesting Professor
Goodspeed, his associate in physics, as one who would probably be
disposed to witness the series of experiments about to be given;
showing the neutralizing or overcoming of gravity and the separation
of metallic plates by vibration. After the date upon which these
latter experiments were to have been made, and which I may mention,
en passant, had been repeatedly made in the laboratory of Mr. Keely,
this cablegram was sent from London to Philadelphia:-- 'Ask Dr. Leidy's
permission to announce here his conviction that Keely has discovered
a new force.'"


The answer was returned as follows:--


"Having had the opportunity of seeing Mr. John Keely's experiments,
it has appeared to me that he has command of some unknown force of
most wonderful mechanical power.

"Joseph Leidy."


Invention, in commenting upon the communication, says: "We wish
to make it quite clear that we do not identify ourselves with any
of the opinions which are expressed in this communication. It is
certainly desirable that the motor should be thoroughly tested, and
particularly that all the secrecy, which has hitherto been practised
in connection with it, should be abandoned. There can be no reason
why this invention, if invention it be, should not be published to the
world as long as it is fully protected by patents. We agree, however,
so far, that Professor Barker's report, if his visit be paid, will
be of considerable interest."

These remarks of our English contemporary are based upon quite
wrong premises. The motor cannot be tested nor patented until it
is completed. Mr. Keely's work is one of experimental research. His
machine for the production and liberation of the power is in daily
operation. He has made many failures in constructing his commercial
engine, but each failure has brought him nearer to perfection.

When he has succeeded in building an engine in which he can regulate
the speed, control reversions and govern its operations, as completely
as the steam engine is now governed, then he will be ready to test
its action publicly, take out patents for the same, and make known
to the world the nature of his discovery. Up to the present time
Mr. Keely's inventions have been principally devices, enabling him
to experiment with the force which he has discovered and to obtain
control over it. For years he was impeded by the frequency of the
explosions which took place, breaking his ribs, paralyzing his left
side for six weeks at one time, and frequently bursting iron tubes
as if they were pipe stems.

Little by little he learned the laws which governed the unknown force,
and now he never has an explosion. Mr. Keely has not preserved any
secrecy with regard to his experiments, but on the contrary he has
lost much time in exhibiting the production of this force to those
who desire to see it. For instance, some years ago he stopped his
work on the graduating of his engine to take his liberator to pieces,
in order to show its interior construction to Sir William Thompson
and Lord Raleigh: these gentlemen, misled by Professor Barker's
assertion, that Keely was deceiving his dupes with compressed air,
refused to witness his experiments. This was in 1884.

There is no "secrecy to be abandoned," therefore. The question to be
settled was not one of secrecy, but whether Mr. Keely should continue
his experimental research, unimpeded by exhibitions, until he should
succeed in perfecting a commercial engine; or whether he should first
convince scientists that he is not a modern Cagliostro as he has been
called, and that he is a discoverer of an unknown force.

The ground taken by those who urged the latter course was that the
interests of the Keely Motor Company would thus be better served;
reasoning that, when scientists have been convinced that Mr. Keely's
researches are in a field comparatively unknown to them, the cries
of execration would be drowned in the applause which would resound
throughout the world as the result of his stupendous labours became
better known.

For this end several scientists were invited to witness the present
stage of experiment, which Mr. Keely had reached in his efforts to
provide his provisional engine with a governor, and Dr. Leidy was
one of the number who, after witnessing the experiments on May 28th,
1889, confessed himself convinced that Keely was dealing with some
unknown force.

When we call to mind Watt's persevering efforts during thirty years,
before he succeeded in his attempt to invent a governor for the steam
engine, we can afford to be more patient with Mr. Keely than we have
been. Taking into consideration the marvellous advance which Mr. Keely
has made in the past five years in perfecting his liberator, we should
not be surprised to hear at any moment that he has also perfected
his commercial engine, the so-called "Keely Motor," thus overcoming
his sole remaining obstacle to financial success. Those who talk of
"testing" the motor, or of patenting it in its present condition,
are not aware of the exertions which have been made by Mr. Keely
to bring the motor to its present stage of development; nor that,
although the motor now seems to be approaching perfection, the work
of evolution will not be completed until it is in a patentable form.

In 1759 James Watt made his first model of a steam carriage. In
1784 he took out a patent. In 1803 the first engine was built, but
it was not until 1824 that the experiment of running a locomotive
from Liverpool to Stockport was made. Until Mr. Keely's commercial
engine is perfected and patented, now that scientists are beginning
to support him as the discoverer of an unknown force, ridicule should
give way to sympathy; for we know that nature never reveals one of
her tyrant forces without at the same time showing how this force is
to be transformed into the slave of man, and that complete success
is only a question of time.--Anglo-Austria, March, 1890.



SOME RECENT EXPERIMENTS. [8]

Copy of a Letter addressed to Professor Dewar of the Royal Institution
of Great Britain.

Dear Professor Dewar,--As I have already informed you, I carried
out your wishes in reference to Professor Rowland of the John
Hopkins University, as far as extending to him an invitation to
witness some of Mr. Keely's experiments in sympathetic vibration
was concerned. Professor Rowland was not able to witness any
demonstration whatever, on account of an accident which happened to the
disintegrator, and he could not fail to have formed an unfavourable
opinion of Mr. Keely from all that transpired on that occasion. I
next renewed the invitation to Professor Barker, which had already
been extended to him by Professor Leidy, both of these gentlemen
being Professors in the Pennsylvania University. Professor Barker
was not able to be present. The series of experiments which have
been given for scientists, mechanical engineers, and others since my
return, closed on the 12th. The steady progress from week to week,
since the accident to the disintegrator was repaired, has given
beautiful evidence of the wisdom of the plan adopted by Mr. Keely
in the winter of 1888-89, which led him to turn his attention to a
class of experiments of quite a different nature from those which,
up to that time, had been made for commercial ends; experiments which
have not failed to convince all who attended the entire series that
Mr. Keely is dealing with an unknown force, the laws governing which
he is still in partial ignorance concerning. He admits now that he
cannot construct a patentable engine to use this force till he has
mastered the principle; and a fund, with the approval of scientists,
has been appropriated for this end, upon the condition that he will
waste no more time upon what is known as the Keely Motor Engine
until he has demonstrated his ability to control reversions and in
all points to govern the revolutions.

His last engine was built to exhibit the practical nature of
his discovery to capitalists, the managers of "The Keely Motor
Company"--which company died a natural death years since--hoping
thereby to raise the price of its stock, and in this way to furnish
Mr. Keely with the funds that he needed. But the exhibition of this
engine was premature and did not succeed. There will be no further
need for such exhibitions in future, for it is, as it always has been,
in the interest of stock-holders that the stock should not rise until
the system is completed, when it will rise to remain raised. From
this time the interests of stock-holders will not be sacrificed to
the interest of stock-jobbers. The experiments conducted on Saturday
last surpassed preceding ones in the purity of the demonstrations,
the instruments being in better condition.

In demonstrating what seems to be the overcoming of gravity for aerial
navigation, Mr. Keely used a model of an air-ship, weighing about eight
pounds, which, when the differentiated wire of silver and platinum
was attached to it, communicating with the sympathetic transmitter,
rose, descended, or remained stationary midway, the motion as gentle
as that of thistledown floating in the air.

The experiment illustrating "chord of mass" sympathy was repeated,
using a glass chamber, forty inches in height, filled with water,
standing on a slab of glass. Three metal spheres, weighing about
six ounces each, rested on the glass floor of the chamber. The
chord of mass of these spheres was B flat first octave, E flat
second octave, and B flat third octave. Upon sounding the note B
flat on the sympathetic transmitter, the sphere having that chord of
mass rose slowly to the top of the chamber; the positive end of the
wire having been attached, which connected the covered jar with the
transmitter. The same result followed the sound of the note in sympathy
with the chord of mass of the other spheres, all of which descended
as gently as they rose, upon changing the positive to the negative.

J. M. Willcox, Ph.D., who was present, remarked,--"This experiment
proves the truth of a fundamental law in scholastic philosophy,
viz., that when one body attracts or seeks another body, it is not
that the effect is the sum of effects produced by parts of one body
upon parts of another, one aggregate of effects, but the result of
the operation of one whole upon another whole."

The experiments on the 12th closed with the disintegration of water,
twelve drops of which we saw dropped, drop by drop, into the small
sphere attached to the disintegrator after exhausting the air
by suction. A pressure of over 20,000 pounds to the square inch
was shown to the satisfaction of all present, and when Mr. Willcox
accepted Mr. Keely's invitation to take a seat on the arm of the lever,
adding his 260 pounds to the weight, applause broke forth. Mr. Keely
showed control of the ether, inter-atomic subdivision, by graduating
the escape of the residue, as he allowed it to discharge itself with
a noise like the rushing of steam to an expulsion as gentle as the
breathings of an infant. The three subdivisions acted simultaneously,
showing instantaneous association and disassociation. The sympathetic
globe was operated upon, 120 revolutions a second, ceasing the instant
that the wire was detached.

I regret to say that Professor Ira Remsen was prevented, I fear
by Professor Rowland, from witnessing any one of this series of
experiments as he intended doing; nor have I been able to get the
opinion of any physicist in whom I felt any confidence; but Mr. Keely
is satisfied to have the support of such men as J. M. Willcox, Ph.D.,
and Professor Leidy, LL.D. Dr. Leidy was awarded the Lyell Medal in
1884, when in London, and the Cuvier Prize in 1888, from the Academy
of Sciences in France. He is known in America not only as possessing
the broadest of minds and the gentlest of natures, but as holding in
his heart that love for, and reverence of, truth and justice which
alone can confer the power of forming a correct and a just judgment.

I would like to have you make known in England that Mr. Keely
is indebted to Macvicar's Sketch of a Philosophy for turning his
attention, in 1884, to researches on the structure of ether, and to
Mrs. F. J. Hughes (not Mrs. Watts Hughes), for the suggestions in her
work on Harmonies of Tones and Colours Developed by Evolution, which
led him into the line of experiment that will enable him to show on
a disc the various colours of sound, each note having its colour, and
to demonstrate in various ways Mrs. Hughes' own words "that the same
laws which develop musical harmonies develop the universe," etc., etc.

On the 10th of June, 1890, the Rev. John Andrew, of Belfast, whose
pendulographs illustrate the ratios which rule in the domain of
atmospheric vibrations, in which audible music has been located by the
great numberer, wrote: "I think that now, at last, Keely's labours
are about to be honourably recognized by the world of science. May
he live to rejoice in his triumphs." Mr. Andrew, who was the friend
of the late Dr. Macvicar, was instrumental in bringing "A Sketch
of a Philosophy" to Mrs. Moore's notice, and has maintained great
interest in Keely's researches since he first heard of them. Miss
Mary Green, a governess in the family of Lord Wimborne, was another
instrument used to make known to Keely the important nature of the
energy he had liberated from the suspension in which it is always
held in our atmosphere. About this time Professor James Dewar, who
had been following Keely's claims as a discoverer since 1884, wrote:
"If Mr. Keely succeeds in making his discovery practically useful, as
it is said that he is demonstrating to scientists his ability to do--if
this information be true, it is strange to contrast the past history of
science with the present. Fancy the discoverer of electricity having
succeeded in inventing the modern dynamo machine! Such a fact would
mean the concentration of hundreds of years of scientific discovery
and invention into the single life of one man. Such a result would
be simply marvellous."

At this time a number of the leading journals in various parts of
the United States announced that, although Keely's methods and his
failures had combined to engender distrust and arouse ridicule,
it could no longer be denied that he had discovered what no other
man has discovered. Still "penny-a-liners" continued to employ those
"weapons of small souls and narrow minds," sneers and ridicule and
calumny, which Lavater's allegorical vignette so well depicts: A hand
holding a lighted torch is stung by a wasp, and the gnats that swarm
around it are consumed in its flame. Underneath are these lines:--


        And although it singes the wings of the gnats,
        Destroys their heads and all their little brains,
            Light is still light;
        And although I am stung by the angriest wasp,
            I will not yield.


Every defender of the truth, at whom shafts of ridicule are levelled,
should recall these words. Never, for one moment, has Keely turned
aside from his work to answer his assailants.

It is not to be wondered at that the magical nature of his
demonstrations, more inexplicable than any feats of legerdemain, should
have brought upon him the suspicion of fraudulent representation,
concerning the production of the force and its manipulation; but his
persistency alone in seeking to unravel the mysteries of nature, ought
to have brought around him sooner men who, like the revered and great
Leidy, were able to appreciate his researches in sympathetic vibration,
the laws of which govern everything in creation, from the movements of
the planets, down to the movements of atoms. From the time in which it
was made known to Keely that the same principle underlies harmonies
and the motion of heavenly bodies, as announced by Pythagoras, his
grasping intellect conceived the idea that planetary bodies have
a nerve-system, subject to conditions which govern it and keep it
under control, just as our human mechanism is controlled by the law
which governs its operation. In Keely's theories all is mechanical in
nature. A molecule of steel, a molecule of gas, a molecule of brain
matter are all of the one primeval substance--the Ether.



AERIAL NAVIGATION.

The instrument devised by Mr. Keely for bringing the air-ship under
control in its ascent and descent, consists of a row of bars, like
the keys of a piano, representing the enharmonic and the diatonic
conditions. These bars range from 0 to 100. At 50 Mr. Keely thinks
the progress of the vessel ought to be about 500 miles an hour. At
100 gravity resumes its control. If pushed to that speed it would
descend like a rifle-ball to the earth. There is no force known so
safe to use as the polar flow if, as Mr. Keely thinks, that, when
the conditions are once set up, they remain for ever, with perpetual
molecular action as the result, until the machinery wears out. In
the event of meeting a cyclone, the course of the vessel, he teaches,
can be guided so as to ascend above the cyclone by simply dampening
a certain proportion of these vibratory bars.

The instrument for guiding the ship has nothing to do with the
propelling of it, which is a distinct feature of itself, acting by
molecular bombardment; moving the molecules in the same order as in
the suspension process, but transversely. After the molecular mass
of the vessel is sensitized, or made concordant with the celestial
and terrestrial streams, the control of it in all particulars is
easy and simple. In ascending the positive force is used, or the
celestial, as Keely has named it, and in descending the negative
or terrestrial. Passing through a cyclone the air-ship would not be
affected by it.

The breaking up of cyclones will open a field for future research,
if any way can be discovered for obtaining the chord of mass of the
cyclone. To differentiate the chord of its thirds would destroy it; but
to those who know nothing of the underlying principle, on which Keely
has based his system, all such assertions are the merest "rubbish."

For a few months following the announcement of Professor Leidy's
and Dr. Willcox's opinions, Mr. Keely continued his researches
under favourable circumstances; but, in the autumn of 1890, he was
again threatened with suits-at-law and harassed by demands to give
exhibitions in order to raise the price of stock. A subscription
was started to raise funds for the prosecution. These threats made
it necessary to make public the history of Keely's connection with
an organization which was supposed by many to have been formed for
speculative purposes, before the stock of the company possessed any
value other than prospective; but to which company, notwithstanding,
the world is indebted for supplying Mr. Keely with the means to
continue his work, at a time when it was impossible for him to gain
the recognition of science or the aid of capitalists. The discovery
would in all probability have been lost, but for the help which
this organization gave, at a time when Keely needed help; he had
made a discovery, and these shrewd business men, totally ignorant of
physics, knew enough to comprehend its financial importance. Never
doubting that Keely would be able to master the difficulties at once,
in the way of its subjugation, and not realizing the width of the
gulf that lies between discovery and invention, they expected him to
leap it with one bound; and when he failed to do so they threw upon
him all the odium which befell the enterprise. Keely, who had twice
destroyed his researching instruments, when harassed and threatened
by the managers of the company, first in 1882, and again in 1887,
was now placed by their threatened proceedings in a position where
he had to choose between continuing his researches with the end in
view of completing his system; or diverting his course and resuming
his efforts to perfect an engine, to continue exhibitions for the
purpose of raising the stock of the company.

At this juncture an attempt was made to have circulated among the
stock-holders a narrative setting forth facts to show that their
interests would be better served by a continuance of the researches
that had led to the results attained within the last two years; and
which were of so important a character as to justify Keely in saying
that he had learned more of the law, governing the operation of the
force he was dealing with, in that time, than in the many preceding
years during which he had been scarcely doing more than liberating the
ether. The effort to have the narrative circulated failed; and, as a
last resort, the history of the company was made public in a pamphlet,
entitled The Keely Motor Bubble; which contained the Minority Report of
Mr. John Lorimer, made, in 1881, when he was a member of the Board of
Directors of "the now defunct Keely Motor Company;" giving a masterly
analysis of the situation at that time. Mr. Lorimer's faith in,
and loyalty to, Mr. Keely, has never been questioned. He is probably
the best and most disinterested adviser that Mr. Keely has ever had;
among those who are interested solely in the commercial aspect of
the discovery.









