CHAPTER VI.

THE FOUNTAIN HEAD OF FORCE.

        Those who occupy themselves with the mysteries of molecular
        vibration bear the victorious wreaths of successful
        discovery, and show that every atom teems with wonders not
        less incomprehensible than those of the vast and bright
        far-off suns.--Reynolds.

        The famous Keely motor, which has been hovering on the
        horizon of success for a decade, is but an attempt to repeat
        in an engine of metal the play of forces which goes on at the
        inmost focus of life, the human will, or in the cosmic spaces
        occupied only by the ultimate atoms. The engineer with his
        mallet shooting the cannon-ball by means of a few light taps on
        a receiver of depolarized atoms of water is only re-enacting
        the rôle of the will when with subtle blows it sets the nerve
        aura in vibration, and this goes on multiplying in force and
        sweep of muscle until the ball is thrown from the hand with
        a power proportionate to the one-man machinery. The inventor
        Keely seeks a more effective machinery; a combination of
        thousands of will-forces in a single arm, as it were. But he
        keeps the same vibrating principle, and the power in both cases
        is psychical. That is, in its last analysis.--George Perry.

        One eternal and immutable law embraces all things and all
        times.--Cicero.

        When the truth is made known, it will unwarp the complications
        of man's manufacture; and show everything in nature to be
        very simple.--David Sinclair, author of A New Creed.--Digby,
        Long & Co.


A gradual change seems to be taking place in the minds of the
well-informed in reference to the discoverer of, and experimenter
with, etheric force--John Worrell Keely--which will in time remove
the burden of accusations from him to those who are responsible for
the load which he has had to carry.

Those who know the most of Mr. Keely's philosophy, and of his
inventions to apply this new force to mechanics, are the most sanguine
as to his ultimate success. They say he is great enough in soul,
wise enough in mind, and sublime enough in courage to overcome all
difficulties, and to stand at last before the world as the greatest
discoverer and inventor in the world:--that the hour demanded his
coming--that he was not born for his great work before his appointed
time. They predict that he will, with the hammer of science, demolish
the idols of science; that the demonstration of the truth of his system
will humble the pride of those scientists who are materialists, by
revealing some of the mysteries which lie behind the world of matter;
proving that physical disintegration affects only the mode, and not
the existence, of individual consciousness.

The discovery of vibratory etheric force, even though never utilized
in mechanics, brings us upon the bridge which divides physical science
from spiritual science, and opens up domains the grandeur and glory of
which eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, nor hath it entered into
the mind of man to conceive. The few who understand the nature and
the extent of Keely's vast researches say that he is about to give
a new philosophy to the world, which will upset all other systems;
they say that he knows what force is; and that he seeks to know
what impels and fixes the neutral centre, which attracts to itself
countless correlations of matter, until it becomes a world; that he
is approaching the origin of life, of memory, and of death; and more,
that he knows how ignorant he still is: possessing the humility of a
little child who knows nothing of science. Such a philosopher deserves
the appreciation and the encouragement of all who hold Truth as the
one thing most worth living for--and dying for, if need be.

What is etheric force? the inquirer asks. It is the soul of nature. It
is the primal force from which all the forces of nature spring.

Fichte writes: "The will is the living principle of the world of
spirit, as motion is of the world of sense. I stand between two
opposite worlds; the one visible, in which the act alone avails; the
other invisible and incomprehensible, acted on only by the will. I
am an effective force in both these worlds."

Newton said that this subtle ether penetrates through all, even the
hardest bodies, and is concealed in their substance. Through the
strength and activity of this spirit, bodies attract each other, and
adhere together when brought into contact. In it, and by it, distance
is annihilated, and all objects touch each other. Through this "life
spirit" light also flows, and is refracted and reflected, and warms
bodies. Through it we are connected in sympathy with all other souls,
and all the objects of nature, even to all the heavenly bodies. The
word ether is from "aithô," to light up or kindle. According
to Pythagoras and all the oldest philosophers, it was viewed as a
divine luminous principle or substance, which permeates all things,
and, at the same time, contains all things. They called it the astral
light. The Germans call it the "Weltgeist," the breath of the Father,
the Holy Ghost, the life-principle.

The sheet-anchor of Keely's philosophy is, in the words of Hooker,
one power, ever present, ever ruling, neglecting not the least, not
quailing before the greatest: the lowest not excluded from its care,
nor the highest exempted from its dominion. A power that presents
itself to us as a force: the one force in nature, thrilling to
its deepest heart, and flowing forth responsive to every call. A
power which does all things, and assumes all forms; which has been
called electricity in the storm, heat in the fire, magnetism in
the iron bar, light in the taper, but ever one grand reality, one
all-embracing law. Cosmical law at the fountain-head, suggesting
that, as the Creator Himself is only one in substance, so also,
primarily, will the creation be, to which He awards existence. The
extreme simplicity of this deduction, made as it is in the face
of all the variety and multiplicity of individualized objects that
there are in the universe, seems to involve many difficulties. But,
as Macvicar writes, different beings, whether classes or individuals,
are known to us, not by any difference in their substance, but only
by differences in their attributes. And since being or substance,
and power or potentiality, differ from each other only in conception,
only as the statical differs from the dynamical, it is reasonable, nay,
in the circumstances it is alone legitimate, to suppose that it is not
in virtue of some absolute difference in substance (for none appears),
but only from differences in the quantity or intensity of substance
or power in the individual, and from the variety of their build,
that different individuals display such different potentialities or
endowments as they do display; and come to be justly classified as
they are into various orders of beings. Inasmuch as the Author of all
is Himself a Spiritual Being, cosmical law leads us to expect that
the type of created being shall be spirit also. Nor can Being in any
object be so attenuated or so far removed from Him who filleth all in
all, but it must surely retain an aura of the spiritual nature. This,
then, is the corner-stone of Keely's philosophy--one power; one law;
order and method reigning throughout creation; spirit controlling
matter; as the divine order and law of creation, that the spiritual
should govern the material,--that the whole realm of matter should
be under the dominion of the world of spirit.

When Keely's discovery has been made known to scientists, a new
field of research will be opened up in the realm of Philosophy, where
all eternal, physical, and metaphysical truths are correlated; for
Philosophy has been well defined by Willcox as the science of that
human thought which contains all human knowledges. He who possesses
the structure of philosophic wisdom built up of all knowledges--grand
and sublime--has a mental abode wherein to dwell which other men have
not. Dr. Macvicar says:--"The nearer we ascend to the fountain-head
of being and of action, the more magical must everything inevitably
become, for that fountain-head is pure volition. And pure volition,
as a cause, is precisely what is meant by magic; for by magic is
merely meant a mode of producing a phenomenon without mechanical
appliances--that is, without that seeming continuity of resisting
parts and that leverage which satisfy our muscular sense and
our imagination, and bring the phenomenon into the category of
what we call 'the natural'--that is, the sphere of the elastic,
the gravitating, the sphere into which the vis inertiæ is alone
admitted." In Keely's philosophy, as in Dr. Macvicar's "Sketch of a
Philosophy," the economy of creation is not regarded as a theory of
development all in one direction, which is the popular supposition,
but as a cycle in which, after development and as its fruit, the last
term gives again the first. Herein is found the link by which the
law of continuity is maintained throughout, and the cycle of things
is made to be complete:--the link which is missing in the popular
science of the day, with this very serious consequence, that, to
keep the break out of sight, the entire doctrine of spirit and the
spiritual world is ignored or denied altogether.

Joseph Cook affirms that, "as science progresses, it draws nearer
in all its forms to the proof of the spiritual origin of force--that
is, of the divine immanence in natural law. God was not transiently
present in nature--that is, in a mere creative moment; nor has He now
left the world in a state of orphanage, bereft of a deific influence
and care, but He is immanent in nature, as the Apostle Paul affirmed:
In Him we live, and are moved, and have our being; as certainly as
the unborn infant's life is that of the mother, so it is divinely
true that somehow God's life includes ours."

The philosophy of Keely sets forth the universal ether (denied by
scientists in the last century to suit their views of the celestial
spaces, which they declared to be a vacuum) as the medium by which our
lives are included in God's life; demonstrating how it is that we live
because He lives, and shall live as long as He exists: how our being
is comprised in His, so that if we could suppose the divine life to
come to an end, ours would terminate with it as surely--to compare
great things with small--as a stream would cease to flow when its
fountain is dried up; teaching that our existence may be distinct,
but never separate from His, and that in the hidden depth of the
soul there is somewhere a point where our individual being comes in
contact with God, and is identified with the infinite life.

"If extreme vicissitudes of belief on the part of men of science are
evidence of uncertainty, it may be affirmed that, of all kinds of
knowledge, none is more uncertain than science." The existence of the
universal ether is now affirmed again, and must be affirmed, as one
of the most elementary facts in physical science. Sir J. F. Herschel
asserts that, supposing the ether to be analogous to other elastic
media, an amount of it equal in quantity of matter to that which is
contained in a cubic inch of air (which weighs about one-third of a
grain), if enclosed in a cube of one inch in the side, would exert
a bursting power of upwards of seventeen billions of pounds on each
side of the cube, while common air exerts only fifteen pounds. It
should not, therefore, be surprising to those who have witnessed the
manifestations of etheric force, as exhibited by Keely in producing
a pressure ranging from 8000 to 30,000 pounds to the square inch,
when modern scientists support Herschel's views, as they do,
unhesitatingly; rather should they be surprised at the marvellous
perseverance which has kept Keely, in the face of every discouragement,
true to his inspired mission; conquering every difficulty, surmounting
every obstacle, and turning his mistakes into stepping-stones which
have helped him to attain the goal he has, from the start, aimed at
reaching--viz. the utilizing in mechanics of the power he discovered
many years ago. Before the grandeur and glory of such an attainment,
all things had to give way. Like a General who sees the fortress
looming up in the distance which he must take to complete his victory,
his horse's hoofs trampling the dead and dying in his path, so has
this discoverer and inventor been unmindful of all that lay between
him and his goal. Taking for the key-note of his experiments, in
applying inter-molecular vapour to the running of an engine, that all
the movements of elastic elements are rhythmical, he has had problems
to solve which needed the full measure of inspiration he has received
before he could attain that degree of success which he has now reached.

Mr. Keely realizes the full extent of the difficulties which he yet
has to contend with in obtaining continuity of action, though, with his
sanguine temperament, anticipating near and complete success. To quote
from his writings:--"The mathematics of vibratory etheric science,
both pure and applied, require long and arduous research. It seems to
me that no man's life is sufficient, with the most intense application,
to cover more than the introductory branch. The theory of elliptic
functions, the calculus of probabilities, are but as pigmies in
comparison to a science which requires the utmost tension of the
human mind to grasp. But let us wait patiently for the light that
will come--that is even now dawning."


            All we can dream of loveliness within,
              All ever hoped for by a will intense,
              This shall one day be palpable to sense,
            And earth at last become to heaven akin.


These four lines, from Robert Browning's sonnet on Keely's discoveries,
read like an inspired insight into that "Age of Harmony," which
interpreters of scripture prophecies anticipate the twentieth century
will usher into our world; recalling Shakespeare's seeming knowledge,
before Harvey's discovery even, of the circulation of the blood. "All
truth is inspired."









