CHAPTER II.--THE MORAL STRUGGLE OR THE REALIZING OF IDEALS.


LXVI.

Goodness as a Struggle.

We have already seen that the bare repetition of identically the
same acts does not consist with morality. To aim at securing a
satisfaction precisely like the one already experienced, is to fail
to recognize the altered capacity and environment, and the altered
duty. Moral satisfaction prior to an act is _ideal_; ideal not simply
in the sense of being conceived, or present to thought, but ideal in
the sense that it has not been already enjoyed. Some satisfaction has
been enjoyed in a previous activity, but that very satisfaction has
so enlarged and complicated the situation, that its mere repetition
would not afford moral or active satisfaction, but only what Kant
terms 'pathological' satisfaction. Morality thus assumes the form of a
struggle. The past satisfaction speaks for itself; it has been verified
in experience, it has conveyed its worth to our very senses. We have
tried and tasted it, and know that it is good. If morality lay in the
repetition of similar satisfactions, it would not be a struggle. We
should know experimentally before hand that the chosen end would bring
us satisfaction, and should be at rest in that knowledge. But when
morality lies in striving for satisfactions which have not verified
themselves to our sense, it always requires an effort. We have to
surrender the enjoyed good, and stake ourselves upon that of which we
cannot say: We _know_ it is good. To surrender the actual experienced
good for a possible ideal good is the struggle.

We arrive, in what is termed the opposition of desire and duty, at the
heart of the moral struggle. Of course, taken strictly, there can be
no opposition here. The duty which did not awaken _any_ desire would
not appeal to the mind even as a duty. But we may distinguish between
a desire which is based on past satisfaction actually experienced, and
desire based simply upon the idea that the end is _desirable_--that it
ought to be desired. It may seem strange to speak of a desire based
simply upon the recognition that an end _should_ be desired, but the
possibility of awakening such a desire and the degree of its strength
are the test of a moral character. How far does this end awaken
response in me because I see that it is the end which is fit and due?
How far does it awaken this response although it does not fall into
line with past satisfactions, or although it actually thwart some
habitual satisfaction? Here is the opposition of duty and desire. It
lies in the contrast of a good which has demonstrated itself as such
in experience, and a good whose claim to be good rests only on the
fact that it is the act which meets the situation. It is the contrast
between a good of possession, and one of action.

From this point of view morality is a life of _aspiration_, and of
_faith_; there is required constant willingness to give up past
goods as the good, and to press on to new ends; not because past
achievements are bad, but because, being good, they have created
a situation which demands larger and more intricately related
achievements. This willingness is aspiration and it implies _faith_.
Only the old good is of sight, has verified itself to sense. The new
ideal, the end which meets the situation, is felt as good only in so
far as the character has formed the conviction that to meet obligation
is itself a good, whether bringing sensible satisfaction or not. You
can prove to a man that he ought to act so and so (that is to say,
that such an act is the one which fits the present occasion), but you
cannot _prove_ to him that the performance of that duty will be good.
Only faith in the moral order, in the identity of duty and the good,
can assert this. Every time an agent takes as his end (that is, chooses
as good) an activity which he has not already tried, he asserts his
belief in the goodness of right action as such. This faith is not a
mere intellectual thing, but it is practical--the staking of self upon
activity as against passive possession.


LXVII.

Moral Badness.

Badness originates in the contrast which thus comes about between
_having_ the repetition of former action, and _doing_--pressing
forward to the new right action. Goodness is the choice of doing; the
refusal to be content with past good as exhausting the entire content
of goodness. It is, says Green, 'in the continued effort to be better
that goodness consists'. The man, however bad his past and however
limited his range of intellectual, æsthetic and social activity, who
is dissatisfied with his past, and whose dissatisfaction manifests
itself in act, is accounted better than the man of a respectable past
and higher plane of life who has lapsed into contented acquiescence
with past deeds. For past deeds are not _deeds_, they are passive
enjoyments. The bad man, on the other hand, is not the man who loves
badness _in and for itself_. Such a man would be a mad man or a
devil. All conduct, bad as well as good, is for the sake of _some_
satisfaction, that is, some good. In the bad man, the satisfaction
which is aimed at is _simply_ the one congruent with existing
inclinations, irrespective of the sufficiency of those inclinations in
view of the changed capacity and environment: it is a good of _having_.
The bad man, that is to say, does not recognize any _ideal_ or _active_
good; any good which has not already commended itself to him as such.
This good may be good in _itself_; but, as distinguished from the good
which requires action, that which would fulfill the present capacity or
meet the present situation, it is bad.

     Thus Alexander terms badness _a survival_, in part at
     least, of former goodness. Hinton says (Philosophy and
     Religion, p. 146), "That a thing is wrong does not mean
     that it ought never to have been done or thought, but that
     it ought to be left off". It will be noted that we are not
     dealing with the metaphysical or the religious problem of
     the nature and origin of evil, but simply with an account
     of bad action as it appears in individual conduct.

Badness has four traits, all derivable from this basal fact. They are:
(1) Lawlessness, (2) Selfishness, (3) Baseness, (4) Demoralization.

1. _Lawlessness._ When desire and duty, that is, when desires based on
past having and on future acting, conflict, the bad man lets duty go.
He virtually denies that it is a good at all--it may be a good in the
abstract but not a good for him. He denies that obligation as such has
any value; that any end is to be consulted save his own state of mind.
He denies that there is law for conduct--at least any law beyond the
inclination which he happens to have at the time of action. Keeping
himself within that which has verified itself to his feeling in the
past, he abrogates all authority excepting that of his own immediate
feelings.

2. _Selfishness._ It has already been shown that the self is not
necessarily immoral, and hence that action for self is not necessarily
bad--indeed, that the true self is social and interest in it right (see
Sec. XXXV). But when a satisfaction based on past experience is set
against one proceeding from an act as meeting obligation, there grows
up a divorce in the self. The actual self, the self recognizing only
past and sensible satisfaction, is set over against the self which
recognizes the necessity of expansion and a wider environment. Since
the former self confines its action to benefits demonstrably accruing
to itself, while the latter, in meeting the demands of the situation,
necessarily contributes to the satisfaction of others, one takes the
form of a _private_ self, a self whose good is set over against and
exclusive of that of others, while the self recognizing obligation
becomes a social self--the self which performs its due function in
society. It is, again, the contrast between getting and doing.

All moral action is based upon the presupposition of the identity
of good (Sec. XL), but it by no means follows that this identity of
good can be demonstrated to the agent at the time of action. On the
contrary, it is matter of the commonest experience that the sensible
good, the demonstrable good (that is, the one visible on the line of
past satisfaction) may be contradictory to the act which would satisfy
the interests of others. The identity of interests can be proved _only
by acting upon it_; to the agent, prior to action, it is a matter of
faith. Choice presents itself then in these cases as a test: Do you
believe that the Good is simply your private good, or is the true Good,
is _your_ good, one which includes the good of others? The condemnation
passed upon the 'selfish' man is that he virtually declares that good
is essentially exclusive and private. He shuts himself up within
himself, within, that is, his past achievements, and the inclinations
based upon them. The good man goes out of himself in new action. Bad
action is thus essentially narrowing, it confines the self; good action
is expansive and vital, it moves on to a larger self.

In fine, all conduct, good and bad, satisfies the self; bad conduct,
however, aims at a self which, keeping its eye upon its private and
assured satisfaction, refuses to recognize the increasing function with
its larger social range,--the 'selfish' self.

Light is thrown upon this point by referring to what was said about
interest (Sec. XXXIV). Interest is _active_ feeling, feeling turned
upon an object, and going out toward it so as to identify it with self.
In this active and objective interest there is satisfaction, but the
satisfaction is _in_ the activity which has the object for its content.
This is the satisfaction of the good self. In the bad self, interest is
reduced to mere feeling; for the aim of life in such a self is simply
to have certain feelings as its own possession; activity and its object
are degraded into mere means for getting these sensations.

Activity has two sides; as activity, as projection or expression of
one's powers, it satisfies self; as activity, also, it has some end,
some object, for its content. The activity as such, therefore, the
activity for its own sake, must involve the realization of this object
for its own sake. But in having, in getting, there is no such creation
or maintenance of an object for itself. Objects cease to be 'ends
in themselves' when they cease to be the content of action; and are
degraded into means of private satisfaction, that is, of sensation.

3. _Baseness._ For, when we say that bad action takes account of
ideals only on the basis of possession, we say, in effect, that
it takes account only of _sensible_ satisfaction. As it is in the
progressive movement of morality that there arises the distinction of
the law-abiding and the lawless self, of the social and the selfish
self, so in the same aspect there comes into existence the distinction
of the low, degraded, sensual self, as against the higher or spiritual
self. In themselves, or naturally, there is no desire high, none low.
But when an inclination for an end which consists in possession comes
into conflict with one which includes an active satisfaction--one not
previously enjoyed--the contrast arises. It is wrong to say, with Kant,
that the bad act is simply for pleasure; for the bad act, the choice
of a past satisfaction as against the aspiration for a wider good,
may have a large content--it may be the good of one's family; it may
be scientific or æsthetic culture. Yet the moment a man begins to live
on the plane of past satisfaction as such, he has begun to live on the
plane of 'sense', or for pleasure. The refusal to recognize the ideal
good, to acknowledge activity as good, throws the agent back into a
life of dwelling upon his own sensible good, and thus he falls more and
more into a life of dwelling upon mere sensations. What made the past
good a good at all was the spirit, the activity, in it, and when it is
no longer an activity, but a mere keeping, the life is gone out of it.
The selfish life must degenerate into mere sensuality--although when
sensuality is 'refined' we call it sentimentality.

4. _Demoralization._ Morality is activity; exercise of function.
To cease this activity is not to remain on the attained level, for
that, _when attained_, was active. It is to relapse, to slip down
into badness. The moral end is always an activity. To fail in this
activity is, therefore, to involve character in disintegration. It can
be kept together only by constant organizing activity; only by acting
upon new wants and moving toward new situations. Let this activity
cease, and disorganization ensues, as surely as the body decays when
life goes, instead of simply remaining inert as it was. Bad conduct
is thus _unprincipled_; it has no center, no movement. The good man
is 'organic'; he uses his attainments to discover new needs, and to
assimilate new material. He lives from within outwards, his character
is compact, coherent; he has _integrity_. The bad man, having no
controlling unity, has no consistent line of action; his motives of
conduct contradict one another; he follows this maxim in relation to
this person, that in relation to another; character is _demoralized_.

The bad man is unstable and double-minded. He is not one person, but a
group of conflicting wills. So far as he is really bad he becomes as
many persons as he has desires. His conduct cannot be made universal.
He always makes exceptions in favor of himself. He does not want moral
relations abolished, but relaxed or deflected in his own case, while
they still hold for other men.

     This is the truth at the basis of Kant's contention
     regarding goodness as conduct whose maxim is capable of
     generalization. See also Bradley, Op. cit., pp. 261-271.
     And Alexander, Op. cit., pp. 309-312.


LXVIII.

Goodness in its Relation to the Struggle.

1. Two aspects of this we have already noted; one, that of
conscientiousness, or habitual alertness and responsiveness of
intelligence to the nature of obligation, both in general and as to
the specific acts which are obligatory. The other is that goodness,
in this relation, consists in _progressive_ adjustment, involving
aspiration as to future conduct, and correlative humility as to present
achievements of character.

2. We may state what has already been suggested, that goodness as
self-sacrifice or self-renunciation has also its place here. The moral
attitude is one of renunciation, because, on account of the constantly
growing wants and circumstances, the satisfactions which belong to
the actually realized self must be given up for active goods. That
the self-sacrifice takes largely the form of the surrender of private
interests to the welfare of the whole, is explained by what has just
been said regarding selfishness. Self-sacrifice is not in any way the
moral end or the last word. Life is lost that it may be found. The
smaller local life of the private self is given up in order that the
richer and fuller life of the social or active self may be realized.
But none the less the self-sacrifice at the time that it is made is
genuine and real. While it is involved in the very nature of morality
that moral conduct shall bring greater activity, larger life, the
motive of the agent in self-sacrifice is not to give up the lesser
satisfaction for the sake of getting a greater. It is only so far as
he is already moral that he is convinced that the new duty will bring
satisfaction, and his conviction is not one of sense, but of faith.
To the agent at the time of action, it is a real satisfaction which is
given up for one that is only ideal, and given up because the ideal
satisfaction is ethical, active--one congruent to duty, while the
actual satisfaction is only pathological; that is, congruent to the
actualized self--to the having, instead of the doing self.

3. Goodness is not remoteness from badness. In one sense, goodness is
based upon badness; that is, good action is always based upon action
good once, but bad if persisted in under changing circumstances. The
moral struggle thus presents itself as the conflict between this
"bad" and the good which would duly meet the existing situation. This
good, of course, does not involve the annihilation of the previously
attained good--the present bad--but its subordination; its use in the
new function. This is the explanation of the apparently paradoxical
statement that badness is the material of good action--a statement
literally correct when badness is understood as it is here. Evil is
simply that which goodness has to _overcome_--has to make an element of
itself.

Badness, as just spoken of, is only potential--the end is bad as
contrasted with the better. Badness may also, of course, be actual;
the bad end may be chosen, and adopted into character. Even in this
sense, goodness is not the absence of evil, or entire freedom from it.
Badness even on this basis is the material of goodness; it is to be put
under foot and made an element in good action. But how can actual evil
be made a factor of right conduct? In this way; the good man learns
from his own bad acts; he does not continue to repeat such acts, nor
does he, while recognizing their badness, simply endeavor to do right
without regard to the previous bad conduct. Perceiving the effect of
his own wrong acts, the change produced in his own capacities, and his
altered relations to other people, he acts so as to meet the situation
which his own bad act has helped to create. Conduct is then right,
although made what it is, to some degree, by previous wrong conduct.

In this connection, the introduction of Christianity made one of its
largest ethical contributions. It showed how it was possible for a man
to put his badness behind him and even make it an element in goodness.
Teaching that the world of social relations was itself an ethical
reality and a good (a redeemed world), it taught that the individual,
by identifying himself with the spirit of this ethical world, might be
freed from slavery to his past evil; that by recognizing and taking
for his own the evil in the world, instead of engaging in an isolated
struggle to become good by himself, he might make the evil a factor in
his own right action.

Moreover, by placing morality in activity and not in some thing, or in
conformity to an external law, Christianity changed the nature of the
struggle. While the old struggle had been an effort to get away from
evil to a good beyond, Christianity made the struggle itself a good.
It, then, was no longer the effort to escape to some fixed, unchanging
state; the constant onward movement was itself the goal. Virtue, as
Hegel says, is the battle, the struggle, carried to its full.

4. _The conception of merit._ This is, essentially, the idea of social
desert--the idea that an agent deserves well of others on account of
his act or his character. An action evokes two kinds of judgments:
first, that the act is right or virtuous, that it fulfills duty. This
judgment may be passed by any one; as well by the agent as by any one
else. It is simply the recognition of the moral character of the act.
But a right act may also awaken a conviction of desert; that the act is
one which furthers the needs of society, and thus is meritorious.

_This_ is _not_ a judgment which the agent can pass upon his own act.
Virtue and duty are strictly coextensive; no act can be so virtuous, so
right, as to go beyond meeting the demands of the situation. Everything
is a duty which needs to be done in a given situation; the doing of
what needs to be done is right or virtuous. While the agent may and
must approve of right action in himself, he cannot claim desert or
reward because of its virtuousness; he simply does what he should.

Others, however, may see that the act has been done in the face
of great temptation; after a hard struggle; that it denotes some
unusual qualification or executes some remarkable service. It is not
only right, but obligatory, for others to take due notice of these
qualities, of these deeds. Such notice is as requisite as it is to show
gratitude for generosity, or forgiveness to a repentant man.

Two errors are to be avoided here; both arising from the identification
of merit with virtue. One view holds that the virtue and merit consist
in doing something over and above duty. There is a minimum of action
which is obligatory; to perform this, since it is obligatory, is no
virtue. Anything above this is virtuous. The other view reverses this
and holds that since no man can do more than he ought, there is no
such thing as merit. Great excellence or heroism in one man is no
more meritorious than ordinary conduct in another; since the one man
is naturally more gifted than the other. But while one act is no more
right or virtuous than another, it may be more meritorious, because
contributing more to moral welfare or progress. To depreciate the
meritorious deed is a sign of a carping, a grudging or a mean spirit.

     The respective relations of duty, virtue and merit have
     been variously discussed. Different views will be found in
     Sidgwick, Method of Ethics, Bk. III, ch. iv; Alexander,
     Moral Order and Progress, pp. 187-195 and 242-247; Stephen,
     Science of Ethics, pp. 293-303; Martineau, Types of Ethical
     Theory, pp. 78-81; Laurie, Ethica, pp. 145-148.




