PART III.

THE MORAL LIFE OF THE INDIVIDUAL.


LVII.

Division of Subject.

We have now analyzed the fundamental moral notions--the good, duty and
freedom; we have considered their objective realization, and seen that
they are outwardly expressed in social relations, the more typical
and abiding of which we call institutions; that abstract duties are
realized in the laws created and imposed by such institutions, and
that abstract freedom is realized in the rights possessed by members
in them. We have now to consider the concrete moral life of an
individual born into this existing ethical world and finding himself
confronted with institutions in which he must execute his part, and
in which he obtains his satisfaction and free activity. We have to
consider how these institutions appeal to the individual, awakening in
him a distinct _moral_ consciousness, or the consciousness of active
relations to persons, in antithesis to the theoretical consciousness
of relations which exist in contemplation; how the individual behaves
towards these institutions, realizing them by assuming his proper
position in them, or attempting to thwart them by living in isolation
from them; and how a moral character is thus called into being. More
shortly, we have to deal (I) with the practical consciousness, or
the formation and growth of ideals of conduct; (II) with the moral
struggle, or the process of realizing ideals, and (III) with moral
character, or the virtues.




CHAPTER I.--THE FORMATION AND GROWTH OF IDEALS.


LVIII.

Analysis of Conscience.

The practical consciousness, or the recognition of ends and relations
of action, is what is usually termed _conscience_. The analysis
of conscience shows that it involves three elements, which may be
distinguished in theory, although they have no separate existence in
the actual fact of conscience itself. These three elements are (1) the
knowledge of certain specific forms of conduct, (2) the recognition of
the authority or obligatoriness of the forms, and (3) the emotional
factors which cluster about this recognition. That is to say, we often
speak (1) of conscience telling or informing us of duties; we speak of
an enlightened or unenlightened conscience; of savage, or mediæval, or
modern conscience. Here we are evidently thinking of the kind and range
of particular acts considered right or wrong. But we also speak (2) of
the authority and majesty of conscience; of the commands of conscience,
etc. Here we are thinking of the consciousness of _obligation in
general_. The savage and the civilized man may vary greatly in their
estimate of what particular acts are right or wrong, and yet agree in
the recognition that such acts as are right are absolutely obligatory.
Finally we speak of an approving or disapproving, or remorseful
conscience, of a tender or a hardened conscience, of the pangs, the
pricks of conscience, etc. Here (3) we are evidently dealing with the
responsiveness of the disposition to moral distinctions, either in
particular acts, or in the recognition of moral law in general.


LIX.

Conscience as the Recognition of Special Acts as Right or Wrong.

Conscience in this sense is no peculiar, separate faculty of mind. It
is simply intelligence dealing with a certain subject-matter. That is,
conscience is distinguished not by the kind of mental activity at work,
but by the kind of material the mind works upon. Intelligence deals
with the nature and relations of things, and we call it understanding;
intelligence deals with the relations of persons and deeds, and it is
termed conscience.

We may, with advantage, recognize these stages in the development of
intelligence as dealing with moral relationships:

1. _The Customary or Conventional Conscience._ The existing moral
world, with the types and varieties of institutions peculiar to it, is
constantly impressing itself upon the immature mind; it makes certain
demands of moral agents and enforces them with all the means in its
power--punishment, reward, blame, public-opinion, and the bestowal of
social leadership. These demands and expectations naturally give rise
to certain convictions in the individual as to what he should or should
not do. Such convictions are not the outcome of independent reflection,
but of the moulding influence of social institutions. Moreover the
morality of a time becomes consolidated into proverbs, maxims and
law-codes. It takes shape in certain habitual ways of looking at and
judging matters. All these are instilled into the growing mind through
language, literature, association and legal custom, until they leave in
the mind a corresponding habit and attitude toward things to be done.
This process may be compared to the process by which knowledge of
the world of things is first attained. Certain of the more permanent
features of this world, especially those whose observance is important
in relation to continued physical existence and well-being, impress
themselves upon the mind. Consciousness, with no reflective activity of
its own, comes to mirror some of the main outlines of the world. The
more important distinctions are fixed in language, and they find their
way into the individual mind, giving it unconsciously a certain bent
and coloring.

2. _The Loyal Conscience._ But just as the mind, which seems at
first to have the facts and features of the world poured into itself
as a passive vessel, comes in time through its own experience to
appreciate something of their meaning, and, to some extent, to verify
them for itself; so the mind in its moral relations. Without forming
any critical theory of the institutions and codes which are forming
character, without even considering whether they are what they should
be, the individual yet comes at least to a practical recognition that
it is in these institutions that he gets his satisfactions, and through
these codes that he is protected. He identifies himself, his own life,
with the social forms and ideals in which he lives, and repels any
attack upon them as he would an attack upon himself. The demands which
the existing institutions make upon him are not felt as the coercions
of a despot, but as expressions of his own will, and requiring loyalty
as such. The conventional conscience, if it does not grow into this,
tends to become slavish, while an intelligence which practically
realizes, although without continual reflection, the _significance_ of
conventional morality is _free_ in its convictions and service.

3. _The Independent or Reflective Conscience._ The intelligence may
not simply appropriate, as its own, conventions embodied in current
institutions and codes, but may _reflect_ upon them. It may ask: What
is this institution of family, property for? Does the institution
in its present form work as it should work, or is some modification
required? Does this rule which is now current embody the true needs of
the situation, or is it an antiquated expression of by-gone relations?
What is the true spirit of existing institutions, and what sort of
conduct does this spirit demand?

Here, in a word, we have the same relation to the ethical world, that
we have in physical science to the external world. Intelligence is not
content, on its theoretical side, with having facts impressed upon
it by direct contact or through language; it is not content with
coming to feel for itself the value of the truths so impressed. It
assumes an independent attitude, putting itself over against nature and
cross-questioning her. It proposes its own ideas, its own theories and
hypotheses, and manipulates facts to see if this rational meaning can
be verified. It criticises what passes as truth, and pushes on to more
adequate statement.

The correlative attempt, on the part of intelligence on its practical
side, may have a larger or a smaller scope. In its wider course
it aims to criticise and to re-form prevailing social ideals and
institutions--even those apparently most fixed. This is the work of
the great moral teachers of the world. But in order that conscience be
critical, it is not necessary that its range be so wide. The average
member of a civilized community is nowadays called upon to reflect
upon his immediate relationships in life, to see if they are what
they should be; to regulate his own conduct by rules which he follows
not simply because they are customary, but the result of his own
examination of the situation. There is no difference in kind between
the grander and the minuter work. And it is only the constant exercise
of reflective examination on the smaller scale which makes possible,
and which gives efficiency to, the deeper criticism and transformation.


LX.

Reflective Conscience and the Ethical World.

This conception of conscience as critical and reflective is one of the
chief fruits of the Socratic ethics, fructified by the new meaning
given life through the Christian spirit. It involves the 'right of
free conscience'--the right of the individual to know the good, to
know the end of action, for himself, rather than to have some good,
however imposing and however beneficent, enjoined from without. It
is this principle of subjective freedom, says Hegel, which marks the
turning-point in the distinction of modern from ancient times (Sec.
124, _Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts_, Vol. VIII of Hegel's
Works).[2]

     [2] I hardly need say how largely I am indebted in the
     treatment of this topic, and indeed, in the whole matter of
     the 'ethical world', to Hegel.

But this notion of conscience is misinterpreted when the content as
well as the form of conscience is thought to be individual. There is
no right of private judgment, in the sense that there is not a public
source and standard of judgment. What is meant by this right is that
the standard, the source, is not the opinion of some other person,
or group of persons. It is a common, objective standard. It is that
embodied in social relationships themselves.

The conception of conscience as a private possession, to be exercised
by each one in independence of historical forms and contemporary
ideals, is thoroughly misleading. The saying "I had to follow my
own notion of what is right" has been made the excuse for all sorts
of capricious, obstinate and sentimental performance. It is of such
notions that Hegel further says: "The striving for a morality of one's
own is futile, and by its very nature impossible of attainment; in
respect of morality the saying of the wisest men of antiquity is the
only true one: To be moral is to live in accordance with the moral
tradition of one's country" (Hegel, Works, Vol. I, p. 389). And in
discussing the same question, Bradley has said that the wish to have
a morality of one's own better than that of the world is to be on the
threshold of morality (p. 180).

Yet, on the other hand, conscience should not simply repeat the
burden of existing usages and opinions. No one can claim that the
existing morality embodies the highest possible conception of personal
relations. A morality which does not recognize both the possibility
and the necessity of advance is immorality. Where then is the way out
from a capricious self-conceit, on one hand, and a dead conformity
on the other? Reflective conscience must be _based_ on the moral
consciousness expressed in existing institutions, manners and beliefs.
Otherwise it is empty and arbitrary. But the existing moral status is
never wholly self-consistent. It realizes ideals in one relation which
it does not in another; it gives rights to 'aristocrats' which it
denies to low-born; to men, which it refuses to women; it exempts the
rich from obligations which it imposes upon the poor. Its institutions
embody a common good which turns out to be good only to a privileged
few, and thus existing in self-contradiction. They suggest ends which
they execute only feebly or intermittently. Reflective intelligence
cross-questions the existing morality; and extracts from it the
ideal which it pretends to embody, and thus is able to criticise the
existing morality in the light of its _own_ ideal. It points out the
inconsistencies, the incoherencies, the compromises, the failures,
between the actual practice and the theory at the basis of this
practice. And thus the new ideal proposed by the individual is not
a product of his private opinions, but is the outcome of the ideal
embodied in existing customs, ideas and institutions.


LXI.

The Sense of Obligation.

There has been much discussion regarding the nature of the act of mind
by which obligation is recognized. A not uncommon view has been that
the sense of duty as such must be the work of a peculiar faculty of
the mind. Admitting that the recognition of this or that particular
thing as right or wrong, is the work of ordinary intelligence, it is
held that the additional recognition of the absolute obligatoriness of
the right cannot be the work of this intelligence. For our intellect is
confined to judging what is or has been; the conception of obligation,
of something which should be, wholly transcends its scope. There is,
therefore, some special moral in faculty called which affixes to the
ordinary judgments the stamp of the categorical imperative "You ought".

     See for example Maurice on "Conscience". The view is
     traceable historically to Kant's conception of Practical
     Reason, but as the view is ordinarily advanced the function
     of Practical Reason in Kant's philosophy is overlooked. The
     Practical Reason is no special faculty of man's being; it
     is his consciousness of himself as an acting being; that
     is, as a being capable of acting from ideas. Kant never
     separates the consciousness of duty from the very nature
     of will as the realization of conceptions. In the average
     modern presentation, this intrinsic connection of duty with
     activity is absent. Conscience becomes a faculty whose
     function it is to clap the idea of duty upon the existent
     conception of an act; and this existent conception is
     regarded as morally indifferent.

     It is true that Kant's Practical Reason has a certain
     separateness or isolation. But this is because of his
     general separation of the rational from the sensuous
     factor, and not because of any separation of the
     consciousness of action from the consciousness of duty. If
     Kant erred in his divorce of desire and duty, then even the
     relative apartness of the Practical Reason must be given
     up. The consciousness of obligation is involved in the
     recognition of _any_ end of conduct, and not simply in the
     end of abstract law.

Such a conception of conscience, however, is open to serious
objections. Aside from the fact that large numbers of men declare
that no amount of introspection reveals any such machinery within
themselves, this separate faculty seems quite superfluous. The real
distinction is not between the consciousness of an action with, and
without, the recognition of duty, but between a consciousness which is
and one which is not capable of conduct. Any being who is capable of
putting before himself ideas as motives of conduct, who is capable of
forming a conception of something which he would realize, is, by that
very fact, capable of a sense of obligation. The consciousness of an
end to be realized, the idea of something to be done, is, in and of
itself, the consciousness of duty.

Let us consider again the horse-car conductor (see Sec. LVI). After he
has analyzed the situation which faces him and decided that a given
course of conduct is the one which fits the situation, does he require
some additional faculty to inform him that this course is the one
which should be followed? The analysis of practical ideas, that is, of
proposed ends of conduct, is from the first an analysis of what should
be done. Such being the case, it is no marvel that the conclusion of
the reflection is: "This should (ought to) be done."

Indeed, just as every judgment about existent fact naturally takes the
form 'S _is_ P', so every judgment regarding an activity which executes
an idea takes the form, 'S ought (or ought not) to be P'. It requires
no additional faculty of mind, after intelligence has been studying
the motions of the moon, to insert itself, and affirm some objective
relation or truth--as that the moon's motions are explainable by the
law of gravitation. It is the very essence of theoretical judgment,
judgment regarding fact, to state truth--what is. And it is the very
essence of practical judgment, judgment regarding deeds, to state that
active relation which we call obligation, what _ought to be_.

The judgment as to what a practical situation _is_, is an untrue or
abstract judgment.

The practical situation is itself an _activity_; the needs, powers, and
circumstances which make it are moving on. At no instant in time is
the scene quiescent. But the agent, in order to determine his course
of action in view of this situation, has to _fix_ it; he has to arrest
its onward movement in order to tell what it is. So his abstracting
intellect cuts a cross-section through its on-going, and says 'This
_is_ the situation'. Now the judgment 'This ought to be the situation',
or 'in view of the situation, my conduct ought to be thus and so', is
simply restoring the movement which the mind has temporarily put out
of sight. By means of its cross-section, intelligence has detected the
principle, or law of movement, of the situation, and it is on the basis
of this movement that conscience declares what ought to be.

Just as the fact of moral law, or of authority, of the incumbency of
duty, needs for its explanation no separation of the 'is' from the
'ought' (see LVI), but only recognition of the law of the 'is' which
is, perforce, a law of movement, and of change;--so the consciousness
of law, 'the sense of obligation' requires no special mental faculty
which may declare what ought to be. The intelligence that is capable
of declaring truth, or what is, is capable also of making known
obligation. For obligation is only _practical_ truth, the 'is' of doing.

     See upon this point, as well as upon the relation of laws
     and rules to action, my article in Vol. I, No. 2, of the
     International Journal of Ethics, entitled 'Moral Theory and
     Practice'.


LXII.

Conscience as Emotional Disposition.

Probably no judgment is entire-free from emotional coloring and
accompaniments. It is doubtful whether the most indifferent judgment
is not based upon, and does not appeal to, some interest. Certainly
all the more important judgments awaken some response from the self,
and excite its interests to their depths. Some of them may be excited
by the intrinsic nature of the subject-matter under judgment, while
others are the results of associations more or less accidental.
The former will necessarily be aroused in every being, who has any
emotional nature at all, whenever the judgment is made, while the
latter will vary from time to time, and may entirely pass away. That
moral judgments, judgments of what should be (or should have been)
done, arouse emotional response, is therefore no cause for surprise. It
may help clear up difficulties if we distinguish three kinds of such
emotional accompaniment.

1. There are, first, the interests belonging to the sense of obligation
as such. We have just seen that this sense of obligation is nothing
separate from the consciousness of the particular act which is to
be performed. Nevertheless the consciousness of obligation, of an
authority and law, recurs with every act, while the special content of
the act constantly varies. Thus an idea of law, or of duty in general,
is formed, distinct from any special duty. Being formed, it arouses the
special emotional excitation appropriate to it. The formation of this
general idea of duty, and the growth of feeling of duty as such, is
helped on through the fact that children (and adults so far as their
moral life is immature) need to have their moral judgments constantly
reinforced by recurrence to the thought of law. That is to say, a
child, who is not capable of seeing the true moral bearings and claims
of an act, is yet continually required to perform such an act on the
ground that it is obligatory. The feeling, therefore, is natural and
legitimate. It must, however, go hand in hand with the feelings aroused
by the special moral relations under consideration. Disconnected from
such union, it necessarily leads to slavish and arbitrary forms of
conduct. A child, for example, who is constantly taught to perform acts
simply because he _ought_ to do so, without having at the same time
his intelligence directed to the nature of the act which is obligatory
(without, that is, being led to see how or why it is obligatory), may
have a strongly developed sense of obligation. As he grows up, however,
this sense of duty will be largely one of dread and apprehension; a
feeling of constraint, rather than of free service. Besides this, it
will be largely a matter of accident to what act this feeling attaches
itself. Anything that comes to the mind with the force of associations
of past education, any ideal that forces itself persistently into
consciousness from any source may awaken this sense of obligation,
wholly irrespective of the true nature of the act. This is the
explanation of strongly 'conscientious' persons, whose morality is yet
unintelligent and blundering. It is of such persons that it has been
said that a thoroughly _good_ man can do more harm than a number of bad
men.

When, however, the feeling of obligation in general is developed along
with particular moral judgments (that is, along with the habit of
considering the special nature of acts performed), it is one of the
strongest supports to morality. Acts constantly need to be performed
which are recognized as right and as obligatory, and yet with reference
to which there is no fixed habit of conduct. In these cases, the more
direct, or spontaneous, stimulus to action is wanting.

If, however, there is a strong sense of obligation in general, this may
attach itself to the particular act and thus afford the needed impetus.
In unusual experiences, and in cases where the ordinary motive-forces
are lacking, such a feeling of regard for law may be the only sure stay
of right conduct.

2. There is the emotional accompaniment appropriate to the special
content of the act. If, for example, the required act has to do with
some person, there arise in consciousness the feelings of interest, of
love and friendship, or of dislike, which belong to that person. If it
relate to some piece of work to be done, the sweeping of a room, the
taking of a journey, the painting of a picture, there are the interests
natural to such subjects. These feelings when aroused necessarily form
part of the emotional attitude as respects the act. It is the strength
and normal welling-up of such specific interests which afford the best
assurance of healthy and progressive moral conduct, as distinct from
mere sentimental dwelling upon ideals. Only interests prevent the
divorce of feelings and ideas from habits of action. Such interests are
the union of the subjective element, the self, and the objective, the
special relations to be realized (Sec. XXXIV), and thus necessarily
produce a right and healthy attitude towards moral ends. It is obvious
that in a normal moral life, the law of obligation in general, and the
specific interests in particular cases, should more and more fuse. The
interests, at their strongest, take the form of _love_. And thus there
is realized the ideal of an effective character; the union of law and
inclination in its pure form--love for the action in and of itself.

3. Emotions due to accidental associations. It is matter of common
notice that the moral feelings are rarely wholly pure; that all sorts
of sentiments, due to associations of time and place and person not
strictly belonging to the acts themselves, cluster about them. While
this is true, we should not forget the great difficulty there is in
marking off any associations as _wholly_ external to the nature of
the act. We may say that mere fear of punishment is such a wholly
external feeling, having no place in moral emotion. Yet it may be
doubted whether there is any feeling that may be called mere fear
of punishment. It is, perhaps, fear of punishment by a parent, for
whom one has love and respect, and thus the fear has partially a
genuinely moral aspect. Some writers would call the æsthetic feelings,
the feelings of beauty, of harmony, which gather about moral ends
adventitious. Yet the fact that other moralists have made all moral
feelings essentially æsthetic, as due to the perception of the fitness
and proportion of the acts, should warn us from regarding æsthetic
feelings as wholly external. About all that can be said is that
feelings which do not spring from _some_ aspect of the content of the
act itself should be extruded, with growing maturity of character, from
influence upon conduct.


LXIII.

Conscientiousness.

Conscientiousness is primarily the virtue of intelligence in regard
to conduct. That is to say, it is the formed habit of bringing
intelligence to bear upon the analysis of moral relations--the habit of
considering what ought to be done. It is based upon the recognition of
the idea first distinctly formulated by Socrates--that "an unexamined
life is not one that should be led by man". It is the outgrowth of the
customary morality embodied in usages, codes and social institutions,
but it is an advance upon custom, because it requires a meaning and
a reason. It is the mark of a "character which will not be satisfied
without understanding the law that it obeys; without knowing what
the good is, for which the demand has hitherto been blindly at work"
(Green, Op. cit., p. 270). Conscientiousness, then, is reflective
intelligence grown into character. It involves a greater and wider
recognition of obligation in general, and a larger and more stable
emotional response to everything that presents itself as duty; as well
as the habit of deliberate consideration of the moral situation and of
the acts demanded by it.

Conscientiousness is an analysis of the conditions under which conduct
takes place, and of the action that will meet these conditions;
it is a thoroughly _objective_ analysis. What is sometimes termed
conscientiousness is merely the habit of analyzing internal moods
and sentiments; of prying into 'motives' in that sense of motive
which identifies it not with the end of action, but with some
subjective state of emotion. Thus considered, conscientiousness is
morbid. We are sometimes warned against _over_-conscientiousness.
But such conscientiousness means simply over-regard of one's private
self; keeping an eye upon the effect of conduct on one's internal
state, rather than upon conduct itself. Over-conscientiousness is as
impossible as over-intelligence, since it is simply the application
of intelligence to conduct. It is as little morbid and introspective
as is the analysis of any fact in nature. Another notion which is
sometimes thought to be bound up with that of conscience, also has
nothing to do with it; namely, the notion of a precision and coldness
opposed to all large spontaneity and broad sympathy in conduct. The
reflective man of narrow insight and cramped conduct is often called
the conscientious man and opposed to the man of generous impulses. This
comes from identifying conscience with a ready-made code of rules, and
its action with the application of some such fixed code to all acts
as they come up. It is evident, on the contrary, that such a habit is
opposed to conscience. Conscience means the consideration of each case
_in itself_; measuring it not by any outside code, but in the existing
moral situation.

     On conscientiousness, see Green, Op. cit., pp. 269-271
     and 323-327; and Alexander, Op. cit., pp. 156-160. These
     writers, however, seem to identify it too much with
     internal scrutiny. Green, for example, expressly identifies
     conscientiousness with a man's "questioning about himself,
     whether he has been as good as he should have been, whether
     a better man would not have acted otherwise than he has
     done" (p. 323). He again speaks of it as "comparison of
     our own practice, as we know it on the inner side in
     relation to the motives and character which it expresses,
     with an ideal of virtue". The first definition seems to be
     misleading. Questioning as to whether the end adopted was
     what it should have been, _i. e._, whether the analysis
     of the situation was correctly performed, may be of great
     service in aiding future decisions, but questioning
     regarding the purity of one's own 'motive' does not seem of
     much avail. In a man upon the whole good, such questioning
     is apt to be paralyzing. The energy that should go to
     conduct goes to anxiety about one's conduct. It is the view
     of goodness as directed mainly towards one's own private
     motives, which has led such writers as Henry James, Sr.,
     and Mr. Hinton, to conceive of 'morality', the struggle
     for goodness, to be in essence bad. They conceived of
     the struggle for 'private goodness' as no different from
     the struggle for private pleasure, although likely, of
     course, to lead to better things. Nor in a bad man is such
     scrutiny of 'motive', as apart from objective end, of much
     value. The bad man is generally aware of the badness of
     his motive without much close examination. The truth aimed
     at by Green is, I think, amply covered by recognizing that
     conscientiousness as a constant will to know what should
     be, and to readjust conduct to meet the new insight, is the
     spring of the moral life.


LXIV.

Moral Commands, Rules and Systems.

What is the part played by specific commands and by general rules
in the examination of conduct by conscience? We should note, in the
first place, that commands are not rules, and rules are not commands.
A command, to be a command, must be specific and individual. It must
refer to time, place and circumstance. 'Thou shalt do no murder' is
not strictly speaking a command, for it allows questioning as to what
is murder. Is killing in war murder? Is the hanging of criminals
murder? Is taking life in self-defense murder? Regarded simply as a
command, this command would be 'void for uncertainty'. A true command
is a specific injunction of one person to another to do or not to do
a stated thing or things. Under what conditions do commands play a
part in moral conduct? In cases where the intelligence of the agent is
so undeveloped that he cannot realize for himself the situation and
see the act required, and when a part of the agent's environment is
constituted by others who have such required knowledge, there _is_ a
moral element in command and in obedience.

This explains the moral responsibility of parents to children and of
children to parents. The soldier, too, in recognizing a general's
command, is recognizing the situation as it exists for him. Were there
simply superior force on one side, and fear on the other, the relation
would be an immoral one. It is implied, of course, in such an instance
as the parents' command, that it be so directed as to enable the child
more and more to dispense with it--that is, that it be of such a
character as to give the child insight into the situation for himself.
Here is the transition from a command to a rule.

A rule does not tell what to do or what to leave undone. The Golden
Rule, for example, does not tell me how to act in any specific case. _A
rule is a tool of analysis._ The moral situation, or capacity in its
relation to environment, is often an extremely complicated affair. How
shall the individual resolve it? How shall he pick it to pieces, so as
to see its real nature and the act demanded by it? It is evident that
the analysis will be the more truly and speedily performed if the agent
has a method by which to attack it, certain principles in the light of
which he may view it, instruments for cross-questioning it and making
it render up its meaning. Moral rules perform this service. While the
Golden Rule does not of itself give one jot of information as to what I
should do in a given case, it does, if accepted, immensely simplify the
situation. Without it I should perhaps have to act blindly; with it the
question comes to this: What should I, under the given circumstances,
like to have done to me? This settled, the whole question of what
should be done is settled.

It is obvious, then, that the value of a moral rule depends upon
its potency in revealing the inner spirit and reality of individual
deeds. Rules in the negative form, rules whose application is limited
in scope because of an attempt to be specific, are midway between
commands proper and rules. The Golden Rule, on the other hand, is
positive, and not attempting to define any specific act, covers in
its range all relations of man to man. It is indeed only a concrete
and forcible statement of the ethical principle itself, the idea of a
common good, or of a community of persons. This is also a convenient
place for considering the practical value of ethical systems. We have
already seen that no system can attempt to tell what in particular
should be done. The principle of a system, however, may be of some aid
in analyzing a specific case. In this way, a system may be regarded
as a highly generalized rule. It attempts to state some fundamental
principle which lies at the basis of moral conduct. So far as it
succeeds in doing this, there is the possibility of its practical
application in particular cases, although, of course, the mediate rules
must continue to be the working tools of mankind--on account of their
decided concrete character, and because they have themselves taken
shape under the pressure of practice rather than of more theoretical
needs.


LXV.

Development of Moral Ideals.

Thus far we have been speaking of conscience mainly as to its method of
working. We have now to speak more definitely of its content, or of the
development of ideals of action.

It is of the very nature of moral conduct to be progressive. Permanence
of _specific_ ideals means moral death. We say that truth-telling,
charity, loyalty, temperance, have always been moral ends and while
this is true, the statement as ordinarily made is apt to hide from us
the fact that the content of the various ideals (what is _meant_ by
temperance, etc.) has been constantly changing, and this of necessity.
The realization of moral ends must bring about a changed situation,
so that the repetition of the same ends would no longer satisfy. This
progress has two sides: the satisfaction of wants leads to a larger
view of what satisfaction really is, _i. e._, to the creation of new
capacities and wants; while adjustment to the environment creates wider
and more complex social relationships.

Let the act be one of intelligence. Some new fact or law is discovered.
On one hand, this discovery may arouse a hitherto comparatively
dormant mind; it may suggest the possession of capacities previously
latent; it may stimulate mental activity and create a thirst for
expanding knowledge. This readjustment of intellectual needs and
powers may be comparatively slight, or it may amount, as it has with
many a young person, to a revolution. On the other hand, the new
fact changes the intellectual outlook, the mental horizon, and, by
transforming somewhat the relations of things, demands new conduct.
All this, even when the growth of knowledge concerns only the physical
world. But development of insight into social needs and affairs has a
larger and more direct progressive influence. The social world exists
spiritually, as conceived, and a new conception of it, new perception
of its scope and bearings, is, perforce, a change of that world. And
thus it is with the satisfaction of the human want of knowledge, that
patience, courage, self-respect, humility, benevolence, all change
character. When, for example, psychology has given an increase of
knowledge regarding men's motives, political economy an increase of
knowledge regarding men's wants, when historical knowledge has added
its testimony regarding the effects of indiscriminate giving, charity
must change its content. While once, the mere supplying of food or
money by one to another may have been right as meeting the recognized
relations, charity now comes to mean large responsibility in knowledge
of antecedents and circumstances, need of organization, careful tracing
of consequences, and, above all, effort to remove the conditions which
made the want possible. The activity involved has infinitely widened.

Let the act be in the region of industrial life--a new invention. The
invention of the telephone does not simply satisfy an old want--it
creates new. It brings about the possibility of closer social
relations, extends the distribution of intelligence, facilitates
commerce. It is a common saying that the luxury of one generation
is the necessity of the next; that is to say, what once satisfied a
somewhat remote need becomes in time the basis upon which new needs
grow up. Energy previously pent up is set free, new power and ideals
are evoked. Consider again a person assuming a family relation. This
seems, at first, to consist mainly in the satisfaction of certain
common and obvious human wants. But this satisfaction, if moral,
turns out rather to be the creation of new insight into life, of new
relationships, and thus of new energies and ideals. We may generalize
these instances. The secret of the moral life is not getting or having,
it is doing and thus being. The getting and the possessing side of life
has a moral value only when it is made the stimulus and nutriment of
new and wider acting. To solve the equation between getting and doing
is the moral problem of life. Let the possession be acquiesced in for
its own sake, and not as the way to freer (and thus more moral) action,
and the selfish life has set in (see Sec. LXVII). It is essential to
moral activity that it feed itself into larger appetites and thus into
larger life.

     This must not be taken to deny that there is a mechanical
     side even to the moral life. A merchant, for example, may
     do the same thing over and over again, like going to his
     business every morning at the same hour. This is a moral
     act and yet it does not seem to lead to a change in moral
     wants or surroundings. Yet even in such cases it should
     be noted that it is only outwardly that the act is the
     _same_. In itself, that is, in its relation to the will
     of the agent, it is simply one element in the whole of
     character; and as character opens up, the act must change
     somewhat also. It is performed somehow in a new spirit. If
     this is not to some extent true, if such acts become wholly
     mechanical, the moral life is hardening into the rigidity
     of death.

This progressive development consists on one side in a richer and
subtler individual activity, in increased individualization, in wider
and freer functions of life; on the other it consists in increase in
number of those persons whose ideal is a 'common good', or who have
membership in the same moral community; and, further, it consists in
more complex relations between them. It is both intensive and extensive.

History is one record of growth in the sense of specific powers.
Its track is marked by the appearance of more and more internal and
distinguishing traits; of new divisions of labor and corresponding
freedom in functioning. It begins with groups in which everything
is massed, and the good is common only in the sense of being
undifferentiated for all. It progresses with the evolution of
individuality, of the peculiar gifts entrusted to each, and hence of
the specific service demanded of each.

The other side, the enlargement of the community of ends, has been
termed growth in "comprehensiveness". History is again a record of
the widening of the social consciousness--of the range of persons
whose interests have to be taken into account in action. There has
been a period in which the community was nothing more than a man's
own immediate family group, this enlarging to the clan, the city,
the social class, the nation; until now, in theory, the community of
interests and ends is humanity itself.

This growth in comprehensiveness is not simply a growth in the number
of persons having a common end. The quantitative growth reacts upon
the _nature_ of the ends themselves. For example, when the conceived
community is small, bravery may consist mainly in willingness to fight
for the recognized community against other hostile groups. As these
groups become themselves included in the moral community, courage must
change its form, and become resoluteness and integrity of purpose in
defending manhood and humanity as such. That is to say, as long as
the community is based largely upon physical facts, like oneness of
blood, of territory, etc., the ideal of courage will have a somewhat
external and physical manifestation. Let the community be truly
spiritual, consisting in recognition of unity of destiny and function
in coöperation toward an all-inclusive life, and the ideal of courage
becomes more internal and spiritual, consisting in loyalty to the
possibilities of humanity, whenever and wherever found.

     On this development of moral ideals, and especially of
     the growth in "comprehensiveness" as reacting upon the
     intrinsic form which the ideal itself takes, see Green, Op.
     cit., pp. 264-308, followed by Alexander, Op. cit., pp.
     384-398. For the process of change of ideals in general,
     see Alexander, pp. 271-292, and 369-371.




