PART II.

THE ETHICAL WORLD.


LIII.

The Reality of Moral Relations.

The habit of conceiving moral action as a certain _kind_ of action,
instead of all action so far as it really is action, leads us to
conceive of morality as a highly desirable something which somehow
ought to be brought into our lives, but which upon the whole is not.
It gives rise to the habit of conceiving morality as a vague ideal
which it is praiseworthy for the individual to strive for, but which
depends wholly for its existence upon the individual's wish in the
matter. Morality, that is, is considered as a relation existing between
something which merely _ought to be_, on one hand, and the individual's
choice, or his conscience on the other. This point of view has found
typical expression in Bishop Butler's saying: "If conscience had might
as it has right, it would rule the world."

But right is not such a helpless creature. It exists not in word but
in power. The moral world is, here and now; it is a reality apart from
the wishes, or failures to wish, of any given individual. It bears
the same relation to the individual's activity that the 'physical
world' does to his knowledge. Not till the individual has to spin the
physical world out of his consciousness in order to know it, will
it be necessary for him to create morality by his choice, before it
can exist. As knowledge is mastery in one's self of the real world,
the reproduction of it in self-consciousness, so moral action is the
appropriation and vital self-expression of the values contained in the
existing practical world.

The existence of this moral world is not anything vaguely mysterious.
Imagine a well organized factory, in which there is some comprehensive
industry carried on--say the production of cotton cloth. This is the
end; it is a common end--that for which each individual labors. Not all
individuals, however, are doing the same thing. The more perfect the
activity, the better organized the work, the more differentiated their
respective labors. This is the side of individual activity or freedom.
To make the analogy with moral activity complete we have to suppose
that each individual is doing the work because of itself, and not
merely as drudgery for the sake of some further end, as pay. Now these
various individuals are bound together by their various acts; some
more nearly because doing closely allied things, all somewhat, because
contributing to a common activity. This is the side of laws and duties.

This group of the differentiated and yet related activities is the
analogue of the moral world. There are certain wants which have
constantly to be fulfilled; certain ends which demand coöperating
activities, and which establish fixed relations between men. There is a
world of ends, a realm of definite activities in existence, as concrete
as the ends and activities in our imagined factory. The child finds,
then, ends and actions in existence when he is born. More than this: he
is not born as a mere spectator of the world; he is born _into_ it. He
finds himself encompassed by such relations, and he finds his own being
and activity intermeshed with them. If he takes away from himself, as
an agent, what he has, as sharing in these ends and actions, nothing
remains.


LIV.

Moral Institutions.

This world of purposes and activities is differentiated into various
institutions. The child is born as a member of a _family_; as he grows
up he finds that others have possessions which he must respect, that
is, he runs upon the institution of _property_. As he grows still
older, he finds persons outside of the family of whose actions he must
take account as respects his own: _society_, in the limited sense
as meaning relations of special intimacy or acquaintanceship. Then
he finds the political institutions; the city, state and nation. He
finds an educational institution, the school, the college; religious
institutions, the church, etc., etc. Everywhere he finds men having
common wants and thus proposing common ends and using coöperative modes
of action. To these organized modes of action, with their reference to
common interests and purposes, he must adjust his activities; he must
take his part therein, if he acts at all, though it be only negatively
or hostilely, as in evil conduct. These institutions _are_ morality
real and objective; the individual becomes moral as he shares in this
moral world, and takes his due place in it.

Institutions, then, are organized modes of action, on the basis of the
wants and interests which unite men. They differ as the family from the
town, the church from the state, according to the scope and character
of the wants from which they spring. They are not bare _facts_ like
objects of knowledge; they are _practical_, existing for the sake of,
and by means of the will--as execution of ideas which have interest.
Because they are expressions of common purposes and ideas, they are
not merely private will and intelligence, but, in the literal sense,
_public_ will and reason.

The moral endeavor of man thus takes the form not of isolated fancies
about right and wrong, not of attempts to frame a morality for himself,
not of efforts to bring into being some praiseworthy ideal never
realized; but the form of sustaining and furthering the moral world
of which he is a member. Since the world is one of action, and not of
contemplation like the world of knowledge, it can be sustained and
furthered only as he makes its ends his own, and identifies himself and
his satisfaction with the activities in which other wills find their
fulfillment.

     This is simply a more concrete rendering of what has
     already been said about the moral environment (see Sec. 33).


LV.

The Aspects of a Moral Institution.

An institution is, as we have seen the expression of unity of desires
and ideas; it is general intelligence in action, or common will. As
such common will, it is, as respects the merely private or exclusive
wants and aims of its members, absolutely _sovereign_. It must aim
to control them. It must set before them the common end or ideal and
insist upon this as the only real end of individual conduct. The ends
so imposed by the public reason are _laws_. But these laws are for the
sake of realizing the _common_ end, of securing that organized unity of
action in which alone the individual can find freedom and fullness of
action, or his own satisfaction. Thus the activity of the common will
gives freedom, or _rights_, to the various members of the institution.

Every institution, then, has its sovereignty, or authority, and
its laws and rights. It is only a false abstraction which makes us
conceive of sovereignty, or authority, and of law and of rights as
inhering only in some supreme organization, as the national state.
The family, the school, the neighborhood group, has its authority
as respects its members, imposes its ideals of action, or laws, and
confers its respective satisfactions in way of enlarged freedom, or
rights. It is true that no one of these institutions is isolated; that
each stands in relation with other like and unlike institutions. Each
minor institution is a member of some more comprehensive whole, to
which it bears the same relation that the individual bears to it. That
is to say, _its_ sovereignty gives way to the authority of the more
comprehensive organization; its laws must be in harmony with the laws
which flow from the larger activity; its rights must become aspects
of a fuller satisfaction. Only humanity or the organized activity of
all the wants, powers and interests common to men, can have absolute
sovereignty, law and rights.

But the narrower group has its relations, none the less, although, in
ultimate analysis, they flow from and manifest the wider good, which,
as wider, must be controlling. Without such minor local authorities,
rights and laws, humanity would be a meaningless abstraction, and its
activity wholly empty. There is an authority in the family, and the
moral growth of the child consists in identifying the law of his own
conduct with the ends aimed at by the institution, and in growing into
maturity and freedom of manhood through the rights which are bestowed
upon him as such a member. Within its own range this institution
is ultimate. But its range is not ultimate; the family, valuable
and sacred as it is, does not exist for itself. It is not a larger
selfishness. It exists as one mode of realizing that comprehensive
common good to which all institutions must contribute, if they are not
to decay. It is the same with property, the school, the local church,
and with the national state.

We can now translate into more concrete terms what was said, in Part
I, regarding the good, obligation and freedom. That performance of
function which is 'the good', is now seen to consist in vital union
with, and reproduction of, the practical institutions of which one is a
member. The maintenance of such institutions by the free participation
therein of individual wills, is, of itself, the common good. Freedom
also gets concreteness; it is the assured rights, or powers of action
which one gets as such a member:--powers which are not mere claims, nor
simply claims recognized as valid by others, but claims re-inforced by
the will of the whole community. Freedom becomes real in the ethical
world; it becomes force and efficiency of action, because it does not
mean some private possession of the individual, but means the whole
coöperating and organized action of an institution in securing to an
individual some power of self expression.


LVI.

Moral Law and the Ethical World.

Without the idea of the ethical world, as the unified activity of
diverse functions exercised by different individuals, the idea of the
good, and of freedom, would be undefined. But probably no one has ever
attempted to conceive of the good and of freedom in total abstraction
from the normal activity of man. Such has not been the lot of duty,
or of the element of law. Often by implication, sometimes in so many
words, it is stated that while a physical law may be accounted for,
since it is simply an abstract from observed facts, a moral law stands
wholly above and apart from actual facts; it expresses solely what
'ought to be' and not what is; that, indeed, whether anything in
accordance with it ever has existed or not, is a matter of no essential
moral importance theoretically, however it may be practically. Now it
is evident that a law of something which has not existed, does not and
perhaps never will exist, is essentially inexplicable and mysterious.
It is as against such a notion of moral law that the idea of a real
ethical world has perhaps its greatest service.

A moral law, _e. g._, the law of justice, is no more _merely_ a law of
what ought to be than is the law of gravitation. As the latter states a
certain relation of moving masses to one another, so the law of justice
states a certain relation of active wills to one another. For a given
individual, at a given time and circumstances, the law of justice may
appear as the law of something which ought to be, but is not:--is not
_for him in this respect_, that is to say. But the very fact that it
ought to be for him implies that it already is for others. It _is_ a
law of the society of which he is a member. And it is because he _is_ a
member of a society having this law, that is a law of what _should_ be
for him.

Would then justice cease to be a law for him if it were not observed
at all in the society of which he is a member? Such a question is as
contradictory as asking what would happen to a planet if the solar
system went out of existence. It is the law of justice (with other such
laws) that _makes_ society; that is, it is those active relations
which find expression in these laws that unify individuals so that they
have a common end, and thus mutual duties. To imagine the abolition of
these laws is to imagine the abolition of society; and to ask for the
law of individual conduct apart from all relationship, actual or ideal,
to society, is to ask in what morality consists when moral conditions
are destroyed. A society in which the social bond we call justice does
not obtain to some degree in the relations of man to man, is _not_
society; and, on the other hand, wherever some law of justice actually
obtains, there the law _is_ for every individual who is a member of the
society.

This does not mean that the 'is', the actual status of the moral
world, is identical with the 'ought', or the ideal relations of man to
man. But it does mean that there is no obligation, either in general
or as any specific duty, which does not _grow_ out of the 'is', the
actual relations now obtaining.[1] The ethical world at any given
time is undoubtedly imperfect, and, _therefore_, it demands a certain
act to meet the situation. The very imperfection, the very badness
in the present condition of things, is a part of the environment
with reference to which we must act; it is, thus, an element in the
_law_ of future action that it shall not exactly repeat the existing
condition. In other words, the 'is' gives the law of the 'ought', but
it is a part of this law that the 'ought' shall not be as the 'is'. It
is because the relation of justice does hold in members of a stratum of
society, having a certain position, power or wealth, but does not hold
between this section and another class, that the law of what should
be is equal justice for all. In holding that actual social relations
afford the law of what should be, we must not forget that these actual
relations have a negative as well as a positive side, and that the new
law must be framed in view of the negatives, the deficiencies, the
wrongs, the contradictions, as well as of the positive attainments. A
moral law, to sum up, is the principle of action, which, acted upon,
will meet the needs of the existing situation as respects the wants,
powers, and circumstances of the individuals concerned. It is no
far-away abstraction, but expresses the _movement_ of the ethical world.

     [1] See Secs. 59, 60 and 63 for discussion of other aspects
     of this question.

One example will help define the discussion. Take the case of a street
railway conductor, whose union has ordered a strike. What determines
the law of his conduct under the circumstances? Evidently the existing
ethical institutions of which he is a member, so far as he is conscious
of their needs. To determine what he should do, he does not hunt up
some law of an 'ought' apart from what is; if he should hunt for and
should find such a law he would not know what to do with it. Just
because it is apart from his concrete circumstances it is no guide, no
law for his conduct at all. He has to act not in view of some abstract
principle, but in view of a concrete situation. He considers his
present wage, its relation to its needs and abilities; his capacity
and taste for this and for that work; the reasons for the strike; the
conditions of labor at present with reference to winning the strike,
and as to the chance of getting other work. He considers his family,
their needs and developing powers; the demand that they should live
decently; that his children should be fairly educated and get a fair
start in the world; he considers his relationships to his fellow
members in the union, etc. These considerations, and such as these,
give the law to his decision in so far as he acts morally and not
instinctively. Where in this law-giving is there any separation from
facts? On the contrary, the more right the act (the nearer it comes
to its proper law), the more it will simply express and reflect the
actual concrete facts. The law, in other words, of action, is the law
of actual social forces in their onward movement, in so far as these
demand some response in the way of conduct from the individual.

We may restate from this point of view, what we have already learned:
A moral law is thoroughly individualized. It cannot be duplicated; it
cannot be for one act just what it is for another. The ethical world
is too rich in capacity and circumstance to permit of monotony; it is
too swift in its movement to allow of bare repetition. It will not hold
still; it moves on, and moral law is the law of action required from
individuals by this movement.

     The consideration of specific institutions, as the family,
     industrial society, civil society, the nation, etc.,
     with their respective rights and laws, belongs rather to
     political philosophy than to the general theory of ethics.




