CHAPTER III.--THE IDEA OF FREEDOM.


XLIX.

The Forms of Freedom.

We may now deal, more briefly, with the problem of moral capacity. It
is, in principle, the ability to conceive of an end and to be governed
in action by this conceived end. We may consider this capacity in three
aspects, as negative, as potential and as positive.

1. _Negative Aspect of Freedom._ The power to be governed in action by
the thought of some end to be reached is freedom _from_ the appetites
and desires. An animal which does not have the power of proposing ends
to itself is impelled to action by its wants and appetites just as they
come into consciousness. It is _irritated_ into acting. Each impulse
demands its own satisfaction, and the animal is helpless to rise above
the particular want. But a _person_, one who can direct his action
by conscious ends, is emancipated from subjection to the particular
appetites. He can consider their relation to the end which he has set
before himself, and can reject, modify or use them as best agrees with
the purposed end. This capacity to control and subjugate impulses by
reflection upon their relationship to a rational end is the power of
self-government, and the more distinct and the more comprehensive in
scope the end is, the more real the self-government.

2. _Potential Freedom._ The power to conceive of ends involves the
possibility of thinking of many and various ends, and even of ends
which are contrary to one another. If an agent could conceive of but
one end in some case, it would always seem to him afterwards that he
had been necessitated to act in the direction of that end; but the
power to put various ends before self constitutes "freedom of choice",
or potential freedom. After action, the agent calls to mind that there
was another end open to him, and that if he did not choose the other
end, it was because of something in his character which made him prefer
the one he actually chose.


L.

Moral Responsibility.

Here we have the basis of moral _responsibility_ or _accountability_.
There is no responsibility for any result which is not intended or
foreseen. Such a consequence is only physical, not moral. (Sec. VII).
But when any result has been foreseen, and adopted as foreseen, such
result is the outcome not of any external circumstances, nor of mere
desires and impulses, but of the agent's conception of his own end.
Now, because the result thus flows from the agent's own conception of
an end, he feels himself responsible for it.

It must be remembered that the end adopted is that which is conceived
_as satisfying self_--that, indeed, when we say end of action, we mean
only some proposed form of self-satisfaction. The adopted end always
indicates, therefore, that sort of condition which the agent considers
to be good, or self-satisfactory. It is because a result flows from the
agent's _ideal of himself_, the thought of himself which he considers
desirable or worth realizing, that the agent feels himself responsible.
The result is simply an expression of himself; a manifestation of what
he would have himself be. Responsibility is thus one aspect of the
identity of character and conduct. (Sec. VII). We are responsible for
our conduct because that conduct is ourselves objectified in actions.

The idea of responsibility is intensified whenever there have been two
contrary lines of conduct conceived, of which one has been chosen. If
the end adopted turns out not to be satisfactory, but, rather, unworthy
and degrading, the agent feels that he _might_ have chosen the other
end, and that if he did not, it was because his character was such,
his ideal of himself was such, that this other end did not appeal
to him. The actual result is felt to be the outcome of an unworthy
character manifested in the adoption of a low form of satisfaction;
and the evident contrast of this low form with a higher form, present
to consciousness but rejected, makes the sense of responsibility more
acute. As such, it is the judgment of disapprobation passed upon
conduct; the feeling of remorse and of the desert of punishment.
Freedom as the power of conceiving ends and of realizing the ideal end
in action, is thus the basis both of responsibility and of approbation
(or disapprobation).

     _The Freedom of Indifference._ It is this potential
     freedom, arising from the power of proposing various
     ends of action, which, misinterpreted, gives rise to the
     theory of a liberty of indifferent choice--the theory
     that the agent can choose this or that without any
     ground or motive. The real experience is the knowledge,
     after the choice of one end, that since another end was
     also present to consciousness that other end might have
     been chosen, _if only the character had been such as to
     find its satisfaction in that other end_. The theory of
     indifference misconstrues this fact to mean that the agent
     might just as well have chosen that other end, without any
     if or qualification whatever. The theory of indifference,
     moreover, defeats its own end. The point which it is
     anxious to save is responsibility. It sees that if only
     one course of action were ever open to an agent, without
     the possibility of any _conception_ of another course, an
     agent, so acting, could not be held responsible for not
     having adopted that other course. And so it argues that
     there must always be the possibility of indifferent or
     alternate choice; the possibility of adopting this or that
     line of action without any motive. But if such were the
     case responsibility would be destroyed. If the end chosen
     is not an expression of character, if it does not manifest
     the agent's ideal of himself, if its choice is a matter
     of indifference, it does not signify morally, but is mere
     accident or caprice. It is because choice is _not_ a matter
     of indifference, but an outcome of character that the
     agent feels responsibility, and approves or disapproves.
     He virtually says: "I am responsible for this outcome,
     not because I could have chosen another end just as well
     _without any reason_, but because I thought of another end
     and rejected it; because my character was such that that
     end did not seem good, and was such that this end did seem
     good. My character is myself, and in this unworthy end I
     stand self-condemned."


LI.

Moral Reformation.

Freedom considered as potential, depending upon the power of the agent
to frame diverse ends, is the basis not only of responsibility, but
also of the possibility of reformation, or of change in character and
conduct. All moral action is the expression of self, but the self
is not something fixed or rigid. It includes as a necessary part of
itself the possibility of framing conceptions of what it would be,
and there is, therefore, at any time the possibility of acting upon
some ideal hitherto unrealized. If conduct were the expression of
character, in a sense which identified character wholly with past
attainments, then reformation would be impossible. What a man once was
he must always continue to be. But past attainments do not exhaust all
the possibilities of character. Since conduct necessarily implies a
continuous adjustment of developing capacity to new conditions, there
is the ability to frame a changed ideal of self-satisfaction--that
is, ability to lead a new life. That the new ideal is adopted from
experience of the unworthy nature of former deeds is what we should
expect. The chosen end having proved itself unsatisfactory, the
alternative end, previously rejected, recurs to consciousness with
added claims. To sum up: The doctrine that choice depends upon
character is correct, but the doctrine is misused when taken to mean
that a man's outward conduct will always be in the same direction that
it has been. Character involves all the ideas of different and of
better things which have been present to the agent, although he has
never attempted to carry them out. And there is always the possibility
that, if the proper influences are brought to bear, some one of
these latent ideals may be made vital, and wholly change the bent of
character and of conduct.


LII.

Positive Freedom.

The _capacity_ of freedom lies in the power to form an ideal or
conception of an end. _Actual_ freedom lies in the realization of
that end which actually satisfies. An end may be freely adopted, and
yet its actual working out may result not in freedom, but in slavery.
It may result in rendering the agent more subject to his passions,
less able to direct his own conduct, and more cramped and feeble in
powers. Only that end which executed really effects greater energy and
comprehensiveness of character makes for actual freedom. In a word,
only the good man, the man who is truly realizing his individuality, is
free, in the positive sense of that word.

Every action which is not in the line of performance of functions
must necessarily result in self-enslavement. The end of desire is
activity; and it is only in fullness and unity of activity that freedom
is found. When desires are not unified--when, that is, the idea of
the exercise of function does not control conduct--one desire must
conflict with another. Action is directed now this way, now that,
and there is friction, loss of power. On account of this same lack of
control of desires by the comprehensive law of social activity, one
member of society is brought into conflict with another, with waste
of energy, and with impeded and divided activity and satisfaction of
desire. Exercise of function, on the other hand, unifies the desires,
giving each its relative, although subordinate, place. It fits each
into the others, and, through the harmonious adjustment of one to
another, effects that complete and unhindered action which is freedom.
The performance of specific function falls also into free relations
with the activities of other persons, coöperating with them, giving and
receiving what is needed, and thus constituting full liberty. Other
aspects of freedom, as the negative and the potential, are simply means
instrumental to the realization of individuality, and when not employed
toward this, their true end, they become methods of enslaving the agent.

     On the subject of moral freedom, as, upon the whole, in
     agreement with the view presented here: See

     Green: Prolegomena to Ethics, pp. 90-117; 142-158. Bradley:
     Ethical Studies, ch. I; Caird: Phil. of Kant, Vol. II, Bk.
     II, ch. 3; Alexander: Moral Order and Progress, pp. 336-341.

     And, for a view agreeing in part, Stephen: Science of
     Ethics, pp. 278-293.

     For presentations of the freedom of indifference, see,
     Lotze: Practical Philosophy, ch. 3. Martineau: Op.
     cit., Vol. II, pp. 34-40. Calderwood: Handbook of Moral
     Philosophy.




