CHAPTER VI.

THE CALCULUS OF FINITE DIFFERENCES.


The different fundamental considerations indicated in the five preceding
chapters constitute, in reality, all the essential bases of a complete
exposition of mathematical analysis, regarded in the philosophical point
of view. Nevertheless, in order not to neglect any truly important
general conception relating to this analysis, I think that I should here
very summarily explain the veritable character of a kind of calculus
which is very extended, and which, though at bottom it really belongs to
ordinary analysis, is still regarded as being of an essentially distinct
nature. I refer to the _Calculus of Finite Differences_, which will be
the special subject of this chapter.


_Its general Character._ This calculus, created by Taylor, in his
celebrated work entitled _Methodus Incrementorum_, consists essentially
in the consideration of the finite increments which functions receive as
a consequence of analogous increments on the part of the corresponding
variables. These increments or _differences_, which take the
characteristic Δ, to distinguish them from _differentials_, or
infinitely small increments, may be in their turn regarded as new
functions, and become the subject of a second similar consideration, and
so on; from which results the notion of differences of various
successive orders, analogous, at least in appearance, to the consecutive
orders of differentials. Such a calculus evidently presents, like the
calculus of indirect functions, two general classes of questions:

1°. To determine the successive differences of all the various
analytical functions of one or more variables, as the result of a
definite manner of increase of the independent variables, which are
generally supposed to augment in arithmetical progression.

2°. Reciprocally, to start from these differences, or, more generally,
from any equations established between them, and go back to the
primitive functions themselves, or to their corresponding relations.

Hence follows the decomposition of this calculus into two distinct ones,
to which are usually given the names of the _Direct_, and the _Inverse
Calculus of Finite Differences_, the latter being also sometimes called
the _Integral Calculus of Finite Differences_. Each of these would,
also, evidently admit of a logical distribution similar to that given in
the fourth chapter for the differential and the integral calculus.


_Its true Nature._ There is no doubt that Taylor thought that by such a
conception he had founded a calculus of an entirely new nature,
absolutely distinct from ordinary analysis, and more general than the
calculus of Leibnitz, although resting on an analogous consideration. It
is in this way, also, that almost all geometers have viewed the analysis
of Taylor; but Lagrange, with his usual profundity, clearly perceived
that these properties belonged much more to the forms and to the
notations employed by Taylor than to the substance of his theory. In
fact, that which constitutes the peculiar character of the analysis of
Leibnitz, and makes of it a truly distinct and superior calculus, is the
circumstance that the derived functions are in general of an entirely
different nature from the primitive functions, so that they may give
rise to more simple and more easily formed relations: whence result the
admirable fundamental properties of the transcendental analysis, which
have been already explained. But it is not so with the _differences_
considered by Taylor; for these differences are, by their nature,
functions essentially similar to those which have produced them, a
circumstance which renders them unsuitable to facilitate the
establishment of equations, and prevents their leading to more general
relations. Every equation of finite differences is truly, at bottom, an
equation directly relating to the very magnitudes whose successive
states are compared. The scaffolding of new signs, which produce an
illusion respecting the true character of these equations, disguises it,
however, in a very imperfect manner, since it could always be easily
made apparent by replacing the _differences_ by the equivalent
combinations of the primitive magnitudes, of which they are really only
the abridged designations. Thus the calculus of Taylor never has
offered, and never can offer, in any question of geometry or of
mechanics, that powerful general aid which we have seen to result
necessarily from the analysis of Leibnitz. Lagrange has, moreover, very
clearly proven that the pretended analogy observed between the calculus
of differences and the infinitesimal calculus was radically vicious, in
this way, that the formulas belonging to the former calculus can never
furnish, as particular cases, those which belong to the latter, the
nature of which is essentially distinct.

From these considerations I am led to think that the calculus of finite
differences is, in general, improperly classed with the transcendental
analysis proper, that is, with the calculus of indirect functions. I
consider it, on the contrary, in accordance with the views of Lagrange,
to be only a very extensive and very important branch of ordinary
analysis, that is to say, of that which I have named the calculus of
direct functions, the equations which it considers being always, in
spite of the notation, simple _direct_ equations.




GENERAL THEORY OF SERIES.


To sum up as briefly as possible the preceding explanation, the calculus
of Taylor ought to be regarded as having constantly for its true object
the general theory of _Series_, the most simple cases of which had alone
been considered before that illustrious geometer. I ought, properly, to
have mentioned this important theory in treating, in the second chapter,
of Algebra proper, of which it is such an extensive branch. But, in
order to avoid a double reference to it, I have preferred to notice it
only in the consideration of the calculus of finite differences, which,
reduced to its most simple general expression, is nothing but a complete
logical study of questions relating to _series_.

Every _Series_, or succession of numbers deduced from one another
according to any constant law, necessarily gives rise to these two
fundamental questions:

1°. The law of the series being supposed known, to find the expression
for its general term, so as to be able to calculate immediately any term
whatever without being obliged to form successively all the preceding
terms.

2°. In the same circumstances, to determine the _sum_ of any number of
terms of the series by means of their places, so that it can be known
without the necessity of continually adding these terms together.

These two fundamental questions being considered to be resolved, it may
be proposed, reciprocally, to find the law of a series from the form of
its general term, or the expression of the sum. Each of these different
problems has so much the more extent and difficulty, as there can be
conceived a greater number of different _laws_ for the series, according
to the number of preceding terms on which each term directly depends,
and according to the function which expresses that dependence. We may
even consider series with several variable indices, as Laplace has done
in his "Analytical Theory of Probabilities," by the analysis to which he
has given the name of _Theory of Generating Functions_, although it is
really only a new and higher branch of the calculus of finite
differences or of the general theory of series.

These general views which I have indicated give only an imperfect idea
of the truly infinite extent and variety of the questions to which
geometers have risen by means of this single consideration of series, so
simple in appearance and so limited in its origin. It necessarily
presents as many different cases as the algebraic resolution of
equations, considered in its whole extent; and it is, by its nature,
much more complicated, so much, indeed, that it always needs this last
to conduct it to a complete solution. We may, therefore, anticipate what
must still be its extreme imperfection, in spite of the successive
labours of several geometers of the first order. We do not, indeed,
possess as yet the complete and logical solution of any but the most
simple questions of this nature.


_Its identity with this Calculus._ It is now easy to conceive the
necessary and perfect identity, which has been already announced,
between the calculus of finite differences and the theory of series
considered in all its bearings. In fact, every differentiation after the
manner of Taylor evidently amounts to finding the _law_ of formation of
a series with one or with several variable indices, from the expression
of its general term; in the same way, every analogous integration may be
regarded as having for its object the summation of a series, the general
term of which would be expressed by the proposed difference. In this
point of view, the various problems of the calculus of differences,
direct or inverse, resolved by Taylor and his successors, have really a
very great value, as treating of important questions relating to series.
But it is very doubtful if the form and the notation introduced by
Taylor really give any essential facility in the solution of questions
of this kind. It would be, perhaps, more advantageous for most cases,
and certainly more logical, to replace the _differences_ by the terms
themselves, certain combinations of which they represent. As the
calculus of Taylor does not rest on a truly distinct fundamental idea,
and has nothing peculiar to it but its system of signs, there could
never really be any important advantage in considering it as detached
from ordinary analysis, of which it is, in reality, only an immense
branch. This consideration of _differences_, most generally useless,
even if it does not cause complication, seems to me to retain the
character of an epoch in which, analytical ideas not being sufficiently
familiar to geometers, they were naturally led to prefer the special
forms suitable for simple numerical comparisons.




PERIODIC OR DISCONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS.


However that may be, I must not finish this general appreciation of the
calculus of finite differences without noticing a new conception to
which it has given birth, and which has since acquired a great
importance. It is the consideration of those periodic or discontinuous
functions which preserve the same value for an infinite series of values
of the corresponding variables, subjected to a certain law, and which
must be necessarily added to the integrals of the equations of finite
differences in order to render them sufficiently general, as simple
arbitrary constants are added to all quadratures in order to complete
their generality. This idea, primitively introduced by Euler, has since
been the subject of extended investigation by M. Fourier, who has made
new and important applications of it in his mathematical theory of heat.




APPLICATIONS OF THIS CALCULUS.


_Series._ Among the principal general applications which have been made
of the calculus of finite differences, it would be proper to place in
the first rank, as the most extended and the most important, the
solution of questions relating to series; if, as has been shown, the
general theory of series ought not to be considered as constituting, by
its nature, the actual foundation of the calculus of Taylor.


_Interpolations._ This great class of problems being then set aside, the
most essential of the veritable applications of the analysis of Taylor
is, undoubtedly, thus far, the general method of _interpolations_, so
frequently and so usefully employed in the investigation of the
empirical laws of natural phenomena. The question consists, as is well
known, in intercalating between certain given numbers other intermediate
numbers, subjected to the same law which we suppose to exist between the
first. We can abundantly verify, in this principal application of the
calculus of Taylor, how truly foreign and often inconvenient is the
consideration of _differences_ with respect to the questions which
depend on that analysis. Indeed, Lagrange has replaced the formulas of
interpolation, deduced from the ordinary algorithm of the calculus of
finite differences, by much simpler general formulas, which are now
almost always preferred, and which have been found directly, without
making any use of the notion of _differences_, which only complicates
the question.


_Approximate Rectification, &c._ A last important class of applications
of the calculus of finite differences, which deserves to be
distinguished from the preceding, consists in the eminently useful
employment made of it in geometry for determining by approximation the
length and the area of any curve, and in the same way the cubature of a
body of any form whatever. This procedure (which may besides be
conceived abstractly as depending on the same analytical investigation
as the question of interpolation) frequently offers a valuable
supplement to the entirely logical geometrical methods which often lead
to integrations, which we do not yet know how to effect, or to
calculations of very complicated execution.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such are the various principal considerations to be noticed with respect
to the calculus of finite differences. This examination completes the
proposed philosophical outline of ABSTRACT MATHEMATICS.


CONCRETE MATHEMATICS will now be the subject of a similar labour. In it
we shall particularly devote ourselves to examining how it has been
possible (supposing the general science of the calculus to be perfect),
by invariable procedures, to reduce to pure questions of analysis all
the problems which can be presented by _Geometry_ and _Mechanics_, and
thus to impress on these two fundamental bases of natural philosophy a
degree of precision and especially of unity; in a word, a character of
high perfection, which could be communicated to them by such a course
alone.




