CHAPTER II.

ANCIENT OR SYNTHETIC GEOMETRY.


The geometrical method of the ancients necessarily constituting a
preliminary department in the dogmatical system of geometry, designed to
furnish _general_ geometry with indispensable foundations, it is now
proper to begin with determining wherein strictly consists this
preliminary function of _special_ geometry, thus reduced to the
narrowest possible limits.




ITS PROPER EXTENT.


_Lines; Polygons; Polyhedrons._ In considering it under this point of
view, it is easy to recognize that we might restrict it to the study of
the right line alone for what concerns the geometry of _lines_; to the
_quadrature_ of rectilinear plane areas; and, lastly, to the _cubature_
of bodies terminated by plane faces. The elementary propositions
relating to these three fundamental questions form, in fact, the
necessary starting point of all geometrical inquiries; they alone cannot
be obtained except by a direct study of the subject; while, on the
contrary, the complete theory of all other figures, even that of the
circle, and of the surfaces and volumes which are connected with it, may
at the present day be completely comprehended in the domain of _general_
or _analytical_ geometry; these primitive elements at once furnishing
_equations_ which are sufficient to allow of the application of the
calculus to geometrical questions, which would not have been possible
without this previous condition.

It results from this consideration that, in common practice, we give to
_elementary_ geometry more extent than would be rigorously necessary to
it; since, besides the right line, polygons, and polyhedrons, we also
include in it the circle and the "round" bodies; the study of which
might, however, be as purely analytical as that, for example, of the
conic sections. An unreflecting veneration for antiquity contributes to
maintain this defect in method; but the best reason which can be given
for it is the serious inconvenience for ordinary instruction which there
would be in postponing, to so distant an epoch of mathematical
education, the solution of several essential questions, which are
susceptible of a direct and continual application to a great number of
important uses. In fact, to proceed in the most rational manner, we
should employ the integral calculus in obtaining the interesting results
relating to the length or the area of the circle, or to the quadrature
of the sphere, &c., which have been determined by the ancients from
extremely simple considerations. This inconvenience would be of little
importance with regard to the persons destined to study the whole of
mathematical science, and the advantage of proceeding in a perfectly
logical order would have a much greater comparative value. But the
contrary case being the more frequent, theories so essential have
necessarily been retained in elementary geometry. Perhaps the conic
sections, the cycloid, &c., might be advantageously added in such cases.


_Not to be farther restricted._ While this preliminary portion of
geometry, which cannot be founded on the application of the calculus,
is reduced by its nature to a very limited series of fundamental
researches, relating to the right line, polygonal areas, and
polyhedrons, it is certain, on the other hand, that we cannot restrict
it any more; although, by a veritable abuse of the spirit of analysis,
it has been recently attempted to present the establishment of the
principal theorems of elementary geometry under an algebraical point of
view. Thus some have pretended to demonstrate, by simple abstract
considerations of mathematical analysis, the constant relation which
exists between the three angles of a rectilinear triangle, the
fundamental proposition of the theory of similar triangles, that of
parallelopipedons, &c.; in a word, precisely the only geometrical
propositions which cannot be obtained except by a direct study of the
subject, without the calculus being susceptible of having any part in
it. Such aberrations are the unreflecting exaggerations of that natural
and philosophical tendency which leads us to extend farther and farther
the influence of analysis in mathematical studies. In mechanics, the
pretended analytical demonstrations of the parallelogram of forces are
of similar character.

The viciousness of such a manner of proceeding follows from the
principles previously presented. We have already, in fact, recognized
that, since the calculus is not, and cannot be, any thing but a means of
deduction, it would indicate a radically false idea of it to wish to
employ it in establishing the elementary foundations of any science
whatever; for on what would the analytical reasonings in such an
operation repose? A labour of this nature, very far from really
perfecting the philosophical character of a science, would constitute a
return towards the metaphysical age, in presenting real facts as mere
logical abstractions.

When we examine in themselves these pretended analytical demonstrations
of the fundamental propositions of elementary geometry, we easily verify
their necessary want of meaning. They are all founded on a vicious
manner of conceiving the principle of _homogeneity_, the true general
idea of which was explained in the second chapter of the preceding book.
These demonstrations suppose that this principle does not allow us to
admit the coexistence in the same equation of numbers obtained by
different concrete comparisons, which is evidently false, and contrary
to the constant practice of geometers. Thus it is easy to recognize
that, by employing the law of homogeneity in this arbitrary and
illegitimate acceptation, we could succeed in "demonstrating," with
quite as much apparent rigour, propositions whose absurdity is manifest
at the first glance. In examining attentively, for example, the
procedure by the aid of which it has been attempted to prove
analytically that the sum of the three angles of any rectilinear
triangle is constantly equal to two right angles, we see that it is
founded on this preliminary principle that, if two triangles have two of
their angles respectively equal, the third angle of the one will
necessarily be equal to the third angle of the other. This first point
being granted, the proposed relation is immediately deduced from it in a
very exact and simple manner. Now the analytical consideration by which
this previous proposition has been attempted to be established, is of
such a nature that, if it could be correct, we could rigorously deduce
from it, in reproducing it conversely, this palpable absurdity, that two
sides of a triangle are sufficient, without any angle, for the entire
determination of the third side. We may make analogous remarks on all
the demonstrations of this sort, the sophisms of which will be thus
verified in a perfectly apparent manner.

The more reason that we have here to consider geometry as being at the
present day essentially analytical, the more necessary was it to guard
against this abusive exaggeration of mathematical analysis, according to
which all geometrical observation would be dispensed with, in
establishing upon pure algebraical abstractions the very foundations of
this natural science.


_Attempted Demonstrations of Axioms, &c._ Another indication that
geometers have too much overlooked the character of a natural science
which is necessarily inherent in geometry, appears from their vain
attempts, so long made, to _demonstrate_ rigorously, not by the aid of
the calculus, but by means of certain constructions, several fundamental
propositions of elementary geometry. Whatever may be effected, it will
evidently be impossible to avoid sometimes recurring to simple and
direct observation in geometry as a means of establishing various
results. While, in this science, the phenomena which are considered are,
by virtue of their extreme simplicity, much more closely connected with
one another than those relating to any other physical science, some must
still be found which cannot be deduced, and which, on the contrary,
serve as starting points. It may be admitted that the greatest logical
perfection of the science is to reduce these to the smallest number
possible, but it would be absurd to pretend to make them completely
disappear. I avow, moreover, that I find fewer real inconveniences in
extending, a little beyond what would be strictly necessary, the number
of these geometrical notions thus established by direct observation,
provided they are sufficiently simple, than in making them the subjects
of complicated and indirect demonstrations, even when these
demonstrations may be logically irreproachable.

The true dogmatic destination of the geometry of the ancients, reduced
to its least possible indispensable developments, having thus been
characterized as exactly as possible, it is proper to consider summarily
each of the principal parts of which it must be composed. I think that I
may here limit myself to considering the first and the most extensive of
these parts, that which has for its object the study of _the right
line_; the two other sections, namely, the _quadrature of polygons_ and
the _cubature of polyhedrons_, from their limited extent, not being
capable of giving rise to any philosophical consideration of any
importance, distinct from those indicated in the preceding chapter with
respect to the measure of areas and of volumes in general.




GEOMETRY OF THE RIGHT LINE.


The final question which we always have in view in the study of the
right line, properly consists in determining, by means of one another,
the different elements of any right-lined figure whatever; which enables
us always to know indirectly the length and position of a right line, in
whatever circumstances it may be placed. This fundamental problem is
susceptible of two general solutions, the nature of which is quite
distinct, the one _graphical_, the other _algebraic_. The first, though
very imperfect, is that which must be first considered, because it is
spontaneously derived from the direct study of the subject; the second,
much more perfect in the most important respects, cannot be studied till
afterwards, because it is founded upon the previous knowledge of the
other.




GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS.


The graphical solution consists in constructing at will the proposed
figure, either with the same dimensions, or, more usually, with
dimensions changed in any ratio whatever. The first mode need merely be
mentioned as being the most simple and the one which would first occur
to the mind, for it is evidently, by its nature, almost entirely
incapable of application. The second is, on the contrary, susceptible of
being most extensively and most usefully applied. We still make an
important and continual use of it at the present day, not only to
represent with exactness the forms of bodies and their relative
positions, but even for the actual determination of geometrical
magnitudes, when we do not need great precision. The ancients, in
consequence of the imperfection of their geometrical knowledge, employed
this procedure in a much more extensive manner, since it was for a long
time the only one which they could apply, even in the most important
precise determinations. It was thus, for example, that Aristarchus of
Samos estimated the relative distance from the sun and from the moon to
the earth, by making measurements on a triangle constructed as exactly
as possible, so as to be similar to the right-angled triangle formed by
the three bodies at the instant when the moon is in quadrature, and when
an observation of the angle at the earth would consequently be
sufficient to define the triangle. Archimedes himself, although he was
the first to introduce calculated determinations into geometry, several
times employed similar means. The formation of trigonometry did not
cause this method to be entirely abandoned, although it greatly
diminished its use; the Greeks and the Arabians continued to employ it
for a great number of researches, in which we now regard the use of the
calculus as indispensable.

This exact reproduction of any figure whatever on a different scale
cannot present any great theoretical difficulty when all the parts of
the proposed figure lie in the same plane. But if we suppose, as most
frequently happens, that they are situated in different planes, we see,
then, a new order of geometrical considerations arise. The artificial
figure, which is constantly plane, not being capable, in that case, of
being a perfectly faithful image of the real figure, it is necessary
previously to fix with precision the mode of representation, which gives
rise to different systems of _Projection_.

It then remains to be determined according to what laws the geometrical
phenomena correspond in the two figures. This consideration generates a
new series of geometrical investigations, the final object of which is
properly to discover how we can replace constructions in relief by plane
constructions. The ancients had to resolve several elementary questions
of this kind for various cases in which we now employ spherical
trigonometry, principally for different problems relating to the
celestial sphere. Such was the object of their _analemmas_, and of the
other plane figures which for a long time supplied the place of the
calculus. We see by this that the ancients really knew the elements of
what we now name _Descriptive Geometry_, although they did not conceive
it in a distinct and general manner.

I think it proper briefly to indicate in this place the true
philosophical character of this "Descriptive Geometry;" although, being
essentially a science of application, it ought not to be included within
the proper domain of this work.




DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY.


All questions of geometry of three dimensions necessarily give rise,
when we consider their graphical solution, to a common difficulty which
is peculiar to them; that of substituting for the different
constructions in relief, which are necessary to resolve them directly,
and which it is almost always impossible to execute, simple equivalent
plane constructions, by means of which we finally obtain the same
results. Without this indispensable transformation, every solution of
this kind would be evidently incomplete and really inapplicable in
practice, although theoretically the constructions in space are usually
preferable as being more direct. It was in order to furnish general
means for always effecting such a transformation that _Descriptive
Geometry_ was created, and formed into a distinct and homogeneous
system, by the illustrious MONGE. He invented, in the first place, a
uniform method of representing bodies by figures traced on a single
plane, by the aid of _projections_ on two different planes, usually
perpendicular to each other, and one of which is supposed to turn about
their common intersection so as to coincide with the other produced; in
this system, or in any other equivalent to it, it is sufficient to
regard points and lines as being determined by their projections, and
surfaces by the projections of their generating lines. This being
established, Monge--analyzing with profound sagacity the various partial
labours of this kind which had before been executed by a number of
incongruous procedures, and considering also, in a general and direct
manner, in what any questions of that nature must consist--found that
they could always be reduced to a very small number of invariable
abstract problems, capable of being resolved separately, once for all,
by uniform operations, relating essentially some to the contacts and
others to the intersections of surfaces. Simple and entirely general
methods for the graphical solution of these two orders of problems
having been formed, all the geometrical questions which may arise in any
of the various arts of construction--stone-cutting, carpentry,
perspective, dialling, fortification, &c.--can henceforth be treated as
simple particular cases of a single theory, the invariable application
of which will always necessarily lead to an exact solution, which may be
facilitated in practice by profiting by the peculiar circumstances of
each case.

       *       *       *       *       *

This important creation deserves in a remarkable degree to fix the
attention of those philosophers who consider all that the human species
has yet effected as a first step, and thus far the only really complete
one, towards that general renovation of human labours, which must
imprint upon all our arts a character of precision and of rationality,
so necessary to their future progress. Such a revolution must, in fact,
inevitably commence with that class of industrial labours, which is
essentially connected with that science which is the most simple, the
most perfect, and the most ancient. It cannot fail to extend hereafter,
though with less facility, to all other practical operations. Indeed
Monge himself, who conceived the true philosophy of the arts better than
any one else, endeavoured to sketch out a corresponding system for the
mechanical arts.

Essential as the conception of descriptive geometry really is, it is
very important not to deceive ourselves with respect to its true
destination, as did those who, in the excitement of its first discovery,
saw in it a means of enlarging the general and abstract domain of
rational geometry. The result has in no way answered to these mistaken
hopes. And, indeed, is it not evident that descriptive geometry has no
special value except as a science of application, and as forming the
true special theory of the geometrical arts? Considered in its abstract
relations, it could not introduce any truly distinct order of
geometrical speculations. We must not forget that, in order that a
geometrical question should fall within the peculiar domain of
descriptive geometry, it must necessarily have been previously resolved
by speculative geometry, the solutions of which then, as we have seen,
always need to be prepared for practice in such a way as to supply the
place of constructions in relief by plane constructions; a substitution
which really constitutes the only characteristic function of descriptive
geometry.

It is proper, however, to remark here, that, with regard to intellectual
education, the study of descriptive geometry possesses an important
philosophical peculiarity, quite independent of its high industrial
utility. This is the advantage which it so pre-eminently offers--in
habituating the mind to consider very complicated geometrical
combinations in space, and to follow with precision their continual
correspondence with the figures which are actually traced--of thus
exercising to the utmost, in the most certain and precise manner, that
important faculty of the human mind which is properly called
"imagination," and which consists, in its elementary and positive
acceptation, in representing to ourselves, clearly and easily, a vast
and variable collection of ideal objects, as if they were really before
us.

Finally, to complete the indication of the general nature of descriptive
geometry by determining its logical character, we have to observe that,
while it belongs to the geometry of the ancients by the character of its
solutions, on the other hand it approaches the geometry of the moderns
by the nature of the questions which compose it. These questions are in
fact eminently remarkable for that generality which, as we saw in the
preceding chapter, constitutes the true fundamental character of modern
geometry; for the methods used are always conceived as applicable to any
figures whatever, the peculiarity of each having only a purely secondary
influence. The solutions of descriptive geometry are then graphical,
like most of those of the ancients, and at the same time general, like
those of the moderns.

       *       *       *       *       *

After this important digression, we will pursue the philosophical
examination of _special_ geometry, always considered as reduced to its
least possible development, as an indispensable introduction to
_general_ geometry. We have now sufficiently considered the _graphical_
solution of the fundamental problem relating to the right line--that
is, the determination of the different elements of any right-lined
figure by means of one another--and have now to examine in a special
manner the _algebraic_ solution.




ALGEBRAIC SOLUTIONS.


This kind of solution, the evident superiority of which need not here be
dwelt upon, belongs necessarily, by the very nature of the question, to
the system of the ancient geometry, although the logical method which is
employed causes it to be generally, but very improperly, separated from
it. We have thus an opportunity of verifying, in a very important
respect, what was established generally in the preceding chapter, that
it is not by the employment of the calculus that the modern geometry is
essentially to be distinguished from the ancient. The ancients are in
fact the true inventors of the present trigonometry, spherical as well
as rectilinear; it being only much less perfect in their hands, on
account of the extreme inferiority of their algebraical knowledge. It
is, then, really in this chapter, and not, as it might at first be
thought, in those which we shall afterwards devote to the philosophical
examination of _general_ geometry, that it is proper to consider the
character of this important preliminary theory, which is usually, though
improperly, included in what is called _analytical geometry_, but which
is really only a complement of _elementary geometry_ properly so called.

Since all right-lined figures can be decomposed into triangles, it is
evidently sufficient to know how to determine the different elements of
a triangle by means of one another, which reduces _polygonometry_ to
simple _trigonometry_.




TRIGONOMETRY.


The difficulty in resolving algebraically such a question as the above,
consists essentially in forming, between the angles and the sides of a
triangle, three distinct equations; which, when once obtained, will
evidently reduce all trigonometrical problems to mere questions of
analysis.


_How to introduce Angles._ In considering the establishment of these
equations in the most general manner, we immediately meet with a
fundamental distinction with respect to the manner of introducing the
angles into the calculation, according as they are made to enter
_directly_, by themselves or by the circular arcs which are proportional
to them; or _indirectly_, by the chords of these arcs, which are hence
called their _trigonometrical lines_. Of these two systems of
trigonometry the second was of necessity the only one originally
adopted, as being the only practicable one, since the condition of
geometry made it easy enough to find exact relations between the sides
of the triangles and the trigonometrical lines which represent the
angles, while it would have been absolutely impossible at that epoch to
establish equations between the sides and the angles themselves.


_Advantages of introducing Trigonometrical Lines._ At the present day,
since the solution can be obtained by either system indifferently, that
motive for preference no longer exists; but geometers have none the less
persisted in following from choice the system primitively admitted from
necessity; for, the same reason which enabled these trigonometrical
equations to be obtained with much more facility, must, in like manner,
as it is still more easy to conceive _à priori_, render these equations
much more simple, since they then exist only between right lines,
instead of being established between right lines and arcs of circles.
Such a consideration has so much the more importance, as the question
relates to formulas which are eminently elementary, and destined to be
continually employed in all parts of mathematical science, as well as in
all its various applications.

It may be objected, however, that when an angle is given, it is, in
reality, always given by itself, and not by its trigonometrical lines;
and that when it is unknown, it is its angular value which is properly
to be determined, and not that of any of its trigonometrical lines. It
seems, according to this, that such lines are only useless
intermediaries between the sides and the angles, which have to be
finally eliminated, and the introduction of which does not appear
capable of simplifying the proposed research. It is indeed important to
explain, with more generality and precision than is customary, the great
real utility of this manner of proceeding.


_Division of Trigonometry into two Parts._ It consists in the fact that
the introduction of these auxiliary magnitudes divides the entire
question of trigonometry into two others essentially distinct, one of
which has for its object to pass from the angles to their
trigonometrical lines, or the converse, and the other of which proposes
to determine the sides of the triangles by the trigonometrical lines of
their angles, or the converse. Now the first of these two fundamental
questions is evidently susceptible, by its nature, of being entirely
treated and reduced to numerical tables once for all, in considering all
possible angles, since it depends only upon those angles, and not at all
upon the particular triangles in which they may enter in each case;
while the solution of the second question must necessarily be renewed,
at least in its arithmetical relations, for each new triangle which it
is necessary to resolve. This is the reason why the first portion of the
complete work, which would be precisely the most laborious, is no longer
taken into the account, being always done in advance; while, if such a
decomposition had not been performed, we would evidently have found
ourselves under the obligation of recommencing the entire calculation in
each particular case. Such is the essential property of the present
trigonometrical system, which in fact would really present no actual
advantage, if it was necessary to calculate continually the
trigonometrical line of each angle to be considered, or the converse;
the intermediate agency introduced would then be more troublesome than
convenient.

In order to clearly comprehend the true nature of this conception, it
will be useful to compare it with a still more important one, designed
to produce an analogous effect either in its algebraic, or, still more,
in its arithmetical relations--the admirable theory of _logarithms_. In
examining in a philosophical manner the influence of this theory, we see
in fact that its general result is to decompose all imaginable
arithmetical operations into two distinct parts. The first and most
complicated of these is capable of being executed in advance once for
all (since it depends only upon the numbers to be considered, and not at
all upon the infinitely different combinations into which they can
enter), and consists in considering all numbers as assignable powers of
a constant number. The second part of the calculation, which must of
necessity be recommenced for each new formula which is to have its
value determined, is thenceforth reduced to executing upon these
exponents correlative operations which are infinitely more simple. I
confine myself here to merely indicating this resemblance, which any one
can carry out for himself.

We must besides observe, as a property (secondary at the present day,
but all-important at its origin) of the trigonometrical system adopted,
the very remarkable circumstance that the determination of angles by
their trigonometrical lines, or the converse, admits of an arithmetical
solution (the only one which is directly indispensable for the special
destination of trigonometry) without the previous resolution of the
corresponding algebraic question. It is doubtless to such a peculiarity
that the ancients owed the possibility of knowing trigonometry. The
investigation conceived in this way was so much the more easy, inasmuch
as tables of chords (which the ancients naturally took as the
trigonometrical lines) had been previously constructed for quite a
different object, in the course of the labours of Archimedes on the
rectification of the circle, from which resulted the actual
determination of a certain series of chords; so that when Hipparchus
subsequently invented trigonometry, he could confine himself to
completing that operation by suitable intercalations; which shows
clearly the connexion of ideas in that matter.


_The Increase of such Trigonometrical Lines._ To complete this
philosophical sketch of trigonometry, it is proper now to observe that
the extension of the same considerations which lead us to replace angles
or arcs of circles by straight lines, with the view of simplifying our
equations, must also lead us to employ concurrently several
trigonometrical lines, instead of confining ourselves to one only (as
did the ancients), so as to perfect this system by choosing that one
which will be algebraically the most convenient on each occasion. In
this point of view, it is clear that the number of these lines is in
itself no ways limited; provided that they are determined by the arc,
and that they determine it, whatever may be the law according to which
they are derived from it, they are suitable to be substituted for it in
the equations. The Arabians, and subsequently the moderns, in confining
themselves to the most simple constructions, have carried to four or
five the number of _direct_ trigonometrical lines, which might be
extended much farther.

But instead of recurring to geometrical formations, which would finally
become very complicated, we conceive with the utmost facility as many
new trigonometrical lines as the analytical transformations may require,
by means of a remarkable artifice, which is not usually apprehended in a
sufficiently general manner. It consists in not directly multiplying the
trigonometrical lines appropriate to each arc considered, but in
introducing new ones, by considering this arc as indirectly determined
by all lines relating to an arc which is a very simple function of the
first. It is thus, for example, that, in order to calculate an angle
with more facility, we will determine, instead of its sine, the sine of
its half, or of its double, &c. Such a creation of _indirect_
trigonometrical lines is evidently much more fruitful than all the
direct geometrical methods for obtaining new ones. We may accordingly
say that the number of trigonometrical lines actually employed at the
present day by geometers is in reality unlimited, since at every
instant, so to say, the transformations of analysis may lead us to
augment it by the method which I have just indicated. Special names,
however, have been given to those only of these _indirect_ lines which
refer to the complement of the primitive arc, the others not occurring
sufficiently often to render such denominations necessary; a
circumstance which has caused a common misconception of the true extent
of the system of trigonometry.


_Study of their Mutual Relations._ This multiplicity of trigonometrical
lines evidently gives rise to a third fundamental question in
trigonometry, the study of the relations which exist between these
different lines; since, without such a knowledge, we could not make use,
for our analytical necessities, of this variety of auxiliary magnitudes,
which, however, have no other destination. It is clear, besides, from
the consideration just indicated, that this essential part of
trigonometry, although simply preparatory, is, by its nature,
susceptible of an indefinite extension when we view it in its entire
generality, while the two others are circumscribed within rigorously
defined limits.

It is needless to add that these three principal parts of trigonometry
have to be studied in precisely the inverse order from that in which we
have seen them necessarily derived from the general nature of the
subject; for the third is evidently independent of the two others, and
the second, of that which was first presented--the resolution of
triangles, properly so called--which must for that reason be treated in
the last place; which rendered so much the more important the
consideration of their natural succession and logical relations to one
another.

It is useless to consider here separately _spherical trigonometry_,
which cannot give rise to any special philosophical consideration;
since, essential as it is by the importance and the multiplicity of its
uses, it can be treated at the present day only as a simple application
of rectilinear trigonometry, which furnishes directly its fundamental
equations, by substituting for the spherical triangle the corresponding
trihedral angle.

This summary exposition of the philosophy of trigonometry has been here
given in order to render apparent, by an important example, that
rigorous dependence and those successive ramifications which are
presented by what are apparently the most simple questions of elementary
geometry.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having thus examined the peculiar character of _special_ geometry
reduced to its only dogmatic destination, that of furnishing to general
geometry an indispensable preliminary basis, we have now to give all our
attention to the true science of geometry, considered as a whole, in the
most rational manner. For that purpose, it is necessary to carefully
examine the great original idea of Descartes, upon which it is entirely
founded. This will be the object of the following chapter.




