letter I am now writing.

Whoever holds that every act of the will as well as every idea of the
mind is under the rigid governance of a necessity co-ordinated with that
of the physical world, will logically be carried to the proposition that
minds are part of the physical world in such a sense that the laws of
mechanics determine everything that happens according to immutable
attractions and repulsions. In that case, that instantaneous state of
things from which every other state of things is calculable consists in
the positions and velocities of all the particles at any instant. This,
the usual and most logical form of necessitarianism, is called the
mechanical philosophy.

When I have asked thinking men what reason they had to believe that
every fact in the universe is precisely determined by law, the first
answer has usually been that the proposition is a “presupposition” or
postulate of scientific reasoning. Well, if that is the best that can be
said for it, the belief is doomed. Suppose it be “postulated”: that does
not make it true, nor so much as afford the slightest rational motive
for yielding it any credence. It is as if a man should come to borrow
money, and when asked for his security, should reply he “postulated” the
loan. To “postulate” a proposition is no more than to hope it is true.
There are, indeed, practical emergencies in which we act upon
assumptions of certain propositions as true, because if they are not so,
it can make no difference how we act. But all such propositions I take
to be hypotheses of individual facts. For it is manifest that no
universal principle can in its universality be comprised in a special
case or can be requisite for the validity of any ordinary inference. To
say, for instance, that the demonstration by Archimedes of the property
of the lever would fall to the ground if men were endowed with
free-will, is extravagant; yet this is implied by those who make a
proposition incompatible with the freedom of the will the postulate of
all inference. Considering, too, that the conclusions of science make no
pretence to being more than probable, and considering that a probable
inference can at most only suppose something to be most frequently, or
otherwise approximately, true, but never that anything is precisely true
without exception throughout the universe, we see how far this
proposition in truth is from being so postulated.

But the whole notion of a postulate being involved in reasoning
appertains to a by-gone and false conception of logic. Non-deductive, or
ampliative inference, is of three kinds: induction, hypothesis, and
analogy. If there be any other modes, they must be extremely unusual and
highly complicated, and may be assumed with little doubt to be of the
same nature as those enumerated. For induction, hypothesis, and analogy,
as far as their ampliative character goes, that is, so far as they
conclude something not implied in the premises, depend upon one
principle and involve the same procedure. All are essentially inferences
from sampling. Suppose a ship arrives at Liverpool laden with wheat in
bulk. Suppose that by some machinery the whole cargo be stirred up with
great thoroughness. Suppose that twenty-seven thimblefuls be taken
equally from the forward, midships, and aft parts, from the starboard,
center, and larboard parts, and from the top, half depth, and lower
parts of her hold, and that these being mixed and the grains counted,
four-fifths of the latter are found to be of quality _A_. Then we infer,
experientially and provisionally, that approximately four-fifths of all
the grain in the cargo is of the same quality. I say we infer this
_experientially_ and _provisionally_. By saying that we infer it
_experientially_, I mean that our conclusion makes no pretension to
knowledge of wheat-in-itself, our ἀλήθεια, as the derivation of that
word implies, has nothing to do with _latent_ wheat. We are dealing only
with the matter of possible experience,—experience in the full
acceptation of the term as something not merely affecting the senses but
also as the subject of thought. If there be any wheat hidden on the
ship, so that it can neither turn up in the sample nor be heard of
subsequently from purchasers,—or if it be half-hidden, so that it may,
indeed, turn up, but is less likely to do so than the rest,—or if it can
affect our senses and our pockets, but from some strange cause or
causelessness cannot be reasoned about,—all such wheat is to be excluded
(or have only its proportional weight) in calculating that true
proportion of quality _A_, to which our inference seeks to approximate.
By saying that we draw the inference _provisionally_, I mean that we do
not hold that we have reached any assigned degree of approximation as
yet, but only hold that if our experience be indefinitely extended, and
if every fact of whatever nature, as fast as it presents itself, be duly
applied, according to the inductive method, in correcting the inferred
ratio, then our approximation will become indefinitely close in the long
run; that is to say, close to the experience _to come_ (not merely close
by the exhaustion of a finite collection) so that if experience in
general is to fluctuate irregularly to and fro, in a manner to deprive
the ratio sought of all definite value, we shall be able to find out
approximately within what limits it fluctuates, and if, after having one
definite value, it changes and assumes another, we shall be able to find
that out, and in short, whatever may be the variations of this ratio in
experience, experience indefinitely extended will enable us to detect
them, so as to predict rightly, at last, what its ultimate value may be,
if it have any ultimate value, or what the ultimate law of succession of
values may be, if there be any such ultimate law, or that it ultimately
fluctuates irregularly within certain limits, if it do so ultimately
fluctuate. Now our inference, claiming to be no more than thus
experiential and provisional, manifestly involves no postulate whatever.

For what is a postulate? It is the formulation of a material fact which
we are not entitled to assume as a premise, but the truth of which is
requisite to the validity of an inference. Any fact, then, which might
be supposed postulated, must either be such that it would ultimately
present itself in experience, or not. If it will present itself, we need
not postulate it now in our provisional inference, since we shall
ultimately be entitled to use it as a premise. But if it never would
present itself in experience, our conclusion is valid but for the
possibility of this fact being otherwise than assumed, that is, it is
valid as far as possible experience goes, and that is all that we claim.
Thus, every postulate is cut off, either by the provisionality or by the
experientiality of our inference. For instance, it has been said that
induction postulates that, if an indefinite succession of samples be
drawn, examined, and thrown back each before the next is drawn, then in
the long run every grain will be drawn as often as any other, that is to
say, postulates that the ratio of the numbers of times in which any two
are drawn will indefinitely approximate to unity. But no such postulate
is made; for if, on the one hand, we are to have no other experience of
the wheat than from such drawings, it is the ratio that presents itself
in those drawings and not the ratio which belongs to the wheat in its
latent existence that we are endeavoring to determine; while if, on the
other hand, there is some other mode by which the wheat is to come under
our knowledge, equivalent to another kind of sampling, so that after all
our care in stirring up the wheat, some experiential grains will present
themselves in the first sampling operation more often than others in the
long run, this very singular fact will be sure to get discovered by the
inductive method, which must avail itself of every sort of experience;
and our inference, which was only provisional, corrects itself at last.
Again, it has been said, that induction postulates that under like
circumstances like events will happen, and that this postulate is at
bottom the same as the principle of universal causation. But this is a
blunder, or _bevue_, due to thinking exclusively of inductions where the
concluded ratio is either 1 or 0. If any such proposition were
postulated, it would be that under like circumstances (the circumstances
of drawing the different samples) different events occur in the same
proportions in all the different sets,—a proposition which is false and
even absurd. But in truth no such thing is postulated, the experiential
character of the inference reducing the condition of validity to this,
that if a certain result does not occur, the opposite result will be
manifested, a condition assured by the provisionality of the inference.
But it may be asked whether it is not conceivable that every instance of
a certain class destined to be ever employed as a datum of induction
should have one character, while every instance destined not to be so
employed should have the opposite character. The answer is that in that
case, the instances excluded from being subjects of reasoning would not
be experienced in the full sense of the word, but would be among these
_latent_ individuals of which our conclusion does not pretend to speak.

To this account of the rationale of induction I know of but one
objection worth mention: it is that I thus fail to deduce the full
degree of force which this mode of inference in fact possesses; that
according to my view, no matter how thorough and elaborate the stirring
and mixing process had been, the examination of a single handful of
grain would not give me any assurance, sufficient to risk money upon
that the next handful would not greatly modify the concluded value of
the ratio under inquiry, while, in fact, the assurance would be very
high that this ratio was not greatly in error. If the true ratio of
grains of quality _A_ were 0.80 and the handful contained a thousand
grains, nine such handfuls out of every ten would contain from 780 to
820 grains of quality _A_. The answer to this is that the calculation
given is correct when we know that the units of this handful and the
quality inquired into have the normal independence of one another, if
for instance the stirring has been complete and the character sampled
for has been settled upon in advance of the examination of the sample.
But in so far as these conditions are not known to be complied with, the
above figures cease to be applicable. Random sampling and predesignation
of the character sampled for should always be striven after in inductive
reasoning, but when they cannot be attained, so long as it is conducted
honestly, the inference retains some value. When we cannot ascertain how
the sampling has been done or the sample-character selected, induction
still has the essential validity which my present account of it shows it
to have.

I do not think a man who combines a willingness to be convinced with a
power of appreciating an argument upon a difficult subject can resist
the reasons which have been given to show that the principle of
universal necessity cannot be defended as being a postulate of
reasoning. But then the question immediately arises whether it is not
proved to be true, or at least rendered highly probable, by observation
of nature.

Still, this question ought not long to arrest a person accustomed to
reflect upon the force of scientific reasoning. For the essence of the
necessitarian position is that certain continuous quantities have
certain exact values. Now, how can observation determine the value of
such a quantity with a probable error absolutely _nil_? To one who is
behind the scenes, and knows that the most refined comparisons of
masses, lengths, and angles, far surpassing in precision all other
measurements, yet fall behind the accuracy of bank-accounts, and that
the ordinary determinations of physical constants, such as appear from
month to month in the journals, are about on a par with an upholsterer’s
measurements of carpets and curtains, the idea of mathematical
exactitude being demonstrated in the laboratory will appear simply
ridiculous. There is a recognized method of estimating the probable
magnitudes of errors in physics,—the method of least squares. It is
universally admitted that this method makes the errors smaller than they
really are; yet even according to that theory an error indefinitely
small is indefinitely improbable; so that any statement to the effect
that a certain continuous quantity has a certain exact value, if
well-founded at all, must be founded on something other than
observation.

Still, I am obliged to admit that this rule is subject to a certain
qualification. Namely, it only applies to continuous[60] quantity. Now,
certain kinds of continuous quantity are discontinuous at one or at two
limits, and for such limits the rule must be modified. Thus, the length
of a line cannot be less than zero. Suppose, then, the question arises
how long a line a certain person had drawn from a marked point on a
piece of paper. If no line at all can be seen, the observed length is
zero; and the only conclusion this observation warrants is that the
length of the line is less than the smallest length visible with the
optical power employed. But indirect observations,—for example, that the
person supposed to have drawn the line was never within fifty feet of
the paper,—may make it probable that no line at all was made, so that
the concluded length will be strictly zero. In like manner, experience
no doubt would warrant the conclusion that there is absolutely _no_
indigo in a given ear of wheat, and absolutely _no_ attar in a given
lichen. But such inferences can only be rendered valid by positive
experiential evidence, direct or remote, and cannot rest upon a mere
inability to detect the quantity in question. We have reason to think
there is no indigo in the wheat, because we have remarked that wherever
indigo is produced it is produced in considerable quantities, to mention
only one argument. We have reason to think there is no attar in the
lichen, because essential oils seem to be in general peculiar to single
species. If the question had been whether there was iron in the wheat or
the lichen, though chemical analysis should fail to detect its presence,
we should think some of it probably was there, since iron is almost
everywhere. Without any such information, one way or the other, we could
only abstain from any opinion as to the presence of the substance in
question. It cannot, I conceive, be maintained that we are in any
_better_ position than this in regard to the presence of the element of
chance or spontaneous departures from law in nature.

Those observations which are generally adduced in favor of mechanical
causation simply prove that there is an element of regularity in nature,
and have no bearing whatever upon the question of whether such
regularity is exact and universal, or not. Nay, in regard to this
_exactitude_, all observation is directly _opposed_ to it; and the most
that can be said is that a good deal of this observation can be
explained away. Try to verify any law of nature, and you will find that
the more precise your observations, the more certain they will be to
show irregular departures from the law. We are accustomed to ascribe
these, and I do not say wrongly, to errors of observation; yet we cannot
usually account for such errors in any antecedently probable way. Trace
their causes back far enough, and you will be forced to admit they are
always due to arbitrary determination, or chance.

But it may be asked whether if there were an element of real chance in
the universe it must not occasionally be productive of signal effects
such as could not pass unobserved. In answer to this question, without
stopping to point out that there is an abundance of great events which
one might be tempted to suppose were of that nature, it will be simplest
to remark that physicists hold that the particles of gases are moving
about irregularly, substantially as if by real chance, and that by the
principles of probabilities there must occasionally happen to be
concentrations of heat in the gases contrary to the second law of
thermodynamics, and these concentrations, occurring in explosive
mixtures, must sometimes have tremendous effects. Here, then, is in
substance the very situation supposed; yet no phenomena ever have
resulted which we are forced to attribute to such chance concentration
of heat, or which anybody, wise or foolish, has ever dreamed of
accounting for in that manner.

In view of all these considerations, I do not believe that anybody, not
in a state of case-hardened ignorance respecting the logic of science,
can maintain that the precise and universal conformity of facts to law
is clearly proved, or even rendered particularly probable, by any
observations hitherto made. In this way, the determined advocate of
exact regularity will soon find himself driven to _a priori_ reasons to
support his thesis. These received such a socdolager from Stuart Mill in
his Examination of Hamilton, that holding to them now seems to me to
denote a high degree of imperviousness to reason; so that I shall pass
them by with little notice.

To say that we cannot help believing a given proposition is no argument,
but it is a conclusive fact if it be true; and with the substitution of
“I” for “we,” it is true in the mouths of several classes of minds, the
blindly passionate, the unreflecting and ignorant, and the person who
has overwhelming evidence before his eyes. But that which has been
inconceivable to-day has often turned out indisputable on the morrow.
Inability to conceive is only a stage through which every man must pass
in regard to a number of beliefs,—unless endowed with extraordinary
obstinacy and obtuseness. His understanding is enslaved to some blind
compulsion which a vigorous mind is pretty sure soon to cast off.

Some seek to back up the _a priori_ position with empirical arguments.
They say that the exact regularity of the world is a natural belief, and
that natural beliefs have generally been confirmed by experience. There
is some reason in this. Natural beliefs, however, if they generally have
a foundation of truth, also require correction and purification from
natural illusions. The principles of mechanics are undoubtedly natural
beliefs; but, for all that, the early formulations of them were
exceedingly erroneous. The general approximation to truth in natural
beliefs is, in fact, a case of the general adaptation of genetic
products to recognizable utilities or ends. Now, the adaptations of
nature, beautiful and often marvelous as they verily are, are never
found to be quite perfect; so that the argument is quite _against_ the
absolute exactitude of any natural belief, including that of the
principle of causation.

Another argument, or convenient commonplace, is that absolute chance is
_inconceivable_. (This word has eight current significations. The
_Century Dictionary_ enumerates six.) Those who talk like this will
hardly be persuaded to say in what sense they mean that chance is
inconceivable. Should they do so, it would easily be shown either that
they have no sufficient reason for the statement or that the
inconceivability is of a kind which does not prove that chance is
non-existent.

Another _a priori_ argument is that chance is unintelligible; that is to
say, while it may perhaps be conceivable, it does not disclose to the
eye of reason the how or why of things; and since a hypothesis can only
be justified so far as it renders some phenomenon intelligible, we never
can have any right to suppose absolute chance to enter into the
production of anything in nature. This argument may be considered in
connection with two others. Namely, instead of going so far as to say
that the supposition of chance can _never_ properly be used to explain
any observed fact, it may be alleged merely that no facts are known
which such a supposition could in any way help in explaining. Or again,
the allegation being still further weakened, it may be said that since
departures from law are not unmistakably observed, chance is not a _vera
causa_, and ought not unnecessarily to be introduced into a hypothesis.

These are no mean arguments, and require us to examine the matter a
little more closely. Come, my superior opponent, let me learn from your
wisdom. It seems to me that every throw of sixes with a pair of dice is
a manifest instance of chance.

“While you would hold a throw of deuce-ace to be brought about by
necessity?” (The opponent’s supposed remarks are placed in quotation
marks.)

Clearly one throw is as much chance as another.

“Do you think throws of dice are of a different nature from other
events?”

I see that I must say that _all_ the diversity and specificalness of
events is attributable to chance.

“Would you, then, deny that there is any regularity in the world?”

That is clearly undeniable. I must acknowledge there is an approximate
regularity, and that every event is influenced by it. But the
diversification, specificalness, and irregularity of things I suppose is
chance. A throw of sixes appears to me a case in which this element is
particularly obtrusive.

“If you reflect more deeply, you will come to see that _chance_ is only
a name for a cause that is unknown to us.”

Do you mean that we have no idea whatever what kind of causes could
bring about a throw of sixes?

“On the contrary, each die moves under the influence of precise
mechanical laws.”

But it appears to me that it is not these _laws_ which made the die turn
up sixes; for these laws act just the same when other throws come up.
The chance lies in the diversity of throws; and this diversity cannot be
due to laws which are immutable.

“The diversity is due to the diverse circumstances under which the laws
act. The dice lie differently in the box, and the motion given to the
box is different. These are the unknown causes which produce the throws,
and to which we give the name of chance; not the mechanical law which
regulates the operation of these causes. You see you are already
beginning to think more clearly about this subject.”

Does the operation of mechanical law not increase the diversity?

“Properly not. You must know that the instantaneous state of a system of
particles is defined by six times as many numbers as there are
particles, three for the co-ordinates of each particle’s position, and
three more for the components of its velocity. This number of numbers,
which expresses the amount of diversity in the system, remains the same
at all times. There may be, to be sure, some kind of relation between
the co-ordinates and component velocities of the different particles, by
means of which the state of the system might be expressed by a smaller
number of numbers. But, if this is the case, a precisely corresponding
relationship must exist between the co-ordinates and component
velocities at any other time, though it may doubtless be a relation less
obvious to us. Thus, the intrinsic complexity of the system is the same
at all times.”

Very well, my obliging opponent, we have now reached an issue. You think
all the arbitrary specifications of the universe were introduced in one
dose, in the beginning, if there was a beginning, and that the variety
and complication of nature has always been just as much as it is now.
But I, for my part, think that the diversification, the specification,
has been continually taking place. Should you condescend to ask me why I
so think, I should give my reasons as follows:

(1) Question any science which deals with the course of time. Consider
the life of an individual animal or plant, or of a mind. Glance at the
history of states, of institutions, of language, of ideas. Examine the
successions of forms shown by paleontology, the history of the globe as
set forth in geology, of what the astronomer is able to make out
concerning the changes of stellar systems. Everywhere the main fact is
growth and increasing complexity. Death and corruption are mere
accidents or secondary phenomena. Among some of the lower organisms, it
is a moot point with biologists whether there be anything which ought to
be called death. Races, at any rate, do not die out except under
unfavorable circumstances. From these broad and ubiquitous facts we may
fairly infer, by the most unexceptionable logic, that there is probably
in nature some agency by which the complexity and diversity of things
can be increased; and that consequently the rule of mechanical necessity
meets in some way with interference.

(2) By thus admitting pure spontaneity or life as a character of the
universe, acting always and everywhere though restrained within narrow
bounds by law, producing infinitesimal departures from law continually,
and great ones with infinite infrequency, I account for all the variety
and diversity of the universe, in the only sense in which the really
_sui generis_ and new can be said to be accounted for. The ordinary view
has to admit the inexhaustible multitudinous variety of the world, has
to admit that its mechanical law cannot account for this in the least,
that variety can spring only from spontaneity, and yet denies without
any evidence or reason the existence of this spontaneity, or else shoves
it back to the beginning of time and supposes it dead ever since. The
superior logic of my view appears to me not easily controverted.

(3) When I ask the necessitarian how he would explain the diversity and
irregularity of the universe, he replies to me out of the treasury of
his wisdom that irregularity is something which from the nature of
things we must not seek to explain. Abashed at this, I seek to cover my
confusion by asking how he would explain the uniformity and regularity
of the universe, whereupon he tells me that the laws of nature are
immutable and ultimate facts, and no account is to be given of them. But
my hypothesis of spontaneity does explain irregularity, in a certain
sense; that is, it explains the general fact of irregularity, though
not, of course, what each lawless event is to be. At the same time, by
thus loosening the bond of necessity, it gives room for the influence of
another kind of causation, such as seems to be operative in the mind in
the formation of associations, and enables us to understand how the
uniformity of nature could have been brought about. That single events
should be hard and unintelligible, logic will permit without difficulty:
we do not expect to make the shock of a personally experienced
earthquake appear natural and reasonable by any amount of cogitation.
But logic does expect things _general_ to be understandable. To say that
there is a universal law, and that it is a hard, ultimate,
unintelligible fact, the why and wherefore of which can never be
inquired into, at this a sound logic will revolt; and will pass over at
once to a method of philosophizing which does not thus barricade the
road of discovery.

(4) Necessitarianism cannot logically stop short of making the whole
action of the mind a part of the physical universe. Our notion that we
decide what we are going to do, if as the necessitarian says, it has
been calculable since the earliest times, is reduced to illusion.
Indeed, consciousness in general thus becomes a mere illusory aspect of
a material system. What we call red, green, and violet are in reality
only different rates of vibration. The sole reality is the distribution
of qualities of matter in space and time. Brain-matter is protoplasm in
a certain degree and kind of complication,—a certain arrangement of
mechanical particles. Its feeling is but an inward aspect, a phantom.
For, from the positions and velocities of the particles at any one
instant, and the knowledge of the immutable forces, the positions at all
other times are calculable; so that the universe of space, time, and
matter is a rounded system uninterfered with from elsewhere. But from
the state of feeling at any instant, there is no reason to suppose the
states of feeling at all other instants are thus exactly calculable; so
that feeling is, as I said, a mere fragmentary and illusive aspect of
the universe. This is the way, then, that necessitarianism has to make
up its accounts. It enters consciousness under the head of sundries, as
a forgotten trifle; its scheme of the universe would be more
satisfactory if this little fact could be dropped out of sight. On the
other hand, by supposing the rigid exactitude of causation to yield, I
care not how little,—be it but by a strictly infinitesimal amount,—we
gain room to insert mind into our scheme, and to put it into the place
where it is needed, into the position which, as the sole
self-intelligible thing, it is entitled to occupy, that of the fountain
of existence; and in so doing we resolve the problem of the connection
of soul and body.

(5) But I must leave undeveloped the chief of my reasons, and can only
adumbrate it. The hypothesis of chance-spontaneity is one whose
inevitable consequences are capable of being traced out with
mathematical precision into considerable detail. Much of this I have
done and find the consequences to agree with observed facts to an extent
which seems to me remarkable. But the matter and methods of reasoning
are novel, and I have no right to promise that other mathematicians
shall find my deductions as satisfactory as I myself do, so that the
strongest reason for my belief must for the present remain a private
reason of my own, and cannot influence others. I mention it to explain
my own position; and partly to indicate to future mathematical
speculators a veritable goldmine, should time and circumstances and the
abridger of all joys prevent my opening it to the world.

If now I, in my turn, inquire of the necessitarian why he prefers to
suppose that all specification goes back to the beginning of things, he
will answer me with one of those last three arguments which I left
unanswered.

First, he may say that chance is a thing absolutely unintelligible, and,
therefore, that we never can be entitled to make such a supposition. But
does not this objection smack of naïve impudence? It is not mine, it is
his own conception of the universe which leads abruptly up to hard,
ultimate, inexplicable, immutable law, on the one hand, and to
inexplicable specification and diversification of circumstances on the
other. My view, on the contrary, hypothetises nothing at all, unless it
be hypothesis to say that all specification came about in some sense,
and is not to be accepted as unaccountable. To undertake to account for
anything by saying boldly that it is due to chance would, indeed, be
futile. But this I do not do. I make use of chance chiefly to make room
for a principle of generalization, or tendency to form habits, which I
hold has produced all regularities. The mechanical philosopher leaves
the whole specification of the world utterly unaccounted for, which is
pretty nearly as bad as to boldly attribute it to chance. I attribute it
altogether to chance, it is true, but to chance in the form of a
spontaneity which is to some degree regular. It seems to me clear at any
rate that one of these two positions must be taken, or else
specification must be supposed due to a spontaneity which develops
itself in a certain and not in a chance way, by an objective logic like
that of Hegel. This last way I leave as an open possibility, for the
present; for it is as much opposed to the necessitarian scheme of
existence as my own theory is.

Secondly, the necessitarian may say there are, at any rate, no observed
phenomena which the hypothesis of chance could aid in explaining. In
reply, I point first to the phenomenon of growth and developing
complexity, which appears to be universal, and which though it may
possibly be an affair of mechanism perhaps, certainly presents all the
appearance of increasing diversification. Then, there is variety itself,
beyond comparison the most obtrusive character of the universe: no
mechanism can account for this. Then, there is the very fact the
necessitarian most insists upon, the regularity of the universe which
for him serves only to block the road of inquiry. Then, there are the
regular relationships between the laws of nature,—similarities and
comparative characters, which appeal to our intelligence as its cousins,
and call upon us for a reason. Finally, there is consciousness, feeling,
a patent fact enough, but a very inconvenient one to the mechanical
philosopher.

Thirdly, the necessitarian may say that chance is not a _vera causa_,
that we cannot know positively there is any such element in the
universe. But the doctrine of the _vera causa_ has nothing to do with
elementary conceptions. Pushed to that extreme, it at once cuts off
belief in the existence of a material universe; and without that
necessitarianism could hardly maintain its ground. Besides, variety is a
fact which must be admitted; and the theory of chance merely consists in
supposing this diversification does not antedate all time. Moreover, the
avoidance of hypotheses involving causes nowhere positively known to
act—is only a recommendation of logic, not a positive command. It cannot
be formulated in any precise terms without at once betraying its
untenable character,—I mean as rigid rule, for as a recommendation it is
wholesome enough.

I believe I have thus subjected to fair examination all the important
reasons for adhering to the theory of universal necessity, and have
shown their nullity. I earnestly beg that whoever may detect any flaw in
my reasoning will point it out to me, either privately or publicly; for
if I am wrong, it much concerns me to be set right speedily. If my
argument remains unrefuted, it will be time, I think, to doubt the
absolute truth of the principle of universal law; and when once such a
doubt has obtained a living root in any man’s mind, my cause with him, I
am persuaded, is gained.

Footnote 59:

  _The Monist_, April, 1892.

Footnote 60:

  _Continuous_ is not exactly the right word, but I let it go to avoid a
  long and irrelevant discussion.




                        III. THE LAW OF MIND[61]


In an article published in _The Monist_ for January, 1891, I endeavored
to show what ideas ought to form the warp of a system of philosophy, and
particularly emphasized that of absolute chance. In the number of April,
1892, I argued further in favor of that way of thinking, which it will
be convenient to christen _tychism_ (from τύχη, chance). A serious
student of philosophy will be in no haste to accept or reject this
doctrine; but he will see in it one of the chief attitudes which
speculative thought may take, feeling that it is not for an individual,
nor for an age, to pronounce upon a fundamental question of philosophy.
That is a task for a whole era to work out. I have begun by showing that
_tychism_ must give birth to an evolutionary cosmology, in which all the
regularities of nature and of mind are regarded as products of growth,
and to a Schelling-fashioned idealism which holds matter to be mere
specialized and partially deadened mind. I may mention, for the benefit
of those who are curious in studying mental biographies, that I was born
and reared in the neighborhood of Concord,—I mean in Cambridge,—at the
time when Emerson, Hedge, and their friends were disseminating the ideas
that they had caught from Schelling, and Schelling from Plotinus, from
Boehm, or from God knows what minds stricken with the monstrous
mysticism of the East. But the atmosphere of Cambridge held many an
antiseptic against Concord transcendentalism; and I am not conscious of
having contracted any of that virus. Nevertheless, it is probable that
some cultured bacilli, some benignant form of the disease was implanted
in my soul, unawares, and that now, after long incubation, it comes to
the surface, modified by mathematical conceptions and by training in
physical investigations.

The next step in the study of cosmology must be to examine the general
law of mental action. In doing this, I shall for the time drop my
tychism out of view, in order to allow a free and independent expansion
to another conception signalized in my first _Monist_ paper as one of
the most indispensable to philosophy, though it was not there dwelt
upon; I mean the idea of continuity. The tendency to regard continuity,
in the sense in which I shall define it, as an idea of prime importance
in philosophy may conveniently be termed _synechism_. The present paper
is intended chiefly to show what synechism is, and what it leads to. I
attempted, a good many years ago, to develop this doctrine in the
_Journal of Speculative Philosophy_ (Vol. II.); but I am able now to
improve upon that exposition, in which I was a little blinded by
nominalistic prepossessions. I refer to it, because students may
possibly find that some points not sufficiently explained in the present
paper are cleared up in those earlier ones.


                            WHAT THE LAW IS


Logical analysis applied to mental phenomena shows that there is but one
law of mind, namely, that ideas tend to spread continuously and to
affect certain others which stand to them in a peculiar relation of
affectibility. In this spreading they lose intensity, and especially the
power of affecting others, but gain generality and become welded with
other ideas.

I set down this formula at the beginning, for convenience; and now
proceed to comment upon it.


                         INDIVIDUALITY OF IDEAS


We are accustomed to speak of ideas as reproduced, as passed from mind
to mind, as similar or dissimilar to one another, and, in short, as if
they were substantial things; nor can any reasonable objection be raised
to such expressions. But taking the word “idea” in the sense of an event
in an individual consciousness, it is clear that an idea once past is
gone forever, and any supposed recurrence of it is another idea. These
two ideas are not present in the same state of consciousness, and
therefore cannot possibly be compared. To say, therefore, that they are
similar can only mean that an occult power from the depths of the soul
forces us to connect them in our thoughts after they are both no more.
We may note, here, in passing, that of the two generally recognized
principles of association, contiguity and similarity, the former is a
connection due to a power without, the latter a connection due to a
power within.

But what can it mean to say that ideas wholly past are thought of at
all, any longer? They are utterly unknowable. What distinct meaning can
attach to saying that an idea in the past in any way affects an idea in
the future, from which it is completely detached? A phrase between the
assertion and the denial of which there can in no case be any sensible
difference is mere gibberish.

I will not dwell further upon this point, because it is a commonplace of
philosophy.


                          CONTINUITY OF IDEAS


We have here before us a question of difficulty, analogous to the
question of nominalism and realism. But when once it has been clearly
formulated, logic leaves room for one answer only. How can a past idea
be present? Can it be present vicariously? To a certain extent, perhaps;
but not merely so; for then the question would arise how the past idea
can be related to its vicarious representation. The relation, being
between ideas, can only exist in some consciousness: now that past idea
was in no consciousness but that past consciousness that alone contained
it; and that did not embrace the vicarious idea.

Some minds will here jump to the conclusion that a past idea cannot in
any sense be present. But that is hasty and illogical. How extravagant,
too, to pronounce our whole knowledge of the past to be mere delusion!
Yet it would seem that the past is as completely beyond the bounds of
possible experience as a Kantian thing-in-itself.

How can a past idea be present? Not vicariously. Then, only by direct
perception. In other words, to be present, it must be _ipso facto_
present. That is, it cannot be wholly past; it can only be going,
infinitesimally past, less past than any assignable past date. We are
thus brought to the conclusion that the present is connected with the
past by a series of real infinitesimal steps.

It has already been suggested by psychologists that consciousness
necessarily embraces an interval of time. But if a finite time be meant,
the opinion is not tenable. If the sensation that precedes the present
by half a second were still immediately before me, then, on the same
principle the sensation preceding that would be immediately present, and
so on _ad infinitum_. Now, since there is a time, say a year, at the end
of which an idea is no longer _ipso facto_ present, it follows that this
is true of any finite interval, however short.

But yet consciousness must essentially cover an interval of time; for if
it did not, we could gain no knowledge of time, and not merely no
veracious cognition of it, but no conception whatever. We are,
therefore, forced to say that we are immediately conscious through an
infinitesimal interval of time.

This is all that is requisite. For, in this infinitesimal interval, not
only is consciousness continuous in a subjective sense, that is,
considered as a subject or substance having the attribute of duration;
but also, because it is immediate consciousness, its object is _ipso
facto_ continuous. In fact, this infinitesimally spread-out
consciousness is a direct feeling of its contents as spread out. This
will be further elucidated below. In an infinitesimal interval we
directly perceive the temporal sequence of its beginning, middle, and
end,—not, of course, in the way of recognition, for recognition is only
of the past, but in the way of immediate feeling. Now upon this interval
follows another, whose beginning is the middle of the former, and whose
middle is the end of the former. Here, we have an immediate perception
of the temporal sequence of its beginning, middle, and end, or say of
the second, third, and fourth instants. From these two immediate
perceptions, we gain a mediate, or inferential, perception of the
relation of all four instants. This mediate perception is objectively,
or as to the object represented, spread over the four instants; but
subjectively, or as itself the subject of duration, it is completely
embraced in the second moment. (The reader will observe that I use the
word _instant_ to mean a point of time, and _moment_ to mean an
infinitesimal duration.) If it is objected that, upon the theory
proposed, we must have more than a mediate perception of the succession
of the four instants, I grant it; for the sum of the two infinitesimal
intervals is itself infinitesimal, so that it is immediately perceived.
It is immediately perceived in the whole interval, but only mediately
perceived in the last two-thirds of the interval. Now, let there be an
indefinite succession of these inferential acts of comparative
perception; and it is plain that the last moment will contain
objectively the whole series. Let there be, not merely an indefinite
succession, but a continuous flow of inference through a finite time;
and the result will be a mediate objective consciousness of the whole
time in the last moment. In this last moment, the whole series will be
recognized, or known as known before, except only the last moment, which
of course will be absolutely unrecognizable to itself. Indeed, even this
last moment will be recognized like the rest, or, at least, be just
beginning to be so. There is a little _elenchus_, or appearance of
contradiction, here, which the ordinary logic of reflection quite
suffices to resolve.


                  INFINITY AND CONTINUITY, IN GENERAL


Most of the mathematicians who during the last two generations have
treated the differential calculus have been of the opinion that an
infinitesimal quantity is an absurdity; although, with their habitual
caution, they have often added “or, at any rate, the conception of an
infinitesimal is so difficult, that we practically cannot reason about
it with confidence and security.” Accordingly, the doctrine of limits
has been invented to evade the difficulty, or, as some say, to explain
the signification of the word “infinitesimal.” This doctrine, in one
form or another, is taught in all the text-books, though in some of them
only as an alternative view of the matter; it answers well enough the
purposes of calculation, though even in that application it has its
difficulties.

The illumination of the subject by a strict notation for the logic of
relatives had shown me clearly and evidently that the idea of an
infinitesimal involves no contradiction, before I became acquainted with
the writings of Dr. Georg Cantor (though many of these had already
appeared in the _Mathematische Annalen_ and in _Borchardt’s Journal_, if
not yet in the _Acta Mathematica_, all mathematical journals of the
first distinction), in which the same view is defended with
extraordinary genius and penetrating logic.

The prevalent opinion is that finite numbers are the only ones that we
can reason about, at least, in any ordinary mode of reasoning, or, as
some authors express it, they are the only numbers that can be reasoned
about mathematically. But this is an irrational prejudice. I long ago
showed that finite collections are distinguished from infinite ones only
by one circumstance and its consequences, namely, that to them is
applicable a peculiar and unusual mode of reasoning called by its
discoverer, De Morgan, the “syllogism of transposed quantity.”

Balzac, in the introduction of his _Physiologie du mariage_, remarks
that every young Frenchman boasts of having seduced some Frenchwoman.
Now, as a woman can only be seduced once, and there are no more
Frenchwomen than Frenchmen, it follows, if these boasts are true, that
no French women escape seduction. If their number be finite, the
reasoning holds. But since the population is continually increasing, and
the seduced are on the average younger than the seducers, the conclusion
need not be true. In like manner, De Morgan, as an actuary, might have
argued that if an insurance company pays to its insured on an average
more than they have ever paid it, including interest, it must lose
money. But every modern actuary would see a fallacy in that, since the
business is continually on the increase. But should war, or other
cataclysm, cause the class of insured to be a finite one, the conclusion
would turn out painfully correct, after all. The above two reasonings
are examples of the syllogism of transposed quantity.

The proposition that finite and infinite collections are distinguished
by the applicability to the former of the syllogism of transposed
quantity ought to be regarded as the basal one of scientific arithmetic.

If a person does not know how to reason logically, and I must say that a
great many fairly good mathematicians,—yea, distinguished ones,—fall
under this category, but simply uses a rule of thumb in blindly drawing
inferences like other inferences that have turned out well, he will, of
course, be continually falling into error about infinite numbers. The
truth is such people do not reason, at all. But for the few who do
reason, reasoning about infinite numbers is easier than about finite
numbers, because the complicated syllogism of transposed quantity is not
called for. For example, that the whole is greater than its part is not
an axiom, as that eminently bad reasoner, Euclid, made it to be. It is a
theorem readily proved by means of a syllogism of transposed quantity,
but not otherwise. Of finite collections it is true, of infinite
collections false. Thus, a part of the whole numbers are even numbers.
Yet the even numbers are no fewer than all the numbers; an evident
proposition since if every number in the whole series of whole numbers
be doubled, the result will be the series of even numbers.

                          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
                          2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, etc.

So for every number there is a distinct even number. In fact, there are
as many distinct doubles of numbers as there are of distinct numbers.
But the doubles of numbers are all even numbers.

In truth, of infinite collections there are but two grades of magnitude,
the _endless_ and the _innumerable_. Just as a finite collection is
distinguished from an infinite one by the applicability to it of a
special mode of reasoning, the syllogism of transposed quantity, so, as
I showed in the paper last referred to, a numerable collection is
distinguished from an innumerable one by the applicability to it of a
certain mode of reasoning, the Fermatian inference, or, as it is
sometimes improperly termed, “mathematical induction.”

As an example of this reasoning, Euler’s demonstration of the binomial
theorem for integral powers may be given. The theorem is that (_x_ +
_y_)^n, where _n_ is a whole number, may be expanded into the sum of a
series of terms of which the first is _x_^n_y_^o and each of the others
is derived from the next preceding by diminishing the exponent of _x_ by
1 and multiplying by that exponent and at the same time increasing the
exponent of _y_ by 1 and dividing by that increased exponent. Now,
suppose this proposition to be true for a certain exponent, _n_ = _M_,
then it must also be true for _n_ = _M_ + 1. For let one of the terms in
the expansion of (_x_ + _y_)^M be written A_x^p__y^q_. Then, this term
with the two following will be

    A_x^p__y^q_ + A _p_/(_q_ + 1) _x_^{_p_ - 1} _y_^{_q_ + 1} + A
       _p_/(_q_ + 1) (_p_ - 1)/(_q_ + 2) _x_^{_p_ - 2} _y_^{_q_ + 2}

Now, when (_x_ + _y_)^M is multiplied by _x_ + _y_ to give (_x_ +
_y_)^{M + 1}, we multiply first by _x_ and then by _y_ instead of by _x_
and add the two results. When we multiply by _x_, the second of the
above three terms will be the only one giving a term involving
_x^p__y_^{_q_ + 1} and the third will be the only one giving a term in
_x_^{_p_ - 1}_y_^{_q_ + 2}; and when we multiply by y the first will be
the only term giving a term in _x^p__y_^{_q_ + 1}, and the second will
be the only term giving a term in _x_^{_p_ - 1}_y_^{_q_ + 2}. Hence,
adding like terms, we find that the coefficient of _x^p__y_^{_q_ + 1} in
the expansion of (_x_ + _y_)^{M + 1} will be the sum of the coefficients
of the first two of the above three terms, and that the coefficient of
_x_^{_p_ - 1}_y_^{_q_ + 2} will be the sum of the coefficients of the
last two terms. Hence, two successive terms in the expansion of (_x_ +
_y_)^{M + 1} will be

    A[1 + (_p_/(_q_ + 1))]_x^p__y_^{_q_+1} + A(_p_/(_q_ + 1))[1+ ((_p_ -
       1)/(_q_ + 2))]_x_^{_p_-1}_y_^{_q_+2}
    = A((_p_ + _q_ + 1)/(_q_ + 1))_x^p__y_^{_q_+1} + A((_p_ + _q_ +
       1)/(_q_ + 1))(_p_/(_q_ + 2))_x_^{_p_-1}_y_{_q_+2}

It is, thus, seen that the succession of terms follows the rule. Thus if
any integral power follows the rule, so also does the next higher power.
But the first power obviously follows the rule. Hence, all powers do so.

Such reasoning holds good of any collection of objects capable of being
ranged in a series which though it may be endless, can be numbered so
that each member of it receives a definite integral number. For
instance, all the whole numbers constitute such a numerable collection.
Again, all numbers resulting from operating according to any definite
rule with any finite number of whole numbers form such a collection. For
they may be arranged in a series thus. Let F be the symbol of operation.
First operate on 1, giving F(1). Then, operate on a second 1, giving
F(1,1). Next, introduce 2, giving 3rd, F(2); 4th F(2,1); 5th, F(1,2);
6th, F(2,2). Next use a third variable giving 7th, F(1,1,1); 8th,
F(2,1,1); 9th, F(1,2,1); 10th, F(2,2,1); 11th, F(1,1,2); 12th, F(2,1,2);
13th, F(1,2,2); 14th, F(2,2,2). Next introduce 3, and so on, alternately
introducing new variables and new figures; and in this way it is plain
that every arrangement of integral values of the variables will receive
a numbered place in the series.[62]

The class of endless but numerable collections (so called because they
can be so ranged that to each one corresponds a distinct whole number)
is very large. But there are collections which are certainly
innumerable. Such is the collection of all numbers to which endless
series of decimals are capable of approximating. It has been recognized
since the time of Euclid that certain numbers are surd or
incommensurable, and are not exactly expressible by any finite series of
decimals, nor by a circulating decimal. Such is the ratio of the
circumference of a circle to its diameter, which we know is nearly
3.1415926. The calculation of this number has been carried to over 700
figures without the slightest appearance of regularity in their
sequence. The demonstrations that this and many other numbers are
incommensurable are perfect. That the entire collection of
incommensurable numbers is innumerable has been clearly proved by
Cantor. I omit the demonstration; but it is easy to see that to
discriminate one from some other would, in general, require the use of
an endless series of numbers. Now if they cannot be exactly expressed
and discriminated, clearly they cannot be ranged in a linear series.

It is evident that there are as many points on a line or in an interval
of time as there are of real numbers in all. These are, therefore,
innumerable collections. Many mathematicians have incautiously assumed
that the points on a surface or in a solid are more than those on a
line. But this has been refuted by Cantor. Indeed, it is obvious that
for every set of values of coördinates there is a single distinct
number. Suppose, for instance, the values of the coordinates all lie
between 0 and + 1. Then if we compose a number by putting in the first
decimal place the first figure of the first coördinate, in the second
the first figure of the second coördinate, and so on, and when the first
figures are all dealt out go on to the second figures in like manner, it
is plain that the values of the coördinates can be read off from the
single resulting number, so that a triad or tetrad of numbers, each
having innumerable values, has no more values than a single
incommensurable number.

Were the number of dimensions infinite, this would fail; and the
collection of infinite sets of numbers having each innumerable
variations, might, therefore, be greater than the simple innumerable
collection, and might be called _endlessly infinite_. The single
individuals of such a collection could not, however, be designated, even
approximately, so that this is indeed a magnitude concerning which it
would be possible to reason only in the most general way, if at all.

Although there are but two grades of magnitudes of infinite collections,
yet when certain conditions are imposed upon the order in which
individuals are taken, distinctions of magnitude arise from that cause.
Thus, if a simply endless series be doubled by separating each unit into
two parts, the successive first parts and also the second parts being
taken in the same order as the units from which they are derived, this
double endless series will, so long as it is taken in that order, appear
as twice as large as the original series. In like manner the product of
two innumerable collections, that is, the collection of possible pairs
composed of one individual of each, if the order of continuity is to be
maintained, is, by virtue of that order, infinitely greater than either
of the component collections.

We now come to the difficult question. What is continuity? Kant
confounds it with infinite divisibility, saying that the essential
character of a continuous series is that between any two members of it a
third can always be found. This is an analysis beautifully clear and
definite; but unfortunately, it breaks down under the first test. For
according to this, the entire series of rational fractions arranged in
the order of their magnitude, would be an infinite series, although the
rational fractions are numerable, while the points of a line are
innumerable. Nay, worse yet, if from that series of fractions any two
with all that lie between them be excised, and any number of such finite
gaps be made, Kant’s definition is still true of the series, though it
has lost all appearance of continuity.

Cantor defines a continuous series as one which is _concatenated_ and
_perfect_. By a concatenated series, he means such a one that if any two
points are given in it, and any finite distance, however small, it is
possible to proceed from the first point to the second through a
succession of points of the series each at a distance from the preceding
one less than the given distance. This is true of the series of rational
fractions ranged in the order of their magnitude. By a perfect series,
he means one which contains every point such that there is no distance
so small that this point has not an infinity of points of the series
within that distance of it. This is true of the series of numbers
between 0 and 1 capable of being expressed by decimals in which only the
digits 0 and 1 occur.

It must be granted that Cantor’s definition includes every series that
is continuous; nor can it be objected that it includes any important or
indubitable case of a series not continuous. Nevertheless, it has some
serious defects. In the first place, it turns upon metrical
considerations; while the distinction between a continuous and a
discontinuous series is manifestly non-metrical. In the next place, a
perfect series is defined as one containing “every point” of a certain
description. But no positive idea is conveyed of what all the points
are: that is definition by negation, and cannot be admitted. If that
sort of thing were allowed, it would be very easy to say, at once, that
the continuous linear series of points is one which contains every point
of the line between its extremities. Finally, Cantor’s definition does
not convey a distinct notion of what the components of the conception of
continuity are. It ingeniously wraps up its properties in two separate
parcels, but does not display them to our intelligence.

Kant’s definition expresses one simple property of a continuum; but it
allows of gaps in the series. To mend the definition, it is only
necessary to notice how these gaps can occur. Let us suppose, then, a
linear series of points extending from a point, _A_, to a point, _B_,
having a gap from _B_ to a third point, _C_, and thence extending to a
final limit, _D_; and let us suppose this series conforms to Kant’s
definition. Then, of the two points, _B_ and _C_, one or both must be
excluded from the series; for otherwise, by the definition, there would
be points between them. That is, if the series contains _C_, though it
contains all the points up to _B_, it cannot contain _B_. What is
required, therefore, is to state in non-metrical terms that if a series
of points up to a limit is included in a continuum the limit is
included. It may be remarked that this is the property of a continuum to
which Aristotle’s attention seems to have been directed when he defines
a continuum as something whose parts have a common limit. The property
may be exactly stated as follows: If a linear series of points is
continuous between two points, _A_ and _D_, and if an endless series of
points be taken, the first of them between _A_ and _D_ and each of the
others between the last preceding one and _D_, then there is a point of
the continuous series between all that endless series of points and _D_,
and such that every other point of which this is true lies between this
point and _D_. For example, take any number between 0 and 1, as 0.1;
then, any number between 0.1 and 1, as 0.11; then any number between
0.11 and 1, as 0.111; and so on, without end. Then, because the series
of real numbers between 0 and 1 is continuous, there must be a _least_
real number, greater than every number of that endless series. This
property, which may be called the Aristotelicity of the series, together
with Kant’s property, or its Kanticity, completes the definition of a
continuous series.

The property of Aristotelicity may be roughly stated thus: a continuum
contains the end point belonging to every endless series of points which
it contains. An obvious corollary is that every continuum contains its
limits. But in using this principle it is necessary to observe that a
series may be continuous except in this, that it omits one or both of
the limits.

Our ideas will find expression more conveniently if, instead of points
upon a line, we speak of real numbers. Every real number is, in one
sense, the limit of a series, for it can be indefinitely approximated
to. Whether every real number is a limit of a _regular_ series may
perhaps be open to doubt. But the series referred to in the definition
of Aristotelicity must be understood as including all series whether
regular or not. Consequently, it is implied that between any two points
an innumerable series of points can be taken.

Every number whose expression in decimals requires but a finite number
of places of decimals is commensurable. Therefore, incommensurable
numbers suppose an infinitieth place of decimals. The word infinitesimal
is simply the Latin form of infinitieth; that is, it is an ordinal
formed from _infinitum_, as centesimal from _centum_. Thus, continuity
supposes infinitesimal quantities. There is nothing contradictory about
the idea of such quantities. In adding and multiplying them the
continuity must not be broken up, and consequently they are precisely
like any other quantities, except that neither the syllogism of
transposed quantity, nor the Fermatian inference applies to them.

If A is a finite quantity and _i_ an infinitesimal, then in a certain
sense we may write A + _i_ = A. That is to say, this is so for all
purposes of measurement. But this principle must not be applied except
to get rid of _all_ the terms in the highest order of infinitesimals
present. As a mathematician, I prefer the method of infinitesimals to
that of limits, as far easier and less infested with snares. Indeed, the
latter, as stated in some books, involves propositions that are false;
but this is not the case with the forms of the method used by Cauchy,
Duhamel, and others. As they understand the doctrine of limits, it
involves the notion of continuity, and, therefore, contains in another
shape the very same ideas as the doctrine of infinitesimals.

Let us now consider an aspect of the Aristotelical principle which is
particularly important in philosophy. Suppose a surface to be part red
and part blue; so that every point on it is either red or blue, and, of
course, no part can be both red and blue. What, then, is the color of
the boundary line between the red and the blue? The answer is that red
or blue, to exist at all, must be spread over a surface; and the color
of the surface is the color of the surface in the immediate neighborhood
of the point. I purposely use a vague form of expression. Now, as the
parts of the surface in the immediate neighborhood of any ordinary point
upon a curved boundary are half of them red and half blue, it follows
that the boundary is half red and half blue. In like manner, we find it
necessary to hold that consciousness essentially occupies time; and what
is present to the mind at any ordinary instant, is what is present
during a moment in which that instant occurs. Thus, the present is half
past and half to come. Again, the color of the parts of a surface at any
finite distance from a point, has nothing to do with its color just at
that point; and, in the parallel, the feeling at any finite interval
from the present has nothing to do with the present feeling, except
vicariously. Take another case: the velocity of a particle at any
instant of time is its mean velocity during an infinitesimal instant in
which that time is contained. Just so my immediate feeling is my feeling
through an infinitesimal duration containing the present instant.


                            ANALYSIS OF TIME


One of the most marked features about the law of mind is that it makes
time to have a definite direction of flow from past to future. The
relation of past to future is, in reference to the law of mind,
different from the relation of future to past. This makes one of the
great contrasts between the law of mind and the law of physical force,
where there is no more distinction between the two opposite directions
in time than between moving northward and moving southward.

In order, therefore, to analyze the law of mind, we must begin by asking
what the flow of time consists in. Now, we find that in reference to any
individual state of feeling, all others are of two classes, those which
affect this one (or have a tendency to affect it, and what this means we
shall inquire shortly), and those which do not. The present is
affectible by the past but not by the future.

Moreover, if state _A_ is affected by state _B_, and state _B_ by state
_C_, then _A_ is affected by state _C_, though not so much so. It
follows, that if _A_ is affectible by _B_, _B_ is not affectible by _A_.

If, of two states, each is absolutely unaffectible by the other, they
are to be regarded as parts of the same state. They are contemporaneous.

To say that a state is _between_ two states means that it affects one
and is affected by the other. Between any two states in this sense lies
an innumerable series of states affecting one another; and if a state
lies between a given state and any other state which can be reached by
inserting states between this state and any third state, these inserted
states not immediately affecting or being affected by either, then the
second rate mentioned, immediately affects or is affected by the first,
in the sense that in the one the other is _ipso facto_ present in a
reduced degree.

These propositions involve a definition of time and of its flow. Over
and above this definition they involve a doctrine, namely, that every
state of feeling is affectible by every earlier state.


                THAT FEELINGS HAVE INTENSIVE CONTINUITY


Time with its continuity logically involves some other kind of
continuity than its own. Time, as the universal form of change, cannot
exist unless there is something to undergo change, and to undergo a
change continuous in time, there must be a continuity of changeable
qualities. Of the continuity of intrinsic qualities of feeling we can
now form but a feeble conception. The development of the human mind has
practically extinguished all feelings, except a few sporadic kinds,
sound, colors, smells, warmth, etc., which now appear to be disconnected
and disparate. In the case of colors, there is a tridimensional spread
of feelings. Originally, all feelings may have been connected in the
same way, and the presumption is that the number of dimensions was
endless. For development essentially involves a limitation of
possibilities. But given a number of dimensions of feeling, all possible
varieties are obtainable by varying the intensities of the different
elements. Accordingly, time logically supposes a continuous range of
intensity in feeling. It follows, then, from the definition of
continuity, that when any particular kind of feeling is present, an
infinitesimal continuum of all feelings differing infinitesimally from
that is present.


                  THAT FEELINGS HAVE SPATIAL EXTENSION


Consider a gob of protoplasm, say an amœba or a slime-mould. It does not
differ in any radical way from the contents of a nerve-cell, though its
functions may be less specialized. There is no doubt that this
slime-mould, or this amœba, or at any rate some similar mass of
protoplasm feels. That is to say, it feels when it is in its excited
condition. But note how it behaves. When the whole is quiescent and
rigid, a place upon it is irritated. Just at this point, an active
motion is set up, and this gradually spreads to other parts. In this
action, no unity nor relation to a nucleus, or other unitary organ can
be discerned. It is a mere amorphous continuum of protoplasm, with
feeling passing from one part to another. Nor is there anything like a
wave-motion. The activity does not advance to new parts, just as fast as
it leaves old parts. Rather, in the beginning, it dies out at a slower
rate than that at which it spreads. And while the process is going on,
by exciting the mass at another point, a second quite independent state
of excitation will be set up. In some places, neither excitation will
exist, in others each separately, in still other places, both effects
will be added together. Whatever there is in the whole phenomenon to
make us think there is feeling in such a mass of protoplasm,—_feeling_,
but plainly no _personality_,—goes logically to show that that feeling
has a subjective, or substantial, spatial extension, as the excited
state has. This is, no doubt, a difficult idea to seize, for the reason
that it is a subjective, not an objective, extension. It is not that we
have a feeling of bigness; though Professor James, perhaps rightly,
teaches that we have. It is that the feeling, as a subject of inhesion,
is big. Moreover, our own feelings are focused in attention to such a
degree that we are not aware that ideas are not brought to an absolute
unity; just as nobody not instructed by special experiment has any idea
how very, very little of the field of vision is distinct. Still, we all
know how the attention wanders about among our feelings; and this fact
shows that those feelings that are not co-ordinated in attention have a
reciprocal externality, although they are present at the same time. But
we must not tax introspection to make a phenomenon manifest which
essentially involves externality.

Since space is continuous, it follows that there must be an immediate
community of feeling between parts of mind infinitesimally near
together. Without this, I believe it would have been impossible for
minds external to one another, ever to become co-ordinated, and equally
impossible for any coördination to be established in the action of the
nerve-matter of one brain.


                          AFFECTIONS OF IDEAS


But we are met by the question what is meant by saying that one idea
affects another. The unravelment of this problem requires us to trace
out phenomena a little further.

Three elements go to make up an idea. The first is its intrinsic quality
as a feeling. The second is the energy with which it affects other
ideas, an energy which is infinite in the here-and-nowness of immediate
sensation, finite and relative in the recency of the past. The third
element is the tendency of an idea to bring along other ideas with it.

As an idea spreads, its power of affecting other ideas gets rapidly
reduced; but its intrinsic quality remains nearly unchanged. It is long
years now since I last saw a cardinal in his robes; and my memory of
their color has become much dimmed. The color itself, however, is not
remembered as dim. I have no inclination to call it a dull red. Thus,
the intrinsic quality remains little changed; yet more accurate
observation will show a slight reduction of it. The third element, on
the other hand, has increased. As well as I can recollect, it seems to
me the cardinals I used to see wore robes more scarlet than vermillion
is, and highly luminous. Still, I know the color commonly called
cardinal is on the crimson side of vermillion and of quite moderate
luminosity, and the original idea calls up so many other hues with it,
and asserts itself so feebly, that I am unable any longer to isolate it.

A finite interval of time generally contains an innumerable series of
feelings; and when these become welded together in association, the
result is a general idea. For we have just seen how by continuous
spreading an idea becomes generalised.

The first character of a general idea so resulting is that it is living
feeling. A continuum of this feeling, infinitesimal in duration, but
still embracing innumerable parts, and also, though infinitesimal,
entirely unlimited, is immediately present. And in its absence of
boundedness a vague possibility of more than is present is directly
felt.

Second, in the presence of this continuity of feeling, nominalistic
maxims appear futile. There is no doubt about one idea affecting
another, when we can directly perceive the one gradually modified and
shaping itself into the other. Nor can there any longer be any
difficulty about one idea resembling another, when we can pass along the
continuous field of quality from one to the other and back again to the
point which we had marked.

[Illustration: Figure 7.]

Third, consider the insistency of an idea. The insistency of a past idea
with reference to the present is a quantity which is less the further
back that past idea is, and rises to infinity as the past idea is
brought up into coincidence with the present. Here we must make one of
those inductive applications of the law of continuity which have
produced such great results in all the positive sciences. We must extend
the law of insistency into the future. Plainly, the insistency of a
future idea with reference to the present is a quantity affected by the
minus sign; for it is the present that affects the future, if there be
any effect, not the future that affects the present. Accordingly, the
curve of insistency is a sort of equilateral hyperbola. (See the
figure.) Such a conception is none the less mathematical, that its
quantification cannot now be exactly specified.

Now consider the induction which we have here been led into. This curve
says that feeling which has not yet emerged into immediate consciousness
is already affectible and already affected. In fact, this is habit, by
virtue of which an idea is brought up into present consciousness by a
bond that had already been established between it and another idea while
it was still _in futuro_.

We can now see what the affection of one idea by another consists in. It
is that the affected idea is attached as a logical predicate to the
affecting idea as subject. So when a feeling emerges into immediate
consciousness, it always appears as a modification of a more or less
general object already in the mind. The word suggestion is well adapted
to expressing this relation. The future is suggested by, or rather is
influenced by the suggestions of, the past.


             IDEAS CANNOT BE CONNECTED EXCEPT BY CONTINUITY


That ideas can nowise be connected without continuity is sufficiently
evident to one who reflects upon the matter. But still the opinion may
be entertained that after continuity has once made the connection of
ideas possible, then they may get to be connected in other modes than
through continuity. Certainly, I cannot see how anyone can deny that the
infinite diversity of the universe, which we call chance, may bring
ideas into proximity which are not associated in one general idea. It
may do this many times. But then the law of continuous spreading will
produce a mental association; and this I suppose is an abridged
statement of the way the universe has been evolved. But if I am asked
whether a blind ἀνάγκη cannot bring ideas together, first I point out
that it would not remain blind. There being a continuous connection
between the ideas, they would infallibly become associated in a living,
feeling, and perceiving general idea. Next, I cannot see what the
mustness or necessity of this ἁνάγκη would consist in. In the absolute
uniformity of the phenomenon, says the nominalist. Absolute is well put
in; for if it merely happened so three times in succession, or three
million times in succession, in the absence of any reason, the
coincidence could only be attributed to chance. But absolute uniformity
must extend over the whole infinite future; and it is idle to talk of
that except as an idea. No; I think we can only hold that wherever ideas
come together they tend to weld into general ideas; and wherever they
are generally connected, general ideas govern the connection; and these
general ideas are living feelings spread out.


                 MENTAL LAW FOLLOWS THE FORMS OF LOGIC


The three main classes of logical inference are Deduction, Induction,
and Hypothesis. These correspond to three chief modes of action of the
human soul. In deduction the mind is under the dominion of a habit or
association by virtue of which a general idea suggests in each case a
corresponding reaction. But a certain sensation is seen to involve that
idea. Consequently, that sensation is followed by that reaction. That is
the way the hind legs of a frog, separated from the rest of the body,
reason, when you pinch them. It is the lowest form of psychical
manifestation.

By induction, a habit becomes established. Certain sensations, all
involving one general idea, are followed each by the same reaction; and
an association becomes established, whereby that general idea gets to be
followed uniformly by that reaction.

Habit is that specialization of the law of mind whereby a general idea
gains the power of exciting reactions. But in order that the general
idea should attain all its functionality, it is necessary, also, that it
should become suggestible by sensations. That is accomplished by a
psychical process having the form of hypothetic inference. By hypothetic
inference, I mean, as I have explained in other writings, an induction
from qualities. For example, I know that the kind of man known and
classed as a “mugwump” has certain characteristics. He has a high
self-respect and places great value upon social distinction. He laments
the great part that rowdyism and unrefined good-fellowship play in the
dealings of American politicians with their constituency. He thinks that
the reform which would follow from the abandonment of the system by
which the distribution of offices is made to strengthen party
organizations and a return to the original and essential conception of
office-filling would be found an unmixed good. He holds that monetary
considerations should usually be the decisive ones in questions of
public policy. He respects the principle of individualism and of
_laissez-faire_ as the greatest agency of civilization. These views,
among others, I know to be obtrusive marks of a “mugwump.” Now, suppose
I casually meet a man in a railway-train, and falling into conversation
find that he holds opinions of this sort; I am naturally led to suppose
that he is a “mugwump.” That is hypothetic inference. That is to say, a
number of readily verifiable marks of a mugwump being selected, I find
this man has these, and infer that he has all the other characters which
go to make a thinker of that stripe. Or let us suppose that I meet a man
of a semi-clerical appearance and a sub-pharisaical sniff, who appears
to look at things from the point of view of a rather wooden dualism. He
cites several texts of scripture and always with particular attention to
their logical implications; and he exhibits a sternness, almost
amounting to vindictiveness, toward evil-doers, in general. I readily
conclude that he is a minister of a certain denomination. Now the mind
acts in a way similar to this, every time we acquire a power of
co-ordinating reactions in a peculiar way, as in performing any act
requiring skill. Thus, most persons have a difficulty in moving the two
hands simultaneously and in opposite directions through two parallel
circles nearly in the medial plane of the body. To learn to do this, it
is necessary to attend, first, to the different actions in different
parts of the motion, when suddenly a general conception of the action
springs up and it becomes perfectly easy. We think the motion we are
trying to do involves this action, and this, and this. Then, the general
idea comes which unites all those actions, and thereupon the desire to
perform the motion calls up the general idea. The same mental process is
many times employed whenever we are learning to speak a language or are
acquiring any sort of skill.

Thus, by induction, a number of sensations followed by one reaction
become united under one general idea followed by the same reaction;
while by the hypothetic process, a number of reactions called for by one
occasion get united in a general idea which is called out by the same
occasion. By deduction, the habit fulfils its function of calling out
certain reactions on certain occasions.


                      UNCERTAINTY OF MENTAL ACTION


The inductive and hypothetic forms of inference are essentially probable
inferences, not necessary; while deduction may be either necessary or
probable.

But no mental action seems to be necessary or invariable in its
character. In whatever manner the mind has reacted under a given
sensation, in that manner it is the more likely to react again; were
this, however, an absolute necessity, habits would become wooden and
ineradicable, and no room being left for the formation of new habits,
intellectual life would come to a speedy close. Thus, the uncertainty of
the mental law is no mere defect of it, but is on the contrary of its
essence. The truth is, the mind is not subject to “law,” in the same
rigid sense that matter is. It only experiences gentle forces which
merely render it more likely to act in a given way than it otherwise
would be. There always remains a certain amount of arbitrary spontaneity
in its action, without which it would be dead.

Some psychologists think to reconcile the uncertainty of reactions with
the principle of necessary causation by means of the law of fatigue.
Truly for a _law_, this law of fatigue is a little lawless. I think it
is merely a case of the general principle that an idea in spreading
loses its insistency. Put me tarragon into my salad, when I have not
tasted it for years, and I exclaim “What nectar is this!” But add it to
every dish I taste for week after week, and a habit of expectation has
been created; and in thus spreading into habit, the sensation makes
hardly any more impression upon me; or, if it be noticed, it is on a new
side from which it appears as rather a bore. The doctrine that fatigue
is one of the primordial phenomena of mind I am much disposed to doubt.
It seems a somewhat little thing to be allowed as an exception to the
great principle of mental uniformization. For this reason, I prefer to
explain it in the manner here indicated, as a special case of that great
principle. To consider it as something distinct in its nature, certainly
somewhat strengthens the necessitarian position; but even if it be
distinct, the hypothesis that all the variety and apparent arbitrariness
of mental action ought to be explained away in favor of absolute
determinism does not seem to me to recommend itself to a sober and sound
judgment, which seeks the guidance of observed facts and not that of
prepossessions.


                         RESTATEMENT OF THE LAW


Let me now try to gather up all these odds and ends of commentary and
restate the law of mind, in a unitary way.

First, then, we find that when we regard ideas from a nominalistic,
individualistic, sensualistic way, the simplest facts of mind become
utterly meaningless. That one idea should resemble another or influence
another, or that one state of mind should so much as be thought of in
another is, from that standpoint, sheer nonsense.

Second, by this and other means we are driven to perceive, what is quite
evident of itself, that instantaneous feelings flow together into a
continuum of feeling, which has in a modified degree the peculiar
vivacity of feeling and has gained generality. And in reference to such
general ideas, or continua of feeling, the difficulties about
resemblance and suggestion and reference to the external, cease to have
any force.

Third, these general ideas are not mere words, nor do they consist in
this, that certain concrete facts will every time happen under certain
descriptions of conditions; but they are just as much, or rather far
more, living realities than the feelings themselves out of which they
are concreted. And to say that mental phenomena are governed by law does
not mean merely that they are describable by a general formula; but that
there is a living idea, a conscious continuum of feeling, which pervades
them, and to which they are docile.

Fourth, this supreme law, which is the celestial and living harmony,
does not so much as demand that the special ideas shall surrender their
peculiar arbitrariness and caprice entirely; for that would be
self-destructive. It only requires that they shall influence and be
influenced by one another.

Fifth, in what measure this unification acts, seems to be regulated only
by special rules; or, at least, we cannot in our present knowledge say
how far it goes. But it may be said that, judging by appearances, the
amount of arbitrariness in the phenomena of human minds is neither
altogether trifling nor very prominent.


                              PERSONALITY


Having thus endeavored to state the law of mind, in general, I descend
to the consideration of a particular phenomenon which is remarkably
prominent in our own consciousnesses, that of personality. A strong
light is thrown upon this subject by recent observations of double and
multiple personality. The theory which at one time seemed plausible that
two persons in one body corresponded to the two halves of the brain
will, I take it, now be universally acknowledged to be insufficient. But
that which these cases make quite manifest is that personality is some
kind of co-ordination or connection of ideas. Not much to say, this,
perhaps. Yet when we consider that, according to the principle which we
are tracing out, a connection between ideas is itself a general idea,
and that a general idea is a living feeling, it is plain that we have at
least taken an appreciable step toward the understanding of personality.
This personality, like any general idea, is not a thing to be
apprehended in an instant. It has to be lived in time; nor can any
finite time embrace it in all its fullness. Yet in each infinitesimal
interval it is present and living, though specially colored by the
immediate feelings of that moment. Personality, so far as it is
apprehended in a moment, is immediate self-consciousness.

But the word co-ordination implies somewhat more than this; it implies a
teleological harmony in ideas, and in the case of personality this
teleology is more than a mere purposive pursuit of a predeterminate end;
it is a developmental teleology. This is personal character. A general
idea, living and conscious now, it is already determinative of acts in
the future to an extent to which it is not now conscious.

This reference to the future is an essential element of personality.
Were the ends of a person already explicit, there would be no room for
development, for growth, for life; and consequently there would be no
personality. The mere carrying out of predetermined purposes is
mechanical. This remark has an application to the philosophy of
religion. It is that a genuine evolutionary philosophy, that is, one
that makes the principle of growth a primordial element of the universe,
is so far from being antagonistic to the idea of a personal creator,
that it is really inseparable from that idea; while a necessitarian
religion is in an altogether false position and is destined to become
disintegrated. But a pseudo-evolutionism which enthrones mechanical law
above the principle of growth, is at once scientifically unsatisfactory,
as giving no possible hint of how the universe has come about, and
hostile to all hopes of personal relations to God.


                             COMMUNICATION


Consistently with the doctrine laid down in the beginning of this paper,
I am bound to maintain that an idea can only be affected by an idea in
continuous connection with it. By anything but an idea, it cannot be
affected at all. This obliges me to say, as I do say, on other grounds,
that what we call matter is not completely dead, but is merely mind
hide-bound with habits. It still retains the element of diversification;
and in that diversification there is life. When an idea is conveyed from
one mind to another, it is by forms of combination of the diverse
elements of nature, say by some curious symmetry, or by some union of a
tender color with a refined odor. To such forms the law of mechanical
energy has no application. If they are eternal, it is in the spirit they
embody; and their origin cannot be accounted for by any mechanical
necessity. They are embodied ideas; and so only can they convey ideas.
Precisely how primary sensations, as colors and tones, are excited, we
cannot tell, in the present state of psychology. But in our ignorance, I
think that we are at liberty to suppose that they arise in essentially
the same manner as the other feelings, called secondary. As far as sight
and hearing are in question, we know that they are only excited by
vibrations of inconceivable complexity; and the chemical senses are
probably not more simple. Even the least psychical of peripheral
sensations, that of pressure, has in its excitation conditions which,
though apparently simple, are seen to be complicated enough when we
consider the molecules and their attractions. The principle with which I
set out requires me to maintain that these feelings are communicated to
the nerves by continuity, so that there must be something like them in
the excitants themselves. If this seems extravagant, it is to be
remembered that it is the sole possible way of reaching any explanation
of sensation, which otherwise must be pronounced a general fact,
absolutely inexplicable and ultimate. Now absolute inexplicability is a
hypothesis which sound logic refuses under any circumstances to justify.

I may be asked whether my theory would be favorable or otherwise to
telepathy. I have no decided answer to give to this. At first sight, it
seems unfavorable. Yet there may be other modes of continuous connection
between minds other than those of time and space.

The recognition by one person of another’s personality takes place by
means to some extent identical with the means by which he is conscious
of his own personality. The idea of the second personality, which is as
much as to say that second personality itself, enters within the field
of direct consciousness of the first person, and is as immediately
perceived as his ego, though less strongly. At the same time, the
opposition between the two persons is perceived, so that the externality
of the second is recognized.

The psychological phenomena of intercommunication between two minds have
been unfortunately little studied. So that it is impossible to say, for
certain, whether they are favorable to this theory or not. But the very
extraordinary insight which some persons are able to gain of others from
indications so slight that it is difficult to ascertain what they are,
is certainly rendered more comprehensible by the view here taken.

A difficulty which confronts the synechistic philosophy is this. In
considering personality, that philosophy is forced to accept the
doctrine of a personal God; but in considering communication, it cannot
but admit that if there is a personal God, we must have a direct
perception of that person and indeed be in personal communication with
him. Now, if that be the case, the question arises how it is possible
that the existence of this being should ever have been doubted by
anybody. The only answer that I can at present make is that facts that
stand before our face and eyes and stare us in the face are far from
being, in all cases, the ones most easily discerned. That has been
remarked from time immemorial.


                               CONCLUSION


I have thus developed as well as I could in a little space the
_synechistic_ philosophy, as applied to mind. I think that I have
succeeded in making it clear that this doctrine gives room for
explanations of many facts which without it are absolutely and
hopelessly inexplicable; and further that it carries along with it the
following doctrines: 1st, a logical realism of the most pronounced type;
2nd, objective idealism; 3rd, tychism, with its consequent thoroughgoing
evolutionism. We also notice that the doctrine presents no hindrances to
spiritual influences, such as some philosophies are felt to do.

Footnote 61:

  _The Monist_, July, 1892.

Footnote 62:

  This proposition is substantially the same as a theorem of Cantor,
  though it is enunciated in a much more general form.




                      IV. MAN’S GLASSY ESSENCE[63]


In _The Monist_ for January, 1891, I tried to show what conceptions
ought to form the brick and mortar of a philosophical system. Chief
among these was that of absolute chance for which I argued again in last
April’s number.[64] In July, I applied another fundamental idea, that of
continuity, to the law of mind. Next in order, I have to elucidate, from
the point of view chosen, the relation between the psychical and
physical aspects of a substance.

The first step towards this ought, I think, to be the framing of a
molecular theory of protoplasm. But before doing that, it seems
indispensable to glance at the constitution of matter, in general. We
shall, thus, unavoidably make a long detour; but, after all, our pains
will not be wasted, for the problems of the papers that are to follow in
the series will call for the consideration of the same question.

All physicists are rightly agreed the evidence is overwhelming which
shows all sensible matter is composed of molecules in swift motion and
exerting enormous mutual attractions, and perhaps repulsions, too. Even
Sir William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, who wishes to explode action at a
distance and return to the doctrine of a plenum, not only speaks of
molecules, but undertakes to assign definite magnitudes to them. The
brilliant Judge Stallo, a man who did not always rightly estimate his
own qualities in accepting tasks for himself, declared war upon the
atomic theory in a book well worth careful perusal. To the old arguments
in favor of atoms which he found in Fechner’s monograph, he was able to
make replies of considerable force, though they were not sufficient to
destroy those arguments. But against modern proofs he made no headway at
all. These set out from the mechanical theory of heat. Rumford’s
experiments showed that heat is not a substance. Joule demonstrated that
it was a form of energy. The heating of gases under constant volume, and
other facts instanced by Rankine, proved that it could not be an energy
of strain. This drove physicists to the conclusion that it was a mode of
motion. Then it was remembered that John Bernoulli had shown that the
pressure of gases could be accounted for by assuming their molecules to
be moving uniformly in rectilinear paths. The same hypothesis was now
seen to account for Avogadro’s law, that in equal volumes of different
kinds of gases exposed to the same pressure and temperature are
contained equal numbers of molecules. Shortly after, it was found to
account for the laws of diffusion and viscosity of gases, and for the
numerical relation between these properties. Finally, Crookes’s
radiometer furnished the last link in the strongest chain of evidence
which supports any physical hypothesis.

Such being the constitution of gases, liquids must clearly be bodies in
which the molecules wander in curvilinear paths, while in solids they
move in orbits or quasi-orbits. (See my definition _solid_ II, 1, in the
_Century Dictionary_.)

We see that the resistance to compression and to inter-penetration
between sensible bodies is, by one of the prime propositions of the
molecular theory, due in large measure to the kinetical energy of the
particles, which must be supposed to be quite remote from one another,
on the average, even in solids. This resistance is no doubt influenced
by finite attractions and repulsions between the molecules. All the
impenetrability of bodies which we can observe is, therefore, a limited
impenetrability due to kinetic and positional energy. This being the
case, we have no logical right to suppose that absolute impenetrability,
or the exclusive occupancy of space, belongs to molecules or to atoms.
It is an unwarranted hypothesis, not a _vera causa_.[65] Unless we are
to give up the theory of energy, finite positional attractions and
repulsions between molecules must be admitted. Absolute impenetrability
would amount to an infinite repulsion at a certain distance. No analogy
of known phenomena exists to excuse such a wanton violation of the
principle of continuity as such a hypothesis is. In short, we are
logically bound to adopt the Boscovichian idea that an atom is simply a
distribution of component potential energy throughout space (this
distribution being absolutely rigid), combined with inertia. The
potential energy belongs to two molecules, and is to be conceived as
different between molecules _A_ and _B_ from what it is between
molecules _A_ and _C_. The distribution of energy is not necessarily
spherical. Nay, a molecule may conceivably have more than one center; it
may even have a central curve, returning into itself. But I do not think
there are any observed facts pointing to such multiple or linear
centers. On the other hand, many facts relating to crystals, especially
those observed by Voigt,[66] go to show that the distribution of energy
is harmonical but not concentric. We can easily calculate the forces
which such atoms must exert upon one another by considering[67] that
they are equivalent to aggregations of pairs of electrically positive
and negative points infinitely near to one another. About such an atom
there would be regions of positive and of negative potential, and the
number and distribution of such regions would determine the valency of
the atom, a number which it is easy to see would in many cases be
somewhat indeterminate. I must not dwell further upon this hypothesis,
at present. In another paper, its consequences will be further
considered.

I cannot assume that the students of philosophy who read this magazine
are thoroughly versed in modern molecular physics, and, therefore, it is
proper to mention that the governing principle in this branch of science
is Clausius’s law of the virial. I will first state the law, and then
explain the peculiar terms of the statement. This statement is that the
total kinetic energy of the particles of a system in stationary motion
is equal to the total virial. By a _system_ is here meant a number of
particles acting upon one another.[68] Stationary motion is a
quasi-orbital motion among a system of particles so that none of them
are removed to indefinitely great distances nor acquire indefinitely
great velocities. The kinetic energy of a particle is the work which
would be required to bring it to rest, independently of any forces which
may be acting upon it. The virial of a pair of particles is half the
work which the force which actually operates between them would do if,
being independent of the distance, it were to bring them together. The
equation of the virial is

                          1/2∑_mv_^2 = 1/2∑∑_Rr_.

Here _m_ is the mass of a particle, _v_ its velocity, _R_ is the
attraction between two particles, and _r_ is the distance between them.
The sign ∑ on the left hand side signifies that the values of _mv_^2 are
to be summed for all the particles, and ∑∑ on the right hand side
signifies that the values of _Rr_ are to be summed for all the pairs of
particles. If there is an external pressure _P_ (as from the atmosphere)
upon the system, and the volume of vacant space within the boundary of
that pressure is _V_, then the virial must be understood as including
3/2_PV_, so that the equation is

                     1/2∑_mv_^2 = 3/2_PV_ + 1/2∑∑_Rr_.

There is strong (if not demonstrative) reason for thinking that the
temperature of any body above the absolute zero (-273° C.), is
proportional to the average kinetic energy of its molecules, or say
_a_θ, where _a_ is a constant and θ is the absolute temperature. Hence,
we may write the equation

       _a_θ = (1/2)avg(_mv_^2) = (3/2)_P_ avg(_V_) + (1/2)∑ avg(_Rr_)

where the heavy lines above the different expressions signify that the
average values for single molecules are to be taken. In 1872, a student
in the University of Leyden, Van der Waals, propounded in his thesis for
the doctorate a specialization of the equation of the virial which has
since attracted great attention. Namely, he writes it

                    _a_θ = (_P_ + _c_/_V_^2)(_V_ - _b_.)

The quantity _b_ is the volume of a molecule, which he supposes to be an
impenetrable body, and all the virtue of the equation lies in this term
which makes the equation a cubic in _V_, which is required to account
for the shape of certain isothermal curves.[69] But if the idea of an
impenetrable atom is illogical, that of an impenetrable molecule is
almost absurd. For the kinetical theory of matter teaches us that a
molecule is like a solar system or star-cluster in miniature. Unless we
suppose that in all heating of gases and vapors internal work is
performed upon the molecules, implying that their atoms are at
considerable distances, the whole kinetical theory of gases falls to the
ground. As for the term added to _P_, there is no more than a partial
and roughly approximative justification for it. Namely, let us imagine
two spheres described round a particle as their center, the radius of
the larger being so great as to include all the particles whose action
upon the center is sensible, while the radius of the smaller is so large
that a good many molecules are included within it. The possibility of
describing such a sphere as the outer one implies that the attraction of
the particles varies at some distances inversely as some higher power of
the distance than the cube, or, to speak more clearly, that the
attraction multiplied by the cube of the distance diminishes as the
distance increases; for the number of particles at a given distance from
any one particle is proportionate to the square of that distance and
each of these gives a term of the virial which is the product of the
attraction into the distance. Consequently, unless the attraction
multiplied by the cube of the distance diminished so rapidly with the
distance as soon to become insensible, no such outer sphere as is
supposed could be described. However, ordinary experience shows that
such a sphere is possible; and consequently there must be distances at
which the attraction does thus rapidly diminish as the distance
increases. The two spheres, then, being so drawn, consider the virial of
the central particle due to the particles between them. Let the density
of the substance be increased, say, _N_ times. Then, for every turn,
_Rr_, of the virial before the condensation, there will be _N_ terms of
the same magnitude after the condensation. Hence, the virial of each
particle will be proportional to the density, and the equation of the
virial becomes

                    _a_θ = _P_ avg(_V_) + _c_/avg(_V_).

This omits the virial within the inner sphere, the radius of which is so
taken that within that distance the number of particles is not
proportional to the number in a large sphere. For Van der Waals this
radius is the diameter of his hard molecules, which assumption gives his
equation. But it is plain that the attraction between the molecules must
to a certain extent modify their distribution, unless some peculiar
conditions are fulfilled. The equation of Van der Waals can be
approximately true, therefore, only for a gas. In a solid or liquid
condition, in which the removal of a small amount of pressure has little
effect on the volume, and where consequently the virial must be much
greater than _P_ avg(_V_), the virial must increase with the volume. For
suppose we had a substance in a critical condition in which an increase
of the volume would diminish the virial more than it would increase
(3/2)_P_ avg(_V_). If we were forcibly to diminish the volume of such a
substance, when the temperature became equalized, the pressure which it
could withstand would be less than before, and it would be still further
condensed, and this would go on indefinitely until a condition were
reached in which an increase of volume would increase (3/2)_P_ avg(_V_)
more than it would decrease the virial. In the case of solids, at least,
_P_ may be zero; so that the state reached would be one in which the
virial increases with the volume, or the attraction between the
particles does not increase so fast with a diminution of their distance
as it would if the attraction were inversely as the distance.

Almost contemporaneously with Van der Waals’s paper, another remarkable
thesis for the doctorate was presented at Paris by Amagat. It related to
the elasticity and expansion of gases, and to this subject the superb
experimenter, its author, has devoted his whole subsequent life.
Especially interesting are his observations of the volumes of ethylene
and of carbonic acid at temperatures from 20° to 100° and at pressures
ranging from an ounce to 5000 pounds to the square inch. As soon as
Amagat had obtained these results, he remarked that the “coefficient of
expansion at constant volume,” as it is absurdly called, that is, the
rate of variation of the pressure with the temperature, was very nearly
constant for each volume. This accords with the equation of the virial,
which gives

              _dp_/_d_θ = _a_/avg(_V_) - _d_∑ avg(_Rr_)/_d_θ.

Now, the virial must be nearly independent of the temperature, and,
therefore, the last term almost disappears. The virial would not be
quite independent of the temperature, because if the temperature (i.e.,
the square of the velocity of the molecules) is lowered, and the
pressure correspondingly lowered, so as to make the volume the same, the
attractions of the molecules will have more time to produce their
effects, and consequently, the pairs of molecules the closest together
will be held together longer and closer; so that the virial will
generally be increased by a decrease of temperature. Now, Amagat’s
experiments do show an excessively minute effect of this sort, at least,
when the volumes are not too small. However, the observations are well
enough satisfied by assuming the “coefficient of expansion at constant
volume” to consist wholly of the first term, _a_/avg(_V_). Thus,
Amagat’s experiments enable us to determine the values of a and thence
to calculate the virial; and this we find varies for carbonic acid gas
nearly inversely to avg(_V_)^{0.9}. There is, thus, a rough
approximation to satisfying Van der Waals’s equation. But the most
interesting result of Amagat’s experiments, for our purpose at any rate,
is that the quantity _a_, though nearly constant for any one volume,
differs considerably with the volume, nearly doubling when the volume is
reduced fivefold. This can only indicate that the mean kinetic energy of
a given mass of the gas for a given temperature is greater the more the
gas is compressed. But the laws of mechanics appear to enjoin that the
mean kinetic energy of a moving particle shall be constant at any given
temperature. The only escape from contradiction, then, is to suppose
that the mean mass of a moving particle diminishes upon the condensation
of the gas. In other words, many of the molecules are dissociated, or
broken up into atoms or sub-molecules. The idea that dissociation should
be favored by diminishing the volume will be pronounced by physicists,
at first blush, as contrary to all our experience. But it must be
remembered that the circumstances we are speaking of, that of a gas
under fifty or more atmospheres pressure, are also unusual. That the
“coefficient of expansion under constant volume” when multiplied by the
volumes should increase with a decrement of the volume is also quite
contrary to ordinary experience; yet it undoubtedly takes place in all
gases under great pressure. Again, the doctrine of Arrhenius[70] is now
generally accepted, that the molecular conductivity of an electrolyte is
proportional to the dissociation of ions. Now the molecular conductivity
of a fused electrolyte is usually superior to that of a solution. Here
is a case, then, in which diminution of volume is accompanied by
increased dissociation.

The truth is that several different kinds of dissociation have to be
distinguished. In the first place, there is the dissociation of a
chemical molecule to form chemical molecules under the regular action of
chemical laws. This may be a double decomposition, as when iodhydric
acid is dissociated, according to the formula

                         _HI_ + _HI_ = _HH_ + _II_;

or, it may be a simple decomposition, as when pentachloride of
phosphorus is dissociated according to the formula

                      _PCl__{5} = _PCl__{3} + _ClCl_.

All these dissociations require, according to the laws of
thermo-chemistry, an elevated temperature. In the second place, there is
the dissociation of a physically polymerous molecule, that is, of
several chemical molecules joined by physical attractions. This I am
inclined to suppose is a common concomitant of the heating of solids and
liquids; for in these bodies there is no increase of compressibility
with the temperature at all comparable with the increase of the
expansibility. But, in the third place, there is the dissociation with
which we are now concerned, which must be supposed to be a throwing off
of unsaturated sub-molecules or atoms from the molecule. The molecule
may, as I have said, be roughly likened to a solar system. As such,
molecules are able to produce perturbations of one another’s internal
motions; and in this way a planet, i.e., a sub-molecule, will
occasionally get thrown off and wander about by itself, till it finds
another unsaturated sub-molecule with which it can unite. Such
dissociation by perturbation will naturally be favored by the proximity
of the molecules to one another.

Let us now pass to the consideration of that special substance, or
rather class of substances, whose properties form the chief subject of
botany and of zoölogy, as truly as those of the silicates form the chief
subject of mineralogy: I mean the life-slimes, or protoplasm. Let us
begin by cataloguing the general characters of these slimes. They one
and all exist in two states of aggregation, a solid or nearly solid
state and a liquid or nearly liquid state; but they do not pass from the
former to the latter by ordinary fusion. They are readily decomposed by
heat, especially in the liquid state; nor will they bear any
considerable degree of cold. All their vital actions take place at
temperatures very little below the point of decomposition. This extreme
instability is one of numerous facts which demonstrate the chemical
complexity of protoplasm. Every chemist will agree that they are far
more complicated than the albumens. Now, albumen is estimated to contain
in each molecule about a thousand atoms; so that it is natural to
suppose that the protoplasms contain several thousands. We know that
while they are chiefly composed of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and
nitrogen, a large number of other elements enter into living bodies in
small proportions; and it is likely that most of these enter into the
composition of protoplasms. Now, since the numbers of chemical varieties
increase at an enormous rate with the number of atoms per molecule, so
that there are certainly hundreds of thousands of substances whose
molecules contain twenty atoms or fewer, we may well suppose that the
number of protoplasmic substances runs into the billions or trillions.
Professor Cayley has given a mathematical theory of “trees,” with a view
of throwing a light upon such questions; and in that light the estimate
of trillions (in the English sense) seems immoderately moderate. It is
true that an opinion has been emitted, and defended among biologists,
that there is but one kind of protoplasm; but the observations of
biologists, themselves, have almost exploded that hypothesis, which from
a chemical standpoint appears utterly incredible. The anticipation of
the chemist would decidedly be that enough different chemical substances
having protoplasmic characters might be formed to account, not only for
the differences between nerve-slime and muscle-slime, between
whale-slime and lion-slime, but also for those minuter pervasive
variations which characterize different breeds and single individuals.

Protoplasm, when quiescent, is, broadly speaking, solid; but when it is
disturbed in an appropriate way, or sometimes even spontaneously without
external disturbance, it becomes, broadly speaking, liquid. A moner in
this state is seen under the microscope to have streams within its
matter; a slime-mould slowly flows by force of gravity. The liquefaction
starts from the point of disturbance and spreads through the mass. This
spreading, however, is not uniform in all directions; on the contrary,
it takes at one time one course, at another another, through the
homogeneous mass, in a manner that seems a little mysterious. The cause
of disturbance being removed, these motions gradually (with higher kinds
of protoplasm, quickly) cease, and the slime returns to its solid
condition.

The liquefaction of protoplasm is accompanied by a mechanical
phenomenon. Namely, some kinds exhibit a tendency to draw themselves up
into a globular form. This happens particularly with the contents of
muscle-cells. The prevalent opinion, founded on some of the most
exquisite experimental investigations that the history of science can
show, is undoubtedly that the contraction of muscle-cells is due to
osmotic pressure; and it must be allowed that that is a factor in
producing the effect. But it does not seem to me that it satisfactorily
accounts even for the phenomena of muscular contraction; and besides,
even naked slimes often draw up in the same way. In this case, we seem
to recognize an increase of the surface-tension. In some cases, too, the
reverse action takes place, extraordinary pseudopodia being put forth,
as if the surface-tension were diminished in spots. Indeed, such a slime
always has a sort of skin, due no doubt to surface-tension, and this
seems to give way at the point where a pseudopodium is put forth.

Long-continued or frequently repeated liquefaction of the protoplasm
results in an obstinate retention of the solid state, which we call
fatigue. On the other hand, repose in this state, if not too much
prolonged, restores the liquefiability. These are both important
functions.

The life-slimes have, further, the peculiar property of growing.
Crystals also grow; their growth, however, consists merely in attracting
matter like their own from the circumambient fluid. To suppose the
growth of protoplasm of the same nature, would be to suppose this
substance to be spontaneously generated in copious supplies wherever
food is in solution. Certainly, it must be granted that protoplasm is
but a chemical substance, and that there is no reason why it should not
be formed synthetically like any other chemical substance. Indeed,
Clifford has clearly shown that we have overwhelming evidence that it is
so formed. But to say that such formation is as regular and frequent as
the assimilation of food is quite another matter. It is more consonant
with the facts of observation to suppose that assimilated protoplasm is
formed at the instant of assimilation, under the influence of the
protoplasm already present. For each slime in its growth preserves its
distinctive characters with wonderful truth, nerve-slime growing
nerve-slime and muscle-slime muscle-slime, lion-slime growing
lion-slime, and all the varieties of breeds and even individual
characters being preserved in the growth. Now it is too much to suppose
there are billions of different kinds of protoplasm floating about
wherever there is food.

The frequent liquefaction of protoplasm increases its power of
assimilating food; so much so, indeed, that it is questionable whether
in the solid form it possesses this power.

The life-slime wastes as well as grows; and this too takes place chiefly
if not exclusively in its liquid phases.

Closely connected with growth is reproduction; and though in higher
forms this is a specialized function, it is universally true that
wherever there is protoplasm, there is, will be, or has been a power of
reproducing that same kind of protoplasm in a separated organism.
Reproduction seems to involve the union of two sexes; though it is not
demonstrable that this is always requisite.

Another physical property of protoplasm is that of taking habits. The
course which the spread of liquefaction has taken in the past is
rendered thereby more likely to be taken in the future; although there
is no absolute certainly that the same path will be followed again.

Very extraordinary, certainly, are all these properties of protoplasm;
as extraordinary as indubitable. But the one which has next to be
mentioned, while equally undeniable, is infinitely more wonderful. It is
that protoplasm feels. We have no direct evidence that this is true of
protoplasm universally, and certainly some kinds feel far more than
others. But there is a fair analogical inference that all protoplasm
feels. It not only feels but exercises all the functions of mind.

Such are the properties of protoplasm. The problem is to find a
hypothesis of the molecular constitution of this compound which will
account for these properties, one and all.

Some of them are obvious results of the excessively complicated
constitution of the protoplasm molecule. All very complicated substances
are unstable; and plainly a molecule of several thousand atoms may be
separated in many ways into two parts in each of which the polar
chemical forces are very nearly saturated. In the solid protoplasm, as
in other solids, the molecules must be supposed to be moving as it were
in orbits, or, at least, so as not to wander indefinitely. But this
solid cannot be melted, for the same reason that starch cannot be
melted; because an amount of heat insufficient to make the entire
molecules wander is sufficient to break them up completely and cause
them to form new and simpler molecules. But when one of the molecules is
disturbed, even if it be not quite thrown out of its orbit at first,
sub-molecules of perhaps several hundred atoms each are thrown off from
it. These will soon acquire the same mean kinetic energy as the others,
and, therefore, velocities several times as great. They will naturally
begin to wander, and in wandering will perturb a great many other
molecules and cause them in their turn to behave like the one originally
deranged. So many molecules will thus be broken up, that even those that
are intact will no longer be restrained within orbits, but will wander
about freely. This is the usual condition of a liquid, as modern
chemists understand it; for in all electrolytic liquids there is
considerable dissociation.

But this process necessarily chills the substance, not merely on account
of the heat of chemical combination, but still more because the number
of separate particles being greatly increased, the mean kinetic energy
must be less. The substance being a bad conductor, this heat is not at
once restored. Now the particles moving more slowly, the attractions
between them have time to take effect, and they approach the condition
of equilibrium. But their dynamic equilibrium is found in the
restoration of the solid condition, which, therefore, takes place, if
the disturbance is not kept up.

When a body is in the solid condition, most of its molecules must be
moving at the same rate, or, at least, at certain regular sets of rates;
otherwise the orbital motion would not be preserved. The distances of
neighboring molecules must always be kept between a certain maximum and
a certain minimum value. But if, without absorption of heat, the body be
thrown into a liquid condition, the distances of neighboring molecules
will be far more unequally distributed, and an effect upon the virial
will result. The chilling of protoplasm upon its liquefaction must also
be taken into account. The ordinary effect will no doubt be to increase
the cohesion and with that the surface-tension, so that the mass will
tend to draw itself up. But in special cases, the virial will be
increased so much that the surface-tension will be diminished at points
where the temperature is first restored. In that case, the outer film
will give way and the tension at other places will aid in causing the
general fluid to be poured out at those points, forming pseudopodia.

When the protoplasm is in a liquid state, and then only, a solution of
food is able to penetrate its mass by diffusion. The protoplasm is then
considerably dissociated; and so is the food, like all dissolved matter.
If then the separated and unsaturated sub-molecules of the food happen
to be of the same chemical species as sub-molecules of the protoplasm,
they may unite with other sub-molecules of the protoplasm to form new
molecules, in such a fashion that when the solid state is resumed, there
may be more molecules of protoplasm than there were at the beginning. It
is like the jackknife whose blade and handle, after having been
severally lost and replaced, were found and put together to make a new
knife.

We have seen that protoplasm is chilled by liquefaction, and that this
brings it back to the solid state, when the heat is recovered. This
series of operations must be very rapid in the case of nerve-slime and
even of muscle-slime, and may account for the unsteady or vibratory
character of their action. Of course, if assimilation takes place, the
heat of combination, which is probably trifling, is gained. On the other
hand, if work is done, whether by nerve or by muscle, loss of energy
must take place. In the case of the muscle, the mode by which the
instantaneous part of the fatigue is brought about is easily traced out.
If when the muscle contracts it be under stress, it will contract less
than it otherwise would do, and there will be a loss of heat. It is like
an engine which should work by dissolving salt in water and using the
contraction during the solution to lift a weight, the salt being
recovered afterwards by distillation. But the major part of fatigue has
nothing to do with the correlation of forces. A man must labor hard to
do in a quarter of an hour the work which draws from him enough heat to
cool his body by a single degree. Meantime, he will be getting heated,
he will be pouring out extra products of combustion, perspiration, etc.,
and he will be driving the blood at an accelerated rate through minute
tubes at great expense. Yet all this will have little to do with his
fatigue. He may sit quietly at his table writing, doing practically no
physical work at all, and yet in a few hours be terribly fagged. This
seems to be owing to the deranged sub-molecules of the nerve-slime not
having had time to settle back into their proper combinations. When such
sub-molecules are thrown out, as they must be from time to time, there
is so much waste of material.

In order that a sub-molecule of food may be thoroughly and firmly
assimilated into a broken molecule of protoplasm, it is necessary not
only that it should have precisely the right chemical composition, but
also that it should be at precisely the right spot at the right time and
should be moving in precisely the right direction with precisely the
right velocity. If all these conditions are not fulfilled, it will be
more loosely retained than the other parts of the molecule; and every
time it comes round into the situation in which it was drawn in,
relatively to the other parts of that molecule and to such others as
were near enough to be factors in the action, it will be in special
danger of being thrown out again. Thus, when a partial liquefaction of
the protoplasm takes place many times to about the same extent, it will,
each time, be pretty nearly the same molecules that were last drawn in
that are now thrown out. They will be thrown out, too, in about the same
way, as to position, direction of motion, and velocity, in which they
were drawn in; and this will be in about the same course that the ones
last before them were thrown out. Not exactly, however; for the very
cause of their being thrown off so easily is their not having fulfilled
precisely the conditions of stable retention. Thus, the law of habit is
accounted for, and with it its peculiar characteristic of not acting
with exactitude.

It seems to me that this explanation of habit, aside from the question
of its truth or falsity, has a certain value as an addition to our
little store of mechanical examples of actions analogous to habit. All
the others, so far as I know, are either statical or else involve forces
which, taking only the sensible motions into account, violate the law of
energy. It is so with the stream that wears its own bed. Here, the sand
is carried to its most stable situation and left there. The law of
energy forbids this; for when anything reaches a position of stable
equilibrium, its momentum will be at a maximum, so that it can according
to this law only be left at rest in an unstable situation. In all the
statical illustrations, too, things are brought into certain states and
left there. A garment receives folds and keeps them; that is, its limit
of elasticity is exceeded. This failure to spring back is again an
apparent violation of the law of energy; for the substance will not only
not spring back of itself (which might be due to an unstable equilibrium
being reached) but will not even do so when an impulse that way is
applied to it. Accordingly, Professor James says, “the phenomena of
habit ... are due to the plasticity of the ... materials.” Now,
plasticity of materials means the having of a low limit of elasticity.
(See the _Century Dictionary_, under _solid_.) But the hypothetical
constitution of protoplasm here proposed involves no forces but
attractions and repulsions strictly following the law of energy. The
action here, that is, the throwing of an atom out of its orbit in a
molecule, and the entering of a new atom into nearly, but not quite the
same orbit, is somewhat similar to the molecular actions which may be
supposed to take place in a solid strained beyond its limit of
elasticity. Namely, in that case certain molecules must be thrown out of
their orbits, to settle down again shortly after into new orbits. In
short, the plastic solid resembles protoplasm in being partially and
temporarily liquefied by a slight mechanical force. But the taking of a
set by a solid body has but a moderate resemblance to the taking of a
habit, inasmuch as the characteristic feature of the latter, its
inexactitude and want of complete determinacy, is not so marked in the
former, if it can be said to be present there, at all.

The truth is that though the molecular explanation of habit is pretty
vague on the mathematical side, there can be no doubt that systems of
atoms having polar forces would act substantially in that manner, and
the explanation is even too satisfactory to suit the convenience of an
advocate of tychism. For it may fairly be urged that since the phenomena
of habit may thus result from a purely mechanical arrangement, it is
unnecessary to suppose that habit-taking is a primordial principle of
the universe. But one fact remains unexplained mechanically, which
concerns not only the facts of habit, but all cases of actions
apparently violating the law of energy; it is that all these phenomena
depend upon aggregations of trillions of molecules in one and the same
condition and neighborhood; and it is by no means clear how they could
have all been brought and left in the same place and state by any
conservative forces. But let the mechanical explanation be as perfect as
it may, the state of things which it supposes presents evidence of a
primordial habit-taking tendency. For it shows us like things acting in
like ways because they are alike. Now, those who insist on the doctrine
of necessity will for the most part insist that the physical world is
entirely individual. Yet law involves an element of generality. Now to
say that generality is primordial, but generalization not, is like
saying that diversity is primordial but diversification not. It turns
logic upside down. At any rate, it is clear that nothing but a principle
of habit, itself due to the growth by habit of an infinitesimal chance
tendency toward habit-taking, is the only bridge that can span the chasm
between the chance-medley of chaos and the cosmos of order and law.

I shall not attempt a molecular explanation of the phenomena of
reproduction, because that would require a subsidiary hypothesis, and
carry me away from my main object. Such phenomena, universally diffused
though they be, appear to depend upon special conditions; and we do not
find that all protoplasm has reproductive powers.

But what is to be said of the property of feeling? If consciousness
belongs to all protoplasm, by what mechanical constitution is this to be
accounted for? The slime is nothing but a chemical compound. There is no
inherent impossibility in its being formed synthetically in the
laboratory, out of its chemical elements; and if it were so made, it
would present all the characters of natural protoplasm. No doubt, then,
it would feel. To hesitate to admit this would be puerile and
ultra-puerile. By what element of the molecular arrangement, then, would
that feeling be caused? This question cannot be evaded or pooh-poohed.
Protoplasm certainly does feel; and unless we are to accept a weak
dualism, the property must be shown to arise from some peculiarity of
the mechanical system. Yet the attempt to deduce it from the three laws
of mechanics, applied to never so ingenious a mechanical contrivance,
would obviously be futile. It can never be explained, unless we admit
that physical events are but degraded or undeveloped forms of psychical
events. But once grant that the phenomena of matter are but the result
of the sensibly complete sway of habits upon mind, and it only remains
to explain why in the protoplasm these habits are to some slight extent
broken up, so that according to the law of mind, in that special clause
of it sometimes called the principle of accommodation,[71] feeling
becomes intensified. Now the manner in which habits generally get broken
up is this. Reactions usually terminate in the removal of a stimulus;
for the excitation continues as long as the stimulus is present.
Accordingly, habits are general ways of behavior which are associated
with the removal of stimuli. But when the expected removal of the
stimulus fails to occur, the excitation continues and increases, and
non-habitual reactions take place; and these tend to weaken the habit.
If, then, we suppose that matter never does obey its ideal laws with
absolute precision, but that there are almost insensible fortuitous
departures from regularity, these will produce, in general, equally
minute effects. But protoplasm is in an excessively unstable condition;
and it is the characteristic of unstable equilibrium, that near that
point excessively minute causes may produce startlingly large effects.
Here, then, the usual departures from regularity will be followed by
others that are very great; and the large fortuitous departures from law
so produced, will tend still further to break up the laws, supposing
that these are of the nature of habits. Now, this breaking up of habit
and renewed fortuitous spontaneity will, according to the law of mind,
be accompanied by an intensification of feeling. The nerve-protoplasm
is, without doubt, in the most unstable condition of any kind of matter;
and consequently, there the resulting feeling is the most manifest.

Thus we see that the idealist has no need to dread a mechanical theory
of life. On the contrary, such a theory, fully developed, is bound to
call in a tychistic idealism as its indispensable adjunct. Wherever
chance-spontaneity is found, there, in the same proportion, feeling
exists. In fact, chance is but the outward aspect of that which within
itself is feeling. I long ago showed that real existence, or thing-ness,
consists in regularities. So, that primeval chaos in which there was no
regularity was mere nothing, from a physical aspect. Yet it was not a
blank zero; for there was an intensity of consciousness there in
comparison with which all that we ever feel is but as the struggling of
a molecule or two to throw off a little of the force of law to an
endless and innumerable diversity of chance utterly unlimited.

But after some atoms of the protoplasm have thus become partially
emancipated from law, what happens next to them? To understand this, we
have to remember that no mental tendency is so easily strengthened by
the action of habit as is the tendency to take habits. Now, in the
higher kinds of protoplasm, especially, the atoms in question have not
only long belonged to one molecule or another of the particular mass of
slime of which they are parts; but before that, they were constituents
of food of a protoplasmic constitution. During all this time, they have
been liable to lose habits and to recover them again; so that now, when
the stimulus is removed, and the foregone habits tend to reassert
themselves, they do so in the case of such atoms with great promptness.
Indeed, the return is so prompt that there is nothing but the feeling to
show conclusively that the bonds of law have ever been relaxed.

In short, diversification is the vestige of chance-spontaneity; and
wherever diversity is increasing, there chance must be operative. On the
other hand, wherever uniformity is increasing, habit must be operative.
But wherever actions take place under an established uniformity, there
so much feeling as there may be takes the mode of a sense of reaction.
That is the manner in which I am led to define the relation between the
fundamental elements of consciousness and their physical equivalents.

It remains to consider the physical relations of general ideas. It may
be well here to reflect that if matter has no existence except as a
specialization of mind, it follows that whatever affects matter
according to regular laws is itself matter. But all mind is directly or
indirectly connected with all matter, and acts in a more or less regular
way; so that all mind more or less partakes of the nature of matter.
Hence, it would be a mistake to conceive of the psychical and the
physical aspects of matter as two aspects absolutely distinct. Viewing a
thing from the outside, considering its relations of action and reaction
with other things, it appears as matter. Viewing it from the inside,
looking at its immediate character as feeling, it appears as
consciousness. These two views are combined when we remember that
mechanical laws are nothing but acquired habits, like all the
regularities of mind, including the tendency to take habits, itself; and
that this action of habit is nothing but generalization, and
generalization is nothing but the spreading of feelings. But the
question is, how do general ideas appear in the molecular theory of
protoplasm?

The consciousness of a habit involves a general idea. In each action of
that habit certain atoms get thrown out of their orbit, and replaced by
others. Upon all the different occasions it is different atoms that are
thrown off, but they are analogous from a physical point of view, and
there is an inward sense of their being analogous. Every time one of the
associated feelings recurs, there is a more or less vague sense that
there are others, that it has a general character, and of about what
this general character is. We ought not, I think, to hold that in
protoplasm habit never acts in any other than the particular way
suggested above. On the contrary, if habit be a primary property of
mind, it must be equally so of matter, as a kind of mind. We can hardly
refuse to admit that wherever chance motions have general characters,
there is a tendency for this generality to spread and to perfect itself.
In that case, a general idea is a certain modification of consciousness
which accompanies any regularity or general relation between chance
actions.

The consciousness of a general idea has a certain “unity of the ego,” in
it, which is identical when it passes from one mind to another. It is,
therefore, quite analogous to a person; and, indeed, a person is only a
particular kind of general idea. Long age, in the _Journal of
Speculative Philosophy_ (Vol. II, p. 156), I pointed out that a person
is nothing but a symbol involving a general idea; but my views were,
then, too nominalistic to enable me to see that every general idea has
the unified living feeling of a person.

All that is necessary, upon this theory, to the existence of a person is
that the feelings out of which he is constructed should be in close
enough connection to influence one another. Here we can draw a
consequence which it may be possible to submit to experimental test.
Namely, if this be the case, there should be something like personal
consciousness in bodies of men who are in intimate and intensely
sympathetic communion. It is true that when the generalization of
feeling has been carried so far as to include all within a person, a
stopping-place, in a certain sense, has been attained; and further
generalization will have a less lively character. But we must not think
it will cease. _Esprit de corps_, national sentiment, sympathy, are no
mere metaphors. None of us can fully realize what the minds of
corporations are, any more than one of my brain-cells can know what the
whole brain is thinking. But the law of mind clearly points to the
existence of such personalities, and there are many ordinary
observations which, if they were critically examined and supplemented by
special experiments, might, as first appearances promise, give evidence
of the influence of such greater persons upon individuals. It is often
remarked that on one day half a dozen people, strangers to one another,
will take it into their heads to do one and the same strange deed,
whether it be a physical experiment, a crime, or an act of virtue. When
the thirty thousand young people of the society for Christian Endeavor
were in New York, there seemed to me to be some mysterious diffusion of
sweetness and light. If such a fact is capable of being made out
anywhere, it should be in the church. The Christians have always been
ready to risk their lives for the sake of having prayers in common, of
getting together and praying simultaneously with great energy, and
especially for their common body, for “the whole state of Christ’s
church militant here in earth,” as one of the missals has it. This
practice they have been keeping up everywhere, weekly, for many
centuries. Surely, a personality ought to have developed in that church,
in that “bride of Christ,” as they call it, or else there is a strange
break in the action of mind, and I shall have to acknowledge my views
are much mistaken. Would not the societies for psychical research be
more likely to break through the clouds, in seeking evidences of such
corporate personality, than in seeking evidences of telepathy, which,
upon the same theory, should be a far weaker phenomenon?

Footnote 63:

  _The Monist_, October, 1892.

Footnote 64:

  I am rejoiced to find, since my last paper was printed, that a
  philosopher as subtle and profound as Dr. Edmund Montgomery has long
  been arguing for the same element in the universe. Other
  world-renowned thinkers, as M. Renouvier and M. Delbœuf, appear to
  share this opinion.

Footnote 65:

  By a _vera causa_, in the logic of science, is meant a state of things
  known to exist in some cases and supposed to exist in other cases,
  because it would account for observed phenomena.

Footnote 66:

  Wiedemann, _Annalen_, 1887-1889.

Footnote 67:

  See Maxwell on Spherical Harmonics, in his _Electricity and
  Magnetism_.

Footnote 68:

  The word _system_ has three peculiar meanings in mathematics. (_A._)
  It means an orderly exposition of the truths of astronomy, and hence a
  theory of the motions of the stars; as the Ptolemaic _system_, the
  Copernican _system_. This is much like the sense in which we speak of
  the Calvinistic _system_ of theology, the Kantian _system_ of
  philosophy, etc. (_B._) It means the aggregate of the planets
  considered as all moving in somewhat the same way, as the solar
  _system_; and hence any aggregate of particles moving under mutual
  forces. (_C._) It means a number of forces acting simultaneously upon
  a number of particles.

Footnote 69:

  But, in fact, an inspection of these curves is sufficient to show that
  they are of a higher degree than the third. For they have the line _V_
  = O, or some line _V_ a constant for an asymptote, while for small
  values of _P_, the values of _d_^2_p_/(_dV_)^2 are positive.

Footnote 70:

  Anticipated by Clausius as long ago as 1857; and by Williamson in
  1851.

Footnote 71:

  “Physiologically, ... accommodation means the breaking up of a
  habit.... Psychologically, it means reviving consciousness.” Baldwin,
  _Psychology_, Part III, ch. i., § 5.




                        V. EVOLUTIONARY LOVE[72]
                    AT FIRST BLUSH. COUNTER-GOSPELS


Philosophy, when just escaping from its golden pupa-skin, mythology,
proclaimed the great evolutionary agency of the universe to be Love. Or,
since this pirate-lingo, English, is poor in such-like words, let us say
Eros, the exuberance-love. Afterwards, Empedocles set up passionate-love
and hate as the two co-ordinate powers of the universe. In some
passages, kindness is the word. But certainly, in any sense in which it
has an opposite, to be senior partner of that opposite, is the highest
position that love can attain. Nevertheless, the ontological gospeller,
in whose days those views were familiar topics, made the One Supreme
Being, by whom all things have been made out of nothing, to be
cherishing-love. What, then, can he say to hate? Never mind, at this
time, what the scribe of the apocalypse, if he were John, stung at
length by persecution into a rage unable to distinguish suggestions of
evil from visions of heaven, and so become the Slanderer of God to men,
may have dreamed. The question is rather what the sane John thought, or
ought to have thought, in order to carry out his idea consistently. His
statement that God is love seems aimed at that saying of Ecclesiastes
that we cannot tell whether God bears us love or hatred. “Nay,” says
John, “we can tell, and very simply! We know and have trusted the love
which God hath in us. God is love.” There is no logic in this, unless it
means that God loves all men. In the preceding paragraph, he had said,
“God is light and in him is no darkness at all.” We are to understand,
then, that as darkness is merely the defect of light, so hatred and evil
are mere imperfect stages of ἀγἀπη and ἀγαθόν, love and loveliness. This
concords with that utterance reported in John’s Gospel: “God sent not
the Son into the world to judge the world; but that the world should
through him be saved. He that believeth on him is not judged: he that
believeth not hath been judged already.... And this is the judgment,
that the light is come into the world, and that men loved darkness
rather than the light.” That is to say, God visits no punishment on
them; they punish themselves, by their natural affinity for the
defective. Thus, the love that God is, is not a love of which hatred is
the contrary; otherwise Satan would be a co-ordinate power; but it is a
love which embraces hatred as an imperfect stage of it, an Anteros—yea,
even needs hatred and hatefulness as its object. For self-love is no
love; so if God’s self is love, that which he loves must be defect of
love; just as a luminary can light up only that which otherwise would be
dark. Henry James, the Swedenborgian, says: “It is no doubt very
tolerable finite or creaturely love to love one’s own in another, to
love another for his conformity to one’s self: but nothing can be in
more flagrant contrast with the creative Love, all whose tenderness _ex
vi termini_ must be reserved only for what intrinsically is most
bitterly hostile and negative to itself.” This is from _Substance and
Shadow_: an _Essay on the Physics of Creation_. It is a pity he had not
filled his pages with things like this, as he was able easily to do,
instead of scolding at his reader and at people generally, until the
physics of creation was well-nigh forgot. I must deduct, however, from
what I just wrote: obviously no genius could make his every sentence as
sublime as one which discloses for the problem of evil its everlasting
solution.

The movement of love is circular, at one and the same impulse projecting
creations into independency and drawing them into harmony. This seems
complicated when stated so; but it is fully summed up in the simple
formula we call the Golden Rule. This does not, of course, say, Do
everything possible to gratify the egoistic impulses of others, but it
says, Sacrifice your own perfection to the perfectionment of your
neighbor. Nor must it for a moment be confounded with the Benthamite, or
Helvetian, or Beccarian motto, Act for the greatest good of the greatest
number. Love is not directed to abstractions but to persons; not to
persons we do not know, nor to numbers of people, but to our own dear
ones, our family and neighbors. “Our neighbor,” we remember, is one whom
we live near, not locally perhaps, but in life and feeling.

Everybody can see that the statement of St. John is the formula of an
evolutionary philosophy, which teaches that growth comes only from love,
from—I will not say self-_sacrifice_, but from the ardent impulse to
fulfil another’s highest impulse. Suppose, for example, that I have an
idea that interests me. It is my creation. It is my creature; for as
shown in last July’s _Monist_, it is a little person. I love it; and I
will sink myself in perfecting it. It is not by dealing out cold justice
to the circle of my ideas that I can make them grow, but by cherishing
and tending them as I would the flowers in my garden. The philosophy we
draw from John’s gospel is that this is the way mind develops; and as
for the cosmos, only so far as it yet is mind, and so has life, is it
capable of further evolution. Love, recognizing germs of loveliness in
the hateful, gradually warms it into life, and makes it lovely. That is
the sort of evolution which every careful student of my essay _The Law
of Mind_, must see that _synechism_ calls for.

The nineteenth century is now fast sinking into the grave, and we all
begin to review its doings and to think what character it is destined to
bear as compared with other centuries in the minds of future historians.
It will be called, I guess, the Economical Century; for political
economy has more direct relations with all the branches of its activity
than has any other science. Well, political economy has its formula of
redemption, too. It is this: Intelligence in the service of greed
ensures the justest prices, the fairest contracts, the most enlightened
conduct of all the dealings between men, and leads to the _summum
bonum_, food in plenty and perfect comfort. Food for whom? Why, for the
greedy master of intelligence. I do not mean to say that this is one of
the legitimate conclusions of political economy, the scientific
character of which I fully acknowledge. But the study of doctrines,
themselves true, will often temporarily encourage generalizations
extremely false, as the study of physics has encouraged
necessitarianism. What I say, then, is that the great attention paid to
economical questions during our century has induced an exaggeration of
the beneficial effects of greed and of the unfortunate results of
sentiment, until there has resulted a philosophy which comes unwittingly
to this, that greed is the great agent in the elevation of the human
race and in the evolution of the universe.

I open a handbook of political economy,—the most typical and middling
one I have at hand,—and there find some remarks of which I will here
make a brief analysis. I omit qualifications, sops thrown to Cerberus,
phrases to placate Christian prejudice, trappings which serve to hide
from author and reader alike the ugly nakedness of the greed-god. But I
have surveyed my position. The author enumerates “three motives to human
action:

The love of self;

The love of a limited class having common interests and feelings with
one’s self;

The love of mankind at large.”

Remark, at the outset, what obsequious title is bestowed on greed,—“the
love of self.” Love! The second motive _is_ love. In place of “a limited
class” put “certain persons,” and you have a fair description. Taking
“class” in the old-fashioned sense, a weak kind of love is described. In
the sequel, there seems to be some haziness as to the delimitation of
this motive. By the love of mankind at large, the author does not mean
that deep, subconscious passion that is properly so called; but merely
public-spirit, perhaps little more than a fidget about pushing ideas.
The author proceeds to a comparative estimate of the worth of these
motives. Greed, says he, but using, of course, another word, “is not so
great an evil as is commonly supposed... Every man can promote his own
interests a great deal more effectively than he can promote any one
else’s, or than any one else can promote his.” Besides, as he remarks on
another page, the more miserly a man is, the more good he does. The
second motive “is the most dangerous one to which society is exposed.”
Love is all very pretty: “no higher or purer source of human happiness
exists.” (Ahem!) But it is a “source of enduring injury,” and, in short,
should be overruled by something wiser. What is this wiser motive? We
shall see.

As for public spirit, it is rendered nugatory by the “difficulties in
the way of its effective operation.” For example, it might suggest
putting checks upon the fecundity of the poor and the vicious; and “no
measure of repression would be too severe,” in the case of criminals.
The hint is broad. But unfortunately, you cannot induce legislatures to
take such measures, owing to the pestiferous “tender sentiments of man
towards man.” It thus appears, that public-spirit, or Benthamism, is not
strong enough to be the effective tutor of love, (I am skipping to
another page), which must, therefore, be handed over to “the motives
which animate men in the pursuit of wealth,” in which alone we can
confide, and which “are in the highest degree beneficent.”[73] Yes, in
the “highest degree” without exception are they beneficent to the being
upon whom all their blessings are poured out, namely, the Self, whose
“sole object,” says the writer in accumulating wealth is his individual
“sustenance and enjoyment.” Plainly, the author holds the notion that
some other motive might be in a higher degree beneficent even for the
man’s self to be a paradox wanting in good sense. He seeks to gloze and
modify his doctrine; but he lets the perspicacious reader see what his
animating principle is; and when, holding the opinions I have repeated,
he at the same time acknowledges that society could not exist upon a
basis of intelligent greed alone, he simply pigeon-holes himself as one
of the eclectics of inharmonious opinions. He wants his mammon flavored
with a _soupçon_ of god.

The economists accuse those to whom the enunciation of their atrocious
villainies communicates a thrill of horror of being _sentimentalists_.
It may be so: I willingly confess to having some tincture of
sentimentalism in me, God be thanked! Ever since the French Revolution
brought this leaning of thought into ill-repute,—and not altogether
undeservedly, I must admit, true, beautiful, and good as that great
movement was—it has been the tradition to picture sentimentalists as
persons incapable of logical thought and unwilling to look facts in the
eyes. This tradition may be classed with the French tradition that an
Englishman says _godam_ at every second sentence, the English tradition
that an American talks about “Britishers,” and the American tradition
that a Frenchman carries forms of etiquette to an inconvenient extreme,
in short with all those traditions which survive simply because the men
who use their eyes and ears are few and far between. Doubtless some
excuse there was for all those opinions in days gone by; and
sentimentalism, when it was the fashionable amusement to spend one’s
evenings in a flood of tears over a woeful performance on a
candle-litten stage, sometimes made itself a little ridiculous. But what
after all is sentimentalism? It is an _ism_, a doctrine, namely, the
doctrine that great respect should be paid to the natural judgments of
the sensible heart. This is what sentimentalism precisely is; and I
entreat the reader to consider whether to contemn it is not of all
blasphemies the most degrading. Yet the nineteenth century has steadily
contemned it, because it brought about the Reign of Terror. That it did
so is true. Still, the whole question is one of _how much_. The Reign of
Terror was very bad; but now the Gradgrind banner has been this century
long flaunting in the face of heaven, with an insolence to provoke the
very skies to scowl and rumble. Soon a flash and quick peal will shake
economists quite out of their complacency, too late. The twentieth
century, in its latter half, shall surely see the deluge-tempest burst
upon the social order,—to clear upon a world as deep in ruin as that
greed-philosophy has long plunged it into guilt. No post-thermidorian
high jinks then!

So a miser is a beneficent power in a community, is he? With the same
reason precisely, only in a much higher degree, you might pronounce the
Wall Street sharp to be a good angel, who takes money from heedless
persons not likely to guard it properly, who wrecks feeble enterprises
better stopped, and who administers wholesome lessons to unwary
scientific men, by passing worthless checks upon them,—as you did, the
other day, to me, my millionaire Master in glomery, when you thought you
saw your way to using my process without paying for it, and of so
bequeathing to your children something to boast of their father
about,—and who by a thousand wiles puts money at the service of
intelligent greed, in his own person. Bernard Mandeville, in his _Fable
of the Bees_, maintains that private vices of all descriptions are
public benefits, and proves it, too, quite as cogently as the economist
proves his point concerning the miser. He even argues, with no slight
force, that but for vice civilization would never have existed. In the
same spirit, it has been strongly maintained and is to-day widely
believed that all acts of charity and benevolence, private and public,
go seriously to degrade the human race.

The _Origin of Species_ of Darwin merely extends politico-economical
views of progress to the entire realm of animal and vegetable life. The
vast majority of our contemporary naturalists hold the opinion that the
true cause of those exquisite and marvellous adaptations of nature for
which, when I was a boy, men used to extol the divine wisdom is that
creatures are so crowded together that those of them that happen to have
the slightest advantage force those less pushing into situations
unfavorable to multiplication or even kill them before they reach the
age of reproduction. Among animals, the mere mechanical individualism is
vastly reënforced as a power making for good by the animal’s ruthless
greed. As Darwin puts it on his title-page, it is the struggle for
existence; and he should have added for his motto: Every individual for
himself, and the Devil take the hindmost! Jesus, in his sermon on the
Mount, expressed a different opinion.

Here, then, is the issue. The gospel of Christ says that progress comes
from every individual merging his individuality in sympathy with his
neighbors. On the other side, the conviction of the nineteenth century
is that progress takes place by virtue of every individual’s striving
for himself with all his might and trampling his neighbor under foot
whenever he gets a chance to do so. This may accurately be called the
Gospel of Greed.

Much is to be said on both sides. I have not concealed, I could not
conceal, my own passionate predilection. Such a confession will probably
shock my scientific brethren. Yet the strong feeling is in itself, I
think, an argument of some weight in favor of the agapastic theory of
evolution,—so far as it may be presumed to bespeak the normal judgment
of the Sensible Heart. Certainly, if it were possible to believe in
agapasm without believing it warmly, that fact would be an argument
against the truth of the doctrine. At any rate, since the warmth of
feeling exists, it should on every account be candidly confessed;
especially since it creates a liability to onesidedness on my part
against which it behooves my readers and me to be severally on our
guard.


                       SECOND THOUGHTS. IRENICA.


Let us try to define the logical affinities of the different theories of
evolution. Natural selection, as conceived by Darwin, is a mode of
evolution in which the only positive agent of change in the whole
passage from moner to man is fortuitous variation. To secure advance in
a definite direction chance has to be seconded by some action that shall
hinder the propagation of some varieties or stimulate that of others. In
natural selection, strictly so called, it is the crowding out of the
weak. In sexual selection, it is the attraction of beauty, mainly.

The _Origin of Species_ was published toward the end of the year 1859.
The preceding years since 1846 had been one of the most productive
seasons,—or if extended so as to cover the great book we are
considering, _the_ most productive period of equal length in the entire
history of science from its beginnings until now. The idea that chance
begets order, which is one of the corner-stones of modern physics
(although Dr. Carus considers it “the weakest point in Mr. Peirce’s
system,”) was at that time put into its clearest light. Quetelet had
opened the discussion by his _Letters on the Application of
Probabilities to the Moral and Political Sciences_, a work which deeply
impressed the best minds of that day, and to which Sir John Herschel had
drawn general attention in Great Britain. In 1857, the first volume of
Buckle’s _History of Civilisation_ had created a tremendous sensation,
owing to the use he made of this same idea. Meantime, the “statistical
method” had, under that very name, been applied with brilliant success
to molecular physics. Dr. John Herapath, an English chemist, had in 1847
outlined the kinetical theory of gases in his _Mathematical Physics_;
and the interest the theory excited had been refreshed in 1856 by
notable memoirs by Clausius and Krönig. In the very summer preceding
Darwin’s publication, Maxwell had read before the British Association
the first and most important of his researches on this subject. The
consequence was that the idea that fortuitous events may result in a
physical law, and further that this is the way in which those laws which
appear to conflict with the principle of the conservation of energy are
to be explained, had taken a strong hold upon the minds of all who were
abreast of the leaders of thought. By such minds, it was inevitable that
the _Origin of Species_, whose teaching was simply the application of
the same principle to the explanation of another “non-conservative”
action, that of organic development, should be hailed and welcomed. The
sublime discovery of the conservation of energy by Helmholtz in 1847,
and that of the mechanical theory of heat by Clausius and by Rankine,
independently, in 1850, had decidedly overawed all those who might have
been inclined to sneer at physical science. Thereafter a belated poet
still harping upon “science peddling with the names of things” would
fail of his effect. Mechanism was now known to be all, or very nearly
so. All this time, utilitarianism,—that improved substitute for the
Gospel,—was in its fullest feather; and was a natural ally of an
individualistic theory. Dean Mansell’s injudicious advocacy had led to
mutiny among the bondsmen of Sir William Hamilton, and the nominalism of
Mill had profited accordingly; and although the real science that Darwin
was leading men to was sure some day to give a death-blow to the
sham-science of Mill, yet there were several elements of the Darwinian
theory which were sure to charm the followers of Mill. Another thing:
anæsthetics had been in use for thirteen years. Already, people’s
acquaintance with suffering had dropped off very much; and as a
consequence, that unlovely hardness by which our times are so contrasted
with those that immediately preceded them, had already set in, and
inclined people to relish a ruthless theory. The reader would quite
mistake the drift of what I am saying if he were to understand me as
wishing to suggest that any of those things (except perhaps Malthus)
influenced Darwin himself. What I mean is that his hypothesis, while
without dispute one of the most ingenious and pretty ever devised, and
while argued with a wealth of knowledge, a strength of logic, a charm of
rhetoric, and above all with a certain magnetic genuineness that was
almost irresistible, did not appear, at first, at all near to being
proved; and to a sober mind its case looks less hopeful now than it did
twenty years ago; but the extraordinarily favorable reception it met
with was plainly owing, in large measure, to its ideas being those
toward which the age was favorably disposed, especially, because of the
encouragement it gave to the greed-philosophy.

Diametrically opposed to evolution by chance, are those theories which
attribute all progress to an inward necessary principle, or other form
of necessity. Many naturalists have thought that if an egg is destined
to go through a certain series of embryological transformations, from
which it is perfectly certain not to deviate, and if in geological time
almost exactly the same forms appear successively, one replacing another
in the same order, the strong presumption is that this latter succession
was as predeterminate and certain to take place as the former. So,
Nägeli, for instance, conceives that it somehow follows from the first
law of motion and the peculiar, but unknown, molecular constitution of
protoplasm, that forms must complicate themselves more and more.
Kolliker makes one form generate another after a certain maturation has
been accomplished. Weismann, too, though he calls himself a Darwinian,
holds that nothing is due to chance, but that all forms are simple
mechanical resultants of the heredity from two parents.[74] It is very
noticeable that all these different sectaries seek to import into their
science a mechanical necessity to which the facts that come under their
observation do not point. Those geologists who think that the variation
of species is due to cataclysmic alterations of climate or of the
chemical constitution of the air and water are also making mechanical
necessity chief factor of evolution.

Evolution by sporting and evolution by mechanical necessity are
conceptions warring against one another. A third method, which
supersedes their strife, lies enwrapped in the theory of Lamarck.
According to his view, all that distinguishes the highest organic forms
from the most rudimentary has been brought about by little hypertrophies
or atrophies which have affected individuals early in their lives, and
have been transmitted to their offspring. Such a transmission of
acquired characters is of the general nature of habit-taking, and this
is the representative and derivative within the physiological domain of
the law of mind. Its action is essentially dissimilar to that of a
physical force; and that is the secret of the repugnance of such
necessitarians as Weismann to admitting its existence. The Lamarckians
further suppose that although some of the modifications of form so
transmitted were originally due to mechanical causes, yet the chief
factors of their first production were the straining of endeavor and the
overgrowth superinduced by exercise, together with the opposite actions.
Now, endeavor, since it is directed toward an end, is essentially
psychical, even though it be sometimes unconscious; and the growth due
to exercise, as I argued in my last paper, follows a law of a character
quite contrary to that of mechanics.

Lamarckian evolution is thus evolution by the force of habit.—That
sentence slipped off my pen while one of those neighbors whose function
in the social cosmos seems to be that of an Interrupter, was asking me a
question. Of course, it is nonsense. Habit is mere inertia, a resting on
one’s oars, not a propulsion. Now it is energetic projaculation (lucky
there is such a word, or this untried hand might have been put to
inventing one) by which in the typical instances of Lamarckian evolution
the new elements of form are first created. Habit, however, forces them
to take practical shapes, compatible with the structures they affect,
and in the form of heredity and otherwise, gradually replaces the
spontaneous energy that sustains them. Thus, habit plays a double part;
it serves to establish the new features, and also to bring them into
harmony with the general morphology and function of the animals and
plants to which they belong. But if the reader will now kindly give
himself the trouble of turning back a page or two, he will see that this
account of Lamarckian evolution coincides with the general description
of the action of love, to which, I suppose, he yielded his assent.

Remembering that all matter is really mind, remembering, too, the
continuity of mind, let us ask what aspect Lamarckian evolution takes on
within the domain of consciousness. Direct endeavor can achieve almost
nothing. It is as easy by taking thought to add a cubit to one’s
stature, as it is to produce an idea acceptable to any of the Muses by
merely straining for it, before it is ready to come. We haunt in vain
the sacred well and throne of Mnemosyne; the deeper workings of the
spirit take place in their own slow way, without our connivance. Let but
their bugle sound, and we may then make our effort, sure of an oblation
for the altar of whatsoever divinity its savor gratifies. Besides this
inward process, there is the operation of the environment, which goes to
break up habits destined to be broken up and so to render the mind
lively. Everybody knows that the long continuance of a routine of habit
makes us lethargic, while a succession of surprises wonderfully
brightens the ideas. Where there is a motion, where history is a-making,
there is the focus of mental activity, and it has been said that the
arts and sciences reside within the temple of Janus, waking when that is
open, but slumbering when it is closed. Few psychologists have perceived
how fundamental a fact this is. A portion of mind abundantly commissured
to other portions works almost mechanically. It sinks to a condition of
a railway junction. But a portion of mind almost isolated, a spiritual
peninsula, or _cul-de-sac_, is like a railway terminus. Now mental
commissures are habits. Where they abound, originality is not needed and
is not found; but where they are in defect, spontaneity is set free.
Thus, the first step in the Lamarckian evolution of mind is the putting
of sundry thoughts into situations in which they are free to play. As to
growth by exercise, I have already shown, in discussing _Man’s Glassy
Essence_, in last October’s _Monist_, what its _modus operandi_ must be
conceived to be, at least, until a second equally definite hypothesis
shall have been offered. Namely, it consists of the flying asunder of
molecules, and the reparation of the parts by new matter. It is, thus, a
sort of reproduction. It takes place only during exercise, because the
activity of protoplasm consists in the molecular disturbance which is
its necessary condition. Growth by exercise takes place also in the
mind. Indeed, that is what it is to _learn_. But the most perfect
illustration is the development of a philosophical idea by being put
into practice. The conception which appeared, at first, as unitary,
splits up into special cases; and into each of these new thought must
enter to make a practicable idea. This new thought, however, follows
pretty closely the model of the parent conception; and thus a
homogeneous development takes place. The parallel between this and the
course of molecular occurrences is apparent. Patient attention will be
able to trace all these elements in the transaction called learning.

Three modes of evolution have thus been brought before us; evolution by
fortuitous variation, evolution by mechanical necessity, and evolution
by creative love. We may term them _tychastic_ evolution, or _tychasm_,
_anancastic_ evolution, or _anancasm_, and _agapastic_ evolution, or
_agapasm_. The doctrines which represent these as severally of principal
importance, we may term _tychasticism_, _anancasticism_, and
_agapasticism_. On the other hand the mere propositions that absolute
chance, mechanical necessity, and the law of love, are severally
operative in the cosmos, may receive the names of _tychism_, _anancism_,
and _agapism_.

All three modes of evolution are composed of the same general elements.
Agapasm exhibits them the most clearly. The good result is here brought
to pass, first, by the bestowal of spontaneous energy by the parent upon
the offspring, and, second, by the disposition of the latter to catch
the general idea of those about it and thus to subserve the general
purpose. In order to express the relation that tychasm and anancasm bear
to agapasm, let me borrow a word from geometry. An ellipse crossed by a
straight line is a sort of cubic curve; for a cubic is a curve which is
cut thrice by a straight line; now a straight line might cut the ellipse
twice and its associated straight line a third time. Still the ellipse
with the straight line across it would not have the characteristics of a
cubic. It would have, for instance, no contrary flexure, which no true
cubic wants; and it would have two nodes, which no true cubic has. The
geometers say that it is a _degenerate_ cubic. Just so, tychasm and
anancasm are degenerate forms of agapasm.

Men who seek to reconcile the Darwinian idea with Christianity will
remark that tychastic evolution, like the agapastic, depends upon a
reproductive creation, the forms preserved being those that use the
spontaneity conferred upon them in such wise as to be drawn into harmony
with their original, quite after the Christian scheme. Very good! This
only shows that just as love cannot have a contrary, but must embrace
what is most opposed to it, as a degenerate case of it, so tychasm is a
kind of agapasm. Only, in the tychastic evolution progress is solely
owing to the distribution of the napkin-hidden talent of the rejected
servant among those not rejected, just as ruined gamesters leave their
money on the table to make those not yet ruined so much the richer. It
makes the felicity of the lambs just the damnation of the goats,
transposed to the other side of the equation. In genuine agapasm, on the
other hand, advance takes place by virtue of a positive sympathy among
the created springing from continuity of mind. This is the idea which
tychasticism knows not how to manage.

The anancasticist might here interpose, claiming that the mode of
evolution for which he contends agrees with agapasm at the point at
which tychasm departs from it. For it makes development go through
certain phases, having its inevitable ebbs and flows, yet tending on the
whole to a foreordained perfection. Bare existence by this its destiny
betrays an intrinsic affinity for the good. Herein, it must be admitted,
anancasm shows itself to be in a broad acception a species of agapasm.
Some forms of it might easily be mistaken for the genuine agapasm. The
Hegelian philosophy is such an anancasticism. With its revelatory
religion, with its synechism (however imperfectly set forth), with its
“reflection,” the whole idea of the theory is superb, almost sublime.
Yet, after all, living freedom is practically omitted from its method.
The whole movement is that of a vast engine, impelled by a _vis a
tergo_, with a blind and mysterious fate of arriving at a lofty goal. I
mean that such an engine it _would_ be, if it really worked; but in
point of fact, it is a Keely motor. Grant that it really acts as it
professes to act, and there is nothing to do but accept the philosophy.
But never was there seen such an example of a long chain of
reasoning,—shall I say with a flaw in every link?—no, with every link a
handful of sand, squeezed into shape in a dream. Or say, it is a
pasteboard model of a philosophy that in reality does not exist. If we
use the one precious thing it contains, the idea of it, introducing the
tychism which the arbitrariness of its every step suggests, and make
that the support of a vital freedom which is the breath of the spirit of
love, we may be able to produce that genuine agapasticism, at which
Hegel was aiming.


                     A THIRD ASPECT. DISCRIMINATION


In the very nature of things, the line of demarcation between the three
modes of evolution is not perfectly sharp. That does not prevent its
being quite real; perhaps it is rather a mark of its reality. There is
in the nature of things no sharp line of demarcation between the three
fundamental colors, red, green, and violet. But for all that they are
really different. The main question is whether three radically different
evolutionary elements have been operative; and the second question is
what are the most striking characteristics of whatever elements have
been operative.

I propose to devote a few pages to a very slight examination of these
questions in their relation to the historical development of human
thought. I first formulate for the reader’s convenience the briefest
possible definitions of the three conceivable modes of development of
thought, distinguishing also two varieties of anancasm and three of
agapasm. The tychastic development of thought, then, will consist in
slight departures from habitual ideas in different directions
indifferently, quite purposeless and quite unconstrained whether by
outward circumstances or by force of logic, these new departures being
followed by unforeseen results which tend to fix some of them as habits
more than others. The anancastic development of thought will consist of
new ideas adopted without foreseeing whither they tend, but having a
character determined by causes either external to the mind, such as
changed circumstances of life, or internal to the mind as logical
developments of ideas already accepted, such as generalizations. The
agapastic development of thought is the adoption of certain mental
tendencies, not altogether heedlessly, as in tychasm, nor quite blindly
by the mere force of circumstances or of logic, as in anancasm, but by
an immediate attraction for the idea itself, whose nature is divined
before the mind possesses it, by the power of sympathy, that is, by
virtue of the continuity of mind; and this mental tendency may be of
three varieties, as follows: First, it may affect a whole people or
community in its collective personality, and be thence communicated to
such individuals as are in powerfully sympathetic connection with the
collective people, although they may be intellectually incapable of
attaining the idea by their private understandings or even perhaps of
consciously apprehending it. Second, it may affect a private person
directly, yet so that he is only enabled to apprehend the idea, or to
appreciate its attractiveness, by virtue of his sympathy with his
neighbors, under the influence of a striking experience or development
of thought. The conversion of St. Paul may be taken as an example of
what is meant. Third, it may affect an individual, independently of his
human affections, by virtue of an attraction it exercises upon his mind,
even before he has comprehended it. This is the phenomenon which has
been well called the _divination_ of genius; for it is due to the
continuity between the man’s mind and the Most High.

Let us next consider by means of what tests we can discriminate between
these different categories of evolution. No absolute criterion is
possible in the nature of things, since in the nature of things there is
no sharp line of demarcation between the different classes.
Nevertheless, quantitative symptoms may be found by which a sagacious
and sympathetic judge of human nature may be able to estimate the
approximate proportions in which the different kinds of influence are
commingled.

So far as the historical evolution of human thought has been tychastic,
it should have proceeded by insensible or minute steps; for such is the
nature of chances when so multiplied as to show phenomena of regularity.
For example, assume that of the native-born white adult males of the
United States in 1880, one-fourth part were below 5 feet 4 inches in
stature and one-fourth part above 5 feet 8 inches. Then by the
principles of probability, among the whole population, we should expect

                             216 under 4 feet 6 inches,
                              48   “   4   ”  5   “
                               9   ”   4   “  4   ”
                     less than 2   “   4   ”  3   “

                             216 above 6 feet 6 inches,
                              48   “   6   ”  7   “
                               9   ”   6   “  8   ”
                     less than 2   “   6   ”  9   “

I set down these figures to show how insignificantly few are the cases
in which anything very far out of the common run presents itself by
chance. Though the stature of only every second man is included within
the four inches between 5 feet 4 inches and 5 feet 8 inches, yet if this
interval be extended by thrice four inches above and below, it will
embrace all our 8 millions odd of native-born adult white males (of
1880), except only 9 taller and 9 shorter.

The test of minute variation, if _not_ satisfied, absolutely negatives
tychasm. If it is satisfied, we shall find that it negatives anancasm
but not agapasm. We want a positive test, satisfied by tychasm, only.
Now wherever we find men’s thought taking by imperceptible degrees a
turn contrary to the purposes which animate them, in spite of their
highest impulses, there, we may safely conclude, there has been a
tychastic action.

Students of the history of mind there be of an erudition to fill an
imperfect scholar like me with envy edulcorated by joyous admiration,
who maintain that ideas when just started are and can be little more
than freaks, since they cannot yet have been critically examined, and
further that everywhere and at all times progress has been so gradual
that it is difficult to make out distinctly what original step any given
man has taken. It would follow that tychasm has been the sole method of
intellectual development. I have to confess I cannot read history so; I
cannot help thinking that while tychasm has sometimes been operative, at
others great steps covering nearly the same ground and made by different
men independently, have been mistaken for a succession of small steps,
and further that students have been reluctant to admit a real entitative
“spirit” of an age or of a people, under the mistaken and unscrutinized
impression that they should thus be opening the door to wild and
unnatural hypotheses. I find, on the contrary, that, however it may be
with the education of individual minds, the historical development of
thought has seldom been of a tychastic nature, and exclusively in
backward and barbarizing movements. I desire to speak with the extreme
modesty which befits a student of logic who is required to survey so
very wide a field of human thought that he can cover it only by a
reconnaissance, to which only the greatest skill and most adroit methods
can impart any value at all; but, after all, I can only express my own
opinions and not those of anybody else; and in my humble judgment, the
largest example of tychasm is afforded by the history of Christianity,
from about its establishment by Constantine, to, say, the time of the
Irish monasteries, an era or eon of about 500 years. Undoubtedly the
external circumstance which more than all others at first inclined men
to accept Christianity in its loveliness and tenderness, was the fearful
extent to which society was broken up into units by the unmitigated
greed and hard-heartedness into which the Romans had seduced the world.
And yet it was that very same fact, more than any other external
circumstance, that fostered that bitterness against the wicked world of
which the primitive gospel of Mark contains not a single trace. At
least, I do not detect it in the remark about the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, where nothing is said about vengeance, nor even in that
speech where the closing lines of Isaiah are quoted, about the worm and
the fire that feed upon the “carcasses of the men that have transgressed
against me.” But little by little the bitterness increases until in the
last book of the New Testament, its poor distracted author represents
that all the time Christ was talking about having come to save the
world, the secret design was to catch the entire human race, with the
exception of a paltry 144,000, and souse them all in a brimstone lake,
and as the smoke of their torment went up forever and ever, to turn and
remark, “There is no curse any more.” Would it be an insensible smirk or
a fiendish grin that should accompany such an utterance? I wish I could
believe St. John did not write it; but it is his gospel which tells
about the “resurrection unto condemnation,”—that is of men’s being
resuscitated just for the sake of torturing them;—and, at any rate, the
Revelation is a very ancient composition. One can understand that the
early Christians were like men trying with all their might to climb a
steep declivity of smooth wet clay; the deepest and truest element of
their life, animating both heart and head, was universal love; but they
were continually, and against their wills, slipping into a party spirit,
every slip serving as a precedent, in a fashion but too familiar to
every man. This party feeling insensibily grew until by about A.D. 330
the luster of the pristine integrity that in St. Mark reflects the white
spirit of light was so far tarnished that Eusebius, (the Jared Sparks of
that day), in the preface to his History, could announce his intention
of exaggerating everything that tended to the glory of the church and of
suppressing whatever might disgrace it. His Latin contemporary
Lactantius is worse, still; and so the darkling went on increasing until
before the end of the century the great library of Alexandria was
destroyed by Theophilus,[75] until Gregory the Great, two centuries
later, burnt the great library of Rome, proclaiming that “Ignorance is
the mother of devotion,” (which is true, just as oppression and
injustice is the mother of spirituality), until a sober description of
the state of the church would be a thing our not too nice newspapers
would treat as “unfit for publication.” All this movement is shown by
the application of the test given above to have been tychastic. Another
very much like it on a small scale, only a hundred times swifter, for
the study of which there are documents by the library-full, is to be
found in the history of the French Revolution.

Anancastic evolution advances by successive strides with pauses between.
The reason is that in this process a habit of thought having been
overthrown is supplanted by the next strongest. Now this next strongest
is sure to be widely disparate from the first, and as often as not is
its direct contrary. It reminds one of our old rule of making the second
candidate vice-president. This character, therefore, clearly
distinguishes anancasm from tychasm. The character which distinguishes
it from agapasm is its purposelessness. But external and internal
anancasm have to be examined separately. Development under the pressure
of external circumstances, or cataclysmine evolution, is in most cases
unmistakable enough. It has numberless degrees of intensity, from the
brute force, the plain war, which has more than once turned the current
of the world’s thought, down to the hard fact of evidence, or what has
been taken for it, which has been known to convince men by hordes. The
only hesitation than can subsist in the presence of such a history is a
quantitative one. Never are external influences the only ones which
affect the mind, and therefore it must be a matter of judgment for which
it would scarcely be worth while to attempt to set rules, whether a
given movement is to be regarded as principally governed from without or
not. In the rise of medieval thought, I mean scholasticism and the
synchronistic art developments, undoubtedly the crusades and the
discovery of the writings of Aristotle were powerful influences. The
development of scholasticism from Roscellin to Albertus Magnus closely
follows the successive steps in the knowledge of Aristotle. Prantl
thinks that that is the whole story, and few men have thumbed more books
than Carl Prantl. He has done good solid work, notwithstanding his
slap-dash judgments. But we shall never make so much as a good beginning
of comprehending scholasticism until the whole has been systematically
explored and digested by a company of students regularly organized and
held under rule for that purpose. But as for the period we are now
specially considering, that which synchronised the Romanesque
architecture, the literature is easily mastered. It does not quite
justify Prantl’s dicta as to the slavish dependence of these authors
upon their authorities. Moreover, they kept a definite purpose steadily
before their minds, throughout all their studies. I am, therefore,
unable to offer this period of scholasticism as an example of pure
external anancasm, which seems to be the fluorine of the intellectual
elements. Perhaps the recent Japanese reception of western ideas is the
purest instance of it in history. Yet in combination with other
elements, nothing is commoner. If the development of ideas under the
influence of the study of external facts be considered as external
anancasm,—it is on the border between the external and the internal
forms,—it is, of course, the principal thing in modern learning. But
Whewell, whose masterly comprehension of the history of science critics
have been too ignorant properly to appreciate, clearly shows that it is
far from being the overwhelmingly preponderant influence, even there.

Internal anancasm, or logical groping, which advances upon a predestined
line without being able to foresee whither it is to be carried nor to
steer its course, this is the rule of development of philosophy. Hegel
first made the world understand this; and he seeks to make logic not
merely the subjective guide and monitor of thought, which was all it had
been ambitioning before, but to be the very main-spring of thinking, and
not merely of individual thinking but of discussion, of the history of
the development of thought, of all history, of all development. This
involves a positive, clearly demonstrable error. Let the logic in
question be of whatever kind it may, a logic of necessary inference or a
logic of probable inference (the theory might perhaps be shaped to fit
either), in any case it supposes that logic is sufficient of itself to
determine what conclusion follows from given premises; for unless it
will do so much, it will not suffice to explain why an individual train
of reasoning should take just the course it does take, to say nothing of
other kinds of development. It thus supposes that from given premises,
only one conclusion can logically be drawn, and that there is no scope
at all for free choice. That from given premises only one conclusion can
logically be drawn, is one of the false notions which have come from
logicians’ confining their attention to that Nantucket of thought, the
logic of non-relative terms. In the logic of relatives, it does not hold
good.

One remark occurs to me. If the evolution of history is in considerable
part of the nature of internal anancasm, it resembles the development of
individual men; and just as 33 years is a rough but natural unit of time
for individuals, being the average age at which man has issue, so there
should be an approximate period at the end of which one great historical
movement ought to be likely to be supplanted by another. Let us see if
we can make out anything of the kind. Take the governmental development
of Rome as being sufficiently long and set down the principal dates.

                B.C.  753, Foundation of Rome.
                B.C.  510, Expulsion of the Tarquins.
                B.C.   27, Octavius assumes title Augustus.
                A.D.  476, End of Western Empire.
                A.D.  962, Holy Roman Empire.
                A.D. 1453, Fall of Constantinople.

The last event was one of the most significant in history, especially
for Italy. The intervals are 243, 483, 502, 486, 491 years. All are
rather curiously near equal, except the first which is half the others.
Successive reigns of kings would not commonly be so near equal. Let us
set down a few dates in the history of thought.

    B.C.  585, Eclipse of Thales. Beginning of Greek philosophy.
    A.D.   30, The crucifixion.
    A.D.  529, Closing of Athenian schools. End of Greek philosophy.
    A.D. 1125, (Approximate) Rise of the Universities of Bologna and
       Paris.
    A.D. 1543, Publication of the “De Revolutionibus” of Copernicus.
       Beginning of Modern Science.

The intervals are 615, 499, 596, 418, years. In the history of
metaphysics, we may take the following:

                       B.C.  322, Death of Aristotle.
                       A.D. 1274, Death of Aquinas.
                       A.D. 1804, Death of Kant.

The intervals are 1595 and 530 years. The former is about thrice the
latter.

From these figures, no conclusion can fairly be drawn. At the same time,
they suggest that perhaps there may be a rough natural era of about 500
years. Should there be any independent evidence of this, the intervals
noticed may gain some significance.

The agapastic development of thought should, if it exists, be
distinguished by its purposive character, this purpose being the
development of an idea. We should have a direct agapic or sympathetic
comprehension and recognition of it, by virtue of the continuity of
thought. I here take it for granted that such continuity of thought has
been sufficiently proved by the arguments used in my paper on the “Law
of Mind” in _The Monist_ of last July. Even if those arguments are not
quite convincing in themselves, yet if they are reënforced by an
apparent agapasm in the history of thought, the two propositions will
lend one another mutual aid. The reader will, I trust, be too well
grounded in logic to mistake such mutual support for a vicious circle in
reasoning. If it could be shown directly that there is such an entity as
the “spirit of an age” or of a people, and that mere individual
intelligence will not account for all the phenomena, this would be proof
enough at once of agapasticism and of synechism. I must acknowledge that
I am unable to produce a cogent demonstration of this; but I am, I
believe, able to adduce such arguments as will serve to confirm those
which have been drawn from other facts. I believe that all the greatest
achievements of mind have been beyond the powers of unaided individuals;
and I find, apart from the support this opinion receives from
synechistic considerations, and from the purposive character of many
great movements, direct reason for so thinking in the sublimity of the
ideas and in their occurring simultaneously and independently to a
number of individuals of no extraordinary general powers. The pointed
Gothic architecture in several of its developments appears to me to be
of such a character. All attempts to imitate it by modern architects of
the greatest learning and genius appear flat and tame, and are felt by
their authors to be so. Yet at the time the style was living, there was
quite an abundance of men capable of producing works of this kind of
gigantic sublimity and power. In more than one case, extant documents
show that the cathedral chapters, in the selection of architects,
treated high artistic genius as a secondary consideration, as if there
were no lack of persons able to supply that; and the results justify
their confidence. Were individuals in general, then, in those ages
possessed of such lofty natures and high intellect? Such an opinion
would break down under the first examination.

How many times have men now in middle life seen great discoveries made
independently and almost simultaneously! The first instance I remember
was the prediction of a planet exterior to Uranus by Leverrier and
Adams. One hardly knows to whom the principle of the conservation of
energy ought to be attributed, although it may reasonably be considered
as the greatest discovery science has ever made. The mechanical theory
of heat was set forth by Rankine and by Clausius during the same month
of February, 1850; and there are eminent men who attribute this great
step to Thomson.[76] The kinetical theory of gases, after being started
by John Bernoulli and long buried in oblivion, was reinvented and
applied to the explanation not merely of the laws of Boyle, Charles, and
Avogadro, but also of diffusion and viscosity, by at least three modern
physicists separately. It is well known that the doctrine of natural
selection was presented by Wallace and by Darwin at the same meeting of
the British Association; and Darwin in his “Historical Sketch” prefixed
to the later editions of his book shows that both were anticipated by
obscure forerunners. The method of spectrum analysis was claimed for
Swan as well as for Kirchhoff, and there were others who perhaps had
still better claims. The authorship of the Periodical Law of the
Chemical Elements is disputed between a Russian, a German, and an
Englishman; although there is no room for doubt that the principal merit
belongs to the first. These are nearly all the greatest discoveries of
our times. It is the same with the inventions. It may not be surprising
that the telegraph should have been independently made by several
inventors, because it was an easy corollary from scientific facts well
made out before. But it was not so with the telephone and other
inventions. Ether, the first anæsthetic, was introduced independently by
three different New England physicians. Now ether had been a common
article for a century. It had been in one of the pharmacopœias three
centuries before. It is quite incredible that its anæsthetic property
should not have been known; it was known. It had probably passed from
mouth to ear as a secret from the days of Basil Valentine; but for long
it had been a secret of the Punchinello kind. In New England, for many
years, boys had used it for amusement. Why then had it not been put to
its serious use? No reason can be given, except that the motive to do so
was not strong enough. The motives to doing so could only have been
desire for gain and philanthropy. About 1846, the date of the
introduction, philanthropy was undoubtedly in an unusually active
condition. That sensibility, or sentimentalism, which had been
introduced in the previous century, had undergone a ripening process, in
consequence of which, though now less intense than it had previously
been, it was more likely to influence unreflecting people than it had
ever been. All three of the ether-claimants had probably been influenced
by the desire for gain; but nevertheless they were certainly not
insensible to the agapic influences.

I doubt if any of the great discoveries ought, properly, to be
considered as altogether individual achievements; and I think many will
share this doubt. Yet, if not, what an argument for the continuity of
mind, and for agapasticism is here! I do not wish to be very strenuous.
If thinkers will only be persuaded to lay aside their prejudices and
apply themselves to studying the evidences of this doctrine, I shall be
fully content to await the final decision.

Footnote 72:

  _The Monist_, January, 1893.

Footnote 73:

  How can a writer have any respect for science, as such, who is capable
  of confounding with the scientific propositions of political economy,
  which have nothing to say concerning what is “beneficent,” such
  brummagem generalisations as this?

Footnote 74:

  I am happy to find that Dr. Carus, too, ranks Weismann among the
  opponents of Darwin, notwithstanding his flying that flag.

Footnote 75:

  See _Draper’s History of Intellectual Development_, chap. x.

Footnote 76:

  Thomson, himself, in his article _Heat_ in the _Encyclopedia
  Britannica_, never once mentions the name of Clausius.




                         _Supplementary Essay_
                        THE PRAGMATISM OF PEIRCE
                                   BY
                               JOHN DEWEY


The term pragmatism was introduced into literature in the opening
sentences of Professor James’s California Union address in 1898. The
sentences run as follows: “The principle of pragmatism, as we may call
it, may be expressed in a variety of ways, all of them very simple. In
the _Popular Science Monthly_ for January, 1878, Mr. Charles S. Peirce
introduces it as follows:” etc. The readers who have turned to the
volume referred to have not, however, found the word there. From other
sources we know that the name as well as the idea was furnished by Mr.
Peirce. The latter has told us that both the word and the idea were
suggested to him by a reading of Kant, the idea by the _Critique of Pure
Reason_, the term by the “Critique of Practical Reason.”[77] The article
in the _Monist_ gives such a good statement of both the idea and the
reason for selecting the term that it may be quoted _in extenso_. Peirce
sets out by saying that with men who work in laboratories, the habit of
mind is molded by experimental work much more than they are themselves
aware. “Whatever statement you may make to him, he [the experimentalist]
will either understand as meaning that if a given prescription for an
experiment ever can be and ever is carried out in act, an experience of
a given description will result, or else he will see no sense at all in
what you say.” Having himself the experimental mind and being interested
in methods of thinking, “he framed the theory that a _conception_, that
is, the rational purport of a word or other expression, lies exclusively
in its bearing upon the conduct of life; so that, since obviously
nothing that might not result from experiment can have any direct
bearing upon conduct, if one can define accurately all the conceivable
experimental phenomena which the affirmation or denial of a concept
could imply, one will have therein a complete definition of the concept,
and _there is absolutely nothing more in it_. For this doctrine, he
invented the name _pragmatism_.”

After saying that some of his friends wished him to call the doctrine
practicism or practicalism, he says that he had learned philosophy from
Kant, and that to one “who still thought in Kantian terms most readily,
_praktisch_ and _pragmatisch_ were as far apart as the two poles, the
former belonging to a region of thought where no mind of the
experimentalist type can ever make sure of solid ground under his feet,
the latter expressing relation to some definite human purpose. Now quite
the most striking feature of the new theory was its recognition of an
inseparable connection between rational cognition and human
purpose.”[78]

From this brief statement, it will be noted that Peirce confined the
significance of the term to the determination of the meaning of terms,
or better, propositions; the theory was not, of itself, a theory of the
test, or the truth, of propositions. Hence the title of his original
article: _How to Make Ideas Clear_. In his later writing, after the term
had been used as a theory of truth,—he proposed the more limited
“pragmaticism” to designate his original specific meaning.[79] But even
with respect to the meaning of propositions, there is a marked
difference between his pragmaticism and the pragmatism of, say, James.
Some of the critics (especially continental) of the latter would have
saved themselves some futile beating of the air, if they had reacted to
James’s statements instead of to their own associations with the word
“pragmatic.” Thus James says in his California address: “The effective
meaning of any philosophic proposition can always be brought down to
some particular consequence, in our future practical experience, whether
active or passive; the point lying rather in the fact that the
experience must be _particular_, than in the fact that it must be
_active_.” (Italics mine.)

Now the curious fact is that Peirce puts more emphasis upon practise (or
conduct) and less upon the particular; in fact, he transfers the
emphasis to the general. The following passage is worth quotation
because of the definiteness with which it identifies meaning with both
the future and with the general. “The rational meaning of every
proposition lies in the future. How so? The meaning of a proposition is
itself a proposition. Indeed, it is no other than the very proposition
of which it is the meaning: it is a translation of it. But of the
myriads of forms into which a proposition may be translated, which is
that one which is to be called its very meaning? It is, according to the
pragmaticist, that form in which the proposition becomes applicable to
human conduct, not in these or those special circumstances nor when one
entertains this or that special design, but that form which is most
applicable to self-control under every situation and to every purpose.”
Hence, “it must be simply the general description of all the
experimental phenomena which the assertion of the proposition virtually
predicts.” Or, paraphrasing, pragmatism identifies meaning with
formation of a habit, or way of acting having the greatest generality
possible, or the widest range of application to particulars. Since
habits or ways of acting are just as real as particulars, it is
committed to a belief in the reality of “universals.” Hence it is not a
doctrine of phenomenalism, for while the richness of phenomena lies in
their sensuous quality, pragmatism does not intend to define these
(leaving them, as it were, to speak for themselves), but “eliminates
their sential element, and endeavors to define the rational purport, and
this it finds in the purposive bearing of the word or proposition in
question.” Moreover, not only are generals real, but they are physically
efficient. The meanings “the air is stuffy” and “stuffy air is
unwholesome” may determine, for example, the opening of the window.
Accordingly on the ethical side, “the pragmaticist does not make the
_summum bonum_ to consist in action, but makes it to consist in that
process of evolution whereby the existent comes more and more to embody
those generals...; in other words, becomes, through action an embodiment
of rational purports or habits generalized as widely as possible.”[80]

The passages quoted should be compared with what Peirce has to say in
the Baldwin Dictionary article. There he says that James’s doctrine
seems to commit us to the belief “that the end of man is action—a
stoical maxim which does not commend itself as forcibly to the present
writer at the age of sixty as it did at thirty. If it be admitted, on
the contrary, that action wants an end, and that the end must be
something of a general description, then the spirit of the maxim itself
... would direct us toward something different from practical facts,
namely, to general ideas.... The only ultimate good which the practical
facts to which the maxim directs attention can subserve is to further
the development of concrete reasonableness.... Almost everybody will now
agree that the ultimate good lies in the evolutionary process in some
way. If so, it is not in individual reactions in their segregation, but
in something general or continuous. Synechism is founded on the notion
that the coalescence, the becoming continuous, the becoming governed by
laws, the becoming instinct with general ideas, are but phases of one
and the same process of the growth of reasonableness. This is first
shown to be true with mathematical exactitude in the field of logic, and
is thence inferred to hold good metaphysically. It is not opposed to
pragmaticism ... but includes that procedure as a step.”

Here again we have the doctrine of pragmaticism as a doctrine that
meaning or rational purport resides in the setting up of habits or
generalized methods, a doctrine passing over into the metaphysics of
synechism. It will be well now to recur explicitly to Peirce’s earlier
doctrine which he seems to qualify—although, as he notes, he upheld the
doctrine of the reality of generals even at the earlier period. Peirce
sets out, in his article on the “Fixation of Belief,” with the empirical
difference of doubt and belief expressed in the facts that belief
determines a habit while doubt does not, and that belief is calm and
satisfactory while doubt is an uneasy and dissatisfied state from which
we struggle to emerge; to attain, that is, a state of belief, a struggle
which may be called inquiry. The sole object of inquiry is the fixation
of belief. The scientific method of fixation has, however, certain
rivals: one is that of “tenacity”—constant reiteration, dwelling upon
everything conducive to the belief, avoidance of everything which might
unsettle it—the will to believe. The method breaks down in practice
because of man’s social nature; we have to take account of contrary
beliefs in others, so that the real problem is to fix the belief of the
community; for otherwise our own belief is precariously exposed to
attack and doubt. Hence the resort to the method of authority. This
method breaks down in time by the fact that authority can not fix all
beliefs in all their details, and because of the conflict which arises
between organized traditions. There may then be recourse to what is
“agreeable to reason”—a method potent in formation of taste and in
esthetic productions and in the history of philosophy,—but a method
which again fails to secure permanent agreements in society, and so
leaves individual belief at the mercy of attack. Hence, finally,
recourse to science, whose fundamental hypothesis is this: “There are
real things, whose characters are entirely independent of our opinions
about them; those realities affect our senses according to regular laws,
and ... by taking advantage of the laws of perception, we can ascertain
by _reasoning_ how things really are, and any man if he have sufficient
experience and reason enough about it, will be led to the one true
conclusion.”[81]

It will be noted that the quotation employs the terms “reality” and
“truth,” while it makes them a part of the statement of the _hypothesis_
entertained in scientific procedure. Upon such a basis, what meanings
attach to the terms “reality” and “truth”? Since they are general terms,
their meanings must be determined on the basis of the effects, having
practical bearings, which the object of our conception has. Now the
effect which real things have is to cause beliefs; beliefs are then the
consequences which give the general term reality a “rational purport.”
And on the assumption of the scientific method, the _distinguishing_
character of the _real_ object must be that it tends to produce a single
universally accepted belief. “All the followers of science are fully
persuaded that the processes of investigation, if only pushed far
enough, will give one certain solution to every question to which they
can be applied.” “This activity of thought by which we are carried, not
where we wish, but to a foreordained goal, is like the operation of
destiny.... This great law is embodied in the conception of truth and
reality. The opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all
_who investigate_, is what we mean by the truth, and the object
represented in this opinion is the real.”[82] In a subsequent essay (on
the “Probability of Induction”) Peirce expressly draws the conclusion
which follows from this statement; viz., that this conception of truth
and reality makes everything depend upon the character of the methods of
inquiry and inference by which conclusions are reached. “In the case of
synthetic inferences we know only the degree of trustworthiness of our
proceeding. As all knowledge comes from synthetic inference, we must
also infer that all human certainty consists merely in our knowing that
the processes by which our knowledge has been derived are such as must
generally have led to true conclusions”[83]—true conclusions, once more,
being those which command the agreement of competent inquiries.

Summing up, we may say that Peirce’s pragmaticism is a doctrine
concerning the meaning, conception, or rational purport of objects,
namely, that these consist in the “effects, which might conceivably have
practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have.
Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of
the object.”[84] “Our idea of anything is our idea of its sensible
effects,” and if we have any doubt as to whether we really believe the
effects to be sensible or no, we have only to ask ourselves whether or
no we should act any differently in their presence. In short, our own
responses to sensory stimuli are the ultimate, or testing, ingredients
in our conception of an object. In the literal sense of the word
pragmatist, therefore, Peirce is more of a pragmatist than James.

He is also less of a nominalist. That is to say, he emphasizes much less
the _particular_ sensible consequence, and much more the habit, the
generic attitude of response, set up in consequence of experiences with
a thing. In the passage in the Dictionary already quoted he speaks as if
in his later life he attached less importance to action, and more to
“concrete reasonableness” than in his earlier writing. It may well be
that the relative emphasis had shifted. But there is at most but a
difference of emphasis. For in his later doctrine, concrete rationality
means a change in existence brought about _through_ action, and through
action which embodies conceptions whose own specific existence consists
in habitual attitudes of response. In his earlier writing, the emphasis
upon habits, as something generic, is explicit. “What a thing means is
simply what habits it involves.”[85] More elaborately, “Induction infers
a rule. Now the belief of a rule is a habit. That a habit is a rule,
active in us, is evident. That every belief is of the nature of a habit,
in so far as it is of a general character, has been shown in the earlier
papers of this series.”[86]

The difference between Peirce and James which next strikes us is the
greater emphasis placed by the former upon the method of procedure. As
the quotations already made show, everything ultimately turned, for
Peirce, upon the trustworthiness of the procedures of inquiry. Hence his
high estimate of logic, as compared with James—at least James in his
later days. Hence also his definite rejection of the appeal to the Will
to Believe—under the form of what he calls the method of tenacity.
Closely associated with this is the fact that Peirce has a more explicit
dependence upon the social factor than has James. The appeal in Peirce
is essentially to the consensus of those who have investigated, using
methods which are capable of employment by all. It is the need for
social agreement, and the fact that in its absence “the method of
tenacity” will be exposed to disintegration from without, which finally
forces upon mankind the wider and wider utilization of the scientific
method.

Finally, both Peirce and James are realists. The reasonings of both
depend upon the assumption of real things which really have effects or
consequences. Of the two, Peirce makes clearer the fact that in
philosophy at least we are dealing with the _conception_ of reality,
with reality as a term having rational purport, and hence with something
whose meaning is itself to be determined in terms of consequences. That
“reality” means the object of those beliefs which have, after prolonged
and coöperative inquiry, becomes stable, and “truth” the quality of
these beliefs is a logical consequence of this position. Thus while “we
may define the real as that whose characters are independent of what
anybody may think them to be ... it would be a great mistake to suppose
that this definition makes the idea of reality perfectly clear.”[87] For
it is only the outcome of persistent and conjoint inquiry which enables
us to give intelligible meaning in the concrete to the expression
“characters independent of what anybody may think them to be.” (This is
the pragmatic way out of the egocentric predicament.) And while my
purpose is wholly expository I can not close without inquiring whether
recourse to Peirce would not have a most beneficial influence in
contemporary discussion. Do not a large part of our epistemological
difficulties arise from an attempt to define the “real” as something
given prior to reflective inquiry instead of as that which reflective
inquiry is forced to reach and to which when it is reached belief can
stably cling?

Footnote 77:

  See article on “Pragmatism,” in _Baldwin’s Dictionary_, Vol. 2., p.
  322, and the _Monist_, Vol. 15, p. 162.

Footnote 78:

  Kant discriminates the laws of morality, which are _a priori_, from
  rules of skill, having to do with technique or art, and counsels of
  prudence, having to do with welfare. The latter he calls pragmatic;
  the _a priori_ laws practical. See _Metaphysics of Morals_, Abbott’s
  trans., pp. 33 and 34.

Footnote 79:

  See the article in the _Monist_ already mentioned, and another one in
  the same volume, p. 481, “The Issues of Pragmaticism.”

Footnote 80:

  It is probably fair to see here an empirical rendering of the Kantian
  generality of moral action, while the distinction and connection of
  “rational purport” and “sensible particular” have also obvious Kantian
  associations.

Footnote 81:

  P. 26.

Footnote 82:

  P. 56-57.

Footnote 83:

  P. 105.

Footnote 84:

  P. 45.

Footnote 85:

  P. 43.

Footnote 86:

  P. 151.

Footnote 87:

  P. 53.




              BIBLIOGRAPHY OF PEIRCE’S PUBLISHED WRITINGS


I. Writings of General Interest.[88]

    _A._ Three papers in the _Journal of Speculative Philosophy_, Vol. 2
    (1868).

    1. “Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man,” pp.
    103-114.

    2. “Some Consequences of Four Incapacities,” pp. 140-157.

    3. “Ground of Validity of the Laws of Logic,” pp. 193-208.

These three papers, somewhat loosely connected, deal mainly with the
philosophy of discursive thought. The first deals with our power of
intuition, and holds that “every thought is a sign.” The second, one of
the most remarkable of Peirce’s writings, contains an acute criticism of
the Cartesian tradition and a noteworthy argument against the
traditional emphasis on “images” in thinking. The third contains, _inter
alia_, a refutation of Mill’s indictment of the syllogism. The same
volume of the _Journal_ contains two unsigned communications on
Nominalism and on the Meaning of Determined.

    _B._ Review of Fraser’s “Berkeley,” in the _North American Review_,
    Vol. 113 (1871), pp. 449-472.

This paper contains an important analysis on medieval realism, and of
Berkeley’s nominalism. (A Scotist realism continues to distinguish
Peirce’s work after this.)

    _C._ “Illustrations of the Logic of Science,” in _Popular Science
    Monthly_, Vols. 12-13 (1877-1878). Reprinted in Pt. I of this
    volume. The first and second papers were also published in the
    _Revue Philosophique_, Vols. 6-7 (1879).

    _D._ Ten papers in the _Monist_, Vols. 1-3 (1891-1893), and 15-16
    (1905-1906). The first five are reprinted in Pt. II of this volume.

The sixth paper, “Reply to the Necessitarians,” Vol. 3, pp. 526-570, is
an answer to the criticism of the foregoing by the editor of the
_Monist_, Vol. 2, pp. 560ff.; cf. Vol. 3, pp. 68ff. and 571ff., and
McCrie, “The Issues of Synechism,” Vol. 3, pp. 380ff.

    7. “What Pragmatism Is?” Vol. 15, pp. 161-181.

    8. “The Issues of Pragmaticism,” Vol. 15, pp. 481-499.

    9. “Mr. Peterson’s Proposed Discussion,” Vol. 16, pp. 147ff.

    10. “Prolegomena to an Apology for Pragmaticism,” Vol. 16, pp.
    492-546.

The last four papers develop Peirce’s thought by showing its agreement
and disagreement with the pragmatism of James and Schiller. The last
paper contains his Method of Existential Graphs.

    _E._ “The Reality of God,” in the _Hibbert Journal_, Vol. 7 (1908),
    pp. 96-112. (This article contains brief indications of many of
    Peirce’s leading ideas.)

    _F._ Six Papers in the _Open Court_, Vols. 6-7 (1893).

    1. “Pythagorics” (on the Pythagorean brotherhood), pp. 3375-3377.

    2. “Dmesis” (on charity towards criminals), pp. 3399-3402.

    3. “The Critic of Arguments (I.), Exact Thinking,” pp. 3391-3394.

    4. “The Critic of Arguments (II.), The Reader is Introduced to
    Relatives,” pp. 3415-3419. (The last two contain a very clear
    succinct account of the general character of Peirce’s logic.)

    5. “What is Christian Faith?” pp. 3743-3745.

    6. “The Marriage of Religion and Science,” pp. 3559-3560.

    _G._ Articles in Baldwin’s “Dictionary of Philosophy”: Individual,
    kind, matter and form, possibility, pragmatism, priority, reasoning,
    sign, scientific method, sufficient reason, synechism, and
    uniformity.

    _H._ “Pearson’s Grammar of Science,” in _Popular Science Monthly_,
    Vol. 58 (1901), pp. 296-306. (A critique of Pearson’s conceptualism
    and of his utilitarian view as to the aim of science.)

II. Writings of Predominantly Logical Interest.

    _A._ Five Papers on Logic, read before the American Academy of Arts
    and Sciences. Published in the _Proceedings of the Academy_, Vol. 7
    (1867).

    1. “On an Improvement in Boole’s Calculus of Logic,” pp. 250-261.
    (Suggests improvements in Boole’s logic, especially in the
    representation of particular propositions. The association of
    probability with the notion of relative frequency became a leading
    idea of Peirce’s thought.)

    2. “On the Natural Classification of Arguments,” pp. 261-287. (A
    suggestive distinction between the leading principle and the premise
    of an argument. Contains also an interesting note (pp. 283-284)
    denying the positivistic maxim that, “no hypothesis is admissible
    which is not capable of verification by direct observation.”)

    3. “On a New List of Categories,” pp. 287-298. The categories are:
    Being, Quality (Reference to a Ground), Relation (Reference to a
    Correlate), Representation (Reference to an Interpretant),
    Substance. “Logic has for its subject-genus all symbols and not
    merely concepts.” Symbols include terms, propositions, and
    arguments.

    4. “Upon the Logic of Mathematics,” pp. 402-412. “There are certain
    general propositions from which the truths of mathematics follow
    syllogistically.”

    5. “Upon Logical Comprehension and Extension,” pp. 416-432.
    (Interesting historical references to the use of these terms and an
    attack on the supposed rule as to their inverse proportionality.)

    _B._ “Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relations,” in
    _Memoires of the American Academy_, Vol. 9 (1870), pp. 317-378.
    (Shows the relation of inclusion between classes to be more
    fundamental than Boole’s use of equality. Extends the Booleian
    calculus to DeMorgan’s logic of relative terms.)

    _C._ “On the Algebra of Logic,” _American Journal of Mathematics_,
    Vol. 3 (1880), pp. 15-57. (Referred to by Schroeder as Peirce’s
    _Hauptwerk_ in “Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik,” Vol. 1., p.
    107.)

    _D._ “On the Logic of Number,” _American Journal of Mathematics_,
    Vol. 4 (1881), pp. 85-95.

    _E._ “Brief Description of the Algebra of Relatives,” Reprinted from
    ??, pp. 1-6.

    _F._ “On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of
    Notation,” _American Journal of Mathematics_, Vol. 7 (1884), pp.
    180-202.

    _G._ “A Theory of Probable Inference” and notes “On a Limited
    Universe of Marks” and on the “Logic of Relatives” in “Studies in
    Logic by members of the Johns Hopkins University,” Boston, 1883, pp.
    126-203.

    _H._ “The Regenerated Logic,” _Monist_, Vol. 7, pp. 19-40.

    “The Logic of Relatives,” _Monist_, Vol. 7, pp. 161-217. (An
    elaborate development of his own logic of relatives, by way of
    review of Schroeder’s book.)

    _I._ Miscellaneous Notes, etc.

    1. Review of Venn’s “Logic of Chance,” _North American Review_,
    July, 1867.

    2. “On the Application of Logical Analysis to Multiple Algebra,”
    _Proceedings of the American Academy_, Vol. 10 (1875), pp. 392-394.

    3. “Note on Grassman’s ‘Calculus of Extension,’” _Proceedings of the
    American Academy_, Vol. 13 (1878), pp. 115-116.

    4. “Note on Conversion,” _Mind_, Vol. 1, p. 424.

    5. Notes and Additions to Benjamin Peirce’s “Linear Associative
    Algebra,” _American Journal of Mathematics_, Vol. 4 (1881), pp.
    92ff., especially pp. 221-229.

    6. “Logical Machines,” _American Journal of Psychology_, Vol. 1
    (1888).

    7. “Infinitesimals,” _Science_, Vol. 11 (1900), p. 430.

    8. “Some Amazing Mazes,” _Monist_, Vol. 18 (April and July, 1908),
    and Vol. 19 (Jan., 1909).

    9. “On Non-Aristotelian Logic” (Letter), _Monist_, Vol. 20.

    _J._ A Syllabus of Certain Topics of Logic. 1903. Boston. Alfred
    Mudge & Son (a four page brochure).

    _K._ Articles in Baldwin’s “Dictionary of Philosophy” on: laws of
    thought, leading principle, logic (exact and symbolic), modality,
    negation, predicate and predication, probable inference, quality,
    quantity, relatives, significant, simple, subject, syllogism,
    theory, truth and falsity universal, universe, validity,
    verification, whole and parts.

III. Researches in the Theory and Methods of Measurement.

    _A._ General and Astronomic.

    1. “On the Theory of Errors of Observation,” _Report of the
    Superintendent of the U. S. Coast Survey_ for 1870, pp. 220-224.

    2. “Note on the Theory of Economy of Research,” _Report of the U. S.
    Coast Survey_ for 1876, pp. 197-201. (This paper deals with the
    relation between the utility and the cost of diminishing the
    probable error.)

    3. “Apparatus for Recording a Mean of Observed Times,” _U. S. Coast
    Survey_, 1877. Appendix No. 15 to _Report_ of 1875.

    4. “Ferrero’s Metodo dei Minimi Quadrati,” _American Journal of
    Mathematics_, Vol. 1 (1878), pp. 55-63.

    5. “Photometric Researches,” _Annals of the Astronomical Observatory
    of Harvard College_, Vol. 9 (1878), pp. 1-181.

    6. “Methods and Results. Measurement of Gravity.” Washington. 1879.

    7. “Methods and Results. A Catalogue of Stars for Observations of
    Latitude.” Washington. 1879.

    8. “On the Ghosts in Rutherford’s ‘Diffraction Spectra,’” _American
    Journal of Mathematics_, Vol. 2 (1879), pp. 330-347.

    9. “Note on a Comparison of a Wave-Length with a Meter,” _American
    Journal of Science_, Vol. 18 (1879), p. 51.

    10. “A Quincuncial Projection of the Sphere,” _American Journal of
    Mathematics_, Vol. 2 (1879), pp. 394, 396.

    11. “Numerical Measure of Success of Predictions,” _Science_, Vol. 4
    (1884), p. 453.

    12. “Proceedings Assay Commission” Washington, 1888. (Joint Reports
    on Weighing.)

    _B._ Geodetic Researches. The Pendulum.

    1. “Measurement of Gravity at Initial Stations in America and
    Europe,” _Report of the U. S. Coast Survey_, 1876, pp. 202-237 and
    410-416.

    2. “De l’influence de la flexibilité du trépied sur l’oscillation du
    pendule a réversion,” Conférence Geodesique Internationale (1877)
    Comptes Rendus, Berlin, 1878, pp. 171-187. (This paper was
    introduced by Plantamour and was followed by the notes of Appolzer.)

    3. “On the Influence of Internal Friction upon the Correction of the
    Length of the Second’s Pendulum,” _Proceedings of the American
    Academy_, Vol. 13 (1878), pp. 396-401.

    4. “On a Method of Swinging Pendulums for the Determination of
    Gravity proposed by M. Faye,” _American Journal of Science_, Vol. 18
    (1879), pp. 112-119.

    5. “Results of Pendulum Experiments,” _American Journal of Science_,
    Vol. 20 (1880).

    6. “Flexure of Pendulum Supports,” _Report of the U. S. Coast
    Survey_, 1881, pp. 359-441.

    7. “On the Deduction of the Ellipticity of the Earth from the
    Pendulum Experiment,” _Report of the U. S. Coast Survey_, 1881, pp.
    442-456.

    8. “Determinations of Gravity at Stations in Pennsylvania,” _Report
    of U. S. Coast Survey_, 1883, Appendix 19 and pp. 473-486.

    9. “On the Use of the Noddy,” _Report of the U. S. Coast Survey_,
    1884, pp. 475-482.

    10. “Effect of the Flexure of a Pendulum upon the Period of
    Oscillation,” _Report of the U. S. Coast Survey_, 1884, pp. 483-485.

    11. “On the Influence of a Noddy, and of Unequal Temperature upon
    the Periods of a Pendulum,” _Report of the U. S. Coast and Geodetic
    Survey_ for 1885, pp. 509-512.

    _C._ Psychologic. “On Small Differences in Sensation” (in
    cooperation with J. Jastrow), _National Academy of Sciences_, Vol. 3
    (1884), pp. 1-11.

IV. Philologic.

    “Shakespearian Pronunciation” (in coöperation with J. B. Noyes),
    _North American Review_, Vol. 98 (April, 1864), pp. 342-369.

V. Contributions to the _Nation_.

    Lazelle, Capt. H. M., One Law in Nature. _Nation_, Vol. 17, No. 419.

    Newcomb, S., Popular Astronomy. Vol. 27, No. 683.

    Read, C., Theory of Logic, 1878. Vol. 28, No. 718.

    Rood, O. N., Modern Chromatics, 1879. Vol. 29, No. 746.

    Note on the _American Journal of Mathematics_. Vol. 29, No. 756.

    Jevons, W. S., Studies in Deductive Logic, 1880. Vol. 32, No. 822.

    Ribot, Th., The Psychology of Attention, 1890. Vol. 50, No. 1303.

    James, W., The Principles of Psychology, 1890. Vol. 53, Nos. 1357
    and 1358.

    Comte, A. (F. Harrison, editor), The New Calendar of Great Men,
    1892. Vol. 54, No. 1386.

    Lobatchewsky, N. (Translator: G. B. Halsted), Geometrical Researches
    on the Theory of Parallels, 1891. Vol. 54, No. 1389.

    Lombroso, C., The Man of Genius, 1891. Vol. 54, No. 1391.

    Note on William James’ abridgment of his Psychology, 1892. Vol. 54,
    No. 1394.

    McClelland, W. J., A Treatise on the Geometry of the Circle, 1891.
    Vol. 54, No. 1395.

    Buckley, Arabella B., Moral Teachings of Science, 1892. Vol. 54, No.
    1405.

    Hale, E. E., A New England Boyhood, 1893. Vol. 57, No. 1468.

    Mach, E. (Translator: T. J. McCormack), The Science of Mechanics,
    1893. Vol. 57, No. 1475.

    Ritchie, D. G., Darwin and Hegel, 1893. Vol. 57, No. 1482.

    Huxley, T. H., Method and Results, 1893. Vol. 58, No. 1489.

    Scott, Sir Walter, Familiar Letters of Sir Walter Scott. Vol. 58,
    No. 1493.

    Gilbert, W. (Translator: P. F. Mottelay), Magnetic Bodies. Vol. 58,
    No. 1494 and No. 1495.

    Forsyth, A. R., Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable, 1893; and
    Harkness, J., A Treatise on the Theory of Functions, 1893; and
    Picard, E., Traité d’analyse, 1893. Vol. 58, No. 1498.

    A Short Sketch of Helmholtz, Sept. 13, 1894. Vol. 59, No. 1524.

    Windelband, W. (Translator: J. H. Tufts), A History of Philosophy;
    and Falkenberg, R. (Translator: A. C. Armstrong), History of Modern
    Philosophy; and Bascom, J., An Historical Interpretation of
    Philosophy; and Burt, B. C., A History of Modern Philosophy. Vol.
    59, Nos. 1526 and 1527.

    Spinoza (Translators: W. H. White and Amelia H. Stirling), Ethics,
    1894. Vol. 59, No. 1532.

    Watson, J., Comte, Mill, and Spencer, 1895. Vol. 60, No. 1554.

    Jones, H., A Critical Account of the Philosophy of Lotze, 1895; and
    Eberhard, V., Die Grundbegriffe der ebenen Geometrie, 1895; and
    Klein, F. (Translator: A. Ziwet), Riemann and his Significance for
    the Development of Modern Mathematics, 1895; and Davis, N. K.,
    Elements of Inductive Logic, 1895. Vol. 61, No. 1566.

    Benjamin, P., The Intellectual Rise in Electricity, 1895. Vol. 62,
    No. 1592.

    Baldwin, J. M., The Story of the Mind, 1898. Vol. 67, No. 1737.

    Darwin, G. H., The Tides and Kindred Phenomena in the Solar System,
    1898. Vol. 67, No. 1747.

    Marshall, H. R., Instinct and Reason, 1898. Vol. 68, No. 1774.

    Britten, F. J., Old Clocks and Watches and their Makers, 1899. Vol.
    69, No. 1778.

    Renouvier, Ch., et Prat, L. La Nouvelle Monadologie, 1899. Vol. 69,
    No. 1779.

    Mackintosh, R., From Comte to Benjamin Kidd, 1899; and Moore, J. H.,
    Better-World Philosophy, 1899. Vol. 69, No. 1784.

    Ford, P. L., The Many-sided Franklin, 1899. Vol. 69, No. 1793.

    Avenel, G. d’, Le Mécanisme de la vie moderne, 1900. Vol. 70, No.
    1805.

    Reid, W., Memoirs and Correspondence of Lyon Playfair, 1899. Vol.
    70, No. 1806.

    Stevenson, F. S., Robert Grosseteste, 1899. Vol. 70, No. 1816.

    Thilly, F., Introduction to Ethics, 1900. Vol. 70, No. 1825.

    Wallace, A. R., Studies, Scientific and Social, 1900. Vol. 72, No.
    1854.

    Sime, J., William Herschel and His Work, 1900. Vol. 72, No. 1856.

    Rand, B. (Editor), The Life, Unpublished Letters, and Philosophical
    Regimen of Anthony, Earl of Shaftesbury, 1900; and Robertson, J. M.
    (Editor), Characteristics of Men, _etc._, by Shaftesbury, 1900. Vol.
    72, No. 1857.

    Bacon, Rev. J. M., By Land and Sea, 1901. Vol. 72, No. 1865.

    Jordan, W. L., Essays in Illustration of the Action of Astral
    Gravitation in Natural Phenomena, 1900. Vol. 72, No. 1876.

    Goblot, E., Le Vocabulaire Philosophique, 1901. Vol. 72, No. 1877.

    Fraser, A. C. (Editor), The Works of George Berkeley, 1901. Vol. 73,
    No. 1883.

    Frazer, P., Bibliotics, 1901. Vol. 73, No. 1883.

    Caldecott, A., The Philosophy of Religion in England and America,
    1901. Vol. 73, No. 1885.

    Review of four physical books. Vol. 73, No. 1887.

    Maher, M., Psychology: Empirical and Rational, 1901. Vol. 73, No.
    1892.

    Mezes, S. E., Ethics, 1901. Vol. 73, No. 1895.

    Report of the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences,
    Philadelphia, 1901. Vol. 73, No. 1899.

    Crozier, J. B., History of Intellectual Developments on the Lines of
    Modern Evolution. Vol. III., 1901, Vol. 74, No. 1908.

    Richardson, E. C., Classification, Theoretical and Practical, 1901.
    Vol. 74, No. 1913.

    Vallery-Radot, R. (Translator: Mrs. R. L. Devonshire), The Life of
    Pasteur. Vol. 74, No. 1914.

    Giddings, F. H., Inductive Sociology, 1902. Vol. 74, No. 1918.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences,
    Washington, D. C., 1902. Vol. 74, No. 1921.

    Emerson, E. R., The Story of the Vine, 1902. Vol. 74, No. 1926.

    Joachim, H. H., A Study of the Ethics of Spinoza, 1901. Vol. 75, No.
    1932.

    Review of four chemistry text-books, 1902. Vol. 75, No. 1934.

    Royce, J., The World and the Individual, Vol. II., 1901. Vol. 75,
    No. 1935. (For a review of Vol. I., probably by Peirce, see 1900,
    Vol. 70, No. 1814.)

    Thorpe, T. E., Essays in Historical Chemistry, 1902. Vol. 75, No.
    1938.

    Paulsen, F., Immanuel Kant: His Life and Doctrine, 1902. Vol. 75,
    No. 1941.

    Aikens, H. A., The Principles of Logic, 1902. Vol. 75, No. 1942.

    Drude, P., The Theory of Optics, 1902. Vol. 75, No. 1944.

    Valentine, E. S., Travels in Space, 1902; and Walker, F., Aerial
    Navigation, 1902. Vol. 75, No. 1947.

    Baillie, J. B., The Origin and Significance of Hegel’s Logic, 1901.
    Vol. 75, No. 1950.

    Forsyth, A. R., Theory of Differential Equations, Vol. IV., 1902.
    Vol. 75, No. 1952.

    Ellwanger, G. W., The Pleasures of the Table, 1902. Vol. 75, No.
    1955.

    Earle, Alice M., Sundials and Roses of Yesterday, 1902. Vol. 75, No.
    1956.

    Smith, Rev. T., Euclid: His Life and System, 1902. Vol. 76, No.
    1961.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences,
    Washington, D. C., 1903. Vol. 76, No. 1974.

    Hibben, J. G., Hegel’s Logic, 1902. Vol. 76, No. 1977.

    Mellor, J. W., Higher Mathematics for Students of Chemistry and
    Physics, 1903. Vol. 76, No. 1977.

    Sturt, H. C. (Editor), Personal Idealism, 1902. Vol. 76, No. 1979.

    Baldwin, J. M., Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology, Vol. II.,
    1902. Vol. 76, No. 1980.

    Note on Kant’s Prolegomene edited in English by Dr. P. Carus, 1903.
    Vol. 76, No. 1981.

    Smith, N., Studies in the Cartesian Philosophy, 1902. Vol. 77, No.
    1985.

    Hinds, J. I. D., Inorganic Chemistry, 1902. Vol. 77, No. 1986.

    Clerke, Agnes M., Problems in Astrophysics, 1903. Vol. 77, No. 1987.

    Michelson, A. A., Light Waves and their Uses, 1903; and Fleming, J.
    A., Waves and Ripples in Water, 1902. Vol. 77, No. 1989.

    Note on Sir Norman Lockyer. Vol. 77, No. 1794.

    Note on British and American Science, 1903. Vol. 77, No. 1996.

    Welby, Lady Victoria, What is Meaning? 1903; and Russell, B., The
    Principles of Mathematics, 1903. Vol. 77, No. 1998.

    Note on the Practical Application of the Theory of Functions, 1903.
    Vol. 77, No. 1999.

    Fahie, J. J., Galileo. Vol. 78, No. 2015.

    Halsey, F. A., The Metric Fallacy, and Dale, S. S., The Metric
    Failure in the Textile Industry. Vol. 78, No. 2020.

    Newcomb, S., The Reminiscences of an Astronomer, 1903. Vol. 78, No.
    2021.

    Boole, Mrs. M. E., Lectures on the Logic of Arithmetic, 1903; and
    Bowden, J., Elements of the Theory of Integers, 1903. Vol. 78, No.
    2024.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences,
    Washington, D. C., 1904. Vol. 78, No. 2026.

    Lévy-Bruhl, L. (Translator: Kathleen de Beaumont-Klein), The
    Philosophy of Auguste Comte, 1903. Vol. 78, No. 2026.

    Turner, W., History of Philosophy, 1903. Vol. 79, No. 2036.

    Duff, R. A., Spinoza’s Political and Ethical Philosophy. Vol. 79,
    No. 2038.

    Allbutt, T. C., Notes on the Composition of Scientific Papers, 1904.
    Vol. 79, No. 2039.

    Sylvester, J. J., The Collected Mathematical Papers of, Vol. I. Vol.
    79, No. 2045.

    Renouvier, Ch., Les Derniers Entretiens, 1904, and Dewey, J.,
    Studies in Logical Theory, 1903. Vol. 79, No. 2046.

    Royce, J., Outlines of Psychology. Vol. 79, No. 2048.

    Straton, G. M., Experimental Psychology and its Bearing upon
    Culture. Vol. 79, No. 2055.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences, New York,
    1904. Vol. 79, No. 2057.

    Boole, Mrs. M. E., The Preparation of the Child for Science, 1904.
    Vol. 80, No. 2062.

    Royce, J., Herbert Spencer, 1904. Vol. 80, No. 2065.

    Strutt, R. J., The Becquerel Rays and the Properties of Radium,
    1904. Vol. 80, No. 2066.

    Schuster, A., An Introduction to the Theory of Optics, 1904. Vol.
    80, No. 2071.

    Findlay, A., The Phase Rule and its Application, 1904. Vol. 80, No.
    2074.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences,
    Washington, D. C., 1905. Vol. 80, No. 2078.

    Flint, R., Philosophy as Scientia Scientiarum, 1904; and Peirce, C.
    S., A Syllabus of Certain Topics of Logic, 1903. Vol. 80, No. 2079.

    Arnold, R. B., Scientific Fact and Metaphysical Reality, 1904, also
    a Note on Mendeleeff’s Principles of Chemistry. Vol. 80, No. 2083.

    Note on Ida Freund’s The Study of Chemical Composition. Vol. 80, No.
    2086.

    Carnegie, A., James Watt, 1905. Vol. 80, No. 2087.

    Ross, E. A., Foundations of Sociology, 1905, and Sociological
    Papers, 1905, published by the Sociological Society. Vol. 81, No.
    2089.

    Wundt, W. (Translator: E. B. Titchener), Principles of Physiological
    Psychology, 1904. Vol. 81, No. 2090.

    Roscoe, H. E., A Treatise on Chemistry, Vol. I., 1905, and de
    Fleury, M., Nos Enfants au Collège, 1905. Vol. 81, No. 2097.

    Varigny, H. de, La Nature et la Vie, 1905. Vol. 81, No. 2101.

    Note on Mr. G. W. Hill’s Moon Theory. Vol. 81, 2103.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences, New
    Haven, 1905. Vol. 81, No. 2108.

    Gosse, E., Sir Thomas Browne, 1905. Vol. 81, No. 2111.

    Rutherford, E., Radio-Activity, 1905. Vol. 82, No. 2116.

    Wallace, A. R., My Life, 1905. Vol. 82, No. 2121.

    Haldane, Elizabeth S., Descartes. Vol. 82, No. 2125.

    Report on the Meeting of the National Academy of Sciences,
    Washington, D. C., 1906. Vol. 82, No. 2130.

    Rogers, H. J. (Editor), Congress of Arts and Sciences, Universal
    Exposition, St. Louis, 1904. Vol. 82, No. 2136.

    Loeb, J., The Dynamics of Living Matter; and Mann, G., Chemistry of
    the Proteids. Vol. 83, No. 2140.

    Roscoe, H. E., The Life and Experiences of Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe.
    Vol. 83, No. 2141.

    Marshall, T., Aristotle’s Theory of Conduct. Vol. 83, No. 2150.

    Joseph, H. W. B., An Introduction to Logic. Vol. 83, No. 2156.

OTHER ARTICLES AND REVIEWS

    Old Stone Mill at Newport, _Science_, 4, 1884, 512.

    Criticism on “Phantasms of the Living,” _Proc. Am. Soc. Psychical
    Research_, Vol. 1, No. 3 (1887).

    Napoleon Intime, _The Independent_, December 21 and December 28,
    1893.

    Decennial Celebration of Clark University, _Science_, 11 (1900), p.
    620.

    Century’s Great Men of Science, _Smithsonian Institute Reports_,
    1900.

    Campanus _Science_, 13 (1901), p. 809.

    French Academy of Science, N. Y. Evening _Post_, March 5, 1904.

Footnote 88:

  The following classification is arbitrary, as some of Peirce’s most
  significant reflections occur in papers under headings II. and III. It
  may, however, be useful.




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).
      Text that was in bold face is enclosed by equals signs (=bold=).
    ○ Footnotes have been moved to follow the chapters in which they are
      referenced.
    ○ Numbers raised to a power are denoted by the caret sign: 2^5 is 2
      raised to the 5th power. Powers may be enclosed in curly brackets,
      so 2^{32} is 2 raised to the 32nd power.
    ○ Subscripts are denoted by an underscore followed by the subscript
      in curly brackets, so O_{2} means O followed by a subscript 2.

