CHAPTER V.

_Advantages of solitude in exile._


The advantages of solitude are not confined to rank, or fortune, or to
circumstances. Fragrant breezes, magnificent forests, richly tinted
meadows, and that endless variety of beautiful objects which the birth of
spring spreads over the face of nature, enchant not only philosophers,
kings, and heroes, but ravish the mind of the meanest spectator with
exquisite delight. An English author has very justly observed, that
“it is not necessary that he who looks with pleasure on the color of a
flower, should study the principles of vegetation; or that the Ptolemaic
and Copernican systems should be compared, before the light of the sun
can gladden, or its warmth invigorate. Novelty in itself is a source
of gratification; and Milton justly observes, that to him who has been
long pent up in cities, no rural object can be presented which will not
delight or refresh some of his senses.”

Exiles themselves frequently experience the advantages and enjoyments of
solitude. Instead of the world from which they are banished, they form,
in the tranquillity of retirement, a new world for themselves; forget the
false joys and fictitious pleasures which they followed in the zenith
of greatness, habituate their minds to others of a nobler kind, more
worthy the attention of rational beings; and to pass their days with
tranquillity, invent a variety of innocent felicities, which are only
thought of at a distance from society, far removed from all consolation,
far from their country, their families, and their friends.

But exiles, if they wish to insure happiness in retirement, must, like
other men, fix their minds upon some one object, and adopt the pursuit
of it in such a way as to revive their buried hopes, or to excite the
prospect of approaching pleasure.

Maurice, prince of Isenbourg, distinguished himself by his courage
during a service of twenty years under Ferdinand, duke of Brunswick,
and Marshal Broglio, and in the war between the Russians and the Turks.
Health and repose were sacrificed to the gratification of his ambition
and love of glory. During his service in the Russian army, he fell under
the displeasure of the empress, and was sent into exile. The calamitous
condition to which persons exiled by this government are reduced is well
known; but this philosophic prince contrived to render even a Russian
banishment agreeable. While oppressed both in body and mind by the
painful reflections which his situation at first created, and reduced by
his anxieties to a mere skeleton, he accidentally met with the little
essay written by Lord Bolingbroke on the subject of Exile. He read it
several times, and, “in proportion to the number of times I read,” said
the prince, in the preface to the elegant and nervous translation he made
of this work, “I felt all my sorrows and disquietudes vanish.”

This essay by Lord Bolingbroke upon exile, is a master-piece of stoic
philosophy and fine writing. He there boldly examines all the adversities
of life. “Let us,” says he, “set all our past and present afflictions at
once before our eyes: let us resolve to overcome them instead of flying
from them, or wearing out the sense of them with long and ignominious
patience. Instead of palliating remedies, let us use the incision knife
and the caustic, search the wound to the bottom, and work an immediate
and radical cure.”

Perpetual banishment, like uninterrupted solitude, certainly strengthens
the powers of the mind, and enables the sufferer to collect sufficient
force to support his misfortunes. Solitude, indeed, becomes an easy
situation to those exiles who are inclined to indulge the pleasing
sympathies of the heart; for they then experience pleasures that were
before unknown, and from that moment forget those they tasted in the more
flourishing and prosperous conditions of life.

Brutus, when he visited the banished Marcellus in his retreat at
Mitylene, found him enjoying the highest felicities of which human
nature is susceptible, and devoting his time, as before his banishment,
to the study of every useful science. Deeply impressed by the example
this unexpected scene afforded, he felt, on his return, that it was
Brutus who was exiled, and not Marcellus whom he left behind. Quintus
Metellus Numidicus had experienced the like fate a few years before.
While the Roman people, under the guidance of Marius were laying the
foundation of that tyranny which Cesar afterward completed, Metellus,
singly, in the midst of an alarmed senate, and surrounded by an enraged
populace, refused to take the oath imposed by the pernicious laws of
the tribune Saturnius; and his intrepid conduct was converted, by the
voice of faction, into a high crime against the state; for which he
was dragged from his senatorial seat by the licentious rabble, exposed
to the indignity of a public impeachment, and sentenced to perpetual
exile. The more virtuous citizens, however, took arms in his defence, and
generously resolved rather to perish than behold their country unjustly
deprived of so much merit: but this magnanimous Roman, whom no persuasion
could induce to do wrong, declined to increase the confusion of the
commonwealth by encouraging resistance, conceiving it a duty he owed
to the laws, not to suffer any sedition to take place on his account.
Contenting himself with protesting his innocence, and sincerely lamenting
the public phrenzy, he exclaimed, as Plato had done before during the
distractions of the Athenian commonwealth, “If the times should mend,
I shall recover my station; if not, it is a happiness to be absent
from Rome;” and departed without regret into exile, fully convinced of
its advantages to a mind incapable of finding repose except on foreign
shores, and which at Rome must have been incessantly tortured by the
hourly sight of a sickly state and an expiring republic.

Rutilius also, feeling the same contempt for the sentiments and manners
of the age, voluntarily withdrew himself from the corrupted metropolis of
the republic. Asia had been defended by his integrity and courage against
the ruinous and oppressive extortion of the publicans. These noble and
spirited exertions, which he was prompted to make not only from his high
sense of justice, but in the honourable discharge of the particular
duties of his office, drew on him the indignation of the equestrian
order, and excited the animosity of the faction which supported the
interests of Marius. They induced the vile and infamous Apicius to become
the instrument of his destruction. He was accused of corruption; and as
the authors and abettors of this false accusation sat as judges on his
trial, Rutilius, the most innocent and virtuous citizen of the republic,
was of course condemned: for, indeed, he scarcely condescended to
defend the cause. Seeking an asylum in the east, this truly respectable
Roman, whose merits were not only overlooked, but traduced, by his
ungrateful country, was every where received with profound veneration
and unqualified applause. He had however, before the term of his exile
expired, an opportunity of exhibiting the just contempt he felt for
the treatment he had received; for when Sylla earnestly solicited him
to return to Rome, he not only refused to comply with his request, but
removed his residence to a greater distance from his infatuated country.

Cicero, however, who possessed in an eminent degree all the resources
and sentiments which are necessary to render solitude pleasant and
advantageous, is a memorable exception to these instances of happy
and contented exiles. This eloquent patriot, who had been publicly
proclaimed, “the saviour of his country,” who had pursued his measures
with undaunted perseverance, in defiance of the open menaces of a
desperate faction, and the concealed daggers of hired assassins, sunk
into dejection and dismay under a sentence of exile. The strength of his
constitution had long been impaired by incessant anxiety and fatigue;
and the terrors of banishment so oppressed his mind, that he lost all
his powers, and became, from the deep melancholy into which it plunged
him, totally incapable of adopting just sentiments, or pursuing spirited
measures. By this weak and unmanly conduct he disgraced an event by which
Providence intended to render his glory complete. Undetermined where
to go, or what to do, he lamented, with effeminate sighs and childish
tears, that he could now no longer enjoy the luxuries of his fortune,
the splendor of his rank, or the charms of his popularity. Weeping over
the ruins of his magnificent mansion, which Clodius levelled with the
ground, and groaning for the absence of his wife, Terentia, whom he soon
afterward repudiated, he suffered the deepest melancholy to seize upon
his mind: became a prey to the most inveterate grief; complained with
bitter anguish of wants, which, if supplied, would have afforded him no
enjoyment; and acted, in short, so ridiculously, that both his friends
and his enemies concluded that adversity had deranged his mind. Cesar
beheld with secret and malignant pleasure, the man who had refused to act
as his lieutenant, suffering under the scourge of Clodius. Pompey hoped
that all sense of _his_ ingratitude would be effaced by the contempt and
derision to which a benefactor, whom he had shamefully abandoned, thus
meanly exposed his character. Atticus himself, whose mind was bent on
magnificence and money, and who, by his temporizing talents, endeavored
to preserve the friendship of all parties, without enlisting in any,
blushed for the unmanly conduct of Cicero; and in the censorial style of
Cato, instead of his own plausible dialect, severely reproached him for
continuing so meanly attached to his former fortunes. Solitude had no
influence over a mind so weak and depressed as to turn the worst side of
every subject to its view. He died, however, with greater heroism than he
lived; “approach, old soldier!” cried he, from his litter, to Popilius
Lœnas, his former client and present murderer, “and, if you have the
courage, take my life.”

“These instances,” says Lord Bolingbroke, “show that as change of place,
simply considered, can render no man unhappy; so the other evils which
are objected to exile, either cannot happen to wise and virtuous men, or,
if they do happen to them, cannot render them miserable. Stones are hard,
and cakes of ice are cold, and all who feel them feel alike; but the good
or the bad events which fortune brings upon us, are felt according to the
qualities that we, not they, possess. They are in themselves indifferent
and common accidents, and they acquire strength by nothing but our vice
or our weakness. Fortune can dispense neither felicity nor infelicity,
unless we co-operate with her. Few men who are unhappy under the loss of
an estate, would be happy in the possession of it; and those who deserve
to enjoy the advantages which exile takes away, will not be unhappy when
they are deprived of them.”

An exile, however, cannot hope to see his days glide quietly away in
rural delights and philosophic repose, except he has conscientiously
discharged those duties which he owed to the world, and given that
example of rectitude to future ages which every character exhibits who
is as great after his fall as he was at the most brilliant period of his
prosperity.




