CHAPTER VI.

_The influence of solitude on the passions._


The passions lose in solitude a certain portion of that regulating weight
by which in society they are guided and controlled; the counteracting
effects produced by variety, the restraints imposed by the obligations
of civility, and the checks which arise from the calls of humanity,
occur much less frequently in retirement than amidst the multifarious
transactions of a busy world. The desires and sensibilities of the
heart having no real objects on which their vibrations can pendulate,
are stimulated and increased by the powers of imagination. All the
propensities of the soul, indeed, experience a degree of restlessness and
vehemence greater than they ever feel while diverted by the pleasures,
subdued by the surrounding distresses, and engaged by the business of
active and social life.

The calm which seems to accompany the mind in its retreat is deceitful;
the passions are secretly at work within the heart; the imagination is
continually heaping fuel on the latent fire, and at length the laboring
desire bursts forth, and glows with volcanic heat and fury. The temporary
inactivity and inertness which retirement seems to impose, may check,
but cannot subdue the energies of spirit. The high pride and lofty
ideas of great and independent minds may be, for a while, lulled into
repose; but the moment the feelings of such a character are awakened by
indignity or outrage, its anger springs like an elastic body drawn from
its centre, and pierces with vigorous severity the object that provoked
it. The perils of solitude, indeed, always increase in proportion as
the sensibilities, imaginations, and passions of its votaries are
quick, excursive, and violent. The man may be the inmate of a cottage,
but the same passions and inclinations still lodge within his heart:
_his_ mansion may be changed, but _their_ residence is the same; and
though they appear to be silent and undisturbed, they are secretly
influencing all the propensities of his heart. Whatever be the cause
of his retirement, whether it be a sense of undeserved misfortune, the
ingratitude of supposed friends, the pangs of despised love, or the
disappointment of ambition, memory prevents the wound from healing, and
stings the soul with indignation and resentment. The image of departed
pleasures haunts the mind, and robs it of its wished tranquillity. The
ruling passion still subsists; it fixes itself more strongly on the
fancy; moves with greater agitation; and becomes, in retirement, in
proportion as it is inclined to vice or virtue, either a horrid and
tormenting spectre, inflicting apprehension and dismay, or a delightful
and supporting angel, irradiating the countenance with smiles of joy, and
filling the heart with peace and gladness.

    Blest is the man, as far as earth can bless,
    Whose measur’d passions reach no wild excess;
    Who, urged by nature’s voice, her gifts enjoys,
    Nor other means than nature’s force employs.
    While warm with youth the sprightly current flows,
    Each vivid sense with vigorous rapture glows;
    And when he droops beneath the hand of age,
    No vicious habit stings with fruitless rage;
    Gradual his strength and gay sensations cease,
    While joys tumultuous sink in silent peace.

The extraordinary power which the passions assume, and the improper
channel in which they are apt to flow in retired situations, is
conspicuous from the greater acrimony with which they are in general
tainted in small villages than in large towns. It is true, indeed, that
they do not always explode in such situations with the open and daring
violence which they exhibit in the metropolis; but lie buried as it
were, and mouldering in the bosom with a more malignant flame. To those
who only observe the listlessness and languor which distinguish the
characters of those who reside in small provincial towns, the slow and
uniform rotation of amusements which fills up the leisure of their lives;
the confused wildness of their cares; the poor subterfuges to which they
are continually resorting, in order to avoid the clouds of discontent
that impend in angry darkness, over their heads; the lagging current
of their drooping spirits; the miserable poverty of their intellectual
powers; the eagerness with which they strive to raise a card party; the
transports they enjoy on the prospect of any new diversion or occasional
exhibition; the haste with which they run toward any sudden, unexpected
noise that interrupts the deep silence of their situation; and the
patient industry with which, from day to day, they watch each other’s
conduct, and circulate reports of every action of each other’s lives,
will scarcely imagine that any virulence of passion can disturb the
bosoms of persons who live in so quiet and seemingly composed a state.
But the unoccupied time and barren minds of such characters cause the
faintest emotions, and most common desires, to act with all the violence
of high and untamed passions. The lowest diversions, a cock fighting, or
a pony race, make the bosom of a country ’squire beat with the highest
rapture; while the inability to attend the monthly ball fills the minds
of his wife and daughter with the keenest anguish. Circumstances, which
scarcely make any impression on those who reside in the metropolis,
plunge every description of residents in a country village into all
the extravagances of joy, or the dejection of sorrow; from the peer to
the peasant, from the duchess to the dairy maid, all is rapture and
convulsion. Competition is carried on for the humble honors and petty
interests of a sequestered town, or miserable hamlet, with as much heat
and rancor, as it is for the highest dignities and greatest emoluments
of the state. Upon many occasions, indeed, ambition, envy, revenge, and
all the disorderly and malignant passions, are felt and exercised with a
greater degree of violence and obstinacy amidst the little contentions of
claybuilt cottages, than ever prevailed amidst the highest commotions of
courts. Plutarch relates that when Cæsar, after his appointment to the
government of Spain, came to a little town, as he was passing the Alps,
his friends, by way of mirth, took occasion to say, “Can there here be
any disputes for offices, any contentions for precedency, or such envy
and ambition as we behold among the great in all the transactions of
imperial Rome?” The idea betrayed their ignorance of human nature; while
the celebrated reply of their great commander, that _he would rather be
the first man in this little town, than the second even in the imperial
city_, spoke the language, not of an individual, but of the species;
and instructed them that there is no place, however insignificant, in
which the same passions do not proportionately prevail. The humble
competitors for village honors, however low and subordinate they may
be, feel as great anxiety for pre-eminence, as much jealousy of rivals,
and as violent envy against superiors, as agitate the bosoms of the
most ambitious statesmen in contending for the highest prize of glory,
of riches, or of power. The manner, perhaps, in which these inferior
candidates exert their passions may be less artful, and the objects of
them less noble, but they are certainly not less virulent. “Having,” says
Euphelia, who had quitted London, to enjoy the quietude and happiness
of a rural village, “been driven by the mere necessity of escaping from
absolute inactivity, to make myself more acquainted with the affairs
and happiness of this place, I am now no longer a stranger to _rural
conversation_ and employments; but am far from discerning in them more
innocence or wisdom than in the sentiments or conduct of those with whom
I have passed more cheerful and more fashionable hours. It is common
to reproach the tea table and the park, with giving opportunities and
encouragement to scandal I cannot wholly clear them from the charge, but
must, however, observe, in favor of the modish prattlers, that if not by
principle, we are at least by accident, less guilty of defamation than
the country ladies. For, having greater numbers to observe and censure,
we are commonly content to charge them only with their own faults or
follies, and seldom give way to malevolence, but such as arises from
injury or affront, real or imaginary, offered to ourselves. But in those
distant provinces, where the same families inhabit the same houses from
age to age, they transmit and recount the faults of a whole succession.
I have been informed how every estate in the neighborhood was originally
got, and find, if I may credit the accounts given me, that there is
not a single acre in the hands of the right owner. I have been told of
intrigues between beaus and toasts, that have been now three centuries
in their quiet graves; and am often entertained with traditional scandal
on persons of whose names there would have been no remembrance, had they
not committed somewhat that might disgrace their descendants. If once
there happens a quarrel between the principal persons of two families,
the malignity is continued without end; and it is common for old maids
to fall out about some election in which their grandfathers were
competitors. Thus malice and hatred descend here with an inheritance; and
it is necessary to be well versed in history, that the various factions
of the country may be understood. You cannot expect to be on good
terms with families who are resolved to love nothing in common; and in
selecting your intimates, you are, perhaps, to consider which party you
most favor in the barons’ wars.”

Resentments and enmities burn with a much more furious flame among
the thinly-scattered inhabitants of a petty village, than amidst the
ever varying concourse of a great metropolis. The objects by which the
passions are set on fire are hidden from our view by the tumults which
prevail in a crowded city, and the bosom willingly loses the pains which
such emotions excite when the causes which occasioned them are forgot:
but in country villages, the thorns by which the feelings have been hurt
are continually before our eyes, and preserve on every approach toward
them, a remembrance of the injuries sustained. An extreme devout and
highly religious lady, who resided in a retired hamlet in Swisserland,
once told me, in a conversation on this subject, that she had completely
suppressed all indignation against the envy, the hatred, and the malice
of her surrounding neighbors; for that she found they were so deeply dyed
in sin, that a rational remonstrance was lost upon them; and that the
only vexation she felt from a sense of their wretchedness arose from the
idea that her soul would at the last day be obliged to keep company with
such incorrigible wretches.

The inhabitants of the country, indeed, both of the lower and middling
classes, cannot be expected to possess characters of a very respectable
kind, when we look at the conduct of those who set them the example. A
country magistrate, who has certainly great opportunities of forming the
manners and morals of the district over which he presides, is in general
puffed up with high and extravagant conceptions of the superiority of
his wisdom, and the extent of his power; and raising his idea of the
greatness of his character in an inverse proportion to his notions of
the insignificance and littleness of those around him, he sits enthroned
with fancied pre-eminence, the disdainful tyrant, rather than the kind
protector of his neighbors. Deprived of all liberal and instructive
society, confined in their knowledge both of men and things, the slaves
of prejudice and the pupils of folly; with contracted hearts and degraded
faculties the inhabitants of a country village feel all the base and
ignoble passions, sordid rapacity, mean envy, and insulting ostentation
more forcibly than they are felt either in the enlarged society of the
metropolis, or even in the confined circle of the monastery.

The social virtues, indeed, are almost totally excluded from cloisters,
as well as from every other kind of solitary institution: for when the
habits, interests, and pleasures of the species are pent up by any
means within a narrow compass, mutual jealousies and exasperations
must prevail; every trifling immunity, petty privilege, and paltry
distinction, becomes an object of the most violent contention; and
increasing animosities at length reach to such a degree of virulence,
that the pious flock is converted into a herd of famished wolves, eager
to worry and devour each other.

The laws of every convent strictly enjoin the holy sisterhood to
live in Christian charity and sincere affection with each other. I
have, however, when attending these fair recluses in my professional
character, observed many of them with wrinkles, that seemed rather the
effect of angry perturbation, than of peaceful age, with aspects formed
rather by envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness, than by mild
benevolence and singleness of heart. But I should do injustice if I
did not declare, that I have seen some few who were strangers to such
unworthy passions; whose countenances were unindented by their effects:
and whose beauty and comeliness still shone in their native lustre and
simplicity. It was, indeed, painful to reflect upon the sufferings which
these lovely innocents must endure, until the thoughts of their lost
hopes, defeated happiness, and unmerited wrongs, should have changed
the milky kindness of their virtuous dispositions into the gall-like
bitterness of vexation and despair; until the brightness of their
charming features should be darkened by the clouds of discontent, which
their continued imprisonment would create; and until their cheerful and
easy tempers should be perverted by the corrosions of those vindictive
passions which the jealous furies, with whom they were immured, and
to whom they formed so striking a contrast, must in time so cruelly
inflict. These lovely mourners, on entering the walls of a convent, are
obliged to submit to the tyranny of an envious superior, or the jealousy
of the older inmates, whose angry passions arise in proportion as they
perceive others less miserable than themselves; and retiring, at the
stated periods, from their joint persecution, they find that the gloomy
solitude to which they have flown, only tends to aggravate and widen
the wound it was expected to cure. It is, indeed, almost impossible
for any female, however amiable, to preserve in the joyless gloom of
conventual solitude the cheering sympathies of nature. A retrospect of
her past life most probably exhibits to her tortured fancy, superstition
stinging with scorpion like severity her pious mind; love sacrificed
on the altar of family pride; or fortune ruined by the avarice of a
perfidious guardian; while the future presents to her view the dreary
prospect of an eternal and melancholy separation from all the enjoyments
of society, and a continual exposure to the petulance and ill humor of
the dissatisfied sisterhood. What disposition, however mild and gentle
by nature, can preserve itself amidst such confluent dangers? How is
it possible to prevent the most amiable tenderness of heart, the most
lively and sensible mind from becoming, under such circumstances, a prey
to the bitterness of affliction and malevolence? Those who have had
an opportunity to observe the operation of the passions on the habits,
humors, and dispositions of recluse females, have perceived with horror
the cruel and unrelenting fury with which they goad the soul, and with
what an imperious and irresistible voice they command obedience to their
inclination.

The passion of love, in particular, acts with much greater force upon the
mind that endeavors to escape from its effects by retirement, than it
does when it is either resisted or indulged.

Retirement, under such circumstances, is a childish expedient; it is
expecting to achieve that, by means of a fearful flight, which it is
frequently too much for the courage and the constancy of heroes to
subdue. Retirement is the very nest and harbor of this powerful passion.
How many abandon the gay and jovial circles of the world, renounce even
the most calm and satisfactory delights of friendship, and quit, without
a sigh, the most delicious and highest seasoned pleasures of society, to
seek in retirement the superior joys of love! a passion in whose high
and tender delights the insolence of power, the treachery of friendship,
and the most vindictive malice, is immediately forgot. It is a passion,
when pure, that can never experience the least decay; no course of
time, no change of place, no alteration of circumstances, can erase or
lessen the ideas of that bliss which it has once imprinted on the heart.
Its characters are indelible. Solitude, in its most charming state,
and surrounded by its amplest, powers, affords no resource against its
anxieties, its jealous fears, its tender alarms, its soft sorrows, or its
inspiringly tumultuous joys. The bosom that is once deeply wounded by the
barbed dart of real love, seldom recovers its tranquillity, but enjoys,
if happy, the highest of human delights; and if miserable, the deepest
of human torments. But, although the love-sick shepherd fills the lonely
vallies, and the verdant groves, with the softest sighs, or severest
sorrows, and the cells of the monasteries and convents resound with heavy
groans and deep-toned curses against the malignity of this passion,
solitude may perhaps, for a while suspend, if it cannot extinguish its
fury. Of the truth of this observation, the history of those unfortunate,
but real lovers, Abelard and Eloisa, furnishes a memorable instance.

In the twelfth century, and while Louis the Gross filled the throne
of France, was born in the retired village of Palais, in Brittany, the
celebrated Peter Abelard. Nature had lavished the highest perfections
both on his person and his mind: a liberal education improved to their
utmost possible extent the gifts of nature; and he became in a few years
the most learned, elegant, and polite gentleman of his age and country.
Philosophy and divinity were his favorite studies: and lest the affairs
of the world should prevent him from becoming a proficient in them,
he surrendered his birthright to his younger brethren, and travelled
to Paris, in order to cultivate his mind under that great professor,
William des Champeaux. The eminence he attained as a professor, while
it procured him the esteem of the rational and discerning, excited the
envy of his rivals. But, beside his uncommon merit as a scholar, he
possessed a greatness of soul which nothing could subdue. He looked
upon riches and grandeur with contempt; and his only ambition was to
render his name famous among learned men, and to acquire the reputation
of the greatest doctor of his age. But when he had attained his seven
and twentieth year of age, all his philosophy could not guard him
against the shafts of love. Not far from the place where Abelard read
his lectures, lived a canon of the church of Notre Dame, named Fulbert,
whose niece, the celebrated Eloisa, had been educated under his own eye
with the greatest care and attention. Her person was well proportioned,
her features regular, her eyes sparkling, her lips vermilion and well
formed, her complexion animated, her air fine, and her aspect sweet and
agreeable. She possessed a surprising quickness of wit, an incredible
memory, and a considerable share of learning, joined with great humility
and tenderness of disposition: and all these accomplishments were
attended with something so graceful and moving, that it was impossible
for those who saw her not to love her. The eye of Abelard was charmed,
and his whole soul intoxicated in the passion of love, the moment he
beheld and conversed with this extraordinary woman; and he laid aside
all other engagements to attend to his passion. He was deaf to the calls
both reason and philosophy, and thought of nothing but her company and
conversation. An opportunity, fortunate for his love, but fatal to his
happiness, soon occurred. Fulbert, whose affection for his niece was
unbounded, willing to improve to the highest degree the excellency of
those talents which nature had so bountifully bestowed on her, engaged
Abelard as her preceptor, and received him in that character into his
house. A mutual passion strongly infused itself into the hearts of both
pupil and preceptor. She consented to become his mistress, but, for a
long time, refused to become his wife. The secret of their loves could
not remain long concealed from the eyes of Fulbert, and the lover was
dismissed from his house: but Eloisa flew with rapture to his arms, and
was placed under the protection of his sister, where she remained; until,
from the cruel vengeance which her uncle exercised on the unfortunate
Abelard, she was induced at his request to enter into the convent of
Argenteuil, and he into the monastery of St. Gildas. In this cloister,
the base of which was washed by the waves of a sea less turbulent
than the passions which disturbed his soul, the unfortunate Abelard,
endeavored by the exercises of religion and study, to obliterate all
remembrance of his love; but his virtue was too feeble for the great
attempt. A course of many years, however, had passed in penitence and
mortification, without any communication between them, and further time
might possibly have calmed in a still greater degree the violence of
their feelings; but a letter which Abelard wrote to his friend Philintus,
in order to comfort him under some affliction which had befallen him, in
which he related his affection for Eloisa with great tenderness, fell
into her hands, and induced her to break through the silence which had
so long prevailed, by writing to him a letter, the contents of which
revived in his mind all the former furies of his passion. Time, absence,
solitude, and prayer, had in no degree diminished the amiable tenderness
of the still lovely Eloisa, or augmented the fortitude of the unfortunate
Abelard. The composing influence of religion seems to have made an
earlier impression upon his feelings than it did upon those of Eloisa;
but he continually counteracted its effects, by comparing his former
felicity with his present torments; and he answered Eloisa’s letter, not
as a moral preceptor, or holy confessor, but as a still fond and adoring
lover; as a man whose wounded feelings were in some degree alleviated by
a recollection of his former joys; and who could only console the sorrows
of his mistress, by avowing an equal tenderness, and confessing the
anguish with which their separation rent his soul. The walls of Paraclete
resounded his sighs less frequently, and re-echoed less fervently with
his sorrows, than those of St. Gildas; for his continued solitude, so
far from affording him relief, had administered an aggravating medicine
to his disease; and afforded that vulture, grief, greater leisure to
tear and prey upon his disordered heart. “Religion,” says he, “commands
me to pursue virtue since I have nothing to hope for from love; but
love still asserts its dominion in my fancy, and entertains itself with
past pleasures; memory supplies the place of a mistress. Piety and duty
are not always the fruits of retirement. Even in deserts, when the dew
of heaven falls not on us, we love what we ought no longer to love.
The passions, stirred up by solitude, fill those regions of death and
silence; and it is very seldom that what ought to be is truly followed
there, and that God only is loved and served.”

The letters of Eloisa were soft, gentle, and endearing; but they breathed
the warmest language of tenderness and unconquerable passion. “I have
your picture,” says she, “in my room. I never pass by it without stopping
to look at it; and yet when you were present with me, I scarce even
cast my eyes upon it. If a picture, which is but a mute representation
of an object, can give such pleasure, what cannot letters inspire?
Letters have souls; they have in them all that force which expresses the
transports of the heart: they have all the fire of our passions; they
can raise them as much as if the persons themselves were present; they
have all the softness and delicacy of speech, and sometimes a boldness
of expression even beyond it. We may write to each other; so innocent a
pleasure is not forbidden us. Let us not lose, through negligence, the
only happiness which is left to us, and the only one perhaps, which the
malice of our enemies can never ravish from us. I shall read that you
are my husband, and you shall see me address you as a wife. In spite
of all your misfortunes, you may be what you please in your letters.
Letters were first invented for comforting such solitary wretches as
myself. Having lost the pleasure of seeing you, I shall compensate this
loss by the satisfaction I shall find in your writings: there I shall
read your most secret thoughts: I shall carry them always about me; I
shall kiss them every moment. If you can be capable of jealousy, let it
be for the fond curiosity I shall bestow on your letters, and envy only
the happiness of those rivals. That writing may be no trouble to you,
write always to me carelessly and without study: I had rather read the
dictates of the heart than of the brain. I cannot live, if you do not
tell me you always love me. You cannot but remember, (for what do not
lovers remember?) with what pleasure I have passed whole days in hearing
you discourse; how, when you was absent, I shut myself up from every one
to write to you; how uneasy I was till my letter had come to your hands;
what artful management was required to engage confidants. This detail,
perhaps, surprises you, and you are in pain for what will follow: but
I am no longer ashamed that my passion has had no bounds for you; for
I have done more than all this: I have hated myself that I might love
you. I came hither to ruin myself in a perpetual imprisonment, that I
might make you live quiet and easy. Nothing but virtue, joined to a love
perfectly disengaged from the commerce of the senses, could have produced
such effects. Vice never inspires any thing like this. How did I deceive
myself with the hopes that you would be wholly mine when I took the
veil, and engaged myself to live for ever under your laws! For, in being
professed, I vowed no more than to be yours only; and I obliged myself
voluntarily to a confinement in which you denied to place me. Death only
can make me leave the place where you have fixed me; and then too my
ashes shall rest here, and wait for yours, in order to show my obedience
and devotedness to you to the latest moment possible.”

Abelard, while he strove, in his reply, to adhere to the dictates of
reason, betrayed the lurking tenderness of his heart. “Deliver yourself,
Eloisa,” says he, “from the shameful remains of a passion which has
taken too deep root. Remember that the least thought for any other than
God is an adultery. If you could see me here, pale, meagre, melancholy,
surrounded by a band of persecuting monks, who feel my reputation for
learning as a reproach of their stupidity and ignorance, my emaciated
figure as a slander on their gross and sensual corpulency, and my prayers
as an example for their reformation, what would you say to the unmanly
sighs, and unavailing tears, by which they are deceived? Alas! I am bowed
down by the oppressive weight of love, rather than contrition for past
offences. Oh, my Eloisa, pity me, and endeavor to free my laboring soul
from its captivity! If your vocation be, as you say, my wish, deprive me
not of the merit of it by your continual inquietudes: tell me that you
will honor the habit which covers you by an inward retirement. Fear God
that you may be delivered from your frailties. Love him, if you would
advance in virtue. Be not uneasy in the cloister, for it is the dwelling
of saints; embrace your bands, they are the chains of Jesus, and he
will lighten them, and bear with you, if you bear them with humility
and repentance. Consider me no more, I entreat you, as a founder, or as
a person in any way deserving your esteem; for your encomiums do but
ill agree with the multiplying weakness of my heart. I am a miserable
sinner, prostrate before my Judge; and when the rays of grace break on my
troubled soul, I press the earth with my lips, and mingle my sighs and
tears in the dust. Couldest thou survey thy wretched lover thus lost and
forlorn, thou wouldest no longer solicit his affection. The tenderness of
thy heart would not permit thee to interpose an earthly passion, which
can only tend to deprive him of all hopes of heavenly grace and future
comfort. Thou wouldest not wish to be the object of sighs and tears,
which ought to be directed to God alone. Canst thou, my Eloisa, become
the confederate of my evil genius, and be the instrument to promote sin’s
yet unfinished conquest? What, alas! couldest thou not achieve with a
heart, the weaknesses of which you so well know? But, oh! let me conjure
you, by all the sacred ties, to forget for ever the wretched Abelard, and
thereby contribute to his salvation. Let me entreat you by our former
joys, and by our now common misfortunes, not to abet my destruction. The
highest affection you can now show me, is to hide your tenderness from my
view and to renounce me for ever. Oh, Eloisa! be devoted to God alone;
for I here release you from all engagements to me.”

The conflict between love and religion tore the soul of Eloisa with pangs
far more violent and destructive. There is scarcely a line of her reply
to Abelard, that does not show the dangerous influence which solitude had
given to the concealed, but unsmothered, passion that glowed within her
breast. “Veiled as I am,” she exclaims, “behold in what a disorder you
have plunged me! How difficult it is to fight always for duty against
inclination! I know the obligation which this sacred veil has imposed
on me; but feel more strongly the power which a long and habitual
passion has gained over my heart. I am the victim of almighty love: my
passion troubles my mind, and disorders my senses. My soul is sometimes
influenced by the sentiments of piety which my reflections inspire, but
the next moment I yield myself up to the tenderness of my feelings,
and to the suggestions of my affection. My imagination riots with wild
excursion in the scenes of past delights. I disclose to you one moment
what I would not have told you a moment before. I resolve no longer
to love you; I consider the solemnity of the vow I have made, and the
awfulness of the veil I have taken; but there arises, unexpectedly, from
the bottom of my heart, a passion which triumphs over all these notions,
and, while it darkens my reason, destroys my devotion. You reign in all
the close and inward retreats of my soul; and I know not how nor where
to attack you with any prospect of success. When I endeavor to break the
chains which bind me so closely to you, I only deceive myself, and all
my efforts serve only to confirm my captivity, and to rivet our hearts
more firmly to each other. Oh! for pity’s sake, comply with my request;
and endeavor by this means, to make me renounce my desires, by showing
me the obligation I am under to renounce you. If you are still a lover,
or a father, oh! help a mistress, and give comfort to the distraction
of an afflicted child. Surely these dear and tender names will excite
the emotion either of pity or of love. Gratify my request; only continue
to write to me, and I shall continue to perform the hard duties of my
station without profaning that character which my love for you induced
me to assume. Under your advice and admonition I shall willingly humble
myself, and submit with penitence and resignation to the wonderful
providence of God, who does all things for our sanctification; who, by
his grace purifies all that is vicious and corrupt in our natures; and,
by the inconceivable riches of his mercy, draws us to himself against
our wishes, and by degrees opens our eyes to discern the greatness of
that bounty which at first we are incapable of understanding. Virtue
is too amiable not to be embraced when you reveal her charms, and vice
too hideous not to be avoided when you show her deformities. When you
are pleased, every thing seems lovely to me. Nothing is frightful
or difficult when you are by. I am only weak when I am alone, and
unsupported by you; and therefore it depends on you alone that I may be
such as you desire. Oh! that you had not so powerful an influence over
all my soul! It is your fears, surely, that make you thus deaf to my
entreaties, and negligent of my desires: but what is there for you to
fear? When we lived happily together you might have doubted whether it
was pleasure or affection that united me to you; but the place from which
I now indite my lamentations must have removed that idea, if it ever
could find a place in your mind. Even within these gloomy walls, my heart
springs toward you with more affection than it felt, if possible, in the
gay and glittering world. Had pleasure been my guide, the world would
have been the theatre of my joys. Two and twenty years only of my life
had worn away, when the lover on whom my soul doated was cruelly torn
from my arms; and at that age female charms are not generally despised;
but, instead of seeking to indulge the pleasures of youth, your Eloisa,
when deprived of thee, renounced the world, suppressed the emotions of
sense, at a time when the pulses beat with the warmest ardor, and buried
herself within the cold and cheerless region of the cloister. To you she
consecrated the flower of her charms; to you she now devotes the poor
remains of faded beauty; and dedicates to heaven and to you, her tedious
days and widowed nights in solitude and sorrow.”

The passion, alas! which Eloisa thus fondly nourished in her bosom, like
an adder, to goad and sting her peace of mind, was very little of a
spiritual nature; and the walls of Paraclete only re-echoed more fervent
sighs than she had before breathed, and witnessed a more abundant flow
of tears than she had shed in the cells of Argenteuil, over the memory
of departed joys with her beloved Abelard. Her letters, indeed, show
with what toilsome but ineffectual anxiety she endeavored to chasten her
mind, and support her fainting virtue, as well by her own reasoning and
reflection, as by his counsels and exhortations; but the passion had
tenaciously rooted itself at the very bottom of her heart; and it was
not until the close of life that she was able to repress the transports
of her imagination, and subdue the wild sallies of her fond and fertile
fancy. Personally separated from each other, she indulged a notion that
her love could not be otherwise than pure and spiritual; but there are
many parts of letters which show how much she was deceived by this idea;
for in all the fancied chastity of their tender and too ardent loves,

    “Back thro’ the pleasing maze of sense she ran,
    And felt within the slave of love and man.”

The wild and extravagant excesses to which the fancy and the feelings
of Eloisa were carried, was not occasioned merely by the warm impulses
of unchecked nature; but were forced, to the injury of virtue, and the
distraction of reason, by the rank hot bed of monastic solitude. The
story of these celebrated lovers, when calmly examined, and properly
understood, proves how dangerous it is to recede entirely from the
pleasures and occupations of social life, and how deeply the imagination
may be corrupted, and the passions inflamed, during a splenetic and
ill-prepared retirement from the world. The frenzies which follow
disappointed love, are of all others the most likely to settle into
habits of the deepest melancholy. The finest sensibilities of the heart,
the purest tenderness of the soul, when joined with a warm constitution,
and an ardent imagination, experience from interruption and control the
highest possible state of exasperation. Solitude confirms the feelings
such a situation creates; and the passions and inclinations of a person
laboring under such impressions are more likely to be corrupted and
inflamed by the leisure of retirement, than they would be even by
engaging in all the lazy opulence and wanton plenty of a debauched
metropolis.

The affection which Petrarch entertained for Laura was refined, elevated,
and virtuous, and differed, in almost every ingredient of it, from
the luxurious fondness of the unfortunate Eloisa; but circumstances
separated him from the beloved object; and he labored during many years
of his life, under the oppression of that grievous melancholy which
disappointment uniformly inflicts. He first beheld her as she was going
to the church of the monastery of St. Claire. She was dressed in green,
and her gown was embroidered with violets. Her face, her air, her gait,
appeared something more than mortal. Her person was delicate, her eyes
tender and sparkling, and her eyebrows black as ebony. Golden locks waved
over her shoulders whiter than snow, and the ringlets were woven by the
fingers of love. Her neck was well formed, and her complexion animated
by the tints of nature, which art vainly attempts to imitate. When she
opened her mouth, you perceived the beauty of pearls, and the sweetness
of roses. She was full of graces. Nothing was so soft as her looks, so
modest as her carriage, so touching as the sound of her voice. An air
of gayety and tenderness breathed around her; but so pure and happily
tempered, as to inspire every beholder with the sentiments of virtue;
for she was chaste as the spangled dewdrop on the thorn. Such was the
description given of this divine creature by her enslaved lover. But,
unfortunately for his happiness, she was at this time married to Hugues
de Sade, whose family was originally of Avignon, and held the first
offices there. Notwithstanding the sufferings he underwent from the
natural agitation of an affection so tender as that which now engrossed
his soul, he owns that Laura behaved to him with kindness so long as he
concealed his passion; but when she discovered that he was captivated
with her charms, she treated him with great severity; avoiding every
place it was likely he would frequent, and concealing her face under a
large veil whenever they accidentally met. The whole soul of Petrarch was
overthrown by this disastrous passion; and he felt all the visitation
of unfortunate love as grievously as if it had been founded upon less
virtuous principles. He endeavored to calm and tranquillize the troubles
of his breast by retiring to the celebrated solitude of Vaucluse, a
place in which nature delighted to appear under a form the most singular
and romantic; “But, alas!” says he, “I knew not what I was doing. The
resource was ill suited to the safety I sought. Solitude was incapable
of mitigating the severity of my sorrows. The griefs that hung around
my heart, consumed me like a devouring flame. I had no means of flying
from their attacks. I was alone, without consolation, and in the deepest
distress, without even the counsel of a friend to assist me. Melancholy
and despair shot their poisoned arrows against my defenceless breast, and
I filled the unsoothing and romantic vale with my sighs and lamentations.
The muse indeed, conveyed my sufferings to the world; but while the poet
was praised, the unhappy lover remained unpitied and forlorn.”

The love which inspired the lays of Petrarch was a pure and perfect
passion of the heart; and his sufferings were rendered peculiarly
poignant by a melancholy sense of the impossibility of ever being united
with the object of it; but the love of Abelard and Eloisa was a furious
heat of wild desire. This passion flows clear or muddied, peaceful or
violent, in proportion to the sources from which it springs. When it
arises from pure and unpolluted sources, its stream is clear, peaceful,
and surrounded with delights: but when its source is foul, and its
course improperly directed, it foams and rages, overswells its banks,
and destroys the scenes which nature intended it to fertilize and adorn.
The different effects produced by the different kinds of this powerful
passion, have, on observing how differently the character of the same
person appears when influenced by the one or the other of them, given
rise to an idea that the human species are possessed of two souls; the
one leading to vice, and the other conducting to virtue. A celebrated
philosopher has illustrated this notion by the following story:

A virtuous young prince, of an heroic soul, capable of love and
friendship, made war upon a tyrant, who was in every respect his reverse.
It was the happiness of our prince to be as great a conqueror by his
clemency and bounty, as by his arms and military virtue. Already he had
won over to his party several potentates and princes, who had before
been subject to the tyrant. Among those who still adhered to the enemy
there was a prince, who, having all the advantages of person and merit,
had lately been made happy in the possession and mutual love of the most
beautiful princess in the world. It happened that the occasion of the war
called the new married prince to a distance from his beloved princess.
He left her secure as he thought, in a strong castle, far within the
country; but, in his absence, the place was taken by surprise, and the
princess brought a captive to the quarters of the heroic prince. There
was in the camp a young nobleman the favorite of the prince; one who
had been educated with him, and was still treated by him with perfect
familiarity. Him he immediately sent for, and with strict injunctions,
committed the captive princess to his charge; resolving she should be
treated with that respect which was due to her rank and merit. It was the
same young lord who had discovered her disguised among the prisoners,
and learnt her story; the particulars of which he now related to the
prince. He spoke in ecstacy on this occasion; telling the prince how
beautiful she appeared even in the midst of sorrow; and though disguised
under the meanest habit, yet how distinguished by her air and manner from
every other beauty of her sex. But what appeared strange to our young
nobleman was, that the prince, during this whole relation, discovered
not the least intention of seeing the lady, or satisfying that curiosity
which seemed so natural on such an occasion. He pressed him, but without
success. “Not see her, sir!” said he wondering, “when she is so much
handsomer than any woman you have yet seen!” “For that very reason,”
replied the prince, “I would rather decline the interview; for should I,
upon this bare report of her beauty, be so charmed as to make the first
visit at this urgent time of business, I may upon sight, with better
reason, be induced, perhaps, to visit her when I am more at leisure;
and so again and again, until at last I may have no leisure left for my
affairs.” “Would you, sir, persuade me then,” said the young nobleman,
smiling, “that a fair face can have such power as to force the will
itself, and constrain a man in any respect to act contrary to what he
thinks becoming him? Are we to hearken to the poets, in what they tell
us of that incendiary love and his irresistible flames? A real flame, we
see, burns all alike; but that imaginary one of beauty hurts only those
that are consenting. It affects no otherwise than as we ourselves are
pleased to allow it. In many cases we absolutely command it, as when
relation and consanguinity are in the nearest degree. Authority and law
we see can master it; but it would be vain, as well as unjust, for any
law to intermeddle or prescribe, was not the case voluntary, and our
will entirely free.” “How comes it then,” replied the prince, “that if
we are thus masters of our choice, and free at first to admire and love
where we approve, we cannot afterward as well cease to love whenever we
see cause? This latter liberty you will hardly defend; for I doubt not
you have heard of many who, though they were used to set the highest
value on liberty before they loved, yet, afterward, were necessitated
to serve in the most abject manner, finding themselves constrained,
and bound by a stronger chain than any of iron or of adamant.” “Such
wretches,” replied the youth, “I have often heard complain, who, if you
will believe them, are wretched indeed, without means or power to help
themselves. You may hear them in the same manner complain grievously of
life itself; but though there are doors enough at which to go out of
life, they find it convenient to keep still where they are. They are the
very same pretenders who, through this plea of irresistible necessity,
make bold with what is another’s, and attempt unlawful beds; but the law,
I perceive, makes bold with them in its turn, as with other invaders
of property. Neither is it your custom, sir, to pardon such offences.
So that beauty itself, you must allow, is innocent and harmless, and
cannot compel any one to do amiss. The debauched compel themselves, and
unjustly charge their guilt on love. They who are honest and just can
admire and love whatever is beautiful, without offering at any thing
beyond what is allowed. How then is it possible, sir, that one of your
virtue should be in pain on any such account, or fear such a temptation?
You see, sir, I am sound and whole after having beheld the princess. I
have conversed with her; I have admired her in the highest degree; yet
I am myself still, and in my duty, and shall be ever in the same manner
at your command.” “It is well,” replied the prince; “keep yourself so:
be ever the same man, and look to your fair charge carefully, as becomes
you; for it may so happen, in the present situation of the war that
this beautiful captive may stand us in good stead.” The young nobleman
then departed to execute his commission; and immediately took such care
of the captive princess that she seemed as perfectly obeyed, and had
every thing which belonged to her in as great splendor as in her own
principality, and in the height of her fortune. He found her in every
respect deserving, and saw in her a generosity of soul exceeding even her
other charms. His studies to oblige her and to soften her distress, made
her, in return, desirous to express her gratitude. He soon discovered the
feelings of her mind; for she showed, on every occasion, a real concern
for his interest; and when he happened to fall ill, she took such tender
care of him herself, and by her servants, that he seemed to owe his
recovery entirely to her friendship. From these beginnings, insensibly,
and by natural degrees, as may easily be conceived, the youth fell
desperately in love. At first he offered not to make the least mention
of his passion to the princess, for he scarce dared believe it himself.
But time, and the increasing ardor of his passion, subdued his fears,
and she received his declaration with an unaffected trouble, and real
concern. She reasoned with him as a friend, and endeavored to persuade
him to subdue so improper and extravagant a flame. But in a short time
he became outrageous, and talked to her of _force_. The princess was
alarmed by his audacity, and immediately sent to the prince to implore
his protection. The prince received the information with the appearance
of more than ordinary attention; sent instantly for one of his first
ministers, and directed him to return with the princess’ domestic, and
tell the young nobleman that _force_ was not to be used to such a lady;
but that he might use _persuasion_, if he thought it was proper so to
do. The minister, who was of course the inveterate enemy of his prince’s
favorite, aggravated the message, inveighed publicly against the young
nobleman for the grossness of his misconduct, and even reproached him to
his face with having been a traitor to the confidence of his prince, and
a disgrace to his nation. The minister, in short, conveyed the message
of his master in such virulent and angry terms, that the youth looked on
his case as desperate; fell into the deepest melancholy; and prepared
himself for that fate which he was conscious he well deserved. While he
was thus impressed with a sense of his misconduct, and the danger to
which it had exposed him, the prince commanded him to attend a private
audience. The youth entered the closet of the prince covered with the
deepest confusion. “I find,” said he, “that I am now become dreadful to
you indeed, since you can neither see me without shame, nor imagine me
to be without resentment. But away with all these thoughts from this
time forward! I know how much you have suffered on this occasion. I know
the power of love; and am no otherwise safe myself, than by keeping out
of the way of beauty. I alone am to blame; for it was I who unhappily
matched you with that unequal adversary; who gave you that impracticable
task; who imposed on you that hard adventure, which no one yet was ever
strong enough to accomplish.” “In this, sir, as in all else,” replied the
youth, “you express that goodness which is so natural to you. You have
compassion, and can allow for human frailties; but the rest of mankind
will never cease to upbraid me: nor shall I ever be forgiven, even were I
able ever to forgive myself. I am reproached by my nearest friends; and I
must be odious to all mankind wherever I am known. The least punishment
I can think due to me is banishment for ever from your presence; for I
am no longer worthy of being called your friend.” “You must not think of
banishing yourself for ever,” replied the prince: “but trust me, if you
will retire only for a while, I shall so order matters, that you shall
return with the applause even of those who are now your enemies, when
they find what a considerable service you shall have rendered both to
them and me.” Such a hint was sufficient to revive the spirits of the
despairing youth. He was transported to think that his misfortunes could
be turned in any way to the advantage of his prince. He entered with
joy into the scheme his royal friend had contrived for the purpose of
restoring him to his former fame and happiness, and appeared eager to
depart and execute the directions that were given to him. “Can you then,”
said the prince, “resolve to quit the charming princess?” “O, sir,”
replied the youth, with tears in his eyes, “I am now well satisfied that
I have in reality within me two distinct separate souls. This lesson of
philosophy I have learnt from that villanous sophister love; for it is
impossible to believe that, having one and the same soul, it should be
actually both good and bad; passionate for virtue and vice, desirous of
contraries. No; there must of necessity be two; and when the good soul
prevails, we are happy; but when the bad prevails, we are miserable. Such
was my case. Lately the ill soul was wholly master, and I was miserable;
but now the good prevails, by your assistance, and I am plainly a new
creature, with quite another apprehension, another reason, and another
will.”

He who would be master of his appetites, must not only avoid temptation,
but vigilantly restrain the earliest shoots of fancy, and destroy the
first blooms of a warm imagination. It is the very nature of confidence
to be always in danger. To permit the mind to riot in scenes of fancied
delights, under an idea that reason will be able to extinguish the
flames of desire, is to nurse and foster the sensual appetites, which,
when guided by the cool and temperate voice of nature alone, are seldom
raised to an improper height. The natural current of the blood, even in
the warmest constitutions, and under the most torrid zone, would keep an
even, temperate course, were it not accelerated by such incentives. Youth
indeed despises this species of reasoning, and imputes it to the sickness
of satiety, or the coldness of old age. I have, however, in general,
observed, that those who seek these incitements to what they improperly
call love, possess a rayless eye, a hollow cheek, a palsied hand, a
pallid countenance; and these symptoms of faded splendour and withered
strength, unquestionably prove that they have not consulted nature in
their gay pursuits; for nature has not planted any propensities in the
human frame which lead it to early ruin, or premature decay. The blame
which is so unjustly thrown upon temperament and constitution, belongs
to the indulgence of false and clamorous passions, those which sensual
fancies, and lascivious ideas have raised to the destruction of chastity
and health.

Monastic institutions produce, in this respect, incalculable mischiefs.
The sexes, whom these religious prisons seclude from the free and
unconfined intercourses of society, suffer their imaginations to riot
without restraint or discipline, in proportion to the violence imposed
on their actions. A thousand boyish fancies, eager appetites and warm
desires, are perpetually playing truant, and the chastity of the soul
is corrupted. To effect the conquest of the passion of love, it is
absolutely necessary that the evil suggestions of the imagination should
be first silenced; and he who succeeds in quelling the insurrections
of that turbulent inmate, or in quieting its commotions, achieves an
enterprise at once difficult and glorious. The holy Jerome checked the
progress of many disorderly passions which he found rising in his breast;
but the passion of love resisted all his opposition, and followed him,
with increasing fury, even into the frightful cavern to which he retired
to implore, in humble prayer and solitary abstraction, the mercies of
his God. The solitude, however remote, to which the demon of sensuality
is admitted, is soon crowded with legions of tormenting fiends. John,
the anchorite of the deserts of Thebais, wisely addressed his solitary
brethren, “If there be any among you who in his pride, conceives that
he has entirely renounced the devil and all his works, he should learn
that it is not sufficient to have done this merely by his lips, by having
resigned his worldly dignities, and by dividing his possessions among
the poor; for, unless he has also abandoned his sensual appetites, his
salvation cannot be secure. It is only by purifying our bosoms from the
pernicious influence of this master passion, that we can ever hope to
counteract the machinations of satan, and to guard our hearts from his
dangerous practices. Sin always introduces itself under the guidance
of some guilty passion; some fond desire; some pleasing inclination,
which we willingly indulge, and by that means suffer the enemy of peace
to establish his unruly dominion in our souls. Then tranquillity and
real happiness quit their abode in our hearts, and all is uproar and
anarchy within. This must be the fate of all who permit an evil spirit
to seat itself on the throne of their hearts, and to scatter around
the poisonous seeds of wild desire and vicious inclinations.” But love
once indulged in bright and rapturous fancies, fills the mind with
such high and transporting ideas of supreme bliss, that the powers
of reason are seldom, if ever, capable of making head against its
fascinations. The hermit and the monk, who, from the nature of their
situations, cannot taste its real charms, ought, if it were for that
reason alone, to stifle at their birth the earliest emotions of this
inspiring passion; for the indulgence of it must prove fatal to the
virtue, and of course destructive to the peace of every recluse. The
impossibility that such characters can listen with any propriety to
the dictates of this delightful passion, shows in the strongest manner
the impolicy and absurdity of those institutions, on the members of
which celibacy is enjoined. The happiness of every individual, as well
as the civil and religious interests of society, are best promoted by
inducing the endearments of sense to improve the sympathies, tenderness,
and affections of the human heart. But these blessings are denied to
the solitary fanatic, who is condemned to endure the suppression of
his passions, and prevented from indulging without endangering his
principles, both the desires of sense, and the dreams of fancy. He
cannot form that delightful union of the sexes, where sentiments of
admiration are increased by prospects of personal advantage; where
private enjoyment arises from a sense of mutual merit; and the warmest
beams of love are tempered by the refreshing gales of friendship. The
grosser parts of this innate and glowing passion can alone occupy his
fancy; and the sentiments it instils, instead of refining his desires,
and meliorating his affections, tend, through the operation of his soul
and corrupted imagination, to render his appetites still more depraved.
He is as ignorant of its benefits as he is of its chaste and dignified
pleasures; and totally unacquainted with its fine sensibilities, and
varied emotions, his bosom burns with the most violent rage; his mind
wallows in images of sensuality; and his temper frets itself, by unjustly
accusing the tempter as the author of his misery. If the luxurious
cogitations of such a character were dissipated by the pleasures and
pursuits of busy life; if the violence of his passions were checked by
laborious exercises; and if habits of rational study enabled him to vary
the uniformity of retirement, and to substitute the excursions of mental
curiosity, and moral reflections, instead of that perpetual recurrence
of animal desire by which he is infected, the danger we have described
would certainly be reduced; but without such aids, his self-denials, his
penitence, his prayers, and all the austere discipline of the monkish
and ascetic school, will be ineffectual. Celibacy, indeed, instead of
assisting, as their disciples mistakingly conceive, to clear the soul
from its earthly impurities, and to raise it to divine brightness and
sublimity, drags it down to the basest appetites and lowest desires.
But matrimony, or that suitable and appropriate union of the sexes
which prevails under different circumstances, according to the manner
and custom of different societies, leads, when properly formed, to the
highest goal of human bliss.

The mischievous effects which the celibacy and solitude of monastic
institutions produce on that passion which arises so spontaneously
between the sexes in the human heart, will appear unavoidable, when it
is considered how absurdly the founders of these religious retreats have
frequently endeavored to guard against the danger. The partitions which
divide virtues from their opposite vices are so slender and conjoined,
that we scarcely reach the limits of the one before we enter to a certain
degree, the confines of the other. How ridiculous, therefore, is it
to conceive, that frequent meditation on forbidden pleasures, should
be at all likely to eradicate impure ideas from the mind. And yet the
Egyptian monastics were enjoined to have these rules constantly in their
contemplation: first, that their bosoms must remain unagitated by the
thoughts of love; that they should never permit their fancies to loiter
on voluptuous images; that female beauty, in its fairest form, and most
glowing charms, should be incapable of exciting in their hearts the least
sensation; and that, even during the hours of sleep, their minds should
continue untainted by such impure affections. The chastity of these
solitary beings was, on some occasions, actually tried by experiment; but
the consequences which resulted from such irrational discipline, were
directly the reverse of those it was intended to produce. The imagination
was vitiated, and the inclination rendered so corrupt, that neither
the examples nor the precepts of the more enlightened ages were able
to correct their manners, or reclaim them from the machinations of the
unclean spirit. Numberless indeed, and horrid, are the instances recorded
by Ruffinus, and other writers, of the perversions of all sense and
reason, of all delicacy and refinement, of all virtue and true holiness,
which prevailed in the ascetic solitudes of every description, while the
nuptial state was held incompatible with the duties of religion, and the
sexes separated from each other, that they might more piously, and with
less interruption, follow its dictates. Some of the fathers of the church
defined female celibacy to be the only means of living a chaste and godly
life amidst the impurities of a sinful world, and regaining, during the
perdition of gross mortality, the resemblance of the soul’s celestial
origin. The holy, happy tie of matrimony they considered as a cloak to
the indulgence of impure desires, and launched their anathemas against it
as an hateful institution. Even the eloquent and pious Chrysostom says,
“that a double purpose was intended to be attained by the institution of
marriage, _viz._ the propagation of the species, and the gratification
of sexual affection; but that, as population had sufficiently covered
the face of the earth, the first had become no longer necessary; and
that it was the duty of the sexes rather to conquer their affections
by abstinence and prayer, than indulge them under so thin a disguise.”
The human soul, he admits, must, in a state of celibacy, subsist under
a perpetual warfare and the faculties be in continual ferment; but
contends, that piety exists in proportion to the difficulties which the
sufferer surmounts. The holy fathers seem, from the whole strain of
their exhortations and reasonings, to have considered female chastity
in a very serious point of view; and there can be no doubt but that it
is the brightest jewel and most becoming ornament of the sex; but these
reverend teachers were so blinded by their zeal, that they lost all
sight of nature, and mistakingly conceived that the Great Creator had
planted affections in our hearts, and passions in our breasts, only to
try our tempers in suppressing their turbulence, rather than promote
our happiness, and to answer the ends of his creation, by a sober and
rational indulgence of them.

But nature will not be argued out of her rights; and these absurd
doctrines introduced into every monastic institution throughout Europe
a private intercourse, hostile, from its evil example to the interests
both of morality and religion. The nuns of the convent of Argenteuil,
who chose Eloisa for their Abbess, were in all probability, influenced
in their choice by the recollections of her former frailty, and their
knowledge of the present ruling passion of her heart; they meant to
provide the abbey with a superior who, if she were not inclined to
promote, would feel no disposition to interrupt their intrigues. The fact
certainly was, that during the time Eloisa presided over the convent,
the conduct of the nuns was so extremely licentious, that Sugger, abbot
of St. Dennis, complained of their irregularities to Pope Honorius, in
such a manner as to induce his holiness to give the abbot possession of
it; and he immediately expelled the negligent prioress and her intriguing
sisters, and established in their place a monastery of his own order.
Strong suspicions may, perhaps, prevail against the virtue and integrity
of Eloisa’s character, from the dissoluteness which existed in this
society; but she was certainly not included by name in the articles of
accusation which the abbot of St. Dennis transmitted upon this subject
to the court of Rome; and there is every reason to believe that these
irregularities were carefully concealed from her knowledge. When this
lovely victim was presented with the veil, some persons who pitied her
youth, and admired her beauty, represented to her the cruel sacrifice she
would make of herself by accepting it: but she immediately exclaimed, in
the words of Cornelia, after the death of Pompey the great--

    “Oh my loved lord! our fatal marriage draws
    On thee this doom, and I the guilty cause:
    Then while thou go’st th’ extremes of fate to prove,
    I’ll share that fate, and expiate thus my love!”

and accepted the fatal present with a constancy not to have been expected
in a woman who had so high a taste for pleasures which she might still
enjoy. It will therefore, be easily conceived, that her distress, on
being ignominiously expelled from this retreat, was exceedingly severe.
She applied to Abelard to procure her some permanent asylum, where
she might have the opportunity of estranging herself from all earthly
weaknesses and passions; and he, by the permission of the bishop of
Troyes, resigned to her the house and the chapel of Paraclete, with its
appendages, where she settled with a few sisters, and became herself the
foundress of a nunnery. Of this monastery she continued the superior
until she died; and whatever her conduct was among the licentious nuns of
Argenteuil, she lived so regular in this her new and last retreat, and
conducted herself with such exemplary prudence, zeal, and piety, that all
her former failings were forgot, her character adored by all who knew
her, and her monastery in a short time enriched with so great a variety
of donations, that she was celebrated as the ablest cultivator of the
virtues of forgiveness and Christian charity then existing. The bishop
of the district behaved to her as if she had been his own daughter; the
neighboring priors and abbots treated her with all the tenderness and
attention of a real sister: and those who were distressed and poor,
revered her as their mother. But all her cares, and all her virtues,
could not protect her against the returning weakness of her heart.
“Solitude,” says she, “is insupportable to a mind that is ill at ease;
its troubles increase in the midst of silence, and retirement heightens
them. Since I have been shut up within these walls, I have done nothing
but weep for our misfortunes: this cloister has resounded with my cries,
and like a wretch condemned to eternal slavery, I have worn out my days
in grief and sighing.”

The useful regulations imposed by the wisdom of St. Benedict upon the
votaries of monastic retirement, were soon neglected. Abstinence and
prayer were succeeded by luxury and impiety. The revenues of the several
orders had, by the increased value of property, become so great, that
they were expended in purchasing a remission of those duties which
their founders had enjoined. The admission of the poor laity relieved
the initiated members from the toil of cultivating the demesne lands,
and produced a system of indolence and laziness. They exchanged their
long fast and unsavory diet, for frequent feasts, and the richest
repasts; substituted indolent pride for laborious humility; and lost
entirely their original piety and virtue. Abelard, indeed, and some few
other abbots of the tenth century, endeavored to restore the ancient
discipline, but they were reviled and persecuted with the most vindictive
malice by their contemporaries. The duke of Brittany, in order to secure
Abelard from the rage with which he was pursued, for exercising qualities
which ought to have procured him admiration and esteem, gave him the
convent of St. Gildas, as an asylum from their hatred. The high character
which this monastery comparatively enjoyed for regularity and good
order, excited a hope that he might there find rest from his vexations,
and consolation for his griefs. But instead of finding it the seat of
wisdom and piety, and the mansion of tranquillity, he discovered the
most dissolute manners and abandoned conduct prevailing in every part of
the convent. His mild and rational attempts to reclaim these disorderly
brethren, were so far from producing the desired effect upon their minds,
that it only provoked their rage, and gave new edge to their malice.
Foiled in their endeavors, by conspiracy and calumny, to dispossess him
of his situation, they attempted, several times at their common repasts,
to infuse poison into his victuals: and at length, dreadful to relate!
actually administered, in the sacramental cup, the poisoned chalice to
his lips, but which he was miraculously prevented from tasting. It is,
indeed, impossible to read the description he has given of his dreadful
situation in this wild and savage community, without shuddering at the
idea how much an irrational solitude tends to corrupt the manners and
deprave the heart. “I live,” says he, in his letter to Philintus, “in a
barbarous country, the language of which I do not understand. I have no
conversation but with the rudest people. My walks are on the inaccessible
shore of a sea which is perpetually stormy. My monks are only known by
their dissoluteness, and living without any rule or order. Ah! Philintus,
were you to see my habitation, you would rather think it a slaughter
house than a convent. The doors and walks are without any ornament except
the heads of wild boars, the antlers of stags, the feet of foxes and the
hides of other animals, which are nailed up against them. The cells are
hung with the skins of victims destroyed in the chase. The monks have not
so much as a bell to wake them, and are only roused from their drowsiness
by the howling of dogs and the croaking of ravens. Nothing disturbs
their laziness or languor but the rude noises of hunting; and their only
alternatives are riot and rest. But I should return my thanks to heaven
if that were their only fault. I endeavor in vain to recall them to their
duty; they all combine against me; and I only expose myself to continual
vexations and dangers. I imagine I see every moment a naked sword hanging
over my head. Sometimes they surround me, and load me with the vilest
abuse; and even when they abandon me, I am still left to my own dreadful
tormenting thoughts.” This single example would be sufficient to prove
the extraordinary dominion which solitude has over the human mind. It
is, indeed, unless it be managed with great good sense, the complete
nursery of mischief. The mind is without those numerous incentives to
action which are continually occurring in the busy world; and nothing
can contribute to produce irregular and disorderly passions more than
the want of some pursuit by which the heart is interested and the mind
employed. The minds of idle persons are always restless; their hearts
never at perfect ease; their spirits continually on the fret; and their
passions goaded to the most unwarrantable excess.

Idleness, even in social life, inflicts the severest torments on the
soul; destroys the repose of individuals; and, when general, frequently
endangers the safety of the state. Timotheus, an Egyptian monk, surnamed
the Cat, a short time after the Eutychian Controversy, in the year
457, felt an ambition to fill the episcopal and patriarchal chair.
The splenetic restlessness which prevailed among the monks in their
several monastic solitudes, seemed to present to his observing eye
proper instruments for the execution of his scheme. He was conscious,
from his profound knowledge of the human character, that if men who
had so long remained in uneasy and dissatisfied indolence, could be
provoked to activity, their zeal would be as turbulent as their former
life had been lazy and supine; and that their dispositions might be
easily turned to the accomplishment of his wishes. The better to effect
his purpose, he clothed himself in a white garment, crept silently in
the dead of night to the cells of his companions, and, through a tube,
which concealed his voice while it magnified the sound of it, hailed
every monk by his name. The sound seemed to convey the voice of heaven
to the superstitious ears of the awakened auditors; and the sagacious
and enterprising trumpeter did not fail to announce himself as an
ambassador of heaven, sent in the name of the Almighty to command the
monks to assemble immediately, to consult on the most likely mode of
deposing the Nestorian heretic Proterus, and of raising the favored
and orthodox Timotheus to the episcopal throne. The idea of being thus
elected to execute this pious rebellion, roused all the sleeping powers
of these solitary and hitherto idle fanatics; they rose tumultuously
at the sacred signal; proclaimed him as a heaven elected patriarch;
solicited him with friendly violence, not to refuse the promised boon;
and burning with all the ardor of expected success, marched, in a
few days under the banner of the imposter, to Alexandria, where they
inspired the members of other monasteries with their own delusion, and
created throughout Egypt the wildest and most tremendous commotions.
The populace caught the religious frenzy, and joined in vast numbers the
monastic rout. Assisted by this desperate rabble, Timotheus proceeded
to the principal church of Alexandria, where he was, by a preconcerted
arrangement, pompously received by two deposed bishops, and ordained the
metropolitan of the whole Egyptian territory. Proterus was astonished
at this sudden irruption, and hurled his anathemas with great art and
dexterity against the impious audacity of the obscure monastic who had
thus dared to depart from the humility of his station, and to invade
with his indolent brethren, the rights of sovereignty; but being well
aware of the fury with which this description of men generally act when
they are once set in motion, and being informed of the vast multitude by
which they had been joined, he thought it prudent to quit his palace, and
to retire to the sacred shelter of the church of St. Quirinus. Heathens
and barbarians had heretofore respected this venerable sanctuary; but,
upon the present occasion, it was incapable of giving safety to its aged
refugee. The furious troops of the holy imposter burst with irresistible
violence through the walls of this consecrated edifice, and with their
daggers drank the blood of the innocent pontiff, even upon that altar,
the very sight of which ought to have paralyzed the hand of guilt. His
surrounding and numerous friends, particularly six ecclesiastics of
great eminence, learning, and piety, shared the fate of their unhappy
master, and were found, when the dreadful massacre was over, clinging
with fondness, in the arms of death, round his mangled body. But it was
necessary for the murderers to calumniate the purity of that life which
they had thus violently and injuriously destroyed. They accordingly
dragged the corpse of this virtuous patriarch to the most public part
of the city, and, after the grossest abuse of his character, and most
scandalous misrepresentation of his conduct, hung it on an elevated
cross, and exposed it to the brutal insults of the misguided and deluded
populace. To complete this unmanly outrage, they at length committed the
torn and mangled remains of this excellent prelate to the flames, and
hurled his ashes, amidst the most opprobrious and insulting epithets,
into the darkened air; exclaiming with horrid imprecations, that the
mortal part of such a wretch was not entitled to the right of sepulchre,
or even the tears of friends. So furious and undaunted, indeed, were
all the oriental monks, when once roused from their monastic lethargy,
that even the soldiers of the Greek emperors cautiously avoided meeting
them in the field. The fury by which they were actuated was so blind,
that the pious Chrysostom, the warmest and most zealous advocate for
monastic institutions, trembled at his approach. This celebrated father
of the church was born in the year 344, of one of the first families of
the city of Antioch, and added new lustre to their fame by his virtues
and his eloquence. Having finished his studies with wonderful success,
under Libanus, the greatest rhetorician of the age, he devoted himself to
the study of the law; but religion having planted itself deeply in his
mind, he quitted all secular concerns, and retired into solitude among
the mountains in the vicinity of the city, where, in the dreary caves, he
devoted two entire years to penitence and prayer. Ill health, however,
obliged him to return to Antioch; he began to preach the Word, and was
soon followed by a host of disciples. The life of this excellent pastor
was an example to his whole flock. He endeavored to drive away the wolves
from the folds, and sent missionaries even into Scythia, to convert its
inhabitants to Christianity. These missions, and his various charities,
required either considerable revenues or the most rigid economy; and
the holy patriarch was contented to live in the extremest poverty, that
he might have the better opportunity of relieving the sufferings of his
fellow creatures. The character and conduct of this virtuous pontiff soon
gained him the hearts of his people, and he set himself earnestly to
reform the many abuses which at this time prevailed at Constantinople.
The severity and vehemence, however, with which he declaimed against
the pride, the luxury, and the rapacity of the great; the zeal with
which he endeavored to reform the vices and misconduct of the clergy;
and the eagerness he discovered for the conversion of heretics, created
him a multitude of enemies; and Eutropius, the favorite of the Emperor
Arcadius; Gainas, the tyrant to whom he had refused protection for the
Arians; Theophilus, of Alexandria, the patron of the Origenists; and
the disciples of Arius, whom he banished from Constantinople, entered
into a conspiracy against him; and an occasion soon happened, which gave
them the opportunity of taking ample vengeance. The intrepid preacher,
convinced that while he declaimed against vice in general, the peculiar
vices which prevailed in the court of the Empress Eudoxia, and the
personal misconduct of the Empress herself, called aloud for his severest
animadversions, he took every opportunity of exposing them to the public
abhorrence. The resentment of the court encouraged the discontent of
the clergy and monks of Constantinople, who had been very severely
disciplined by the zeal of the archbishop. He had condemned from the
pulpit the domestic females of the clergy of Constantinople, who, under
the name of servants or sisters, afforded a perpetual occasion either
of sin or scandal. The silent and solitary ascetics, who had secluded
themselves from the world, were entitled to the warmest appprobation of
Chrysostom; but he despised and stigmatized, as the disgrace of their
holy profession, the crowd of degenerate monks, who from some unworthy
motives of pleasure or profit, so frequently infested the streets of the
metropolis. To the voice of persuasion, the archbishop was obliged to
add the lesson of authority; and in his visitation through the Asiatic
provinces, he deposed thirteen bishops of Lydia and Phrygia; and declared
that a deep corruption of simony and licentiousness had infected the
whole episcopal order. These bishops also entered into the confederacy
above mentioned, and the excellent Chrysostom was studiously represented
as the intolerable tyrant of the eastern church. This ecclesiastical
conspiracy was managed by the archbishop of Alexandria, who, by the
invitation of Eudoxia, landed at Constantinople with a stout body of
Egyptian mariners, to encounter the populace, and a train of dependant
bishops, to secure, by their voices, a majority of a synod. The synod
was convened in the suburbs of Chalcedon, and was called the Oak; in
which Chrysostom, was accused of treason against the empress; rudely
arrested, and driven into exile; from whence, however, he was in two
days recalled; but, upon a repetition of his imputed offences, was again
banished to the remote and desolate town of Cucusus among the ridges
of mount Taurus, in the Lesser Armenia. On his way to this place, he
was detained by sickness at Cesarea, and at length confined to his bed.
The bishop of Cesarea, who had long entertained a secret enmity against
him, unmoved by his fallen fortunes and helpless state, stirred up the
lazy monks of the surrounding monasteries to vengeance against him. The
fury with which they issued from their respective cells was incredible;
like the sleeping powder of the present age, they burst into immediate
conflagration and explosion at the touch of that hand by which they were
fired, and directing their heated animosity against the dying Chrysostom,
surrounded his house and threatened, that if he did not immediately
depart, they would involve it in flames, and bury him in its ruins. The
soldiers of the garrison were called out to protect the life of this
virtuous ecclesiastic; and, on their arrival at the scene of action,
very courteously requested the enraged monks to be quiet and depart; but
the request was treated with contempt and defiance; and it was by the
humane resolution of Chrysostom himself that this tumult was quelled;
for, rather than the blood of his fellow creatures should be shed on
his account, he desired a litter might be procured, into which, in his
almost expiring state, he was roughly laid, and, by his departure from
the city, escaped the fury which thus assailed his life. It is evident,
from these facts, that the irrational solitude of monastic institutions,
particularly that which prevailed in the early ages of Christianity
in the eastern parts of the converted world, instead of rendering the
votaries of it mild, complacent and humane, filled their minds with the
wildest notions, and the most uncharitable and acrimonious passions,
and fostered in their hearts the most dangerous and destructive vices.
It is truly said, by a very elegant writer and profound observer of men
and manners, that monastic institutions unavoidably contract and fetter
the human mind; that the partial attachment of a monk to the interest of
his order, which is often incompatible with that of other citizens, the
habit of implicit obedience to the will of a superior, together with the
frequent return of the wearisome and frivolous duties of the cloister,
debase his faculties, and extinguish that generosity of sentiment and
spirit which qualifies men for thinking and feeling justly, with respect
to what is proper in life and conduct; and that father Paul of Venice
was, perhaps, the only person educated in a cloister, that ever was
altogether superior to its prejudices, or who viewed the transactions of
men, and reasoned concerning the interests of society, with the enlarged
sentiments of a philosopher, with the discernment of a man conversant
in affairs, and with the liberality of a gentleman. Depraved, however,
as this order of men has ever been, it was to their prayers and masses
that all the princes and potentates of more than half the discovered
regions of the earth confided their salvation, and expected from their
intercession, divine favor from the fountain of all goodness and truth.
But the fears which these artful and intriguing ecclesiastics raised
in the weak or guilty minds of their contemporaries, instead of being
quieted by the conciliatory and comforting doctrines of the gospel of
Christ, were converted to the purposes of their own sordid avarice, and
made subservient to the enjoyment of their vices, and the advancement
of their power. They inculcated the notion, that the surest passport to
eternal bliss was to overwhelm them with riches, and to indulge them with
extraordinary privileges; and every haughty noble, or despotic sovereign,
who was anxious to gratify his own wanton pleasures, and capricious
vices, at the expense of his people’s prosperity and happiness,
endeavored to reconcile himself to his offended God, by bribing these
ambitious and greedy monastics to grant them absolution for their deepest
crimes. Their history exhibits, in full view, the melancholy truth, that
their hearts were corrupted by the worst passions that disgrace humanity,
and that the discipline of the convent was seldom productive of a single
virtue. Enthusiasts, indeed, of every description, whose sentiments
and feelings are continually at war with the dictates of nature, and
who renounce all the pleasing sympathies, gentle endearments, kind
connexions, and rational enjoyments of life, are not likely to entertain
any great anxiety for the interest or happiness of others, or to feel the
least commiseration for their sorrows. Occupied by sordid and selfish
pursuits, they must hate and despise a society, to the lively enjoyments
of which they look back with such keen regret. When the mind, alas! has
numbed its sense of social joys, and become a stranger to the delightful
charms of sweet domestic love; when all affection for the world and
its concerns has been studiously expelled from the bosom, and no kind
feeling or social inclination suffered to fill the vacant heart; when
man has separated himself from his species, and has not united his soul
with his Creator, he has lost all power of being happy himself, or of
communicating happiness to others.

The bishop exceeded the inferior clergy in every kind of profligacy,
as much as in opulence and power; and, of course, their superintending
and visitorial authority was not exerted to lessen or restrain the
prevalence of those vices which their evil example contributed so greatly
to increase. Time and chance sometimes produce extraordinary events;
and if a really pious, vigilant, and austere prelate arose amidst the
general dissoluteness of the age, his single effort to reclaim these
solitary ecclesiastics was seldom attended with success. These fathers,
indeed, frequently scrutinized with great minuteness into the practices
of the convents; and as they were not so able to detect the guilt of
incontinency, as some philosophers of the present age pretend to be, by
the lines and features of the face, they proceeded upon evidence less
delicate, perhaps, but certainly more demonstrative and unerring.

The celebrated Boccace has, by his witty and ingenious tales, very
severely satirized the licentiousness and immorality which prevailed
during his time in the Italian monasteries; but, by exposing the
scandalous lives, and lashing the vices, of the monks, nuns, and other
orders of the Catholic clergy, he has been decried as a contemner of
religion, and as an enemy to true piety. Contemporary historians have
also delivered the most disgusting accounts of their intemperance and
debauchery. The frailty, indeed, of the female monastics was even an
article of regular taxation; and the holy father did not disdain to fill
his coffers with the price of their impurities. The frail nun, whether
she had become immured within a convent, or still resided without its
walls, might redeem her lost honor, and be reinstated in her former
dignity and virtue, for a few ducats. This scandalous traffic was
carried to an extent that soon destroyed all sense of morality, and
heightened the hue of vice. Ambrosius, bishop of Camadoli, a prelate
of extraordinary virtue, visited various convents in his diocese, but,
on inspecting their proceedings, he found no traces of virtue, or even
of decency remaining in any one of them; nor was he able, with all the
sagacity he exercised on the subject, to reinfuse the smallest particle
of these qualities into the degenerated minds of the sisterhood.

The reform of the nunneries was the first step that distinguished the
government of Sextus IV. after he ascended the papal throne, at the close
of the fifteenth century. Bossus, a celebrated canon, of the strictest
principles, and most inflexible disposition, was the agent selected by
his holiness for this arduous achievement. The Genoese convents, where
the nuns lived in open defiance of all the rules of decency and precepts
of religion, were the first objects of his attention. The orations which
he publicly uttered from the pulpit, as well as the private lectures
and exhortations which he delivered to the nuns from the confessional
chair, were fine models, not only of his zeal and probity, but of his
literature and eloquence. They breathed, in the most impressive manner,
the true spirit of Christian purity; but his glowing representations
of the bright beauties of virtue, and the dark deformities of vice
made little impression upon their corrupt hearts. Despising the open
calumnies of the envious, and the secret hostilities of the guilty, he
proceeded, in spite of all discouragement and opposition, in his highly
honorable pursuit; and at length, by his wisdom and assiduity, beheld
the fairest prospects of success daily opening to his view. The rays of
hope, however, had scarcely beamed upon his endeavors, when they were
immediately overclouded by disappointment. The arm of magistracy, which
he had wisely called upon to aid the accomplishment of his design, was
enervated by the venality of its hand; and the incorrigible objects of
his solicitude having freed themselves by bribery from the terror of the
civil power, contemned the reformer’s denunciation of eternal vengeance
hereafter, and relapsed into their former licentiousness and depravity.
A few, indeed, among the great number of nuns who inhabited these guilty
convents, were converted by the force of his eloquent remonstrances,
and became afterward highly exemplary by the virtue and piety of their
lives; but the rest abandoned themselves to their impious courses; and
though more vigorous methods were, in a short time, adopted against the
refractory monastics, they set all attempts to reform them at defiance.
The modes, perhaps, in which their vices were indulged, changed with
the character of the age; and as manners grew more refined, the gross
and shameful indulgences of the monks and nuns were changed into a more
elegant and decent style of enjoyment. Fashion might render them more
prudent and reserved in their intrigues; but their passions were not less
vicious, nor their dispositions less corrupt.

The disorderly manners of these solitary devotees were among the
principal causes that produced the reformation. There is a point beyond
which even depravity cannot go in corrupting the manners of the age.
The number and power of the monastics, or, as they were at that time
called, the regular clergy, was certainly great, and their resistance
to the approaches of reformation obstinate; but the temper of the times
had changed, and the glorious and beneficial event was at length
accomplished. The Catholics viewed the dismemberment of their church
as a fatal stroke to their interest and power; but it has since been
confessed, by every candid and rational member of this communion to be
an event which has contributed to advance morals to a higher degree of
perfection than they had ever before attained since the introduction of
Christianity, and to restore the discipline of the church to some portion
of its original purity.

The pure spirit of the gospel of Christ breathes forth a holy religion,
founded on meekness, charity, kindness, and brotherly love; but
fanaticism, when joined to a systematic and irrational solitude, only
produces the rank and poisonous fruits we have already described. The
trivial, querulous, and intolerant superstitions, which, during so
many ages, eclipsed the reason and morals of mankind, and obscured, in
clouds of lust and cruelty, the bright rays of evangelical truth, were
the sad effects of irrational solitude. The best affections of nature
were perverted or suppressed; all the gentle offices of humanity were
neglected; moral sentiments despised; and the angel voice of piety
unheard, or converted into the violent vociferations of hatred, and the
cries of persecution. The loud clangors of pretended orthodoxy resounded
with sanguinary hostilities from shore to shore; the earth was deluged
with the blood of those who dared to deny, or even to doubt the absurd
and idle dogmas which the monks every where invented: and their horrid
barbarities were attempted to be justified by propagating the notion that
severity with heretics was the only mode of preserving the true faith.
Oh! how blind is human folly! How obdurate are hearts vitiated by pride!
How can that be the true faith which tears asunder every social tie;
annihilates all the feelings of nature; places cruelty and horror on the
throne of humanity and love, and scatters ferocious fury and insatiable
hatred through the paths of life? But we may now indulge a pleasing hope,
that the period is at hand, when the sacred temple of religion, purified
by the labors of learned and truly pious men, from the foul stains with
which fanaticism and ambition have so long defaced it, shall be restored
to its own divine simplicity; and only the voice of gentleness, of love,
of peace of virtue, and of goodness, be heard within its walls. Then
will every Christian be truly taught the only means by which his days
may be useful and his life happy; and Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists,
Protestants, and every really religious class of men, will unite in acts
of sincere benevolence and universal peace. No austere, gloomy, and
dispiriting duties: no irrational penances and unnatural mortification,
will be enjoined; no intolerant cruelties be inflicted; no unsocial
institutions established; no rites of solitary selfishness be required;
but reason and religion in divine perfection, will reassume their reign;
and unaffected and sincere devotion will occupy every mind; the Almighty
will be worshipped _in spirit_ and _in truth_; and we shall be convinced
that “the wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest; but that
the work of righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietude and assurance for ever.” To effect this, a rational retirement
from the tumults of the world will be occasionally necessary, in order to
_commune with our own hearts, and be still_, and to dispose our minds to
such a train of thinking, as shall prepare us, when the giddy whirl of
life is finished for the society of more exalted spirits.

    Oh! would mankind but make fair truth their guide,
    And force the helm from prejudice and pride,
    Were once these maxims fix’d, that God’s our friend,
    Virtue our good, and happiness our end,
    How soon must reason o’er the world prevail,
    And error, fraud and superstition fail!
    None would hereafter, then, with groundless fear,
    Describe th’ Almighty cruel and severe;
    Predestinating some, without pretence,
    To heaven; and some to hell, for no offence;
    Inflicting endless pains for transient crimes,
    And favoring sects or nations, men or times.
    To please him, none would foolishly forbear,
    Or food, or rest, or itch in shirts of hair:
    Or deem it merit to believe, or teach,
    What reason contradicts or cannot reach.
    None would fierce zeal for piety mistake,
    Or malice, for whatever tenet’s sake;
    Or think salvation to one sect confin’d,
    And heaven too narrow to contain mankind.
    No more would brutal rage disturb our peace,
    But envy, hatred, war, and discord cease;
    Our own and others’ good each hour employ,
    And all things smile with universal joy;
    Fair virtue then, with pure religion join’d,
    Would regulate and bless the human mind,
    And man be what his Maker first design’d.




