CHAPTER II.

_The influence of solitude upon the mind._


The true value of liberty can only be conceived by minds that are free:
slaves remain indolently contented in captivity. Men who have been long
tossed upon the troubled ocean of life, and have learned by severe
experience to entertain just notions of the world and its concerns, to
examine every object with unclouded and impartial eyes, to walk erect in
the strict and thorny paths of virtue, and to find their happiness in the
reflections of an honest mind, alone are _free_.

The path of virtue, indeed, is devious, dark and dreary; but though it
leads the traveller over hills of difficulty, it at length brings him
into the delightful and extensive plains of permanent happiness and
secure repose.

The love of solitude, when cultivated in the morn of life, elevates
the mind to a noble independence; but to acquire the advantage which
solitude is capable of affording, the mind must not be impelled to it by
melancholy and discontent, but by a real distaste to the idle pleasures
of the world, a rational contempt for the deceitful joys of life, and
just apprehensions of being corrupted and seduced by its insinuating and
destructive gayeties.

Many men have acquired and exercised in solitude that transcendent
greatness of mind which defies events; and, like the majestic cedar,
which braves the fury of the most violent tempest, have resisted, with
heroic courage, the severest storms of fate.

Solitude, indeed, sometimes renders the mind in a slight degree arrogant
and conceited; but these effects are easily removed by a judicious
intercourse with mankind. Misanthropy, contempt of folly, and pride of
spirit, are, in noble minds, changed by the maturity of age into dignity
of character; and that fear of the opinion of the world which awed the
weakness and inexperience of youth, is succeeded by firmness, and a high
disdain of those false notions by which it was dismayed: the observations
once so dreadful lose all their stings; the mind views objects not as
they are, but as they ought to be; and, feeling a contempt for vice,
rises into a noble enthusiasm for virtue, gaining from the conflict a
rational experience and a compassionate feeling which never decay.

The science of the heart, indeed, with which youth should be familiarized
as early as possible, is too frequently neglected. It removes the
asperities and polishes the rough surfaces of the mind. This science
is founded on that noble philosophy which regulates the characters of
men; and operating more by love than by rigid precept, corrects the cold
dictates of reason by the warm feelings of the heart; opens to view the
dangers to which they are exposed; animates the dormant faculties of the
mind, and prompts them to the practice of all the virtues.

Dion was educated in all the turpitude and servility of courts,
accustomed to a life of softness and effeminacy, and, what is still
worse, tainted by ostentation, luxury, and every species of vicious
pleasure; but no sooner did he listen to the divine Plato, and acquire
thereby a taste for that sublime philosophy which inculcates the practice
of virtue, than his whole soul became deeply enamored of its charms. The
same love of virtue with which Plato inspired the mind of Dion, may be
silently, and almost imperceptibly infused by every tender mother into
the mind of her child. Philosophy, from the lips of a wise and sensible
woman, glides quietly, but with strong effect, into the mind through the
feelings of the heart. Who is not fond of walking, even through the most
rough and difficult paths, when conducted by the hand of love? What
species of instruction can be more successful than soft lessons from a
female tongue, dictated by a mind profound in understanding, and elevated
in sentiment, where the heart feels all the affection that her precepts
inspire? Oh! may every mother, so endowed, be blessed with a child who
delights to listen in private to her edifying observations; who, with a
book in his hand, loves to seek among the rocks some sequestered spot
favorable to study; who when walking with his dogs and gun, frequently
reclines under the friendly shade of some majestic tree, and contemplates
the great and glorious characters which the pages of Plutarch present
to his view, instead of toiling through the thickest of the surrounding
woods hunting for game.

The wishes of a mother are accomplished when the silence and solitude of
the forests seize and animate the mind of her loved child; when he begins
to feel that he has seen sufficiently the pleasures of the world; when
he begins to perceive that there are greater and more valued characters
than noblemen or esquires, than ministers or kings; characters who enjoy
a more elevated sense of pleasure than gaming tables and assemblies are
capable of affording; who seek, at every interval of leisure, the shades
of solitude with rapturous delight; whose minds have been inspired with
a love of literature and philosophy from their earliest infancy; whose
bosoms have glowed with a love of science through every subsequent period
of their lives; and who, amidst the greatest calamities, are capable of
banishing, by a secret charm, the deepest melancholy and most profound
dejection.

The advantages of solitude to a mind that feels a real disgust at the
tiresome intercourses of society, are inconceivable. Freed from the
world, the veil which obscured the intellect suddenly falls, the clouds
which dimmed the light of reason disappear, the painful burden which
oppressed the soul is alleviated; we no longer wrestle with surrounding
perils; the apprehension of danger vanishes; the sense of misfortune
becomes softened; the dispensations of Providence no longer excite the
murmur of discontent; and we enjoy the delightful pleasures of a calm,
serene and happy mind. Patience and resignation follow and reside with a
contented heart; every corroding care flies away on the wings of gayety;
and on every side agreeable and interesting scenes present themselves
to our view; the brilliant sun sinking behind the lofty mountains
tinging their snow-crowned turrets with golden rays; the feathered
choir hastening to seek within their mossy cells a soft, a silent, and
secure repose; the shrill crowing of the amorous cock; the solemn and
stately march of oxen returning from their daily toil, and the graceful
paces of the generous steed. But, amidst the vicious pleasures of a
great metropolis, where sense and truth are constantly despised, and
integrity and conscience thrown aside as inconvenient and oppressive, the
fairest forms of fancy are obscured, and the purest virtues of the heart
corrupted.

But the first and most incontestable advantage of solitude is, that
it accustoms the mind to think; the imagination becomes more vivid,
and the memory more faithful, while the sense remains undisturbed, and
no external object agitates the soul. Removed far from the tiresome
tumults of public society, where a multitude of heterogeneous objects
dance before our eyes and fill the mind with incoherent notions, we
learn to fix our attention to a single subject, and to contemplate that
alone. An author, whose works I could read with pleasure every hour of
my life, says, “It is the power of attention which, in a great measure
distinguishes the wise and great from the vulgar and trifling herd of
men. The latter are accustomed to think, or rather to dream, without
knowing the subject of their thoughts. In their unconnected rovings
they pursue no end, they follow no track. Every thing floats loose and
disjointed on the surface of their minds, like leaves scattered and blown
about on the face of the waters.”

The habit of thinking with steadiness and attention can only be acquired
by avoiding the distraction which a multiplicity of objects always
create; by turning our observation from external things, and seeking a
situation in which our daily occupations are not perpetually shifting
their course, and changing their direction.

Idleness and inattention soon destroy all the advantages of retirement;
for the most dangerous passions, when the mind is not properly employed,
rise into fermentation, and produce a variety of eccentric ideas and
irregular desires. It is necessary, also, to elevate our thoughts
above the mean consideration of sensual objects; the unincumbered mind
then recalls all that it has read; all that has pleased the eye or
delighted the ear; and reflecting on every idea which either observation,
experience, or discourse, has produced, gains new information by every
reflection, and conveys the purest pleasures to the soul. The intellect
contemplates all the former scenes of life; views by anticipation those
that are yet to come, and blends all ideas of past and future in the
actual enjoyment of the present moment. To keep, however, the mental
powers in proper tone, it is necessary to direct our attention invariably
toward some noble and interesting study.

It may, perhaps, excite a smile, when I assert, that solitude is the only
school in which the characters of men can be properly developed; but it
must be recollected, that, although the materials of this study must be
amassed in society, it is in solitude alone that we can apply them to
their proper use. The world is the great scene of our observations; but
to apply them with propriety to their respective objects is exclusively
the work of solitude. It is admitted that a knowledge of the nature of
man is necessary to our happiness; and therefore I cannot conceive how
it is possible to call those characters malignant and misanthropic, who
while they continue in the world, endeavor to discover even the faults,
foibles and imperfections of human kind. The pursuit of this species of
knowledge, which can only be gained by observation, is surely laudable,
and not deserving the obloquy that has been cast on it. Do I, in my
medical character, feel any malignity or hatred to the species, when
I study the nature, and explore the secret causes of those weaknesses
and disorders which are incidental to the human frame? When I examine
the subject with the closest inspection, and point out for the general
benefit, I hope, of mankind, as well as for my own satisfaction, all the
frail and imperfect parts in the anatomy of the human body?

But a difference is supposed to exist between the observations which
we are permitted to make upon the anatomy of the human body, and those
which we assume respecting the philosophy of the mind. The physician,
it is said, studies the maladies which are incidental to the human
frame, to apply such remedies as particular occasion may require: but
it is contended, that the moralist has a different end in view. This
distinction, however, is certainly without foundation. A sensible and
feeling philosopher views both the moral and physical defects of his
fellow creatures with an equal degree of regret. Why do moralists shun
mankind, by retiring into solitude, if it be not to avoid the contagion
of those vices which they perceive so prevalent in the world, and which
are not observed by those who are in the habit of seeing them daily
indulged without censure or restraint? The mind, without doubt feels a
considerable degree of pleasure in detecting the imperfections of human
nature; and where that detection may prove beneficial to mankind, without
doing an injury to any individual, to publish them to the world, to point
out their qualities, to place them, by a luminous description before the
eyes of men, is in my idea, a pleasure so far from being mischievous,
that I rather think, and I trust I shall continue to think so even in the
hour of death, it is the only real mode of discovering the machinations
of the devil, and destroying the effects of his work. Solitude,
therefore, as it tends to excite a disposition to think with effect, to
direct the attention to proper objects, to strengthen observation, and to
increase the natural sagacity of the mind, is the school in which a true
knowledge of the human character is most likely to be acquired.

Bonnet, in an affecting passage of the preface to his celebrated work on
the Nature of the Soul, relates the manner in which solitude rendered
even his defect of sight advantageous to him. “Solitude,” says he,
“necessarily leads the mind to meditation. The circumstances in which I
have hitherto lived, joined to the sorrows which have attended me for
many years, and from which I am not yet released, induced me to seek in
reflection those comforts which my unhappy condition rendered necessary;
and my mind is now become my constant retreat: from the enjoyments it
affords I derive pleasures which, like potent charms, dispel all my
afflictions.” At this period the virtuous Bonnet was almost blind.
Another excellent character, of a different kind, who devotes his time to
the education of youth, Pfeffel, at Colmar, supports himself under the
affliction of total blindness in a manner equally noble and affecting,
by a lifeless solitary indeed, but by the opportunities of frequent
leisure which he employs in the study of philosophy, the recreations
of poetry, and the exercises of humanity. There was formerly in Japan
a college of blind persons, who, in all probability, were endued with
quicker discernment than many members of more enlightened colleges.
These sightless academicians devoted their time to the study of history,
poetry, and music. The most celebrated traits in the annals of their
country became the subject of their muse; and the harmony of their verses
could only be excelled by the melody of their music. In reflecting upon
the idleness and dissipation in which a number of solitary persons pass
their time, we contemplate the conduct of these blind Japanese with
the highest pleasure. The _mind’s eye_ opened and afforded them ample
compensation for the loss of the corporeal organ. Light, life, and joy,
flowed into their minds through surrounding darkness, and blessed them
with high enjoyment of tranquil thought and innocent occupation.

Solitude teaches us to think, and thoughts become the principal spring
of human actions; for the _actions_ of men, it is truly said, are,
nothing more than their _thoughts_ embodied, and brought into substantial
existence. The mind, therefore, has only to examine with candor and
impartiality the idea which it feels the greatest inclination to pursue,
in order to penetrate and expound the mystery of the human character;
and he who has not been accustomed to self-examination, will upon such
a scrutiny, frequently discover truths of extreme importance to his
happiness, which the mists of worldly delusion had concealed totally from
his view.

Liberty and leisure are all that an active mind requires in solitude.
The moment such a character finds itself alone, all the energies of
his soul put themselves into motion, and rise to a height incomparably
greater than they could have reached under the impulse of a mind clogged
and oppressed by the encumbrances of society. Even plodding authors,
who only endeavor to improve the thoughts of others, and aim not at
originality for themselves, derive such advantages from solitude, as to
render them contented with their humble labors; but to superior minds,
how exquisite are the pleasures they feel when solitude inspires the idea
and facilitates the execution of works of virtue and public benefit!
works which constantly irritate the passions of the foolish, and confound
the guilty consciences of the wicked. The exuberance of a fine fertile
imagination is chastened by the surrounding tranquility of solitude: all
its diverging rays are concentrated to one certain point; and the mind
exalted to such powerful energy, that whenever it is inclined to strike,
the blow becomes tremendous and irresistible. Conscious of the extent
and force of his powers, a character thus collected cannot be dismayed
by legions of adversaries; and he waits, with judicious circumspection,
to render sooner or later, complete justice to the enemies of virtue.
The profligacy of the world, where vice usurps the seat of greatness,
hypocrisy assumes the face of candor, and prejudice overpowers the voice
of truth, must, indeed, sting his bosom with the keenest sensations
of mortification and regret; but cast his philosophic eye over the
disordered scene, he will separate what _ought to be indulged_ from _what
ought not to be endured_; and by a happy, well-timed stroke of satire
from his pen, will destroy the bloom of vice, disappoint machinations of
hipocrisy, and expose the fallacies on which prejudice is founded.

Truth unfolds her charms in solitude with superior splendor. A great and
good man; Dr. Blair, of Edinburgh, says, “The great and the worthy, the
pious and the virtuous, have ever been addicted to _serious retirement_.
It is the characteristic of little and frivolous minds to be wholly
occupied with the vulgar objects of life. These fill up their desires,
and supply all the entertainment which their coarse apprehensions can
relish. But a more refined and enlarged mind leaves the world behind it,
feels a call for higher pleasures, and seeks them in retreat. The man of
public spirit has recourse to it in order to reform plans for general
good; the man of genius in order to dwell on his favorite themes; the
philosopher to pursue his discoveries; and the saint to improve himself
in grace.”

Numa, the legislator of Rome, while he was only a private individual,
retired on the death of Tatia, his beloved wife, into the deep forests
of Aricia and wandered in solitary musings through the thickest groves
and most sequestered shades. Superstition imputed his lonely propensity,
not to disappointment, discontent, or hatred to mankind, but to a higher
cause: a wish silently to communicate with some protecting deity. A rumor
was circulated that the goddess Egeria, captivated by his virtues, had
united herself to him in the sacred bonds of love, and by enlightening
his mind, and storing it with superior wisdom, had led him to divine
felicity. The Druids also, who dwelt among the rocks, in the woods,
and in the most solitary places, are supposed to have instructed the
infant nobility of their respective nations in wisdom and in eloquence,
in the phenomena of nature, in astronomy, in the precepts of religion,
and the mysteries of eternity. The profound wisdom thus bestowed on the
characters of the Druids, although it was, like the story of Numa, the
mere effects of imagination, discovers with what enthusiasm every age and
country have revered those venerable characters who in the silence of the
groves, and in the tranquillity of solitude, have devoted their time and
talents to the improvement of the human mind, and the reformation of the
species.

Genius frequently brings forth its finest fruit in solitude, merely by
the exertion of its own intrinsic powers, unaided by the patronage of the
great, the adulation of the multitude, or the hope of mercenary reward.
Flanders, amidst all the horrors of civil discord, produced painters as
rich in fame as they were poor in circumstances. The celebrated Correggio
had so seldom been rewarded during his life, that the paltry payment of
ten pistoles of German coin, and which he was obliged to travel as far
as Parma, to receive, created in his mind a joy so excessive, that it
caused his death. The self-approbation of conscious merit was the only
recompense these great artists received; they painted with the hope of
immortal fame; and posterity has done them justice.

Profound meditation in solitude and silence frequently exalts the mind
above its natural tone, fires the imagination, and produces the most
refined and sublime conceptions. The soul then tastes the purest and
most refined delight, and almost loses the idea of existence in the
intellectual pleasure it receives. The mind on every motion darts through
space into eternity; and raised, in his free enjoyment of its powers by
its own enthusiasm, strengthens itself in the habitude of contemplating
the noblest subjects, and of adopting the most heroic pursuits. It was in
a solitary retreat, amidst the shades of a lofty mountain near Byrmont,
that the foundation of one of the most extraordinary achievements of
the present age was laid. The king of Prussia, while on a visit to Spa,
withdrew himself from the company, and walked in silent solitude amongst
the most sequestered groves of this beautiful mountain, then adorned in
all the rude luxuriance of nature, and to this day distinguished by the
appellation of “_The Royal Mountain_”.[4] On this uninhabited spot, since
become the seat of dissipation, the youthful monarch, it is said first
formed the plan of conquering Silesia.

Solitude teaches with the happiest effect the important value of _time_,
of which the indolent, having no conception, can form no estimate. A man
who is ardently bent on employment, who is anxious not to live entirely
in vain, never observes the rapid movements of a stop watch, the true
image of transitory life, and most striking emblem of the flight of time,
without alarm and apprehension. Social intercourse, when it tends to
keep the mind and heart in a proper tone, when it contributes to enlarge
the sphere of knowledge, or to banish corroding care, cannot, indeed,
be considered a sacrifice of time. But where social intercourse, even
when attended with these happy effects engages all our attention, turns
the calmness of friendship into violence of love, transforms hours into
minutes, and drives away all ideas, except those which the object of
our affection inspires, year after year will roll unimproved away. Time
properly employed never appears tedious; on the contrary, to him who is
engaged in usefully discharging the duties of his station, according to
the best of his ability, it is light, and pleasantly transitory.

A certain young prince, by the assistance of a number of domestics,
seldom employs above five or six minutes in dressing. Of his carriage
it would be incorrect to say he _goes_ in it; for it _flies_. His table
is superb and hospitable, but the pleasures of it are short and frugal.
Princes, indeed, seem disposed to do every thing with rapidity. This
royal youth who possesses extraordinary talents, and uncommon dignity of
character, attends in his own person to every application, and affords
satisfaction and delight in every interview. His domestic establishment
engages his most scrupulous attention; and he employs seven hours every
day without exception, throughout the year, in reading the best English,
Italian, French, and German authors. It may therefore be truly said, that
this prince is well acquainted with the value of time.

The hours which a man of the world throws idly away, are in solitude
disposed of with profitable pleasure; and no pleasure can be more
profitable than that which results from the judicious use of time. Men
have many duties to perform: he, therefore, who wishes to discharge them
honorably, will vigilantly seize the earliest opportunity, if he does not
wish that any part of the passing moments should be torn like a useless
page from the book of life. Useful employment stops the career of time,
and prolongs our existence. To think and to work, is to live. Our ideas
never flow with more rapidity and abundance, or with greater gayety, than
in those hours which useful labor steals from idleness and dissipation.
To employ our time with economy, we should frequently reflect how many
hours escape from us against our inclination. A celebrated English author
says, “When we have deducted all that is absorbed in sleep, all that
is inevitably appropriated to the demands of nature, or irresistably
engrossed by the tyranny of custom; all that is passed in regulating the
superficial decorations of life, or is given up in the reciprocation
of civility to the disposal of others; all that is torn from us by the
violence of disease, or stolen imperceptibility away by lassitude and
langor; we shall find that part of our duration very small of which we
can truly call ourselves masters, or which we can spend wholly at our own
choice. Many of our hours are lost in a rotation of petty cares, in a
constant recurrence of the same employments, many of our provisions for
ease or happiness are always exhausted by the present day, and a great
part of our existence serves no other purpose than that of enabling us to
enjoy the rest.”

Time is never more misspent than while we declaim against the want of it;
all our actions are then tinctured with peevishness. The yoke of life is
certainly the least oppressive when we carry it with good humor; and in
the shades of rural retirement, when we have once acquired a resolution
to pass our hours with economy, sorrowful lamentations on the subject of
time misspent, and business neglected, never torture the mind.

Solitude, indeed, may prove more dangerous than all the dissipation of
the world, if the mind be not properly employed. Every man, from the
monarch on the throne to the peasant in the cottage, should have a daily
task, which he should feel it his duty to perform without delay. “_Carpe
diem_,” says Horace; and this recommendation will extend with equal
propriety to every hour of our lives.

The voluptuous of every description, the votaries of Bacchus and the sons
of Anacreon, exhort us to drive away corroding care, to promote incessant
gaiety, and to enjoy the fleeting hours as they pass; and these precepts,
when rightly understood, and properly applied, are founded in strong
sense and sound reason; but they must not be understood or applied in the
way these sensualists advise; they must not be consumed in drinking and
debauchery; but employed in steadily advancing toward the accomplishment
of the task which our respective duties require us to perform. “If,”
says Petrarch, “you feel any inclination to serve God, in which consists
the highest felicities of our nature; if you are disposed to elevate the
mind by the study of letters, which, next to religion, procures us the
truest pleasures; if by your sentiments and writings, you are anxious to
leave behind you something that will memorize your name with posterity;
stop the rapid progress of time, and prolong the course of this uncertain
life--fly, ah; fly, I beseech you, from the enjoyment of the _world_, and
pass the few remaining days you have to live in … _Solitude_.”

Solitude refines the taste, by affording the mind greater opportunities
to call and select the beauties of those objects which engage its
attention. There it depends entirely upon ourselves to make choice of
those employments which afford the highest pleasure; to read those
writings, and to encourage those reflections which tend mostly to purify
the mind, and store it with the richest variety of images. The false
notions which we so easily acquire in the world, by relying upon the
sentiments of others, instead of consulting our own, are in solitude
easily avoided. To be obliged constantly to say, “_I dare not think
otherwise_,” is insupportable. Why, alas! will not men strive to form
opinions of their own, rather than submit to be guided by the arbitrary
dictates of others? If a work please me, of what importance is it to me
whether the _beau monde_ approve of it or not?--What information do I
receive from you, ye cold and miserable critics?--Does your approbation
make me feel whatever is truly noble, great and good, with higher relish
or more refined delight?--How can I submit to the judgment of men who
always examine hastily, and generally determine wrong?

Men of enlightened minds, who are capable of correctly distinguishing
beauties from defects, whose bosoms feel the highest pleasure from the
works of genius, and the severest pain from dullness and depravity, while
they admire with enthusiasm, condemn with judgment and deliberation; and,
retiring from the vulgar herd, either alone or in the society of selected
friends, resign themselves to the delights of a tranquil intercourse
with the illustrious sages of antiquity, and with those writers who have
distinguished and adorned succeeding times.

Solitude, by enlarging the sphere of its information, by awakening a more
lively curiosity, by relieving fatigue, and by promoting application,
renders the mind more active, and multiplies the number of its ideas. A
man who is well acquainted with all these advantages, has said, that, “by
silent, solitary reflection, we exercise and strengthen all the powers
of the mind. The many obstacles which render it difficult to pursue our
path disperse and retire, and we return to a busy, social life, with
more cheerfulness and content. The sphere of our understanding becomes
enlarged by reflection; we have learned to survey more objects, and to
behold them more intellectually together; we carry a clearer sight, a
juster judgment, and firmer principles with us into the world in which
we are to live and act; and are then more able, even in the midst of all
its distractions, to preserve our attention, to think with accuracy, to
determine with judgment, in a degree proportioned to the preparations we
have made in the hours of retirement.” Alas! in the ordinary commerce
of the world, the curiosity of a rational mind soon decays, whilst in
solitude it hourly augments. The researches of a finite being necessarily
proceed by slow degrees. The mind links one proposition to another,
joins experience with observation, and from the discovery of one truth
proceeds in search of others. The astronomers who first observed the
course of the planets, little imagined how important their discoveries
would prove to the future interests and happiness of mankind. Attached
by the spangled splendor of the firmament, and observing that the stars
nightly changed their course, curiosity induced them to explore the
cause of this phenomenon, and led them to pursue the road of science.
It is thus that the soul, by silent activity, augments its powers;
and a contemplative mind advances in knowledge in proportion as it
investigates the various causes, the immediate effects, and the remote
consequences of an established truth. Reason, indeed, by impeding the
wings of the imagination, renders her flight less rapid, but it makes
the object of attainment more sure. Drawn aside by the charms of fancy,
the mind may construct new worlds; but they immediately burst, like airy
bubbles formed of soap and water; while reason examines the materials of
its projected fabric, and uses those only which are durable and good.

“The great art to learn much,” says Locke, “is to undertake a little at
a time.” Dr. Johnson, the celebrated English writer, has very forcibly
observed, that “all the performances of human art, at which we look with
praise or wonder, are instances of the resistless force of perseverance:
it is by this that the quarry becomes a pyramid, and that distant
countries are united by canals. If a man was to compare the effect of a
single stroke with the pick-axe, or of one impression of a spade, with
the general design and last result, he would be overwhelmed with the
sense of their disproportion; yet those petty operations, incessantly
continued, in time surmount the greatest difficulties; and mountains are
levelled, and oceans bounded by the slender force of human beings. It
is therefore of the utmost importance that those who have any intention
of deviating from the beaten roads of life, and acquiring a reputation
superior to names hourly swept away by time among the refuse of fame,
should add to their reason and their spirit the power of persisting in
their purposes; acquire the art of sapping what they cannot batter; and
the habit of vanquishing obstinate resistance by obstinate attacks.”

It is activity of mind that gives life to the most dreary desert,
converts the solitary cell into a social world, gives immortal fame
to genius, and produces master-pieces of ingenuity to the artist. The
mind feels a pleasure in the exercise of its powers proportioned to the
difficulties it meets with, and the obstacles it has to surmount. When
Apelles was reproached for having painted so few pictures, and for the
incessant anxiety with which he retouched his works, he contented himself
with this observation, “_I paint for posterity_.”

The inactivity of monastic solitude, the sterile tranquillity of the
cloister, are ill suited to those who, after a serious preparation in
retirement, and an assiduous examination of their own powers, feel a
capacity and inclination to perform great and good actions for the
benefit of mankind. Princes cannot live the lives of monks; statesmen
are no longer sought for in monasteries and convents; generals are no
longer chosen from the members of the church. Petrarch, therefore,
very pertinently observes, “that solitude must not be inactive, nor
leisure uselessly employed. A character indolent, slothful, languid, and
detached from the affairs of life, must infallibly become melancholy and
miserable. From such a being no good can be expected; he cannot pursue
any useful science, or possess the faculties of a great man.”

The rich and luxurious may claim an exclusive right to those pleasures
which are capable of being purchased by pelf, in which the mind has
no enjoyment, and which only afford a temporary relief to langor, by
steeping the senses in forgetfulness; but in the precious pleasures
of intellect, so easily accessible by all mankind, the great have no
exclusive privilege; for such enjoyments are only to be procured by our
own industry, by serious reflection, profound thought, and deep research;
exertions which open hidden qualities to the mind, and lead it to the
knowledge of truth, and to the contemplation of our physical and moral
nature.

A Swiss preacher has in a German pulpit said, “The streams of mental
pleasures, of which all men may equally partake, flow from one to the
other; and that of which we have most frequently tasted, loses neither
its flavor nor its virtues, but frequently acquires new charms, and
conveys additional pleasure the oftener it is tasted. The subjects of
these pleasures are as unbounded as the reign of truth, as extensive as
the world, as unlimited as the divine perfections. Incorporeal pleasures,
therefore, are much more durable than all others; they neither disappear
with the light of the day, change with the external form of things, nor
descend with our bodies to the tomb; but continue with us while we exist;
accompany us under all the vicissitudes not only of our natural life, but
of that which is to come; secure us in the darkness of the night, and
compensate for all the miseries we are doomed to suffer.”

Great and exalted minds, therefore, have always, even in the bustle of
gaiety, or amidst the more agitated career of high ambition, preserved
a taste for intellectual pleasures. Engaged in affairs of the most
important consequence, notwithstanding the variety of objects by which
their attention was distracted, they were still faithful to the muses,
and fondly devoted their minds to works of genius. They disregarded the
false notion, that reading and knowledge are useless to great men; and
frequently condescended, without a blush, to become writers themselves.

Philip of Macedon, having invited Dionysius the younger to dine with him
at Corinth, attempted to deride the father of his royal guest, because
he had blended the characters of prince and poet, and had employed his
leisure in writing odes and tragedies. “How could the king find leisure,”
said Philip, “to write those trifles?” “In those hours,” answered
Dionysius, “which you and I spend in drunkenness and debauchery.”

Alexander who was passionately fond of reading and whilst the world
resounded with his victories, whilst blood and carnage marked his
progress, whilst he dragged captive monarchs at his chariot wheels, and
marched with increasing ardor over smoking towns and desolated provinces
in search of new objects of victory, felt during certain intervals,
the langors of unemployed time; and lamenting that Asia afforded no
books to amuse his leisure, he wrote to Harpalus to send him the works
of Philistus, the tragedies of Euripides, Sophocles, Æschylus, and the
dithyrambics of Thalestes.

Brutus, the avenger of the violated liberties of Rome, while serving in
the army under Pompey, employed among books all the moments he could
spare from the duties of his station; and was even thus employed during
the awful night which preceded the celebrated battle of Pharsalia, by
which the fate of the empire was decided. Oppressed by the excessive
heat of the day, and by the preparatory arrangement of the army, which
was encamped in the middle of summer on a marshy plain, he sought relief
from the bath, and retired to his tent, where, whilst others were locked
in the arms of sleep, or contemplating the event of the ensuing day, he
employed himself until the morning dawned, in drawing a plan from the
History of Polybius.

Cicero, who was more sensible of mental pleasures than any other
character, says, in his oration for the poet Archias, “Why should I be
ashamed to acknowledge pleasures like these, since for so many years the
enjoyment of them has never prevented me from relieving the wants of
others, or deprived me of the courage to attack vice and defend virtue?
Who can justly blame, who can censure me, if, while others are pursuing
the views of interest, gazing at festal shows and idle ceremonies,
exploring new pleasures, engaged in midnight revels, in the distraction
of gaming, the madness of intemperance, neither reposing the body, nor
recreating the mind, I spend the recollective hours in a pleasing review
of my past life, in dedicating my time to learning and the muses?”

Pliny the elder, full of the same spirit devoted every moment of his
life to learning. A person read to him during his meals; and he never
travelled without a book and a portable writing-desk by his side. He made
extracts from every work he read; and scarcely conceiving himself alive
while his faculties were absorbed in sleep, endeavored by his diligence,
to double the duration of his existence.

Pliny the younger, read upon all occasions, whether riding, walking, or
sitting, whenever a moment’s leisure afforded him the opportunity; but
he made it an invariable rule to prefer the discharge of the duties of
his station to those occupations which he followed only as amusement.
It was this disposition which so strongly inclined him to solitude and
retirement. “Shall I never,” exclaimed he in moments of vexation, “break
the fetters by which I am restrained? Are they indissoluble? Alas! I have
no hope of being gratified--every day brings new torments. No sooner is
one duty performed than another succeeds. The chains of business become
every hour more weighty and extensive.”

The mind of Petrarch was always gloomy and dejected, except when he was
reading, writing, or resigned to the agreeable illusions of poetry,
upon the banks of some inspiring stream, among the romantic rocks and
mountains, or the flower-enamelled vallies of the Alps. To avoid the
loss of time during his travels, he constantly wrote at every inn where
he stopped for refreshment. One of his friends, the bishop of Cavaillon,
being alarmed lest the intense application with which he studied at
Vaucluse might totally ruin a constitution already much impaired,
requested of him one day the key of his library. Petrarch immediately
gave it him without asking the reason of his request; when the good
bishop, instantly locking up his books and writing-desk, said, “Petrarch,
I hereby interdict you from the use of pen, ink, and paper, for the space
of ten days.” The sentence was severe; but the offender suppressed his
feelings, and submitted to his fate. The first day of his exile from his
favorite pursuits was tedious, the second accompanied with incessant
headache, and the third brought on symptoms of an approaching fever. The
bishop, observing his indisposition, kindly returned him the key, and
restored him to his health.

The late earl of Chatham, on his entering into the world, was a cornet in
a troop of horse dragoons. The regiment was quartered in a small village
in England. The duties of his station were the first objects of his
attention; but the moment these were discharged, he retired into solitude
during the remainder of the day, and devoted his mind to the study of
history. Subject from his infancy to an hereditary gout, he endeavored
to eradicate it by regularity and abstinence; and perhaps it was the
feeble state of his health which first led him into retirement; but,
however that may be, it was certainly in retirement that he had laid the
foundation of that glory which he afterwards acquired. Characters of this
description, it may be said, are no longer to be found; but in my opinion
both the idea and assertion would be erroneous. Was the earl of Chatham
inferior in greatness to a Roman? And will his son, who already, in the
earliest stage of manhood, thunders forth his eloquence in the senate,
like Demosthenes, and captivates like Pericles the hearts of all who hear
him: who is now, even in the five-and-twentieth year of his age, dreaded
abroad, and beloved at home, as prime minister of the British empire;
ever think, or act under any circumstances with less greatness, than
his illustrious father? What men have been, _man_ may always be. Europe
now produces characters as great as ever adorned a throne or commanded
a field. Wisdom and virtue may exist, by proper cultivation, as well in
public as in private life; and become as perfect in a crowded palace as
in a solitary cottage.

Solitude will ultimately render the mind superior to all the vicissitudes
and miseries of life. The man whose bosom neither riches, nor luxury,
nor grandeur can render happy, may, with a book in his hand, forget all
his torments under the friendly shade of every tree, and experience
pleasures as infinite as they are varied, as pure as they are lasting,
as lively as they are unfading, and as compatible with every public
duty as they are contributary to private happiness. The highest public
duty, indeed, is that of employing our faculties for the benefit of
mankind, and can no where be so advantageously discharged as in solitude.
To acquire a true notion of men and things, and boldly to announce
our opinions to the world, is an indispensible obligation on every
individual. The _press_ is the channel through which writers diffuse
the light of truth among _the people_, and display its radiance to the
eyes of _the great_. Good writers inspire the mind with courage to think
for itself; and the free communication of sentiments contributes to the
improvement and imperfection of human reason. It is this love of liberty
that leads men into solitude, where they may throw off the chains by
which they are fettered in the world. It is this disposition to be free,
that makes the man who thinks in solitude, boldly speak a language which,
in the corrupted intercourse of society, he would not have dared openly
to hazard. Courage is the companion of solitude. The man who does not
fear to seek his comforts in the peaceful shades of retirement, looks
with firmness on the pride and insolence of _the great_, and tears from
the face of despotism the mask by which it is concealed.

His mind, enriched by knowledge, may defy the frowns of fortune, and see
unmoved the various vicissitudes of life. When Demetrius had captured the
city of Megara, and the property of the inhabitants had been entirely
pillaged by the soldiers, he recollected that Stilpo, a philosopher of
great reputation, who sought only the retirement and tranquility of a
studious life, was among the number. Having sent for him, Demetrius
asked him if he had lost any thing during the pillage? “No,” replied the
philosopher, “_my property is safe, for it exists only in my mind_.”

Solitude encourages the disclosure of those sentiments and feelings which
the manners of the world compel us to conceal. The mind there unburthens
itself with ease and freedom. The pen, indeed, is not always taken up
because we are alone; but if we are inclined to write, we ought to be
alone. To cultivate philosophy, or court the muse with effect, the mind
must be free from all embarrassment. The incessant cries of children, or
the frequent intrusion of servants with messages of ceremony and cards
of compliment, distract attention. An author, whether walking in the
open air, seated in his closet, reclined under the shade of a spreading
tree, or stretched upon a sofa, must be free to follow all the impulses
of his mind, and indulge every bent and turn of his genius. To compose
with success, he must feel an irresistible inclination, and be able to
indulge his sentiments and emotions without obstacle or restraint. There
are, indeed, minds possessed of a divine inspiration, which is capable
of subduing every difficulty, and bearing down all opposition: and an
author should suspend his work until he feels this secret call within his
bosom, and watch for those propitious moments when the mind pours forth
its ideas with energy, and the heart feels the subject with increasing
warmth; for

                “… Nature’s kindling breath
    Must fire the chosen genius; Nature’s hand
    Must string his nerves and imp his eagle wings
    Impatient of the painful steep, to soar
    High as the summit; there to breath at large
    Ethereal air, with bards and sages old,
    Immortal sons of praise.…”

Petrarch felt this sacred impulse when he tore himself from Avignon,
the most vicious and corrupted city of the age, to which the pope had
recently transferred the papal chair; and although still young, noble,
ardent, honored by his holiness, respected by princes, courted by
cardinals, he voluntarily quitted the splendid tumults of this brilliant
court, and retired to the celebrated solitude of Vaucluse, at the
distance of six leagues from Avignon, with only one servant to attend
him, and no other possession than an humble cottage and its surrounding
garden. Charmed with the natural beauties of this rural retreat, he
adorned it with an excellent library, and dwelt, for many years, in wise
tranquillity and rational repose, employing his leisure in completing
and polishing his works: and producing more original compositions during
this period than at any other of his life. But, although he here devoted
much time and attention to his writings, it was long before he could be
persuaded to make them public. Virgil calls the leisure he enjoyed at
Naples, ignoble and obscure; but it was during this leisure that he wrote
the Georgics, the most perfect of all his works, and which evince, in
almost every line, that he wrote for immortality.

The suffrage of posterity, indeed, is a noble expectation, which every
excellent and great writer cherishes with enthusiasm. An inferior mind
contents itself with a more humble recompense, and sometimes obtains
its due reward. But writers both great and good, must withdraw from the
interruptions of society, and seeking the silence of the groves, and
the shades, retire into their own minds: for every thing they perform,
all that they produce, is the effect of solitude. To accomplish a work
capable of existing through future ages, or deserving the approbation
of contemporary sages, the love of solitude must entirely occupy their
souls; for there the mind reviews and arranges, with the happiest effect,
all the ideas and impressions it has gained in its observations in the
world: it is there alone that the dart of satire can be truly sharpened
against inveterate prejudices and infatuated opinions; it is there alone
that the vices and follies of mankind present themselves accurately to
the view of the moralist, and excite his ardent endeavors to correct and
reform them. The hope of immortality is certainly the highest with which
a great writer can possibly flatter his mind; but he must possess the
comprehensive genius of a Bacon: think with the acuteness of Voltaire:
compose with the ease and elegance of Rousseau; and, like them, produce
master-pieces worthy of posterity in order to obtain it.

The love of fame, as well in the cottage as on the throne, or in the
camp, stimulates the mind to the performance of those actions which are
most likely to survive mortality and live beyond the grave, and which
when achieved, render the evening of life as brilliant as its morning.
“The praises (says Plutarch,) bestowed upon great and exalted minds, only
spur on and rouse their emulation: like a rapid torrent, the glory which
they have already acquired, hurries them irresistibly on to every thing
that is great and noble.--They never consider themselves sufficiently
rewarded. Their present actions are only pledges of what may be expected
from them; and they would blush not to live faithful to their glory, and
to render it still more illustrious by the noblest actions.”

The ear which would be deaf to servile adulation and insipid compliment,
will listen with pleasure to the enthusiasm with which Cicero exclaims,
“Why should we dissemble what it is impossible for us to conceal? Why
should we not be proud of confessing candidly that we all aspire to
_fame_? The love of praise influences all mankind, and the greatest
minds are the most susceptible of it. The philosophers who most preach
up a contempt for fame, prefix their names to their works: and the very
performances in which they deny ostentation, are evident proofs of their
vanity and love of praise. Virtue requires no other reward for all the
toils and dangers to which she exposes herself than that of fame and
glory. Take away this flattering reward, and what would remain in the
narrow career of life to prompt her exertions? If the mind could not
launch into the prospect of futurity, or the operations of the soul were
to be limited to the space that bounds those of the body, she would not
weaken herself by constant fatigues, nor weary herself with continual
watchings and anxieties; she would not think even life itself worthy of
a struggle: but there lives in the breast of every good man a principle
which unceasingly prompts and inspirits him to the pursuit of a fame
beyond the present hour; a fame not commensurate to our mortal existence,
but co-extensive with the latest posterity. Can we, who every day expose
ourselves to dangers for our country, and have never passed one moment of
our lives without anxiety or trouble, meanly think that all consciousness
shall be buried with us in the grave? If the greatest men have been
careful to preserve their busts and their statues, those images, not
of their minds, but of their bodies, ought we not rather to transmit
to posterity the resemblance of our wisdom and virtue? For my part, at
least, I acknowledge, that in all my actions I conceived that I was
disseminating and transmitting my fame to the remotest corners and the
latest ages of the world. Whether, therefore, my consciousness of this
shall cease in the grave, or, as some have thought, shall survive as a
property of the soul, is of little importance. Of one thing I am certain,
that at this instant I feel from the reflection a flattering hope and a
delightful sensation.”

This is the true enthusiasm with which preceptors should inspire the
bosoms of their young pupils. Whoever shall be happy enough to light up
this generous flame, and increase it by constant application, will see
the object of his care voluntarily relinquish the pernicious pleasures of
youth, enter with virtuous dignity on the stage of life, and add, by the
performance of the noblest actions, new lustre to science, and brighter
rays to glory. The desire of extending our fame by noble deeds, and of
increasing the good opinion of mankind by a dignified conduct and real
greatness of soul, confers advantages which neither illustrious birth,
elevated rank, nor great fortune can bestow; and which, even on the
throne, are only to be acquired by a life of exemplary virtue, and an
anxious attention to the suffrages of posterity.

There is no character, indeed, more likely to acquire future fame than
the satirist, who dares to point out and condemn the follies, the
prejudices, and the growing vices of the age, in strong and nervous
language. Works of this description, however they may fail to reform the
prevailing manners of the times, will operate on succeeding generations,
and extend their influence and reputation to the latest posterity. True
greatness operates long after envy and malice have pursued the modest
merit which produced it to the grave. O, Lavater! those base corrupted
souls who only shine a moment, and are forever extinguished, will be
forgotten, while the memory of thy name is carefully cherished, and thy
virtues fondly beloved: thy foibles will be no longer remembered; and the
qualities which distinguished and adorned thy character will alone be
reviewed. The rich variety of thy language, the judgment with which thou
hast boldly intended and created new expressions, the nervous brevity of
thy style, and thy striking picture of human manners, will, as the author
of “The Characters of German Poets and Prose writers” has predicted,
extend the fame of thy “Fragments upon Physiognomy” to the remotest
posterity. The accusation that Lavater, who was capable of developing
such sublime truths, and of creating almost a new language, gave credit
to the juggles of Gesner, will then be forgot; and he will enjoy the life
after death, which Cicero seemed to hope for with so much enthusiasm.

Solitude, indeed, affords a pleasure to an author of which no one can
deprive him, and which far exceeds all the honors of the world. He not
only anticipates the effect his work will produce, but while it advances
towards completion, feels the delicious enjoyment of those hours of
serenity and composure which his labors procure. What continued and
tranquil delight flows from this successive composition! Sorrows fly
from this elegant occupation. O! I would not exchange one single hour
of such tranquillity and content, for all those flattering illusions of
public fame with which the mind of Tully was so incessantly intoxicated.
A difficulty surmounted, a happy moment seized, a proposition elucidated,
a sentence neatly and elegantly turned, or a thought happily expressed,
are salutary and healing balms, counter-poisons to melancholy, and belong
exclusively to a wise and well-formed solitude.

To enjoy himself without being dependant on the aid of others, to devote
to employments not perhaps entirely useless, those hours which sorrow and
chagrin would otherwise steal from the sum of life is the great advantage
of an author; and with this advantage alone I am perfectly contented.

Solitude not only elevates the mind, but adds new strength to its powers.
The man who has not courage to conquer the prejudices and despise
the manners of the world, whose greatest dread is the imputation of
singularity, who forms his opinion and regulates his conduct upon the
judgment and actions of others, will certainly never possess sufficient
strength of mind to devote himself to voluntary solitude; which, it has
been well observed, is as necessary to give a just, solid, firm, and
forcible tone to our thoughts, as an intercourse with the world is to
give them richness, brilliancy, and just appropriation.

The mind, employed on noble and interesting subjects, disdains
the indolence that stains the vacant breast. Enjoying freedom and
tranquillity, the soul feels the extent of its energies with greater
sensibility, and displays powers which it was before unconscious of
possessing: the faculties sharpen; the mind becomes more clear, luminous,
and extensive; the perception more distinct; the whole intellectual
system, in short, exacts more from itself in the leisure of solitude
than in the bustle of the world. But to produce these happy effects,
solitude must not be reduced to a state of tranquil idleness and inactive
ease, of mental numbness, or sensual stupor; it is not sufficient to
be continually gazing out of a window with a vacant mind, or gravely
walking up and down the study in a ragged _robe-de-chambre_ and worn-out
slippers; for the mere exterior of tranquillity cannot elevate or
increase the activity of the soul, which must feel an eager desire to
roam at large, before it can gain that delightful liberty and leisure,
which at the same instant improves the understanding and corrects the
imagination. The mind, indeed, is enabled, by the strength it acquires
under the shades of retirement, to attack prejudices, and combat
errors, with the unfailing prowess of the most athletic champion; for
the more it examines into the nature of things, the closer it brings
them to its view, and exposes, with unerring clearness, all the latent
properties they possess. An intrepid and reflecting mind, when retired
within itself, seizes with rapture on truth the moment it is discovered;
looks round with a smile of pity and contempt on those who despise its
charms; hears without dismay the invectives which envy and malice let
loose against him; and nobly disdains the hue and cry which the ignorant
multitude raise against him, the moment he elevates his hand to dart
against them one of the strongest and invincible truths he has discovered
in his retreat.

Solitude diminishes the variety of those troublesome passions
which disturb the tranquillity of the human mind, by combining and
forming a number of them into one great desire; for although it may
certainly become dangerous to the passions, it may also, thanks to
the dispensations of Providence! produce very salutary effects. If it
disorder the mind, it is capable of effecting its cure. It extracts
the various propensities of the human heart, and unites them into one.
By this process we feel and learn not only the nature, but the extent,
of all the passions which rise up against us like the angry waves of a
disordered ocean, to overwhelm us in the abyss; but philosophy flies
to our aid, divides their force, and, if we do not yield to them an
easy victory, by neglecting all opposition to their attacks, virtue and
self-denial bring gigantic reinforcements to our assistance, and ensure
success. Virtue and resolution, in short, are equal to every conflict,
the instant we learn that one passion is to be conquered by another.

The mind, exalted by the high and dignified sentiments it acquires by
lonely meditation, becomes proud of its superiority, withdraws itself
from every base and ignoble object, and avoids, with heroic virtue,
the effect of dangerous society. A noble mind observes the sons of
worldly pleasure mingling in scenes of riot and debauchery without being
seduced; hears it in vain echoed from every side, that incontinence is
among the first propensities of the human heart, and that every young
man of fashion and spirit must as necessarily indulge his appetite for
the fair sex, as the calls of hunger or of sleep. Such a mind perceives
that libertinism and dissipation not only enervate youth, and render the
feelings callous to the charms of virtue, and principles of honesty,
but that it destroys every manly resolution, renders the heart timid,
decreases exertion, damps the generous warmth and fine enthusiasm of the
soul, and in the end, totally annihilates all its powers. The youth,
therefore, who seriously wishes to sustain an honorable character on
the theatre of life, must forever renounce the habits of indolence and
luxury; and when he no longer impairs his intellectual faculties by
debauchery, or renders it necessary to attempt the renovation of his
languid and debilitated constitution by excess of wine and luxurious
living, he will soon be relieved from the necessity of consuming whole
mornings on horseback in a vain search of that health from change of
scene which temperance and exercise would immediately bestow.

All men without exception, have something to learn; whatever may be the
distinguished rank which they hold in society, they can never be truly
great but by their personal merit. The more the faculties of the mind
are exercised in the tranquillity of retirement, the more conspicuous
they appear; and should the pleasures of debauchery be the ruling
passion, learn, O young man! that nothing will so easily subdue it as an
increasing emulation in great and virtuous actions, a hatred of idleness
and frivolity, the study of the sciences, a frequent communication with
your own heart, and that high and dignified spirit which views with
disdain every thing that is vile and contemptible. This generous and
high disdain of vice, this fond and ardent love of virtue, discloses
itself in retirement with dignity and greatness, where the passion of
high achievement operates with greater force than in any other situation.
The same passion which carried Alexander into Asia, confined Diogenes to
his tub. Heraclius descended from his throne to devote his mind to the
search of truth. He who wishes to render his knowledge useful to mankind,
must first study the world; not too intensely, or for any long duration,
or with any fondness for its follies; for the follies of the world
enervate and destroy the vigor of the mind. Cesar tore himself from the
embraces of Cleopatra, and became the master of the world; while Antony
took her as a mistress to his bosom, sunk indolently into her arms, and
by his effeminacy lost not only his life, but the government of the Roman
empire.

Solitude, indeed, inspires the mind with notions too refined and exalted
for the level of common life. But a fondness for high conceptions, and a
lively, ardent disposition, discovers to the votaries of solitude, the
possibility of supporting themselves on heights which would derange the
intellects of ordinary men. Every object that surrounds the solitary
man enlarges the faculties of his mind, improves the feelings of his
heart, elevates him above the condition of the species, and inspires his
soul with views of immortality. Every day in the life of a man of the
world seems as if he expected it would be the last of his existence.
Solitude amply compensates for every privation, while the devotee of
worldly pleasures conceives himself lost if he is deprived of visiting a
fashionable assembly, of attending a favorite club, of seeing a new play,
of patronizing a celebrated boxer, or of admiring some foreign novelty
which the hand-bills of the day have announced.

I could never read without feeling the warmest emotions, the following
passage of Plutarch; “I live,” says he, “entirely upon history; and
while I contemplate the pictures it presents to my view, my mind enjoys
a rich repast from the representation of great and virtuous characters.
If the actions of men produce some instances of vice, corruption, and
dishonesty; I endeavor, nevertheless, to remove the impression, or to
defeat its effect. My mind withdraws itself from the scene, and free from
every ignoble passion, I attach myself to those high examples of virtue
which are so agreeable and satisfactory, and which accord so completely
with the genuine feelings of our nature.”

The soul, winged by these sublime images, flies from the earth, mounts
as it proceeds, and casts an eye of disdain on those surrounding clouds
which, as they gravitate to the earth, would impede its flight. At a
certain height the faculties of the mind expand, and the fibres of the
heart dilate. It is, indeed, in the power of every man to perform more
than he undertakes; and therefore it is both wise and praiseworthy to
attempt every thing that is morally within our reach. How many dormant
ideas may be awakened by exertion! and then, what a variety of early
impressions, which were seemingly forgot, revive, and present themselves
to our pens! We may always accomplish more than we conceive, provided
passion fans the flame which the imagination has lighted; for life is
insupportable when unanimated by the soft affections of the heart.

Solitude leads the mind to those sources from whence the grandest
conceptions are most likely to flow. But alas! it is not in the power of
every person to seize the advantages solitude bestows. Were every noble
mind sensible of the extensive information, of the lofty and sublime
ideas, of the exquisitely fine feelings which result from occasional
retirement, they would frequently quit the world, even in the earliest
periods of youth, to taste the sweets of solitude, and lay the foundation
for a wise old age.

In conducting the low and petty affairs of life, common sense is
certainly a more useful quality than even genius itself. Genius, indeed,
or that fine enthusiasm which carries the mind into its highest sphere,
is clogged and impeded in its ascent by the ordinary occupations of the
world, and seldom regains its natural liberty and pristine vigor except
in solitude. Minds anxious to reach the regions of philosophy and science
have, indeed, no other means of rescuing themselves from the burden and
thraldom of worldly affairs. Sickened and disgusted with the ridicule
and obloquy they experience from an ignorant and presumptuous multitude,
their faculties become, as it were, extinct, and mental exertion dies
away; for the desire of fame, that great incentive to intellectual
achievement, cannot long exist where merit is no longer rewarded by
praise. But, remove such minds from the oppression of ignorance, of envy,
of hatred, of malice; let them enjoy liberty and leisure; and with the
assistance of pen, ink, and paper, they will soon take an ample revenge,
and their productions excite the admiration of the world. How many
excellent understandings remain in obscurity, merely on account of the
possessor being condemned to follow worldly employments, in which little
or no use of the mind is required, and which, for that reason, ought to
be exclusively bestowed on the ignorant and illiterate vulgar! But this
circumstance can seldom happen in solitude, where the mental faculties,
enjoying their natural freedom, and roaming unconfined through all parts
and properties of nature, fix on those pursuits most congenial to their
powers, and most likely to carry them into their proper sphere.

The unwelcome reception which solitary men frequently meet with in the
world, becomes, when properly considered, a source of enviable happiness;
for to be universally beloved, would prove a great misfortune to him who
is meditating in tranquillity the performance of some great and important
work: every one would then be anxious to visit him, to solicit his visits
in return, and to press for his attendance on all parties. But though
philosophers are fortunately not in general the most favored guests in
fashionable societies, they have the satisfaction to recollect, that
it is not ordinary or common characters against whom the public hatred
and disgust are excited. There is always something great in that man
against whom the world exclaims, at whom every one throws a stone, and
on whose character all attempt to fix a thousand crimes, without being
able to prove one. The fate of a man of genius, who lives retired and
unknown, is certainly more enviable: for he will then enjoy the pleasure
of undisturbed retirement; and naturally imagining the multitude to
be ignorant of his character, will not be surprised that they should
continually misinterpret and pervert both his words and actions; or that
the efforts of his friends to undeceive the public with respect to his
merit should prove abortive.

Such was, in the mistaken view of the world, the fate of the celebrated
count Schaumbourg Lippe, better known by the appellation of count de
Buckebourg. No character, throughout Germany, was ever more traduced,
or so little understood; and yet he was worthy of being enrolled among
the highest names his age or country ever produced. When I first became
acquainted with him, he lived in almost total privacy, quite retired
from the world, on a small paternal farm, in the management of which
consisted all his pleasure and employment. His exterior appearance was
I confess, rather forbidding, and prevented superficial observers from
perceiving the extraordinary endowments of his brilliant and capacious
mind. The count de Lacy, formerly ambassador from the court of Madrid to
Petersburgh, related to me during his residence at Hanover, that he led
the Spanish army against the Portuguese at the time they were commanded
by the count de Buckebourg; and that when the officers discovered him as
they were reconnoitering the enemy with their glasses, the singularity of
his appearance struck them so forcibly, that they immediately exclaimed,
“Are the Portuguese commanded by Don Quixote?” The ambassador, however,
who possessed a liberal mind, did justice in the highest terms, to the
merit and good conduct of Buckebourg in Portugal; and praised, with
enthusiastic admiration, the goodness of his mind, and the greatness
of his character. Viewed at a distance, his appearance was certainly
romantic; and his heroic countenance, his flowing hair, his tall and
meagre figure, and particularly the extraordinary length of his visage,
might, in truth, recall some idea of the celebrated knight of La Mancha:
but, on a closer view, both his person and his manners dispelled the
idea; for his features, full of fire and animation, announced the
elevation, sagacity, penetration, kindness, virtue, and serenity of his
soul; and the most sublime and heroic sentiments were as familiar and
natural to his mind, as they were to the noblest characters of Greece and
Rome.

The count was born in London, and possessed a disposition as whimsical as
it was extraordinary. The anecdotes concerning him, which I heard from
his relation, a German prince, are perhaps not generally known. Fond of
contending with the English in every thing, he laid a wager that he would
ride a horse from London to Edinburg backwards, that is, with the horse’s
head toward Edinburg, and the count’s face toward London; and in this
manner he actually rode through several counties in England, he travelled
through the greater part of that kingdom on foot in the disguise of a
common beggar. Being informed that part of the current of the Danube,
above Regensberg, was so strong and rapid, that no one dared to swim
across it; he made the attempt, and ventured so far that he nearly lost
his life. A great statesman and profound philosopher at Hanover related
to me, that during the war in which the count commanded the artillery
in the army of prince Ferdinand of Brunswick against the French, he one
day invited a number of Hanoverian officers to dine with him in his
tent. While the company were in the highest state of festive mirth and
gayety, a succession of cannon balls passed directly over the head of
the tent. “The French cannot be far off!” exclaimed the officers. “Oh! I
assure you,” replied the count, “they are not near us;” and he begged the
gentlemen would make themselves perfectly easy, resume their seats, and
finish their dinner. Soon afterwards a cannon ball carried away the top
of the tent, when the officers again rose precipitately from their seats,
exclaiming, “The enemy are here!” “No, no,” replied the count, “the enemy
are not here; therefore I must request, gentlemen, that you will place
yourselves at the table, and sit still, for you may rely on my word.” The
firing recommenced and the balls flew about in the same direction: the
officers, however, remained fixed to their seats; and while they ate and
drank in seeming tranquillity, whispered to each other their surmises
and conjectures on this singular entertainment. At length the count,
rising from his seat addressed the company in these words: “gentlemen,
I was willing to convince you how well I can rely upon the officers of
my artillery. I ordered them to fire, during the time we continued at
dinner, at the pinnacle of the tent; and you have observed with what
punctuality they obeyed my orders.”

Characteristic traits of a man anxious to inure himself and those
about him to arduous and difficult exploits will not be useless or
unentertaining to curious and speculative minds. Being one day in
company with the count at fort Wilhelmstein, by the side of a magazine
of gunpowder, which he had placed in the room immediately under that in
which he slept, I observed to him, that I should not be able to sleep
very contentedly there during some of the hot nights of summer. The
count, however, convinced me, though I do not now recollect by what
means, that _the greatest danger and no danger, are one and the same
thing_. When I first saw this extraordinary man, which was in the company
of two officers, the one English the other Portuguese, he entertained
me for two hours upon the physiology of Haller, whose works he knew by
heart. The ensuing morning he insisted on my accompanying him in a little
boat, which he rowed himself, to fort Wilhelmstein, built under his
direction in the middle of the water, from plans, which he showed me of
his own drawing. One Sunday, on the great parade at Pyrmont, surrounded
by a vast concourse of men and women occupied in music, dancing, and
gallantries, he entertained me during the course of two hours on the
same spot, and with as much serenity if we had been alone, by detailing
the various controversies respecting the existence of God, pointing out
their defective parts and convincing me that he surpassed every writer in
his knowledge of the subject. To prevent my escaping from this lecture,
he held me fast the whole time by one of the buttons of my coat. At his
country seat at Buckebourg, he showed me a large folio volume, in his own
hand-writing, upon “The Art of defending a small town against a great
force.” The work was completely finished and intended as a present to the
king of Portugal. There were many passages in it, which the count did me
the favor to read relating to Swisserland, a country and people which he
considered as invincible; pointing out to me not only all the important
places they might occupy against an enemy, but discovering passes before
unknown, and through which even a cat would scarce be able to crawl. I
do not believe that any thing was ever written of higher importance to
the interests of my country than this work; for it contains satisfactory
answers to every objection that ever has or can be made. My friend M.
Moyse Mendelsohm, to whom the cont read the preface to this work while
he resided at Pyrmont, considered it as a master-piece of fine style
and sound reasoning; for the count, when he pleased, wrote the French
language with nearly as much elegance and purity as Voltaire: while in
the German he was labored, perplexed, and diffuse. I must, however,
add this in his praise, that, on his return from Portugal, he studied
for many years under two of the most acute masters in Germany: first,
Abbt; and afterwards Herder. Many persons who, from a closer intimacy
and deeper penetration, have had greater opportunities of observing the
conduct and character of this truly great and extraordinary man, relate
of him a variety of anecdotes equally instructive and entertaining. I
shall only add one observation more respecting his character, availing
myself of the words of Shakspeare; the count Guilaume de Schaumbourg
Lippe

                           “… carries no dagger.
    He has a lean and hungry look;
                    … but he’s not dangerous:
                            … he reads much:
    He is a great observer: and he looks
    Quite thro’ the deeds of men. He loves no plays
                            … he hears no music;
    Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort,
    As if he mock’d himself, and scorn’d his spirit,
    That could be mov’d to smile at any thing.”

Such was the character, always misunderstood, of this solitary man; and
such a character might fairly indulge a contemptuous smile, on perceiving
the mistaken sneers of an ignorant multitude. But what must be the shame
and confusion of the partial judges of mankind, when they behold the
monument which the great Mendelsohm has raised to his memory; and the
faithful history of his life and manners which a young author is about
to publish at Hanover; the profound sentiments, the elegant style, the
truth, and the sincerity of which will be discovered and acknowledged by
impartial posterity?

The men who, as I have frequently observed, are disposed to ridicule this
illustrious character on account of his long visage, his flowing hair,
his enormous hat, or his little sword, might be pardoned, if, like him,
they were philosophers or heroes. The mind of the count, however, was
too exalted to be moved by their insulting taunts, and he never smiled
upon the world, or upon men, either with spleen or with contempt. Feeling
no hatred, indulging no misanthropy, his looks beamed kindness on all
around him; and he enjoyed with dignified composure the tranquillity
of his rural retreat in the middle of a thick forest, either alone or
in the company of a fond and virtuous wife, whose death so sensibly
afflicted even his firm and constant mind, that it brought him almost
to an untimely grave. The people of Athens laughed at Themistocles, and
openly reviled him even in the streets, because he was ignorant of the
manners of the world, the _ton_ of good company, and that accomplishment
which is called good breeding. He retorted, however, upon these ignorant
railers with the keenest asperity: “It is true,” said he, “I never play
upon the lute; but I know how to raise a small and inconsiderable city to
greatness and to glory.”

Solitude and philosophy may inspire sentiments which appear ludicrous
to the eye of worldly folly, but they banish all light and insignificant
ideas, and prepare the mind for the grandest and most sublime
conceptions. Those who are in the habit of studying great and exalted
characters, of cultivating refined and elevated sentiments, unavoidably
contract a singularity of manners which may furnish ample materials for
ridicule. Romantic characters always view things differently from what
they really are or can be; and the habit of invariably contemplating the
sublime and beautiful, renders them, in the eyes of the weak and wicked,
insipid and unsupportable. Men of this disposition always acquire a high
and dignified demeanor, which shocks the feelings of the vulgar; but it
is not on that account the less meritorious. Certain Indian philosophers
annually quitted their solitude to visit the palace of their sovereign,
where each of them, in his turn, delivered his advice upon the government
of the state, and upon the changes and limitations which might be made
in the laws; but he who three successive times communicated false or
unimportant observations, lost for one year, the privilege of appearing
in the presence-chamber. This practice is well calculated to prevent
the mind from growing romantic: but there are many philosophers of a
different description, who if they had the same opportunity, would not
meet with better success.

Plotinus requested the emperor Gallienus to confer on him a small city
in Campania, and the territory appendant to it, promising to retire to
it with his friends and followers, and to realise in the government of
it the Republic of Plato. It happened then, however, as it frequently
happens now in many courts, to philosophers much less chimerical than
Plotinus; the statesmen laughed at the proposal, and told the emperor
that the philosopher was a fool, in whose mind even experience had
produced no effect.

The history of the greatness and virtues of the ancients operate in
solitude with the happiest effect. Sparks of that bright flame which
warmed the bosoms of the great and good, frequently kindled unexpected
fires. A lady in the country, whose health was impaired by nervous
affections, was advised to read with attention the history of the Greek
and Roman empires. At the expiration of three months she wrote to me in
the following terms: “You have inspired my mind with a veneration for
the virtues of the ancients. What are the buzzing race of the present
day, when compared with those noble characters? History heretofore was
not my favorite study: but now I live only in its pages. While I read of
the transactions of Greece and Rome, I wish to become an actor in the
scenes. It has not only opened to me an inexhaustible source of pleasure,
but it has restored me to health. I could not have believed that my
library contained so inestimable a treasure: my books will now prove
more valuable to me than all the fortune I possess; in the course of six
months you will no longer be troubled with my complaints. Plutarch is
more delightful to me than the charms of dress, the triumphs of coquetry,
or the sentimental effusions which lovers address to those mistresses
who are inclined to be all heart; and with whom satan plays tricks of
love with the same address as a dilettante plays tricks of music on the
violin.” This lady, who is really learned, no longer fills her letters
with the transactions of her kitchen and poultry yard; she has recovered
her health; and will experience hereafter, I conjecture, as much pleasure
among her hens and chickens, as she did before from the pages of Plutarch.

But although the immediate effects of such writings cannot be constantly
perceived, except in solitude, or in the society of select friends,
yet they may remotely be productive of the happiest consequences. The
mind of a man of genius, during his solitary walks, is crowded with a
variety of ideas, which, on being disclosed, would appear ridiculous
to the common herd of mankind: a period, however, arrives, at which
they lead men to the performance of actions worthy of immortality. The
national songs composed by that ardent genius Lavater, appeared at a
moment when the republic was in a declining state, and the temper of
the times unfavorable to their reception. The Schintzuach society, by
whose persuasion they had been written, had given some offence to the
French ambassador; and from that time all the measures which the members
adopted were decried with the most factious virulence in every quarter.
Even the great Haller, who had been refused admission, considering them
as disciples of Rousseau, whom he hated; and as enemies to orthodoxy,
which he loved; pointed his epigrams against them in every letter I
received from him; and the committee for the reformation of literature
at Zurich expressly prohibited the publication of these excellent lyric
compositions, on the curious pretence, that it was dangerous and improper
to stir up a dunghill. No poet of Greece, however, ever wrote with more
fire and force in favor of his country than Lavater did in favor of
the liberties of Swisserland. I have heard children chaunt these songs
with patriotic enthusiasm; and seen the finest eyes filled with tears
of rapture while their ears listened to the singers. Joy glowed in the
breasts of the Swiss peasants to whom they were sung: their muscles
swelled, and the blood inflamed their cheeks. Fathers have, within my own
knowledge, carried their infant children to the chapel of the celebrated
William Tell, to join in full chorus the song which Lavater composed
upon the merits of that great man. I have myself made the rocks re-echo
to my voice, by singing these songs to the music which the feelings of
my heart composed for them while wandering over the fields, and climbing
among the famous mountains where those heroes, the ancestors of our
race, signalized themselves by their immortal valor. I fancied that I
saw them still armed with their knotted clubs, breaking to pieces the
crowned helmets of Germany; and although inferior in numbers, forcing
the proud nobility to seek their safety by a precipitate and ignominious
flight. These, it may be said, are romantic notions, and can only please
solitary and recluse men, who see things differently from the rest of
the world. But great ideas sometimes now make their way in spite of the
most obstinate opposition, and operating, particularly in republics, by
insensible degrees, sow the seeds of those principles and true opinions,
which, as they arrive to maturity, prove so efficacious in times of
political contest and public commotion.

Solitude, therefore, by instilling high sentiments of human nature,
and heroic resolutions in defence of its just privileges, unites all
the qualities which are necessary to raise the soul and fortify the
character, and forms an ample shield against the shafts of envy,
hatred or malice. Resolved to think and to act, upon every occasion in
opposition to the sentiments of narrow minds, the solitary man attends
to all the various opinions he meets with, but is astonished at none.
Without being ungrateful for the just and rational esteem his intimate
friends bestow upon him; remembering, too, that friends, always partial,
and inclined to judge too favorably, frequently, like enemies, suffer
their feelings to carry them too far; he boldly calls upon the public
voice to announce his character to the world at large: displays his just
pretensions before this impartial tribunal, and demands that justice
which is due.

But solitude, although it exalts the sentiments, is generally conceived
to render the mind unfit for business: this, however, is, in my opinion,
a great mistake. To avoid tottering through the walks of public duty,
it must be of great utility to have acquired a firm step, by exercising
the mind in solitude on those subjects which are likely to occur in
public life. The love of truth is best preserved in solitude, and virtue
there acquires greater consistency: but I confess truth is not always
convenient in business nor the rigid exercise of virtue propitious to
worldly success.

The _great_ and the _good_ however, of every clime, revere the simplicity
of manners, and the singleness of heart, which solitude produces. It was
these inestimable qualities which during the fury of the war between
England and France, obtained the philosophic Jean Andre de Luc the
reception he met with at the court of Versailles; and inspired the breast
of the virtuous, the immortal de Vergennes with the desire to reclaim, by
the mild precepts of a philosopher, the refractory citizens of Geneva,
which all his remonstrances, as prime minister of France, had been unable
to effect. De Luc, at the request of Vergennes made the attempt, but
failed of success; and France, as it is well known, was obliged to send
an army to subdue the Genevese. It was upon his favorite mountains that
this amiable philosopher acquired that simplicity of manners, which he
still preserves amidst all the luxuries and seductions of London; where
he endures with firmness all the wants, refuses all the indulgences, and
subdues all the desires of social life. While he resided at Hanover, I
only remarked one single instance of luxury in which he indulged himself;
when any thing vexed his mind, he chewed a small morsel of sugar, of
which he always carried a small supply in his pocket.

Solitude not only creates simplicity of manners, but prepares and
strengthens the faculties for the toils of busy life. Fostered in the
bosom of retirement, the mind becomes more active in the world and its
concerns, and retires again into tranquillity to repose itself, and
prepare for new conflicts. Pericles, Phocion, and Epaminondas, laid
the foundation of all their greatness in solitude, and acquired there
rudiments, which all the language of the schools cannot teach--the
rudiments of their future lives and actions. Pericles, while preparing
his mind for any important object, never appeared in public, but
immediately refrained from feasting, assemblies, and every species of
entertainment; and during the whole time that he administered the affairs
of the republic, he only went once to sup with a friend, and left him
at an early hour. Phocion immediately resigned himself to the study of
philosophy: not from the ostentatious motive of being called a _wise
man_, but to enable himself to conduct the business of the state with
greater resolution and effect. Epaminondas, who had passed his whole
life in the delights of literature, and in the improvement of his mind,
astonished the Thebans by the military skill and dexterity which he all
at once displayed at the battles of Mantinea and Leuctra, in the first of
which he rescued his friend Pelopidas: but it was owing to the frugal use
he made of his time, to the attention with which he devoted his mind to
every pursuit he adopted, and to that solitude which his relinquishment
of every public employment afforded him. His countrymen, however, forced
him to abandon his retreat, gave him the absolute command of the army;
and by his military skill, he saved the republic.

Petrarch, also a character I never contemplate but with increasing
sensibility, formed his mind, and rendered it capable of transacting
the most complicated political affairs, by the habit he acquired in
solitude. He was, indeed, what persons frequently become in solitude,
choleric, satirical, and petulant: and has been severely reproached
with having drawn the manners of his age with too harsh and sombrous a
pencil, particularly the scenes of infamy which were transacted at the
court of Avignon, under the pontificate of Clement VI.; but he was a
perfect master of the human heart, knew how to manage the passions with
uncommon dexterity, and to turn them directly to his purposes. The abbe
de Sades, the best historian of his life, says, “he is scarcely known,
except as a tender and elegant poet, who loved with ardor, and sung, in
all the harmony of verse, the charms of his mistress.” But was this in
reality the whole of his character?--Certainly not. Literature, long
buried in the ruins of barbarity, owes the highest obligations to his
pen; he rescued some of the finest works of antiquity from dust and
rottenness; and many of those precious treasures of learning, which have
since contributed to delight and instruct mankind, were discovered by
his industry, corrected by his learning and sagacity, and multiplied in
accurate copies at his expense. He was the great restorer of elegant
writing and true taste; and by his own compositions, equal to any that
ancient Rome, previous to its subjugation, produced, purified the public
mind, reformed the manners of the age, and extirpated the prejudices
of the times. Pursuing his studies with unremitting firmness to the
hour of his death, his last work surpassed all that had preceded it.
But he was not only a tender lover, an elegant poet, and a correct
and classical historian, but an able statesman also, to whom the most
celebrated sovereigns of his age confided every difficult negotiation,
and consulted in their most important concerns. He possessed, in the
fourteenth century, a degree of fame, credit, and influence, which
no man of the present day, however learned, has ever acquired. Three
popes, an emperor, a sovereign of France, a king of Naples, a crowd of
cardinals, the greatest princes, and the most illustrious nobility of
Italy, cultivated his friendship, and solicited his correspondence. In
the several capacities of statesman, minister, and ambassador, he was
employed in transacting the greatest affairs, and by that means was
enabled to acquire and disclose the most useful and important truths.
These high advantages he owed entirely to solitude, with the nature of
which as he was better acquainted than any other person, so he cherished
it with greater fondness, and resounded its praise with higher energy;
and at length preferred his leisure and liberty to all the enjoyments of
the world. Love, to which he had consecrated the prime of life, appeared,
indeed, for a long time, to enervate his mind; but suddenly abandoning
the soft and effeminate style in which he breathed his sighs at Laura’s
feet, he addressed kings, emperors, and popes, with manly boldness,
and with that confidence which splendid talents and a high reputation
always inspires. In an elegant oration, worthy of Demosthenes and Cicero,
he endeavored to compose the jarring interests of Italy; and exhorted
the contending powers to destroy with their confederated arms, the
barbarians, those common enemies of their country, who were ravaging its
very bosom, and preying on its vitals. The enterprises of Rienzi, who
seemed like an agent sent from heaven to restore the decayed metropolis
of the Roman empire to its former splendor, were suggested, encouraged,
directed, and supported by his abilities. A timid emperor was roused by
his eloquence to invade Italy, and induced to seize upon the reins of
government, as successor to the Cesars. The pope, by his advice, removed
_the holy chair_, which had been transported to the borders of the Rhine,
and replaced it on the banks of the Tiber; and at a moment even when
he confessed, in one of his letters, that his mind was distracted with
vexation, his heart torn with love, and his whole soul disgusted with
men and measures. Pope Clement VI, confided to his negotiation an affair
of great difficulty at the court of Naples, in which he succeeded to the
highest satisfaction of his employer. His residence at courts, indeed,
had rendered him ambitious, busy, and enterprising; and he candidly
acknowledged, that he felt a pleasure on perceiving a hermit, accustomed
to dwell only in woods, and to saunter over plains, running through the
magnificent palaces of cardinals with a crowd of courtiers in his suite.
When John Visconti, archbishop and prince of Milan, and sovereign of
Lombardy, who united the finest talents with ambition so insatiable,
that it threatened to swallow up all Italy, had the happiness to fix
Petrarch in his interests, by inducing him to accept of a seat in his
council, the friends of the philosopher whispered one among another,
“This stern republican who breathed no sentiments but those of liberty
and independence; this untamed bull, who roared so loud at the slightest
shadow of the yoke; who could endure no fetters but those of love, and
who even felt those too heavy: who has refused the first offices at
the court of Rome, because he disdained to wear golden chains; has at
length submitted to be shackled by the tyrant of Italy; and this great
apostle of solitude, who could no longer live except in the tranquillity
of the groves, now contentedly resides amidst the tumults of Milan.”
“My friends,” replied Petrarch, “have reason to arraign my conduct.
Man has not a greater enemy than himself. I acted against my taste and
inclination. Alas! through the whole course of our lives, we do those
things which we ought not to have done, and leave undone what most we
wish to do.” But Petrarch might have told his friends, “I was willing to
convince you how much a mind, long exercised in solitude, can perform
when engaged in the business of the world; how much a previous retirement
enables a man to transact the affairs of public life with ease, firmness,
dignity and effect.”

The courage which is necessary to combat the prejudices of the multitude,
is only to be acquired by a contempt of the frivolous transactions
of the world, and, of course is seldom possessed, except by solitary
men. Worldly pursuits, so far from adding strength to the mind, only
weaken it; in like manner as any particular enjoyment too frequently
repeated, dulls the edge of the appetite for every pleasure. How often
do the best contrived and most excellent schemes fail, merely for want
of sufficient courage to surmount the difficulty which attend their
execution!--How many happy thoughts have been stifled in their birth,
from an apprehension that they were too bold to be indulged!

An idea has prevailed, that truth can only be freely and boldly spoken
under a republican form of government; but this idea is certainly
without foundation. It is true, that in aristocracies, as well as under
a more open form of government, where a single demagogue unfortunately
possesses the sovereign power, common sense is too frequently construed
into public offence. Where this absurdity exists, the mind must be timid,
and the people in consequence deprived of their liberty. In a monarchy
every offence is punished by the sword of justice; but in a republic,
punishments are inflicted by prejudices, passions, and state necessity.
The first maxim which, under a republican form of government, parents
endeavor to instil into the minds of their children, is, _not to make
enemies_; and I remember, when I was very young, replying to this sage
counsel, “My dear mother, do you not know that he who has no enemies
is a poor man?” In a republic the citizens are under the authority and
jealous observation of a multitude of sovereigns; while in a monarchy the
reigning prince is the only man whom his subjects are bound to obey. The
idea of living under the control of a number of masters intimidates the
mind; whereas love and confidence in _one_ alone, raises the spirits and
renders the people happy.

But in all countries, and under every form of government, the rational
man, who renounces the useless conversation of the world, who lives a
retired life, and who, independently of all that he sees, of all that
he hears, forms his notions in tranquillity, by an intercourse with
the heroes of Greece, of Rome, and of Great Britain, will acquire a
steady and uniform character, obtain a noble style of thinking, and rise
superior to every vulgar prejudice.

These are the observations I had to make respecting the influence of
occasional solitude upon the mind. They disclose my real sentiments on
this subject: many of them, perhaps, undigested, and many more certainly
not well expressed. But I shall console myself for these defects, if
this chapter affords only a glimpse of those advantages, which, I am
persuaded, a rational solitude is capable of affording to the minds and
manners of men; and if that which follows shall excite a lively sensation
of the true, noble, and elevated pleasures retirement is capable of
producing by a tranquil and feeling contemplation of nature, and by an
exquisite sensibility for every thing that is good and fair.




