CHAPTER IV.

_The General Advantages of Retirement._


Retirement engages the affections of men whenever it holds up a picture
of tranquillity to their view.

The doleful and monotonous sound of the clock of a sequestered monastery,
the silence of nature in a still night, the pure air on the summit of
a high mountain, the thick darkness of an aged forest, the sight of a
temple fallen into ruins, inspire the soul with a soft melancholy, and
banish all recollection of the world and its concerns.

The man who cannot hold a friendly correspondence with his own heart; who
derives no comfort from the reflections of his mind; who dreads the idea
of meditation, and is fearful of passing a single moment with himself,
looks with equal dread on solitude and on death. He endeavors to enjoy
all the voluptuousness which the world affords; drains the pernicious
cup of pleasure to its dregs; and, until the dreadful moment approaches
when he beholds his nerves shattered, and all the powers of his soul
destroyed, has not the courage to make the delayed confession, “I am
tired of the world and all its idle follies!”

The legions of fantastic fashions to which a man of pleasure is obliged
to sacrifice his time, impair the rational faculties of his mind, and
destroy the native energies of his soul. Forced continually to lend
himself to the performance of a thousand little trifles, a thousand mean
absurdities, he becomes by habit frivolous and absurd. The face of things
no longer wears its true and genuine aspect; and his depraved taste
loses all relish for rational entertainment or substantial pleasure. The
infatuation seizes on his brain, and his corrupted heart teems with idle
fancies and vain imaginations.

The inevitable consequences of this ardent pursuit of entertainments and
diversions are langor and dissatisfaction. He has drained the cup of
pleasure to the last drop, who is at length obliged to confess that all
his hopes are fled; who finds disappointment and disgust mingled with
every enjoyment; who feels astonished at his own insensibility, and who
no longer possesses the magic of the enchantress, imagination, to gild
and decorate the scene, calls in vain to his assistance the daughters of
sensuality and intemperance: their caresses can no longer delight his
dark and melancholy mind: the soft and syren song of luxury no longer can
dispel the cloud of discontent that hovers round his head.

Behold that debilitated weak old man running after pleasures he can no
longer enjoy. The airs of gayety which he affects render him ridiculous;
his attempts to shine expose him to derision; his endeavors to display
the wit and eloquence of youth betray him into the garrulity of old
age. His conversation, filled with repetition and tiresome narrative,
creates disgust, and only forces the smile of pity from the lips of his
youthful rivals. To the eye of wisdom, however, who observed him through
all the former periods of his life, sparkling in the noisy circles of
extravagance and vice, his character always appeared the same.

The wise man, in the midst of the most tumultuous pleasures, frequently
retires within himself, and silently compares what he might do with what
he is doing. Surrounded by, and even when accidentally engaged in, the
excesses of intoxication, he associates only with those warm and generous
souls whose highly elevated minds are drawn toward each other by the most
virtuous inclinations and sublime sentiments. The silent retreat of the
mind within itself, has more than once given birth to enterprizes of the
greatest importance and utility; and it is not difficult to imagine, that
some of the most celebrated actions of mankind were first inspired among
the sounds of music, or conceived amidst the mazes of the dance. Sensible
and elevated minds never commune more closely with themselves than in
those places of public resort in which the low and vulgar, surrendering
themselves to illusion and caprice, become incapable of reflection, and
blindly suffer themselves to be overwhelmed by the surrounding torrent of
folly and distraction.

The unceasing pursuit of sensual enjoyment is merely a mean used by
the votaries of worldly pleasure, of flying from themselves; they
seize with avidity upon any object that promises to occupy the present
hour agreeably, and provide entertainment for the day that is passing
over their heads. To such characters the man who can invent hour after
hour new schemes of pleasure and open day after day fresh sources of
amusement, is a valuable companion indeed; he is their best, their only
friend. Are then these lazy and luxurious votaries of sensual pleasures
destitute of those abilities which might prevent this sacrifice of time,
and, if properly exerted, afford them relief? Certainly not. But, having
been continually led from object to object in the pursuit of pleasure,
the assistance of others has habitually become the first want and
greatest necessity of their lives: they have insensibly lost all power of
acting for themselves, and depend, for every object they see, for every
sensation they feel, for every sentiment they entertain, on those by
whom they are attended. This is the reason why the rich, who are seldom
acquainted with any other pleasures than those of sense, are, in general,
the most miserable of mankind.

The nobility and courtiers of France think their enjoyments appear vain
and ridiculous only to those who have not the opportunity of partaking in
them; but I am of a different opinion. Returning one Sunday from Trianon
to Versailles, I perceived at a distance a number of people assembled
upon the terrace of the castle; and on a nearer approach, I beheld Louis
XV. surrounded by his court, at the windows of his palace. A man very
richly dressed, with a large pair of branching antlers fastened upon his
head, whom they called the stag, was pursued by about a dozen others who
composed the pack. The pursued and the pursuers leaped into the great
canal, scrambled out again, and ran wildly round and round, amidst the
acclamations of the assembly, who loudly clapped their hands to testify
their delight, and to encourage the diversion. “What can all this mean?”
said I to a French gentleman who stood near me. “Sir,” he replied, with
a very serious countenance, “it is for the entertainment of the court.”
The most obscure and indigent individuals may certainly be much happier
than these masters of mankind with their melancholy slaves and miserable
entertainments.

Direful condition! Is there then no occupation whatsoever, no useful
employment, no rational recreation sufficiently high and dignified for
such characters?--Are they reduced to the melancholy condition of not
being able to perform one good and virtuous action during the intervals
of suspended pleasure? Can they render no services to friendship, to
their country, to themselves? Are there no poor and miserable beings to
whose bosom they might afford charitable comfort and relief? Is it, in
short, impossible for such characters in any way to improve themselves in
wisdom or in virtue?

The powers of the human mind are of greater extent than is generally
imagined. He who, either from taste or necessity, exercises them
frequently, soon finds that the highest felicities of which our nature is
capable, reside entirely within ourselves. The wants of life are, for the
greater part, merely artificial; and although sensual objects contribute
most efficaciously to our happiness and delight, it is not because they
are indispensably necessary for this purpose, but because they have been
rendered desirable by habit; and, from the pleasures they produce, we
flatter ourselves that they are absolutely necessary to our felicity. If,
however, we had fortitude to resist their charms, and courage to seek our
happiness in ourselves, we should frequently find in our own bosoms a
greater variety of resources than all the objects of sense are capable of
affording.

Amusements, indeed, may sometimes be found in those places to which the
sexes resort merely to see and to be seen. The eye may be occasionally
gratified by the sight of objects really agreeable; the ear may listen
to observations truly flattering. Lively thoughts and sensible remarks
now and then prevail. Characters equally amiable and interesting
occasionally mix among the group. We may form acquaintance with men of
distinguished merit, whom we should not otherwise have had an opportunity
of knowing; and meet with women of amiable qualities, and irreproachable
conduct, whose refined conversation ravishes the ear with a delight
equal to that with which their exquisite beauty captivates the heart.
But by what a number of painful sensations must the chance of receiving
these pleasures be purchased! Those whom reason or disgust restrain from
mixing in the idle dissipations of life, cannot see without a sigh, the
gay conceit, the airy confidence, the blind arrogance, and the bold
loquacity, with which these votaries of worldly pleasure proclaim a
felicity which is almost invariably deceitful; nor observe without a
sigh, the extravagant joy of so many great men, and the absurd airs of so
many gray-headed children.

Honor, fame, and pleasure are conceived to accompany an invitation to
the board of luxury; although disease, with leaden sceptre, is known to
preside; and reproach and calumny are indiscriminately cast upon the
purest characters. But he who feels the least energy of mind, turns
with aversion from all society which tends to weaken its effect; and
finds the simplest fare, enjoyed with freedom and content amidst a happy
and affectionate family, ten thousand times more agreeable than the
rarest dainty, and the richest wine, with a society where he must sit
ceremoniously silent in compliment to some reputed wit, from whose lips
nothing but absurdities and nonsense proceed.

The spiritless and crowded societies of the world, where a round of low
and trifling amusements fills the hour of entertainment, and where to
display a pomp of dress and levity of manners is the only ambition, may
afford some pleasure to those light and empty minds who are impatient of
the weight of idleness; but the wise man, who occasionally resorts to
them in search of rational conversation or temporary amusement, and only
finds a dull unvaried jargon, and a tiresome round of compliments, will
turn with aversion from these temples of false delight, and exclaim, in
the language of the poet,

    “I envy none their pageantry and show,
    I envy none the gilding of their wo.
    Give me, indulgent gods! with mind serene,
    And guiltless heart, to range the sylvan scene;
    No splendid poverty, no smiling care,
    No well-bred hate or servile grandeur there:
    The pleasing objects useful thoughts suggest;
    The sense is ravish’d and the soul is blest:
    On every thorn, delightful wisdom glows,
    In every rill a sweet instruction flows.”

True social pleasure is founded on unlimited confidence, on an
affectionate and reciprocal interchange of sentiment and opinions. A
tender, faithful, refined, and rational friendship, renders the pleasures
of the world spiritless and disgusting. How joyfully do we disencumber
ourselves from the shackles of society, for that close and sublime
intercourse in which our inclinations are free, our feelings generous,
our sentiments unbiassed; where a mutuality of thought and action, of
pleasure and of pains uninterruptedly prevail; where the gentle hand
of love conducts us along the paths of truth and virtue; where every
thought is anticipated before it escapes from the lips; where advice,
consolation, and succor, are reciprocally given and received in all
the accidents and in all the misfortunes of life! The soul, touched
by the charms of friendship, springs from its apathy and dejection,
and views the enlivening beam of hope awakening it to activity. The
happy pair, casting a retrospective glance on the time passed, mutually
exclaim with the tenderest emotions, “Oh the delights that we have
already experienced!--Oh the joys that we have already felt!” If the
tear of affliction steal down the cheek of the one, the other with
affection wipes it tenderly away. The sorrows of one are felt with equal
sensibility by the other: and what sorrow will not an intercourse of
hearts so closely and affectionately united, entirely subdue!--Day after
day they communicate to each other all they have seen, all they have
heard, all that they feel, and every thing that they know. Time flies
before them on his swiftest pinions. They are never tired of each other’s
company and conversation. The only misfortune they fear, the greatest
indeed they can possibly experience, is the misfortune of being separated
by occasional absence or untimely death.

But human happiness is continually exposed to interruption. At the very
moment alas; when we vainly think ourselves the most secure, fate, by
a sudden blow, strikes its unhappy victim even in our arms. All the
pleasure of life then seems forever extinguished, every object alarms
our mind, and every place seems desert and forlorn. In vain are our
arms extended to embrace our loved, though lost companion; in vain do
we invoke her return. Her well known step still seems to beat upon the
listening ear, and promise her approach; but suspended sense returns,
and the delusive sounds are heard no more. A death-like silence reigns
around, and involves us in the shades of dreary solitude, unconscious of
every thing but our bleeding hearts. Wearied and dejected, we imagine
ourselves no longer capable of loving or of being beloved; and life
without love, to the heart that has once felt its pleasures, is more
terrible than death. So sudden a transition from the highest happiness
to the deepest misery overpowers the mind. No kind friend appears to
assuage our sufferings, or seems capable of forming an adequate idea
of our distress. The pangs, indeed, which such a loss inflicts, cannot
be conceived, unless they have been felt. The only consolation of the
unhappy sufferer is to live in solitude, and his only wish to die
alone. But it is under circumstances like these that solitude enjoys
its greatest triumph, and the afflicted sufferer receives the greatest
benefits; for there is no sorrow, however great, no pang, however
powerful, that it will not, when wisely indulged, at first soften, and
at length subdue. The remedy which solitude “administers to a mind
diseased,” is slow and gradual; for the art of living alone requires much
experience, is subject to so many casualties, and depends so materially
upon the temperament of the patient, that it is necessary we should
attain a complete maturity before any great advantages can be derived
from it. But he who is able to throw off the galling yoke of prejudice,
and possesses a natural esteem and fondness for retirement, will not be
embarrassed as to the choice he ought to make under such circumstances.
Indifferent to external objects, and averse from the dissipations of the
world, he will rely on the powers of his mind, and will never be less
alone than when he is in the company of himself.

Men of genius are frequently condemned to employments as disagreeable
to the turn and temper of their minds, as the most nauseous medicine
must be to an empty stomach. Confined to toil on a dry and disgusting
subject, fixed to a particular spot, and harassed by subordinate duties,
they relinquish all expectation of tranquillity on this side the grave.
Deprived of enjoying the common pleasures of nature, every object
increases their disgust. “It is not for us,” they exclaim, “that the
youthful zephyrs call forth the budding foliage with their caressing
breath; that the feathered choir chant in enlivening strains their rural
songs; that the verdant meadows are decked with fragrant flowers.” But
set these complainers free, give them liberty and leisure to think for
themselves, and the enthusiasm of their minds will soon regenerate, and
soar into the highest regions of intellectual happiness, with the bold
wing and penetrating eye of the bird of Jove.

If solitude be capable of dissipating the afflictions of persons thus
circumstanced, what may not be expected from its influence on those who
are enabled to retire, at pleasure, to its friendly shades, and who
have no other wish than to enjoy pure air and domestic felicity! When
Antisthenes was asked what advantages philosophy had afforded him, he
answered, “_It has taught me to subdue myself._” Pope says, he never laid
his head upon his pillow, without acknowledging that the most important
lesson of life is to learn the art of being happy within ourselves. And
it seems to me that we shall all find what Pope looked for, when home
is our content, and every thing about us, even to the dog and the cat,
partakes of our affection.

Health is certainly essential to happiness, and yet there are
circumstances and situations, under which the privation of it may be
attended with tranquillity.

How frequently have I returned thanks to God, when indisposition has
prevented me from going abroad, and enabled me to recruit my weakened
powers in solitude and silence! Obliged to drag through the streets
of the metropolis day after day during a number of years, feeble in
constitution, weak in limbs; susceptible, on feeling the smallest cold,
to the same sensation as if knives were separating the flesh from the
bone; continually surrounded, in the course of my profession, with the
most afflicting sorrows; it is not surprising that I should thank the
Almighty with tears of gratitude, on experiencing even the relief which
a confinement by indisposition procured. A physician, if he possesses
sensibility, must, in his anxiety to relieve the sufferings of others,
frequently forget his own. But, alas! how frequently must he feel all the
horrors of his situation, when he is summoned to attend patients whose
maladies are beyond the reach of medicine! Under such circumstances, the
indisposition which excuses my attendance, and leaves me the powers of
thought, affords me comparatively a sweet repose; and, provided I am not
disturbed by the polite interruptions of ceremonious visiters, I enjoy a
pleasing solitude. One single day passed undisturbed at home in literary
leisure, affords to the mind more real pleasure than all the circles of
fashionable entertainment are able to bestow.

The fear of being alone is no longer felt either by the young or old,
whenever the mind has acquired the power of employing itself in some
useful or agreeable study. Ill humor may be banished by adopting a
regular course of reading. Books, indeed, cannot be inspected without
producing a beneficial effect, provided we always read with a pen or
pencil in our hand, and note down the new ideas that may occur, or the
observations which confirm the knowledge we before possessed; for reading
becomes not only useless, but fatiguing, unless we apply the information
it affords either to our own characters, or to those of other men. This
habit, however, may be easily acquired; and then books become one of
the most safe and certain antidotes to lassitude and discontent. By
this means a man becomes his own companion, and finds his best and most
cheerful friend in his own heart.

Pleasures of this kind certainly surpass in a great degree all those
which result merely from the indulgence of the senses. The pleasures of
the mind, generally speaking, signify sublime meditation, the profound
deductions of reason, and the brilliant effusions of the imagination;
but there are also others, for the perfect enjoyment of which, neither
extensive knowledge nor extraordinary talents are necessary. Such are
the pleasures which result from active labor; pleasures equally within
the reach of the ignorant and learned, and not less exquisite than
those which result from the mind. Manual exertions, therefore, ought
never to be despised. I am acquainted with gentlemen who understand the
mechanism of their watches, who are able to work as painters, locksmiths,
carpenters, and who are not only possessed of the tools and implements
of every trade, but know how to use them. Such men never feel the least
disquietude from the want of society, and are in general the happiest
characters in existence.

Mental pleasures are within the reach of all persons who, free,
tranquil, and affectionate, are contented with themselves, and at peace
with their fellow-creatures. The mind contemplates the pranks of school,
the sprightly aberrations of our boyish days, the wanton stories of
early youth, our plays and pastimes, and all the little hopes and fears
of infancy, with fond delight. Oh! with what approving smiles and soft
regret, the aged cast their eyes upon those happy times when youthful
inclination prompted all their actions, when every enterprise was
undertaken with lively vigor, and executed with undaunted courage; when
difficulties were sought merely for the purpose of surmounting them! Let
us compare what we were formerly with what we are at present; or rather,
by giving our thoughts a freer range, reflect on the various events we
have experienced or observed; upon the means that the Almighty employs
to raise or sink the prosperity of empires; upon the rapid progress
made, even in our time, in every art and science; upon the diffusion of
useful knowledge, and the destruction of dangerous prejudices; upon the
empire which barbarism and superstition have gained, notwithstanding the
exertions of genius and reason to prevent them; upon the sublime power
of the human mind and its inefficient productions; and languor will
instantly disappear, and tranquillity, peace, and good humor prevail.

Thus advantage may in solitude be attained and relished at every period
of our lives; at the most advanced age, as well as during the vigor of
youth. He who to an unbroken constitution joins a free and contented
mind, and assiduously cultivates the powers of his understanding,
will, if his heart be innocent, at all times enjoy the purest and most
unalterable pleasures. Employment animates all the functions of the soul,
and calls forth their highest energies. It is the secret consciousness
which every person of a lively imagination possesses, of the powers of
the mind, and the dignity they are capable of attaining, that creates the
noble anxiety and ardor, which carries their efforts to the sublimest
heights. But if, either by duty or situation, we maintain too close an
intercourse with society, if we are obliged, in spite of inclination, to
submit to frivolous and fatiguing dissipations, it is only by quitting
the tumult, and entering into silent meditation, that we feel that
effervescence, that desire to break from bondage, to fly from past
errors, and avoid in future every noisy and tumultuous pleasure.

The mind never feels with more energy and satisfaction that it lives,
that it is rational, great, active, free, and immortal, than during those
moments in which it excludes idle and impertinent intruders.

Of all the vexations of life, there are none so insupportable, as those
insipid visits, those annoying partialities, which occupy the time of
frivolous and fashionable characters. “My thoughts,” says Rousseau, “will
only come when they please, and not when I choose:” and therefore the
intrusions of strangers, or of mere acquaintances, were always extremely
odious to him. It was for this reason alone that this extraordinary
character, who seldom experienced an hour of tranquillity, felt such
indignation against the importunate civilities and empty compliments
of common conversation, whilst he enjoyed the rational intercourse of
sensible and well-informed minds with the highest delight. How frequently
are the brightest beams of intellect obscured by associating with low
and little minds! How frequently do the soundest understandings become
frivolous, by keeping frivolous company! For, although these bright beams
are immediate emanations from the Deity on the mind of man, they must be
matured by meditation and reflection, before they can give elevation to
genius, and consistency to character.

Virtues to which the mind cannot rise even when assisted by the most
advantageous intercourse, are frequently the fruits of solitude. Deprived
for ever of the company and conversation of those whom we love and
esteem, we endeavor to charm the uneasy void by every effort in our
power; but while love and friendship lead us by the hand, and cherish us
by their care, we lean incessantly on their bosoms, and remain inert.
Solitude, were it for this reason alone, is indispensably necessary to
the human character; for when men are enabled to depend on themselves
alone, the soul, tossed about by the tempest of life, acquires new vigor;
learns to bear with constancy, or avoid with address, those dangerous
rocks on which vulgar minds are inevitably wrecked; and discovers
continually new resources, by which the mind resists, with stoic courage,
the rigors of its fate.

Weak minds always conceive it most safe to adopt the sentiments of the
multitude. They never venture to express an opinion upon any subject
until the majority have decided; and blindly follow the sentiments of
the many, whether upon men or things, without troubling themselves to
inquire who are right, or on which side truth preponderates. A love of
equity and truth, indeed, is seldom found, except in those who have no
dread of solitude. Men of dissipation never protect the weak, or avenge
the oppressed. If the various and powerful hosts of knaves and fools are
your enemies; if you have been injured in your property by injustice, or
traduced in your fame by calumny, you must not fly for protection and
redress to men of light and dissipated characters; for they are merely
the organs of error, and the conduit pipes of prejudice.

The knowledge of ourselves is in solitude more easily and effectually
acquired than in any other situation; for we there live in habits of
the strictest intimacy with our own bosoms. It is certainly possible
for men to be deliberate and wise, even amidst all the tumultuous folly
of the world, especially if their principles be well fixed before they
enter on the stage of life; but integrity is undoubtedly more easily
preserved in the innocent simplicity of solitude, than in the corrupted
intercourses of society. In the world how many men please only by their
vices! How many profligate villains, and unprincipled adventurers of
insinuating manners, are well received only because they have learnt the
art of administering to the follies, the weaknesses, and the vices of
others! The mind, intoxicated with the fumes of that incense which artful
flattery is continually offering to it, is rendered incapable of justly
appreciating the characters of men. On the contrary, we truly discover in
the silence of solitude, the inward complexion of the heart; and learn
not only what the characters of men are, but what in truth and nature
they ought to be.

How many new and useful discoveries may be made by occasionally forcing
ourselves from the vortex of the world, and retiring to the calm
enjoyments of study and reflection! To accomplish this end, it is only
necessary to commence seriously with our hearts, and to examine our
actions with impartiality. The worldly-minded man, indeed, has reason
to avoid this self-examination, for the result would in all probability
be painful to his feelings; as he who only judges of himself by the
flattering opinions which others may have expressed of his character,
will, in such a scrutiny, behold with surprise that he is the miserable
slave of habit and public opinion; submitting himself with scrupulous
exactness, and the best possible grace, to the tyranny of fashion and
established ceremony; never venturing to oppose their influence, however
ridiculous and absurd it may be; and obsequiously following the example
of others, without daring to resist pursuits which every one seems so
highly to approve. He will perceive, that almost all his thoughts and
actions are engendered by a base fear of himself, or arise from a servile
complaisance to others; that he only seeks to flatter the vanities, and
indulge the caprices of his superiors, and becomes the contemptible
minister of these men, without daring to offer them the smallest
contradiction, or hazard an opinion that is likely to give them the least
displeasure. Whoever, with calm consideration, views this terrifying
picture, will feel, in the silent emotions of his heart, the necessity
of occasionally retiring into solitude, and seeking society with men of
nobler sentiments and purer principles.

Let every one, therefore, who wishes to think with dignity, or live
with ease, seek the retreats of solitude, and enter into a friendly
intercourse with his own heart. How small a portion of true philosophy,
with an enlightened understanding, will render it humble and compliant!
But in the mists of prejudice, dazzled by the intellectual glimmer of
false lights, every one mistakes the true path, and seeks for happiness
in the shades of darkness, and in the labyrinths of obscurity. The
habits of retirement and tranquillity can alone enable us to make
a just estimate of men and things, and it is by renouncing all the
prepossessions which the corruptions of society have implanted in the
mind, that we make the first advances toward the restoration of reason,
and the attainment of felicity.

We have hitherto only pointed out one class of the general advantages
which may be derived from rational solitude, but there are many others
which apply still more closely to men’s business and bosoms. Who, alas!
is there that has not experienced its comforting influence in the
keenest adversities of life? Who is there that does not seek relief from
its friendly shades in the langors of convalescence, in the pangs of
affliction, and even in that distressful moment when death deprives us of
those whose company was the charm and solace of our lives? Happy are they
who know the advantages of a religious retirement, of that holy rest in
which the virtues rivet themselves more closely to the soul, and in which
every man, when he is on the bed of death, devoutly wishes he had lived.

But these advantages become more conspicuous, when we compare the manner
of thinking which employs the mind of a solitary philosopher with that of
a worldly sensualist; the tiresome tumultuous life of the one, with the
ease and tranquillity of the other; the horrors which disturb the death
bed of vice, with the calm sigh which accompanies the expiring soul of
virtue. This is the awful moment in which we feel how important it is
to commune morally with ourselves, and religiously with our Creator; to
enable us to bear the sufferings of life with dignity, and the pains of
death with ease.

The sick, the sorrowful, and the discontented, may find equal relief
in solitude; it administers a balm to their tortured souls, heals the
deep and painful wounds they have received, and in time restores them
to their pristine health and vigor. The deceitful shrine in which the
intoxication of sensuality involved health and happiness disappears,
and they behold, in the place of imaginary joys, those objects only
which afford real pleasure. Prosperity arrays every object in the most
glowing and delightful colors; but to adversity every thing appears black
and dismal. Nor are the errors of these contrary extremes discovered
until the moment when the curtain drops, and dissipates the illusion:
the deceitful dream continues until the imagination is silenced. The
unhappy then perceive that the Almighty was watching over them, even when
they conceived themselves entirely abandoned: the happy then discover
the vanity of those pleasures and amusements to which they surrendered
themselves so implicitly during the intoxication of the world, and
reflect seriously upon their misconduct; upon their present state and
future destiny; and upon the modes most likely to conduct them to true
felicity. How miserable should we be, were the Divine Providence to grant
us every thing we desire! At the very instant when we conceive all the
happiness of our lives annihilated, God, perhaps, is performing something
extraordinary in our favor. Certain it is, that patience and perseverance
will, in solitude, convert the deepest sorrow into tranquillity and joy.
Those objects which, at a distance, appear menacing, lose, on a nearer
approach, their disagreeable aspect, and, in the event, frequently
produce the most agreeable pleasures. He who tries every expedient, who
boldly opposes himself to every difficulty, who steadily resists every
obstacle, who neglects no exertion within his power, and relies with
confidence on the assistance of God, extracts from affliction both its
poison and its sting, and deprives misfortune of its victory.

Sorrow, misfortune, and sickness, soon render solitude easy and familiar
to our minds. How willingly do we renounce the world, and become
indifferent to all its pleasures, when the insidious eloquence of the
passions is silenced, and our powers are debilitated by vexation or ill
health! It is then we perceive the weakness of those succors which the
world affords. How many useful truths, alas! has the bed of sickness
and sorrow instilled even into the minds of kings and princes! truths
which, in the hour of health, they would have been unable to learn amidst
the deceitful counsels of their pretended friends. The time, indeed, in
which a valetudinarian is capable of employing his powers with facility
and success, in a manner conformable to his designs, is short, and runs
rapidly away. Those only who enjoy robust health can exclaim, “Time is
my own;” for he who labors under continual sickness and suffering, and
whose avocations depend on the public necessity or caprice, can never
say that he has one moment to himself. He must watch the fleeting hours
as they pass, and seize an interval of leisure when and where he can.
Necessity, as well as reason, convinces him that he must, in spite of his
daily sufferings, his wearied body, or his harassed mind, firmly resist
his accumulating troubles; and, if he would save himself from becoming
the victim of dejection, he must manfully combat the difficulties by
which he is attacked. The more we enervate ourselves, the more we become
the prey of ill health; but determined courage, and obstinate resistance,
frequently renovate our powers; and he who, in the calm of solitude,
vigorously wrestles with misfortune, is, in the event, sure of gaining
the victory.

The influence of the mind upon the body is a consolatory truth to
those who are subject to constitutional complaints. Supported by this
reflection, the efforts of reason continue unsubdued; the influence of
religion maintains its empire; and the lamentable truth, that men of
the finest sensibility, and most cultivated understanding, frequently
possess less fortitude under affliction than the most vulgar of mankind,
remains unknown. Campanella, incredible as it may seem, suffered by the
indulgence of melancholy reflections, a species of mental torture more
painful than any bodily torture could have produced. I can, however,
from my own experience, assert, that, even in the extremity of distress,
every object which diverts the attention, softens the evils we endure,
and frequently drives them entirely away. By diverting the attention,
many celebrated philosophers have been able not only to preserve a
tranquil mind in the midst of the most poignant sufferings, but have
even increased the strength of their intellectual faculties, in spite of
their corporeal pains. Rousseau composed the greater part of his immortal
works under the continual pressure of sickness and sorrow. Gellert,
who, by his mild, agreeable, and instructive writings, has become the
preceptor of Germany, certainly found, in this interesting occupation,
the secret remedy against melancholy. Mendelsohm, at an age far advanced
in life, and not, in general, subject to dejection, was for a long time
oppressed by an almost inconceivable derangement of the nervous system;
but, by submitting with patience and docility to his sufferings, he still
maintains all the noble and high advantages of youth. Garve, who was
for several years unable to read, to write, or even to think, has since
produced his treatise upon Cicero, in which this profound writer, so
circumspect in all his expressions that he appears hurt if any improper
word escapes his pen, thanks the Almighty, with a sort of rapture,
for the weakness of his constitution, because it had taught him the
extraordinary influence which the powers of the mind have over those of
the body.

Solitude is not merely desirable, but absolutely necessary, to those
characters who possess sensibilities too quick, and imaginations too
ardent, to live quietly in the world, and who are incessantly inveighing
against men and things. Those who suffer their minds to be subdued by
circumstances which would scarcely produce an emotion in other bosoms;
who complain of the severity of their misfortunes on occasions which
others would not feel; who are dispirited by every occurrence which does
not produce immediate satisfaction and pleasure; who are incessantly
tormented by the illusion of fancy; who are unhinged and dejected the
moment prosperity is out of their view; who repine at what they possess,
from an ignorance of what they really want; whose minds are for ever
veering from one vain wish to another; who are alarmed at every thing,
and enjoy nothing; are not formed for society, and, if solitude have no
power to heal their wounded spirits, are certainly incurable.

Men who in other respects possess rational minds and pious dispositions,
frequently fall into low spirits and despair; but it is in general almost
entirely their own fault. If it proceed, as is generally the case, from
unfounded fears; if they love to torment themselves and others on every
trivial disappointment or slight indisposition; if they constantly resort
to medicine for that relief which reason alone can bestow; if they fondly
indulge, instead of repressing, these idle fancies; if, after having
endured the most excruciating pains with patience, and supported the
greatest misfortunes with fortitude, they neither can nor will learn to
bear the puncture of the smallest pin, or those trifling adversities to
which human life is unavoidably subject; they can only attribute their
unhappy condition to their own misconduct; and, although they might,
by no very irksome effort of their understandings, look with an eye of
composure and tranquillity on the multiplied and fatal fires issuing from
the dreadful cannon’s mouth, will continue shamefully subdued by the idle
apprehensions of being fired at by pop-guns.

All these qualities of the soul, fortitude, firmness, and stoic
inflexibility, are much sooner acquired by silent meditation than
amidst the noisy intercourse of mankind, where innumerable difficulties
continually oppose us; where ceremony, servility, flattery, and fear,
contaminate our dispositions; where every occurrence opposes our
endeavors; and where, for this reason, men of the weakest minds, and
the most contracted notions, become more active and popular, gain more
attention, and are better received, than men of feeling hearts and
liberal understandings.

The mind, in short, fortifies itself with impregnable strength in the
bowers of solitary retirement against every species of suffering and
affliction. The frivolous attachments which, in the world, divert the
soul from its proper objects, and drive it wandering, as chance may
direct, into an eccentric void, die away. Contented, from experience,
with the little which nature requires, rejecting every superfluous
desire, and having acquired a complete knowledge of ourselves, the
visitations of the Almighty, when he chastises us with affliction,
humbles our presumptuous pride, disappoints our vain conceits, restrains
the violence of our passions, and makes us sensible of our inanity and
weakness, are received with composure and felt without surprise. How
many important truths do we here learn, of which the worldly minded man
has no idea! Casting the eye of calm reflection on ourselves, and on
the objects around us, how resigned we become to the lot of humanity!
How different every object appears! The heart expands to every noble
sentiment; the bloom of conscious virtue brightens on the cheek; the mind
teems with sublime conceptions; and, boldly taking the right path, we at
length reach the bowers of innocence, and the plains of peace.

On the death of a beloved friend, we constantly feel a strong desire to
withdraw from society; but our worldly acquaintances unite in general to
destroy this laudable inclination. Conceiving it improper to mention the
subject of our grief, our companions, cold and indifferent to the event,
surround us, and think their duties sufficiently discharged by paying the
tributary visit, and amusing us with the current topics of the town. Such
idle pleasantries cannot convey a balm of comfort into the wounded heart.

When I, alas! within two years after my arrival in Germany, lost the
lovely idol of my heart, the amiable companion of my former days, I
exclaimed a thousand times to my surrounding friends, _Oh! leave me
to myself!_ Her departed spirit still hovers round me: the tender
recollection of her society, the afflicting remembrance of her sufferings
on my account, are always present to my mind. What mildness and
affability! Her death was as calm and resigned as her life was pure and
virtuous. During five long months, the lingering pangs of dissolution
hung continually around her. One day, as she reclined upon her pillow,
while I read to her “_The Death of Christ_,” by Rammler, she cast her
eyes over the page, and silently pointed out to me the following passage;
“My breath grows weak, my days are shortened, my heart is full of
affliction, and my soul prepares to take its flight.” Alas! when I recall
all those circumstances to my mind, and recollect how impossible it was
for me to abandon the world at that moment of anguish and distress,
when I carried the seeds of death within my bosom; when I had neither
fortitude to bear my afflictions, nor courage to resist them, while I was
yet pursued by malice, and traduced by calumny; I can easily conceive,
in such a situation, that my exclamation might be, _leave me to myself_.
To a heart thus torn by too rigorous a destiny from the bosom that was
opened for its reception; from a bosom in which it fondly dwelt; from an
object that it dearly loved, detached from every object, at a loss where
to fix its affections or communicate its feelings, solitude alone can
administer comfort.

Solitude, when it has ripened and preserved the tender and humane
feelings of the heart, and created in the mind a salutary distrust of
our vain reason and boasted abilities, may be considered to have brought
us nearer to God. Humility is the first lesson we learn from reflection,
and self distrust the first proof we give of having obtained a knowledge
of ourselves. When, in attending the duties of my profession, I behold,
on the bed of sickness, the efforts of the soul to oppose its impending
dissolution, and discover, by the increasing torments of the patient, the
rapid advances of death; when I see the unhappy sufferer extend his cold
and trembling hands to thank the Almighty for the smallest mitigation of
his pains; when I hear his utterance choked by intermingled groans, and
view the tender looks, the silent anguish of his attending friends; all
my fortitude abandons me; my heart bleeds; and I tear myself from the
sorrowful scene, only to pour my tears more freely over the lamentable
lot of humanity, to regret the inefficacy of those medical powers which
I am supposed only to have sought with so much anxiety as a mean of
prolonging my own miserable existence,

    “When in this vale of years I backward look,
    And miss such numbers, numbers too of such,
    Firmer in health, and greener in their age,
    And stricter on their guard, and fitter far
    To play life’s subtle game, I scarce believe
    I still survive: and am I fond of life
    Who scarce can think it possible I live?
    Alive by miracle! If I am still alive,
    Who long have buried what gives life to live.”

The wisdom that teaches us to avoid the snares of the world, is not to be
acquired by the incessant pursuit of entertainments; by flying, without
reflection, from one party to another; by continual conversation on low
and trifling subjects; by undertaking every thing and doing nothing. “He
who would acquire true wisdom,” says a celebrated philosopher, “must
learn to live in solitude.” An uninterrupted course of dissipation
stifles every virtuous sentiment. The dominion of reason is lost amidst
the intoxications of pleasure; its voice is no longer heard; its
authority is no longer obeyed; the mind no longer strives to surmount
temptations; but instead of shunning the perils which the passions
scatter in our way, we run eagerly to find them. The idea of God, and the
precepts of his holy religion, are never so little remembered as in the
ordinary intercourses of society. Engaged in a multiplicity of absurd
pursuits, entranced in the delirium of gayety, inflamed by the continual
ebriety which raises the passions and stimulates the desires, every
connexion between God and man is dissolved; the bright and noble faculty
of reason obscured; and even the great and important duties of religion,
the only source of true felicity, totally obliterated from the mind,
or remembered only with levity and indifference. On the contrary, he
who, entering into a serious self-examination, elevates his thoughts in
silence toward his God; who consults the theatre of nature, the spangled
firmament of heaven, the meadows enamelled with flowers, the stupendous
mountains, and the silent groves, as the temples of the Divinity; who
directs the emotions of his heart to the great Author and Conductor of
every thing; who has his enlightened providence continually before his
eyes, must, most assuredly, have already lived in pious solitude and
religious retirement.

The pious disposition which a zealous devotion to God engenders in
solitude, may, it is true, in certain characters, and under particular
circumstances, degenerate into the gloom of superstition, or rise
into the phrenzy of fanaticism; but these excesses soon abate; and,
compared with that fatal supineness which extinguishes every virtue,
are really advantageous. The sophistry of the passions is silent during
the serious hours of self-examination, and the perturbations we feel on
the discovery of our errors and defects, is converted by the light of a
pure and rational faith, into happy ease and perfect tranquillity. The
fanatic enthusiast presents himself before the Almighty much oftener
than the supercilious wit who derides an holy religion, and calls piety
a weakness. Philosophy and morality become in solitude the handmaids of
religion, and join their powers to conduct us into the bowers of eternal
peace. They teach us to examine our hearts, and exhort us to guard
against the dangers of fanaticism. But if virtue cannot be instilled
into the soul without convulsive efforts, they also admonish us not to
be intimidated by the apprehension of danger. It is not in the moment of
joy, when we turn our eyes from God and our thoughts from eternity, that
we experience those salutary fervors of the soul, which even religion,
with all her powers, cannot produce so soon as a mental affliction
or a corporeal malady. The celebrated M. Grave, one of the greatest
philosophers of Germany, exclaimed to Dr. Spalding and myself, “I am
indebted to my malady for having led me to make a closer scrutiny and
more accurate observation on my own character.”

In the last moments of life, it is certain that we all wish we had passed
our days in greater privacy and solitude, in stricter intimacy with
ourselves, and in closer communion with God. Pressed by the recollection
of our errors, we then clearly perceive that they were occasioned by
not having shunned the snares of the world, and by not having watched
with sufficient care over the inclinations of our hearts. Oppose the
sentiments of a solitary man, who has passed his life in pious conference
with God, to those which occupy a worldly mind, forgetful of its
Creator, and sacrificing its dearest interests to the enjoyment of the
moment: compare the character of a wise man, who reflects in silence
on the importance of eternity, with that of a fashionable being, who
consumes all his time at ridottos, balls, and assemblies; and we shall
then perceive that solitude, dignified retirement, select friendships,
and rational society, can alone afford true pleasure, and give us what
all the vain enjoyments of the world will never bestow, consolation in
death, and hope of everlasting life. But the bed of death discovers most
clearly the difference between the just man, who has quietly passed his
days in religious contemplation, and the man of the world, whose thoughts
have only been employed to feed his passions and gratify his desires. A
life passed amidst the tumultuous dissipations of the world, even when
unsullied by the commission of any positive crime, concludes, alas! very
differently from that which has been spent in the bowers of solitude,
adorned by innocence, and rewarded by virtue.

But, as example teaches more effectually than precept, and curiosity is
more alive to recent facts than remote illustrations, I shall here relate
the history of a man of family and fashion, who a few years since shot
himself in London; from which it will appear, that men possessed even of
the best feelings of the heart, may be rendered extremely miserable, by
suffering their principles to be corrupted by the practice of the world.

The honorable Mr. Damer, the eldest son of Lord Milton, was five and
thirty years of age when he put a period to his existence by means
perfectly correspondent to the principles in which he had lived. He was
married to a rich lady, the daughter-in-law of General Conway. Nature had
endowed him with extraordinary talents; but a most infatuated fondness
for excessive dissipation obscured the brightest faculties of his mind,
and perverted many of the excellent qualities of the heart. His houses,
his carriages, his horses, and his liveries, surpassed in splendor
and magnificence every thing sumptuous and costly even in the superb
and extravagant metropolis of Great Britain. The fortune he possessed
was great; but the variety of lavish expenditures in which he engaged
exceeded his income, and he was reduced at length to the necessity of
borrowing money. He raised, in different ways, near forty thousand
pounds, the greater part of which he employed with improvident generosity
in relieving the distresses of his less opulent companions; for his
heart overflowed with tenderness and compassion; but this exquisite
sensibility, which was ever alive to the misfortunes of others, was at
length awakened to his own embarrassed situation; and his mind driven by
the seeming irretrievable condition of his affairs, to the utmost verge
of despair. Retiring to a common brothel, he sent for four women of
the town, and passed several hours in their company with apparent good
spirits and unencumbered gayety; but, when the dead of night arrived, he
requested of them, with visible dejection, to retire; and immediately
afterward drawing from his pocket a pistol, which he had carried about
him the whole afternoon, blew out his brains. It appeared that he had
passed the evening with these women in the same manner as he had been
used to pass many others with different women of the same description,
without demanding favours which they would most willingly have granted,
and only desiring, in return for the money he lavished on them, the
dissipation of their discourse, or at most, the ceremony of a salute, to
divert the sorrow that preyed upon his tortured mind. But the gratitude
he felt for the temporary oblivion which these intercourses afforded,
sometimes ripened into feelings of the warmest friendship. A celebrated
actress of the London theatre, whose conversations had already drained
him of considerable sums of money, requested of him, only three days
before his death, to send her five and twenty guineas. At that moment he
had only ten guineas about him; but he sent her, with an apology for his
inability to comply immediately with her request, all he had, and soon
afterward borrowed the remainder of the money, and sent it to her without
delay. This unhappy young man, shortly before the fatal catastrophe, had
written to his father, and disclosed to him the distressed situation he
was in; and the very night on which he terminated his existence, his
affectionate parent, the good Lord Milton, arrived in London, for the
purpose of discharging all the debts, and arranging the affairs of his
unhappy son. Thus lived and died this destitute and dissipated man! How
different from that life which the innocent live, or that death which the
virtuous die!

I hope I may be permitted in this place to relate the story of a young
lady whose memory I am extremely anxious to preserve; for I can with
great truth say of her, as Petrarch said of his beloved Laura, “the world
was unacquainted with the excellence of her character: for she was only
known to those whom she has left behind to bewail her loss.” Solitude
was all the world she knew; for her only pleasures were those which a
retired and virtuous life affords. Submitting with pious resignation
to the dispensations of heaven, her weak frame sustained, with steady
fortitude, every affliction of mortality. Mild, good, and tender, she
endured her sufferings without a murmur or sigh; and although naturally
timid and reserved, disclosed the feelings of her soul with all the
warmth of filial enthusiasm. Of this description was the superior
character of whom I now write; a character who convinced me, by her
fortitude under the severest misfortunes, how much strength solitude is
capable of conveying to the mind even of the feeblest being. Diffident
of her own powers, she listened to the precepts of a fond parent, and
relied with perfect confidence on the goodness of God. Taught by my
experience, submitting to my judgment, she entertained for me the most
ardent affection; and convinced me, not by professions, but by actions,
of her sincerity. Willingly would I have sacrificed my life to have
saved her; and I am satisfied that she would as willingly have given up
her own for me. I had no pleasure but in pleasing her, and my endeavors
for that purpose were most gratefully returned. A rose was my favorite
flower, and she presented one to me almost daily during the season. I
received it from her hand with the highest delight, and cherished it as
the richest treasure. A malady of almost a singular kind, a hæmorrhage
in the lungs, suddenly deprived me of the comfort of this beloved child,
and tore her from my protecting arms. From the knowledge I had of her
constitution, I immediately perceived that the disorder was mortal. How
frequently during that fatal day did my wounded, bleeding heart, bend me
on my knees before God to supplicate for her recovery. But I concealed my
feelings from her observation. Although sensible of her danger, she never
discovered the least apprehension of its approach. Smiles played around
her pallid cheeks whenever I entered or quitted the room; and when worn
down by the fatal distemper, a prey to the most corroding grief, a victim
to the sharpest and most intolerable pains, she made no complaint; but
mildly answered all my questions by some short sentence, without entering
into any detail. Her decay and impending dissolution became obvious to
the eye; but to the last moment of her life, her countenance preserved a
serenity correspondent to the purity of her mind, and the affectionate
tenderness of her heart. Thus I beheld my dear and only daughter, at
the age of five and twenty, after a lingering suffering of nine long,
long months, expire in my arms. So long and so severe an attack was not
necessary to the conquest: she had been the submissive victim of ill
health from her earliest infancy; her appetite was almost gone when we
left Swisserland: a residence which she quitted with her usual sweetness
of temper, and without discovering the smallest regret: although a young
man, as handsome in his person as he was amiable in the qualities of his
mind, the object of her first, her only affection, a few weeks afterward
put a period to his existence. During the few happy days we passed at
Hanover, where she rendered herself universally respected and beloved,
she amused herself by composing religious prayers, which were afterward
found among her papers, and in which she implores death to afford her a
speedy relief from her pains. During the same period she wrote also many
letters, always affecting, and frequently sublime. They were couched
in expressions of the same desire speedily to reunite her soul with
the Author of her days. The last words that my dear, my beloved child
uttered, amidst the most painful agonies, were these--“To-day I shall
taste the joys of heaven!”

How unworthy of this bright example should we be, if, after having seen
the severest sufferings sustained by a female in the earliest period
of life, and of the weakest constitution, we permitted our minds to be
dejected by misfortunes which courage might enable us to surmount! A
female who under the anguish of inexpressible torments, never permitted
a sigh or complaint to escape from her lips, but submitted with silent
resignation to the will of heaven, in hope of meeting with reward
hereafter. She was ever active, invariably mild, and always compassionate
to the miseries of others. But we, who have before our eyes the sublime
instructions which a character thus virtuous and noble has here given us;
we, who like her, aspire to a seat in the mansions of the blessed, refuse
the smallest sacrifice, make no endeavor to stem with courage the torrent
of adversity, or to acquire that degree of patience and resignation,
which a strict examination of our own hearts, and silent communion with
God, would certainly afford.

Sensible and unfortunate beings! The slight misfortunes by which you
are now oppressed, and driven to despair (for slight, indeed, they
are, when compared with mine,) will ultimately raise your minds above
the low considerations of the world, and give a strength to your power
which you now conceive to be impossible. You now think yourselves sunk
into the deepest abyss of suffering and sorrow; but the time will soon
arrive when you will perceive yourselves in that happy state in which
the mind verges from earth and fixes its attention on heaven. You will
then enjoy a calm repose, be susceptible of pleasures equally substantial
and sublime, and possess in lieu of tumultuous anxieties for life, the
serene and comfortable hope of immortality. Blessed, supremely blessed,
is he who knows the value of retirement and tranquillity, who is capable
of enjoying the silence of the groves, and all the pleasures of rural
solitude. The soul then tastes celestial delight even under the deepest
impressions of sorrow and dejection; regains its strength, collects new
courage, and acts with perfect freedom. The eye then looks with fortitude
on the transient sufferings of disease; the mind no longer feels the
dread of being alone; and we learn to cultivate, during the remainder of
our lives, a bed of roses round even the tomb of death.




