CHAPTER VI.

_Advantages of solitude in old age; and on the bed of death._


The decline of life, and particularly the condition of old age, derive
from solitude the purest sources of uninterrupted enjoyment. Old age
when considered as a period of comparative quietude and repose, as a
serious and contemplative interval between a transitory existence and an
approaching immortality, is, perhaps, the most agreeable condition of
human life: a condition to which solitude affords a secure harbor against
those shattering tempests to which the frail bark of man is continually
exposed in the short but dangerous voyage of the world; a harbor from
whence he may securely view the rocks and quicksands which threatened his
destruction, and which he has happily escaped.

Men are by nature disposed to investigate the various properties of
distant objects before they think of contemplating their own characters;
like modern travellers who visit foreign countries before they are
acquainted with their own. But prudence will exhort the young, and
experience teach the aged, to conduct themselves on very different
principles; and both the one and the other will find that solitude and
self-examination are the beginning and the end of true wisdom.

    Oh! lost to virtue, lost to manly thought,
    Lost to the noble sallies of the soul!
    Who think in solitude to be alone.
    Communion sweet; communion large and high.
    Our reason, guardian angel, and our God:
    The nearest these when others most remote;
    And all, ere long, shall be remote but these.

The levity of youth, by this communion large and high, will be repressed,
and the depression which sometimes accompanies old age entirely removed.
An unceasing succession of gay hopes, fond desires, ardent wishes, high
delights, and unfounded fancies, form the character of our early years;
but those which follow are marked with melancholy and increasing sorrows.
A mind, however that is invigorated by observation and experience,
remains dauntless and unmoved, amidst both the prosperities and
adversities of life. He who is no longer forced to exert his powers, and
who at an early period of his life has well studied the manners of men,
will complain very little of the ingratitude with which his favors and
anxieties have been requited. All he asks is, that the world will let him
alone: and having a thorough knowledge not only of his own character, but
of mankind, he is enabled to enjoy the comforts of repose.

It is finely remarked by a celebrated German, that there are political
as well as religious Carthusians, and that both orders are sometimes
composed of most excellent and pious characters. “It is,” says this
admirable writer, “in the deepest and most sequestered recesses of
forests that we meet with the peaceful sage, the calm observer, the
friend of truth, and the lover of his country, who renders himself
beloved by his wisdom, revered for his knowledge, respected for his
veracity, and adored for his benevolence; whose confidence and friendship
every one is anxious to gain; and who excites admiration by the eloquence
of his conversation, and esteem by the virtue of his actions, while
he raises wonder by the obscurity of his name, and the mode of his
existence. The giddy multitude solicit him to relinquish his solitude,
and seat himself on the throne: but they perceive inscribed on his
forehead, beaming with sacred fire, _odi profanum vulgus et arceo_; and
instead of being his seducers, become his disciples.” But, alas! this
extraordinary character, whom I saw some years ago in Weteravia, who
inspired me with filial reverence and affection, and whose animated
countenance announced the superior wisdom and happy tranquillity of his
mind, is now no more. There did not perhaps at that time exist in any
court a more profound statesman: he was intimately acquainted with all,
and corresponded personally with some of the most celebrated sovereigns
of Europe. I never met with an observer who penetrated with such quick
and accurate sagacity into the minds and characters of men, who formed
such true opinions of the world, or criticised with such discerning
accuracy the actions of those who were playing important parts on its
various theatres. There never was a mind more free, more enlarged, more
powerful, or more engaging; or an eye more lively and inquisitive. He
was the man, of all others, in whose company I could have lived with
the highest pleasure, and died with the greatest comfort. The rural
habitation in which he lived, was simple in its structure, and modest in
its attire; the surrounding grounds and gardens laid out in the happy
simplicity of nature; and his fare healthy and frugal. I never felt a
charm more powerful than that which filled my bosom while I contemplated
the happy solitude of the venerable Baron de Schautenbach at Weteravia.

Rousseau, feeling his end approach, also passed the few remaining years
of an uneasy life in solitude. It was during old age that he composed
the best and greater part of his admirable works; but, although he
employed his time with judicious activity, his feelings had been too
deeply wounded by the persecutions of the world, to enable him to find
complete tranquillity in the bowers of retirement. Unhappily he continued
ignorant of the danger of his situation, until the vexations of his mind,
the disorders of his body, and his unpardonable neglect of health, had
rendered his recovery impossible. It was not until he had been many years
tormented by physicians, and racked by a painful malady, that he took up
his pen; and his years increased only to increase the visible effect of
his mental and corporeal afflictions, which at length became so acute,
that he frequently raved wildly or fainted away under the excess of his
pains.

It is observed by one of our refined critics, that “all Rousseau wrote
during his old age is the effect of madness.” “Yes,” replied his fair
friend, with greater truth, “but he raved so pleasantly, that we are
delighted to run mad with him.”

The mind becomes more disposed to seek its “guardian angel and its God,”
the nearer it approaches the confines of mortality. When the ardent
fire of youth is extinguished, and the meridian heat of life’s short
day subsides into the soft tranquillity and refreshing quietude of its
evening, we feel the important necessity of devoting some few hours to
pious meditation before we close our eyes in endless night; and the very
idea of being able to possess this interval of holy leisure, and to hold
this sacred communion with God, recreates the mind, like the approach of
spring after a dull, a dreary, and a distressing winter.

Petrarch scarcely perceived the approaches of old age. By constant
activity he contrived to render retirement always happy, and year after
year rolled unperceived away in pleasures and tranquillity. Seated in
a verdant arbor in the vicinity of a Carthusian monastery, about three
miles from Milan, he wrote to his friend Settimo with a simplicity of
heart unknown in modern times. “Like a wearied traveller, I increase
my pace in proportion as I approach the end of my journey, I pass my
days and nights in reading and writing; these agreeable occupations
alternately relieve each other, and are the only sources from whence I
derive my pleasures. I lie awake and think, and divert my mind by every
means in my power; and my ardor increases as new difficulties arise.
Novelties incite, and obstacles sharpen, my resistance. The labors I
endure are certain, for my hand is tired of holding my pen: but whether
I shall reap the harvest of my toils I cannot tell. I am anxious to
transmit my name to posterity: but if I am disappointed in this wish I
am satisfied the age in which I live, or at least my friends, will know
me, and this fame will satisfy me. My health is so good, my constitution
so robust, and my temperament so warm, that neither the advance of years
nor the most serious occupation, have power to conquer the rebellious
enemy by which I am incessantly attacked. I should certainly become its
victim, as I have frequently been, if Providence did not protect me. On
the approach of spring, I take up arms against the flesh, and am even at
this moment struggling for my liberty against this dangerous enemy.”

A rural retreat, however lonely or obscure, contributes to increase the
fame of those great and noble characters who relinquish the world at an
advanced period of their lives, and pass the remainder of their days in
solitude: their lustre beams from their retirement with brighter rays
than those which shone around them in their earliest days, and on the
theatre of their glory. “It is in solitude, in exile, and on the bed of
death,” says Pope, “that the noblest characters of antiquity shone with
the greatest splendor; it was then they performed the greatest services;
for it was during those periods that they became useful examples.” And
Rousseau appears to have entertained the same opinion: “It is noble,”
says he, “to exhibit to the eyes of men an example of the life they
ought to lead. The man who, when age or ill health has deprived him of
activity, dares to resound from his retreat the voice of truth, and
to announce to mankind the folly of those opinions which render them
miserable, is a public benefactor. I should be of much less use to my
countrymen, were I to live among them, than I can possibly be in my
retreat. Of what importance can it be, whether I live in one place or in
another, provided I discharge my duties properly?”

A certain young lady of Germany, however, was of opinion that Rousseau
was not entitled to praise. She maintained that he was a dangerous
corrupter of the youthful mind, and that he had very improperly
discharged his duties, by discovering in his Confessions the moral
defects and vicious inclinations of his heart. “Such a work written by
a man of virtue,” said she, “would render him an object of abhorrence:
but Rousseau, whose writings are circulated to captivate the wicked,
proves, by his story of the Ruban Vole, that he possesses a heart of the
blackest dye. It is evident, from many passages in that publication, that
it was vanity alone which guided his pen; and from many others, that he
felt himself conscious he was disclosing falsehoods. There is nothing,
in short, throughout the work that bears the stamp of truth; and all
it informs us of is, that Madame de Warens was the original from which
he drew the character of Julia. These unjustly celebrated Confessions
contain, generally speaking, a great many fine words, and but very few
good thoughts. If, instead of rejecting every opportunity of advancing
himself in life, he had engaged in some industrious profession, he might
have been more useful to the world than he has been by the publication of
his dangerous writings.”

This incomparable criticism upon Rousseau merits preservation; for, in my
opinion, it is the only one of its kind. The Confessions of Rousseau is a
work certainly not proper for the eye of youth; but to me it appears one
of the most remarkable philosophic publications that the present age has
produced. The fine style and enchanting colors in which it is written are
its least merits. The most distant posterity will read it with rapture,
without inquiring what age the venerable author had attained when he gave
to the world this last proof of his sincerity.

Age, however advanced, is capable of enjoying real pleasure. A virtuous
old man passes his days with serene gayety, and receives, in the
happiness he feels from the benedictions of all around him, a rich reward
for the rectitude and integrity of his past life; for the mind reviews
with joyful satisfaction its honorable and self-approving transactions:
nor does the near prospect of the tomb give fearful emotion to his
undismayed and steady soul.

The empress Maria Theresa has caused her own mausoleum to be erected,
and frequently, accompanied by her family, visits with serenity and
composure, a monumental depository, the idea of which conveys such
painful apprehension to almost every mind. Pointing it out to the
observation of her children, “Ought we to be proud or arrogant,” says
she, “when we here behold the tomb in which, after a few years, the poor
remains of royalty must quietly repose?”

There are few men capable of thinking with so much sublimity. Every
one, however, is capable of retiring, at least occasionally, from the
corruptions of the world; and if, during this calm retreat, they shall
happily learn to estimate their past days with propriety, and to live the
remainder in private virtue and public utility, the tomb will lose its
menacing aspect, and death appear like the calm evening of a fine and
well spent day.

    “Blest be that hand divine, which gently laid
    My heart at rest beneath this humble shed.
    The world’s a stately bark on dang’rous seas,
    With pleasure seen, but boarded at our peril;
    Here, on a single plank, thrown safe ashore,
    I hear the tumult of the distant throng,
    As that of seas remote, or dying storms;
    And meditate on scenes more silent still;
    Pursue my theme, and fight the fear of death.
    Here, like a shepherd gazing from his hut,
    Touching his reed, or leaning on his staff,
    Eager ambition’s fiery chase I see;
    I see the circling hunt of noisy men
    Burst law’s enclosure, leap the mounds of right,
    Pursuing and pursued, each other’s prey,
    As wolves for rapine; as the fox for wiles;
    Till death, that mighty hunter, earths them all.”

When Addison perceived that he was given over by his physicians, and
felt his end approaching, he sent for Lord Warwick, a young man of very
irregular life and loose opinions, whom he had diligently, but vainly
endeavored to reclaim, but who by no means wanted respect for the
person of his preceptor, and was sensible of the loss he was about to
sustain. When he entered the chamber of his dying friend, Addison, who
was extremely feeble, and whose life at that moment hung quivering on
his lips, observed a profound silence. The youth, after a long and awful
pause, at length said, in low and trembling accents, “Sir, you desired to
see me: signify your commands, and be assured I will execute them with
religious fidelity.” Addison took him by the hand, and with his expiring
breath replied, “observe with what tranquillity a Christian can die.”
Such is the consolation which springs from a due sense of the principles,
and a proper practice of the precepts of our holy religion: such is the
high reward a life of simplicity and innocence bestows.

He who during the retirement of the day seriously studies, and during
the silence of the night piously contemplates the august doctrines of
revelation, will be convinced of their power by experiencing their
effect. He will review with composure his past errors in society,
perceive with satisfaction his present comfort in solitude, and aspire
with hope to future happiness in heaven. He will think with the freedom
of a philosopher, live with the piety of a Christian, and renounce with
ease the poisonous pleasures of society from a conviction that they
weaken the energies of his mind, and prevent his heart from raising
itself toward his God. Disgusted with the vanities and follies of public
life, he will retire into privacy, and contemplate the importance
of eternity. Even if he be still obliged occasionally to venture on
the stormy sea of busy life, he will avoid with greater skill and
prudence the rocks and sands by which he is surrounded, and steer with
greater certainty and effect from the tempests which most threaten his
destruction; rejoicing less at the pleasant course which a favorable wind
and clear sky may afford him, than at his having happily eluded such a
multitude of dangers.

The hours consecrated to God in solitude, are not only the most
important, but when we are habituated to this holy communion, the
happiest of our lives. Every time we silently elevate our thoughts toward
the great Author of our being, we recur to a contemplation of ourselves:
and being rendered sensible of our nearer approach, not only in idea, but
in reality, to the seat of eternal felicity, we retire, without regret,
from the noisy multitude of the world. A philosophic view and complete
knowledge of the nature of the species creep by degrees upon the mind:
we scrutinize our characters with greater severity; feel with redoubled
force the necessity of a reformation; and reflect with substantial effect
on the glorious end for which we were created. Conscious that human
actions are acceptable to the Almighty mind only in proportion as they
are prompted by motives of the purest virtue, men ought benevolently
to suppose that every good work springs from an untainted source and
is performed merely for the benefit of mankind; but human actions are
exposed to the influence of a variety of secondary causes, and cannot
always be the pure production of an unbiassed heart. Good works, however,
from whatever motive they arise, always convey a certain satisfaction and
complacency to the mind. But when the real merit of the performer is to
be actually investigated, the inquiry must always be, whether the mind
was not actuated by sinister views, by the hope of gratifying a momentary
passion, by the feelings of self love, rather than by the sympathies
of brotherly affection: and these subtle and important questions are
certainly discussed with closer scrutiny, and the motives of the heart
explored and developed with greater sincerity, during those hours when we
are alone before God than in any other situation.

Firm and untainted virtue, indeed, cannot be so easily and efficaciously
acquired, as by practising the precepts of Christianity in the bowers of
solitude. Religion refines our moral sentiments, disengages the heart
from every vain desire, renders it tranquil under misfortunes, humble
in the presence of God, and steady in the society of men. A life passed
in the practice of every virtue, affords us a rich reward for all the
hours we have consecrated to its duties, and enables us in the silence of
solitude to raise our pure hands and chaste hearts in pious adoration to
our Almighty Father!

How “low, flat, stale, and unprofitable, seem all the uses of this
world,” when the mind, boldly soaring beyond this lower sphere, indulges
the idea that the pleasures which result from a life of innocence and
virtue may be faintly analogous to the felicities of heaven! At least,
I trust we may be permitted unoffendingly to conceive, according to our
worldly apprehensions, that a free and unbounded liberty of thought
and action, a high admiration of the universal system of nature, a
participation of the divine essence, a perfect communion of friendship,
and a pure interchange of love, may be a portion of the enjoyments we
hope to experience in those regions of peace and happiness where no
impure or improper sentiment can taint the mind. But notions like these,
although they agreeably flatter our imaginations, shed at present but
a glimmering light upon this awful subject, and must continue, like
dreams and visions of the mind, until the clouds and thick darkness which
surrounded the tomb of mortality no longer obscure the bright glories of
everlasting life; until the veil shall be rent asunder, and the Eternal
shall reveal those things which no eye hath seen, no ear has heard, and,
which passeth all understanding. For I acknowledge, with awful reverence
and silent submission, that the knowledge of eternity is to the human
intellect like that which the color of crimson appeared to be in the mind
of a blind man, who compared it to the sound of a trumpet. I cannot,
however, conceive, that a notion more comfortable can be entertained,
than that eternity promises a constant and uninterrupted tranquillity;
although I am perfectly conscious that it is impossible to form an
adequate idea of the nature of that enjoyment which is produced by
happiness without end. An everlasting tranquillity is, in my imagination,
the highest possible felicity, because I know of no felicity upon earth
higher than that which a peaceful mind and contented heart afford.

Since, therefore, internal and external tranquillity is, upon earth,
an incontestable commencement of beatitude, it may be extremely useful
to believe, that a rational and qualified seclusion from the tumults
of the world, may so highly rectify the faculties of the human soul,
as to enable us to acquire in “blissful solitude” the elements of that
happiness we expect to enjoy in the world to come.

    He is the happy man, whose life e’en now,
    Shows somewhat of that happier life to come:
    Who, doom’d to an obscure but tranquil state,
    Is pleas’d with it, and, were he free to choose
    Would make his fate his choice: whom peace, the fruit
    Of virtue, and whom virtue, fruit of faith,
    Prepare for happiness; bespeak him one
    Content, indeed, to sojourn while he must
    Below the skies, but having there his home,
    The world o’erlooks him in her busy search
    Of objects more illustrious in her view;
    And occupied as earnestly as she;
    Though more sublimely, he o’erlooks the world.
    She scorns his pleasures, for she knows them not;
    He seeks not hers, for he has proved them vain.
    He cannot skim the ground like such rare birds
    Pursuing gilded flies, and such he deems
    Her honors, her emoluments, her joys.
    Therefore in contemplation is his bliss,
    Whose power is such, that whom she lifts from earth
    She makes familiar with a heaven unseen,
    And shows him glories yet to be reveal’d.

END OF PART I.




SOLITUDE.

