PART II.

THE PERNICIOUS INFLUENCE OF A TOTAL SECLUSION FROM SOCIETY UPON THE MIND
AND THE HEART.




CHAPTER I.

_Introduction._


Solitude, in its strict and literal acceptation, is equally unfriendly
to the happiness, and foreign to the nature of mankind. An inclination
to exercise the faculty of speech, to interchange the sentiments of the
mind, to indulge the affections of the heart, and to receive themselves,
while they bestow on others, a kind assistance and support, drives
men, by an ever active, and almost irresistible impulse, from solitude
to society: and teaches them that the highest temporal felicity they
are capable of enjoying, must be sought for in a suitable union of
the sexes, and in a friendly intercourse with their fellow creatures.
The profoundest deductions of reason, the highest flights of fancy,
the finest sensibilities of the heart, the happiest discoveries of
science, and the most valuable productions of art, are feebly felt, and
imperfectly enjoyed, in the cold and cheerless regions of solitude.
It is not to the senseless rock, or to the passing gale, that we can
satisfactorily communicate our pleasures and our pains. The heavy sighs
which incessantly transpire from the vacant bosoms of the solitary
hermit and the surly misanthropist, indicate the absence of those high
delights which ever accompany congenial sentiment and mutual affection.
The soul sinks under a situation in which there are no kindred bosoms to
participate its joys, and sympathise in its sorrows; and feels, strongly
feels, that the beneficent Creator has so framed and moulded the temper
of our minds, that society is the earliest impulse and the most powerful
inclination of our hearts.

Society, however, although it is thus pointed out to us, as it were
by the finger of the Almighty, as the means of reaching our highest
possible state of earthly felicity, is so pregnant with dangers, that it
depends entirely on ourselves, whether the indulgence of this instinctive
propensity shall be productive of happiness or misery.

The pleasures of society, like pleasures of every other kind, must, to be
pure and permanent, be temperate and discreet. While passion animates,
and sensibility cherishes, reason must direct, and virtue be the object
of our course. Those who search for happiness in a vague, desultory, and
indiscriminate intercourse with the world; who imagine the palace of
pleasure to be surrounded by the gay, unthinking, and volatile part of
the species; who conceive that the rays of all human delight beam from
places of public festivity and resort;

    “Who all their joys in mean profusion waste,
    Without reflection, management, or taste;
    Careless of all that virtue gives to please;
    For thought too active, and too mad for ease;
    Who give each appetite too loose a rein,
    Push all enjoyment to the verge of pain;
    Impetuous follow where the passions call,
    And live in rapture or not live at all;”

will, instead of lasting and satisfactory fruition, meet only with
sorrowful disappointment. This mode of seeking society is not a rational
indulgence of that natural passion which heaven, in its benevolence to
man, has planted in the human heart; but merely a factitious desire,
an habitual pruriency, produced by restless leisure, and encouraged
by vanity and dissipation. Social happiness, true and essential
social happiness, resides only in the bosom of love and in the arms
of friendship, and can only be really enjoyed by congenial hearts
and kindred minds, in the domestic bowers of privacy and retirement.
Affectionate intercourse produces an inexhaustible fund of delight. It
is the perennial sunshine of the mind. With what extreme anxiety do we
all endeavor to find an amiable being with whom we may form a tender
tie and close attachment, who may inspire us with unfading bliss, and
receive increase of happiness from our endearments and attention! How
greatly do such connexions increase the kind and benevolent dispositions
of the heart! and how greatly do such dispositions, while they lead the
mind to the enjoyment of domestic happiness, awaken all the virtues, and
call forth the best and strongest energies of the soul! Deprived of the
chaste and endearing sympathies of love and friendship, the species sink
into gross sensuality or mute indifference, neglect the improvement of
their faculties, and renounce all anxiety to please; but incited by these
propensities, the sexes mutually exert their powers, cultivate their
talents, call every intellectual energy into action; and, by endeavoring
to promote each other’s happiness, mutually secure their own.

Adverse circumstances, however, frequently prevent well disposed
characters, not only from making the election which their hearts would
prompt, and their understandings approve, but force them into alliances
which both reason and sensibility reject. It is from the disappointments
of love or of ambition that the sexes are generally repelled from society
to solitude. The affection, the tenderness, the sensibility of the heart,
are but too often torn and outraged by the cruelty and malevolence of an
unfeeling world, in which vice bears on its audacious front the mask of
virtue, and betrays innocence into the snares of unsuspected guilt. The
victims, however, whether of love or of ambition, who retire from society
to recruit their depressed spirits, and repair their disordered minds,
cannot, without injustice, be stigmatized as misanthropists, or arraigned
as anti-social characters. All relish for scenes of social happiness may
be lost by an extreme and over ardent passion for the enjoyments of them;
but it is only those who seek retirement from an aversion to the company
of their fellow creatures, that can be said to have renounced, or be
destitute of, the common sympathies of nature.

The present age, however, is not likely to produce many such unnatural
characters, for the manners of the whole world, and particularly of
Europe, were never, perhaps, more disposed to company. The rage for
public entertainments seems to have infected all the classes of society.
The pleasures of private life seem to be held in universal detestation
and contempt; opprobrious epithets, defame the humble enjoyments of
domestic love, and those whose hours are not consumed in unmeaning
visits, or unsocial parties, are regarded as censors of the common
conduct of the world, or as enemies to their fellow creatures; but
although mankind appear so extremely social, they certainly were never
less friendly and affectionate. Neither rank, nor sex, nor age, is free
from this pernicious habit. Infants, before they can well lisp the
rudiments of speech, are initiated into the idle ceremonies and parade of
company: and can scarcely meet their parents or their playmates without
being obliged to perform a punctilious salutation. Formal card parties,
and petty treats, engross the time that should be devoted to healthful
exercise and manly recreation. The manners of the metropolis are imitated
with inferior splendor, but with greater absurdity, in the country; every
village has its routs and its assemblies, in which the curled darlings
of the place blaze forth in feathered lustre and awkward magnificence;
and while the charming simplicity of one sex is destroyed by affectation,
the honest virtues of the other by dissolute gallantry, and the passions
of both inflamed by vicious and indecent mirth, the grave elders of the
districts are trying their tempers and impoverishing their purses at
sixpenny whist and cassino.

The spirit of dissipation has reached even the vagrant tribe. The
Gypsies of Germany suspend their predatory excursions, and on one
previously-appointed evening in every week, assemble to enjoy their
guilty spoils in the fumes of strong waters and tobacco. The place of
rendezvous is generally the vicinity of a mill, the proprietor of which,
by affording to these wandering tribes an undisturbed asylum, not only
secures his property from their depredations, but, by the idle tales
with which they contrive to amuse his ear, respecting the characters
and conduct of his neighbors, furnishes himself with new subjects of
conversation for his next evening coterie.

Minds that derive all their pleasure from the levity and mirth of
promiscuous company, are seldom able to contribute, in any high degree,
to their own amusement. Characters like these search every place
for entertainment, except their own bosoms and the bosoms of their
surrounding families, where by proper cultivation, real happiness, the
happiness arising from love and friendship, is alone capable of being
found.

The wearied pleasurist, sinking under the weight that preys upon his
spirits, flies to scenes of public gayety or private splendor, in fond
but vain expectation that they will dispel his discontent, and recreate
his mind; but he finds, alas! that the fancied asylum affords him no
rest. The ever-craving appetite for pastime grows by what it feeds
on; and the worm, which devoured his delight amidst his sylvan scenery
of solitude, still accompanies him to crowded halls of elegance and
festivity. While he eagerly embraces every object that promises to supply
the dreadful vacancy of his mind, he exhausts his remaining strength;
enlarges the wound he is so anxiously endeavoring to heal; and by too
eagerly grasping at the phantom pleasure, loses, perhaps for ever, the
substantial power of being happy.

Men whose minds are capable of higher enjoyments always feel these
perturbed sensations, when deluded into a fashionable party, they find
nothing to excite curiosity, or interest their feelings! and where they
are pestered by the frivolous importunities of those for whom they cannot
entertain either friendship or esteem. How, indeed, is it possible for a
sensible mind to feel the slightest approbation, when a coxcomb enamored
of his own eloquence, and swoln with the pride of self-conceited merit,
tires by his loquacious nonsense, all around him?

The great Leibnitz was observed by his servant frequently to take notes
while he sat at church; and the domestic very rationally conceived that
he was making observations on the subject of the sermon: but it is more
consistent with the character of this philosopher to conclude, that he
was indulging the powers of his own capacious and excursive mind, when
those of the preacher ceased to interest him. Thus it happens, that
while the multitude are driven from solitude to society, by being tired
of themselves, there are some, and those not a few, who seek refuge in
rational retirement from the frivolous dissipation of company.

An indolent mind is as irksome to itself as it is intolerable to others;
but an active mind feels inexhaustible resources in its own power.
The first is forced to fly from itself for enjoyment, while the other
calmly resigns itself to its own suggestions, and always meets with the
happiness it has vainly sought for in its communion with the world.

To rouse the soul from that lethargy into which its powers are so apt to
drop from the tediousness of life, it is necessary to apply a stimulus
both to the head and to the heart. Something must be contrived to strike
the senses and interest the mind. But it is much more difficult to convey
pleasure to others, than to receive it ourselves; and while the many wait
in anxious hope of being entertained, they find but few who are capable
of entertaining. Disappointment increases the eagerness of desire; and
the uneasy multitude rush to places of public resort, endeavoring,
by noise and bustle, festive gratification, elegant decoration, rich
dresses, splendid illuminations, sportive dances, and sprightly music,
to awaken the dormant faculties, and agitate the stagnant sensibilities
of the soul. These scenes may be considered the machineries of pleasure;
they produce a temporary effect, without requiring much effort or
co-operation to obtain it; while those higher delights, of which
retirement is capable, cannot be truly enjoyed without a certain degree
of intellectual exertion. There are, indeed, many minds so totally
corrupted by the unceasing pursuits of these vain and empty pleasures,
that they are utterly incapable of relishing intellectual delight; which,
as it affords an enjoyment totally unconnected with, and independent of,
common society, requires a disposition and capacity which common company
can never bestow. Retirement, therefore, and its attendant enjoyments,
are of a nature too refined for the gross and vulgar capacities of the
multitude, who are more disposed to gratify their intellectual indolence,
by receiving a species of entertainment which does not require from
them the exertion of thought, than to enjoy pleasures of a nobler kind,
which can only be procured by a rational restraint of the passions, and
a proper exercise of the powers of the mind. Violent and tumultuous
impressions can alone gratify such characters, whose pleasures like
those of the slothful Sybarites, only indicate the pain they undergo in
striving to be happy.

Men, eager for the enjoyment of worldly pleasures, seldom attain the
object they pursue. Dissatisfied with the enjoyments of the moment,
they long for absent delight, which seems to promise a more poignant
gratification. Their joys are like those of Tantalus, always in view, but
never within reach. The activity of such characters lead to no beneficial
end; they are perpetually in motion, without making any progress: they
spur on “the lazy foot of time,” and then complain of the rapidity of its
flight, only because they have made no good use of its presence: they
“take no note of time but by its loss;” and year follows year, only to
increase their uneasiness. If the bright beam of Aurora wake them from
their perturbed repose, it is only to create new anxiety how they are to
drag through the passing day. The change of season produces no change in
their wearied dispositions; and every hour comes and goes with equal
indifference and discontent.

The pleasures of society, however, although they are attended with such
unhappy effects, and pernicious consequences, to men of weak heads and
corrupted hearts, who only follow them for the purpose of indulging
the follies, and gratifying the vices, to which they have given birth,
are yet capable of affording to the wise and the virtuous, a high,
rational, sublime, and satisfactory enjoyment. The world is the only
theatre upon which great and noble actions can be performed, or the
heights of moral and intellectual excellence usefully attained. The
society of the wise and good, exclusive of the pleasing relaxation it
affords from the anxieties of business, and the cares of life, conveys
valuable information to the mind, and virtuous feelings to the breast.
There experience imparts its wisdom in a manner equally engaging and
impressive; the faculties are improved, and knowledge increased. Youth
and age reciprocally contribute to the happiness of each other. Such a
society, while it adds firmness to the character, gives fashion to the
manners; and opens immediately to the view the delightful models of
wisdom and integrity. It is only in such society that man can rationally
hope to exercise, with any prospect of success, the latent principle,
which continually prompts him to pursue the high felicity of which he
feels his nature capable, and of which the Creator has permitted him to
form a faint idea.

    “In every human heart there lies reclined
    Some atom pregnant with ethereal mind;
    Some plastic power, some intellectual ray,
    Some genial sunbeam from the source of day;
    Something that warms, and restless to aspire,
    Wakes the young heart, and sets the soul on fire;
    And bids us all our inborn powers employ
    To catch the phantom of ideal joy.”

Sorrow frequently drives its unhappy victims from solitude into the
vortex of society as a means of relief; for solitude is terrible to those
whose minds are torn with anguish for the loss of some dear friend,
whom death has, perhaps, taken untimely from their arms; and who would
willingly renounce all worldly joys to hear one accent of that beloved
voice, which used, in calm retirement, to fill his ear with harmony, and
his heart with rapture.

Solitude also is terrible to those whose felicity is founded on popular
applause; who have acquired a degree of fame by intrigue, and actions of
counterfeited virtue; and who suffer the most excruciating anxiety to
preserve their spurious fame. Conscious of the fraudulent means by which
they acquire possession of it, and of the weak foundation on which it is
built, it appears continually to totter, and always ready to overwhelm
them in its ruins. Their attention is sedulously called to every quarter;
and, in order to prop up the unsubstantial fabric, they bend with mean
submission to the pride of power; flatter the vanity, and accommodate
themselves to the vices of the great; censure the genius that provokes
their jealousy; ridicule the virtue that shames the conduct of their
patrons; submit to all the follies of the age; take advantage of its
errors; cherish its prejudices; applaud its superstition, and defend its
vices. The fashionable circles may, perhaps, welcome such characters as
their best supporters and highest ornaments; but to them the calm and
tranquil pleasures of retirement are dreary and disgusting.

To all those, indeed, whom vice has betrayed into guilt, and whose bosoms
are stung by the adders of remorse, solitude is doubly terrible; and they
fly from its shades to scenes of worldly pleasure, in the hope of being
able to silence the keen reproaches of violated conscience in the tumults
of society. Vain attempt!

Solitude, indeed, as well as religion, has been represented in such
dismal, disagreeable colors, by those who were incapable of tasting
its sweets, and enjoying its advantages, that many dismiss it totally
from all their schemes of happiness, and fly to it only to alleviate
the bitterness of some momentary passion, or temporary adversity, or to
hide the blushes of approaching shame. But there are advantages to be
derived from solitude, even under such circumstances, by those who are
otherwise incapable of enjoying them. Those who know the most delightful
comforts, and satisfactory enjoyments, of which a well regulated solitude
is productive, like those who are acquainted with the solid benefits
to be derived from religion, will seek retirement, in the hours of
prosperity and content, as the only means by which they can be enjoyed
in true perfection. The tranquillity of its shades will give richness
to their joys; its uninterrupted quietude will enable them to expatiate
on the fullness of their felicity; and they will turn their eyes with
soft compassion on the miseries of the world, when compared with the
blessings they enjoy.

Strongly, therefore, as the social principle operates in our breast; and
necessary as it is, when properly regulated, to the improvement of our
minds, the refinement of our manners, and the melioration of our hearts;
yet some portion of our time ought to be devoted to rational retirement:
and we must not conclude that those who occasionally abstain from the
tumultuous pleasures, and promiscuous enjoyments of the world, are morose
characters, or of peevish dispositions; nor stigmatize those who appear
to prefer the calm delights of solitude to the tumultuous pleasures of
the world, as unnatural and anti-social.

    “Whoever thinks, must see that man was made
    To face the storm, not languish in the shade:
    Action’s his sphere, and for that sphere design’d,
    Eternal pleasures open on his mind.
    For this fair hope leads on th’ impassion’d soul
    Through life’s wild lab’rinths to her distant goal,
    Paints in each dream, to fan the genial flame,
    The pomp of riches, and the pride of fame;
    Or fondly gives reflection’s cooler eye
    In solitude, an image of a future sky.”




