CHAPTER III.

_Influence of Solitude upon the Heart._


The highest happiness which is capable of being enjoyed in this world,
consists in _peace of mind_. The wise mortal who renounces the tumults
of the world, restrains his desires and inclinations, resigns himself to
the dispensations of his Creator, and looks with an eye of pity on the
frailties of his fellow creatures; whose greatest pleasure is to listen
among the rocks to the soft murmurs of a cascade; to inhale, as he walks
along the plains, the refreshing breezes of the zephyrs; and to dwell in
the surrounding woods, on the melodious accents of the aerial choristers;
may, by the simple feelings of his heart, obtain this invaluable blessing.

To taste the charms of retirement, it is not necessary to divest the
heart of its emotions. The world may be renounced without renouncing
the enjoyment which the tear of sensibility is capable of affording.
But to render the heart susceptible of this felicity, the mind must be
able to admire with equal pleasure nature in her sublimest beauties,
and in the modest flower that decks the vallies; to enjoy at the same
time that harmonious combination of parts which expands the soul, and
those detached portions of the whole which present the softest and most
agreeable images to the mind. Nor are these enjoyments exclusively
reserved for those strong and energetic bosoms whose sensations are as
lively as they are delicate, and in which, for that reason, the good
and the bad make the same impression: the purest happiness, the most
enchanting tranquillity, are also granted to men of colder feelings, and
whose imaginations are less bold and lively; but to such characters the
portraits must not be so highly colored, nor the tints so sharp; for as
the bad strikes them less, so also they are less susceptible of livelier
impressions.

The high enjoyments which the heart feels in solitude are derived from
the imagination. The touching aspect of delightful nature, the variegated
verdure of the forests, the resounding echoes of an impetuous torrent,
the soft agitation of the foliage, the warblings of the tenants of the
groves, the beautiful scenery of a rich and extensive country, and all
those objects which compose an agreeable landscape, take such complete
possession of the soul, and so entirely absorb our faculties, that the
sentiments of the mind are by the charms of the imagination instantly
converted into sensations of the heart, and the softest emotions give
birth to the most virtuous and worthy sentiments. But to enable the
imagination thus to render every object fascinating and delightful, it
must act with freedom, and dwell amidst surrounding tranquillity. Oh! how
easy is it to renounce noisy pleasures and tumultuous assemblies for the
enjoyment of that philosophic melancholy which solitude inspires!

Religious awe and rapturous delight are alternately excited by the
deep gloom of forests, by the tremendous height of broken rocks, and
by the multiplicity of majestic and sublime objects which are combined
within the site of a delightful and extensive prospect. The most painful
sensations immediately yield to the serious, soft, and solitary reveries
to which the surrounding tranquillity invites the mind; while the
vast and awful silence of nature exhibits the happy contrast between
simplicity and grandeur; and as our feelings become more exquisite, so
our admiration becomes more intense, and our pleasures more complete.

I had been for many years familiar with all that nature is capable
of producing in her sublimest works, when I first saw a garden in
the vicinity of Hanover, and another upon a much larger scale at
Marienwerder, about three miles distant, cultivated in the English
style of rural ornament. I was not then apprized of the extent of that
art which sports with the most ungrateful soil, and, by a new species
of creation, converts barren mountains into fertile fields and smiling
landscapes. This magic art makes an astonishing impression on the mind,
and captivates every heart, not insensible to the delightful charms of
cultivated nature. I cannot recollect without shedding tears of gratitude
and joy, a single day of this early part of my residence in Hanover,
when, torn from the bosom of my country, from the embraces of my family,
and from every thing that I held dear in life, my mind, on entering
the little garden of my deceased friend, M. de Hinuber, near Hanover,
immediately revived, and I forgot, for the moment, both my country and my
grief. The charm was new to me. I had no conception that it was possible,
upon so small a plot of ground, to introduce at once the enchanting
variety and the noble simplicity of nature. But I was then convinced,
that her aspect alone is sufficient, at first view, to heal the wounded
feelings of the heart, to fill the bosom with the highest luxury, and to
create those sentiments in the mind, which can, of all others, render
life desirable.

This new re-union of art and nature, which was not invented in China, but
in England, is founded upon a rational and refined taste for the beauties
of nature, confirmed by experience, and by the sentiments which a chaste
fancy reflects on a feeling heart.

But in the gardens I have before mentioned, every point of view raises
the soul to heaven, and affords the mind sublime delight; every bank
presents a new and varied scene, which fills the heart with joy: nor,
while I feel the sensation which such scenes inspire, will I suffer my
delight to be diminished by discussing whether the arrangement might have
been made in a better way, or permit the dull rules of cold and senseless
masters to destroy my pleasure. Scenes of serenity, whether created by
tasteful art, or by the cunning hand of nature, always bestow, as a gift
from the imagination, tranquillity to the heart. While a soft silence
breathes around me, every object is pleasant to my view; rural scenery
fixes my attention, and dissipates the grief that lies heavy at my heart;
the loveliness of solitude enchants me, and, subduing every vexation,
inspires my soul with benevolence, gratitude, and content. I return
thanks to my Creator for endowing me with an imagination, which, though
it has frequently caused the trouble of my life, occasionally leads me,
in the hour of my retirement, to some friendly rock, on which I can
climb, and contemplate with greater composure the tempests I have escaped.

There are, indeed, many Anglicised gardens in Germany, laid out so
whimsically absurd, as to excite no other emotions than those of laughter
or disgust. How extremely ridiculous is it to see a forest of poplars,
scarcely sufficient to supply a chamber stove with fuel for a week; mere
molehills dignified with the name of mountains; caves and aviaries,
in which tame and savage animals, birds and amphibious creatures, are
attempted to be represented in their native grandeur; bridges, of various
kinds, thrown across rivers, which a couple of ducks would drink dry; and
wooden fishes swimming in canals, which the pump every morning supplies
with water! These unnatural beauties are incapable of affording any
pleasure to the imagination.

A celebrated English writer has said, that “solitude, on the first view
of it, inspires the mind with terror, because every thing that brings
with it the idea of privation is terrific, and therefore sublime like
space, darkness, and silence.”

The species of greatness which results from the idea of infinity, can
only be rendered delightful by being viewed at a proper distance. The
Alps, in Swisserland, and particularly near the canton of Berne, appear
inconceivably majestic; but on a near approach, they excite ideas
certainly sublime, yet mingled with a degree of terror. The eye, on
beholding those immense and enormous masses piled one upon the other,
forming one vast and uninterrupted chain of mountains, and rearing their
lofty summits to the skies, conveys to the heart the most rapturous
delight, while the succession of soft and lively shades which they
throw around the scene, tempers the impression, and renders the view as
agreeable as it is sublime. On the contrary, no feeling heart can on a
close view, behold this prodigious wall of rocks without experiencing
involuntary trembling. The mind contemplates with affright their
eternal snows, their steep ascents, their dark caverns, the torrents
which precipitate themselves with deafening clamor from their summits,
the black forests of firs that overhang their sides, and the enormous
fragments of rocks which time and tempests have torn away. How my heart
thrilled when I first climbed through a steep and narrow track upon these
sublime deserts, discovering every step I made, new mountains rising over
my head, while upon the least stumble, death menaced me in a thousand
shapes below! But the imagination immediately kindles when you perceive
yourself in the midst of this grand scene of nature, and reflect from
these heights on the weakness of human power, and the imbecility of the
greatest monarchs!

The history of Swisserland evinces, that the natives of these mountains
are not a degenerate race of men, and that their sentiments are as
generous as their feelings are warm. Bold and spirited by nature, the
liberty they enjoy gives wings to their souls, and they trample tyrants
and tyranny under their feet. Some of the inhabitants of Swisserland,
indeed, are not perfectly free; though they all possess notions of
liberty, love their country, and return thanks to the Almighty for that
happy tranquillity which permits each individual to live quietly under
his vine, and enjoy the shade of his fig-tree; but the most pure and
genuine liberty is always to be found among the inhabitants of these
stupendous mountains.

The Alps in Swisserland are inhabited by a race of men sometimes
unsocial, but always good and generous. The hardy and robust characters
given to them by the severity of their climate, is softened by pastoral
life. It is said by an English writer, that he who has never heard a
storm in the Alps, can form no idea of the continuity of the lightning,
the rolling and the burst of the thunder which roars round the horizon of
these immense mountains; and the people never enjoying better habitations
than their own cabins, nor seeing any other country than their own
rocks, believe the universe to be an unfinished work, and a scene of
unceasing tempest. But the skies do not always lower; the thunder does
not incessantly roll, nor the lightnings continually flash; immediately
after the most dreadful tempests, the hemisphere clears itself by slow
degrees, and becomes serene. The dispositions of the Swiss follow the
nature of their climate; kindness succeeds to violence, and generosity
to the most brutal fury: this may be easily proved, not only from the
records of history, but from recent facts.

General Redin, an inhabitant of the Alps, and a native of the canton of
Schwitz, enlisted very early in life into the Swiss Guards, and attained
the rank of lieutenant-general in that corps. His long residence at Paris
and Versailles, however, had not been able to change his character; he
still continued a true Swiss. The new regulation made by the king of
France, in the year 1764, relating to this corps, gave great discontent
to the canton of Schwitz. The citizens, considering it as an innovation
extremely prejudicial to their ancient privileges, threw all the odium
of the measures on the lieutenant-general, whose wife, at this period,
resided on his estate in the canton, where she endeavored to raise a
number of young recruits; but the sound of the French drum had become
so disgusting to the ears of the citizens, that they beheld with
indignation the white cockade placed in the hats of the deluded peasants.
The magistrate apprehensive that this ferment might ultimately cause
an insurrection among the people, felt it his duty to forbid madame de
Redin to continue her levies. The lady requested he would certify his
prohibition in writing; but the magistrate not being disposed to carry
matters to this extremity against the court of France, she continued to
beat up for the requested number of recruits. The inhabitants of the
canton, irritated by this bold defiance of the prohibition, summoned a
General Diet, and madame de Redin appeared before the Assembly of Four
Thousand. “The drum,” said she, “shall never cease to sound, until you
give me such a certificate as may justify my husband to the French court
for not completing the number of his men.” The Assembly accordingly
granted her the required certificate, and enjoining her to procure the
interest and interposition of her husband with the court in favor of her
injured country, waited in anxious expectation that his negotiation would
produce a favorable issue. Unhappily the court of Versailles rejected
all solicitation on the subject, and by this means drove the irritated
and impatient inhabitants beyond the bounds of restraint. The leading
men of the canton pretended that the new regulation endangered not only
their civil liberties, but, what was dearer to them, their religion. The
general discontent was at length fomented into popular fury. A General
Diet was again assembled, and it was publicly resolved not to furnish
the King of France in future with any troops. The treaty of alliance
concluded in the year 1713 was torn from the public register, and general
de Redin ordered instantly to return from France with the soldiers under
his command, upon pain, if he refused, of being irrevocably banished
from the republic. The obedient general obtained permission from the
king to depart with his regiment from France, and entering Schwitz,
the metropolis of the canton, at the head of his troops, with drums
beating and colors flying, marched immediately to the church, where he
deposited his standards upon the great altar, and falling on his knees,
offered up his thanks to God. Rising from the ground, and turning to his
affectionate soldiers, who were dissolved in tears, he discharged their
arrears of pay, gave them their uniforms and accoutrements, and bid
them forever farewell. The fury of the populace, on perceiving within
their power the man whom the whole country considered as the perfidious
abettor, and traitorous adviser, of the new regulation, by which the
court of Versailles had given such a mortal blow to the liberties of
the country, greatly increased; and he was ordered to disclose before
the General Assembly the origin of that measure, and the means by which
it had been carried on, in order that they might learn their relative
situation with France, and ascertain the degree of punishment that
was due to the offender. Redin, conscious that, under the existing
circumstances, eloquence would make no impression on minds so prejudiced
against him, contented himself with coolly declaring, in a few words,
that the cause of framing a new regulation was publicly known, and that
he was as innocent upon the subject as he was ignorant of the cause of
his dismission. “The traitor then will not confess!” exclaimed one of the
most furious members: “Hang him on the next tree--cut him to pieces.”
These menaces were instantly repeated throughout the Assembly; and while
the injured soldier continued perfectly tranquil and undismayed, a party
of the people, more daring than the rest, jumped upon the tribune, where
he stood surrounded by the judges. A young man, his godson, was holding
a _parapluie_ over his head, to shelter him from the rain, which at
this moment poured down in incessant torrents, when one of the enraged
multitude immediately broke the _parapluie_ in pieces with his stick,
exclaiming, “Let the traitor be uncovered!” This exclamation conveyed
a correspondent indignation into the bosom of the youth, who instantly
replied, “My god-father a betrayer of his country! Oh! I was ignorant,
I assure you, of the crime alleged against him; but since it is so,
let him perish! Where is the rope? I will be first to put it round the
traitor’s neck!” The magistrates instantly formed a circle round the
general, and with uplifted hands exhorted him to avert the impending
danger, by confessing that he had not opposed the measures of France
with sufficient zeal, and to offer to the offended people his whole
fortune as an atonement for his neglect; representing to him that these
were the only means of redeeming his liberty, and perhaps his life.
The undaunted soldier, with perfect tranquillity and composure, walked
through the surrounding circle to the side of the tribune, and while the
whole Assembly anxiously expected to hear an ample confession of his
guilt, made a sign of silence with his hand: “Fellow-citizens,” said
he, “you are not ignorant that I have been two-and-forty years in the
French establishment. You know, and many among you, who were with me in
the service, can testify its truth, how often I have faced the enemy,
and the manner in which I conducted myself in battle. I considered every
engagement as the last day of my life. But here I protest to you, in the
presence of that Almighty Being who knows all our hearts, who listens
to all our words, and who will hereafter judge all our actions, that I
never appeared before an enemy with a mind more pure, a conscience more
tranquil, a heart more innocent, than at present I possess; and if it
is your pleasure to condemn me because I refuse to confess a treachery
of which I have not been guilty, I am now ready to resign my life into
your hands.” The dignified demeanor with which the general made this
declaration, and the air of truth which accompanied his words, calmed the
fury of the Assembly, and saved his life. Both he and his wife, however,
immediately quitted the canton; she entering into a convent at Uri, and
he retiring to a cavern among the rocks, where he lived two years in
solitude. Time, at length, subdued the anger of the people, and softened
the general’s sense of their injustice. He returned to the bosom of
his country, rewarded its ingratitude by the most signal services, and
made every individual recollect and acknowledge the integrity of their
magnanimous countryman. To recompense him for the injuries and injustice
he had suffered, they elected him bailli, or chief officer of the canton;
and afforded him an almost singular instance of their constancy and
affection, by successively conferring on him three times this high and
important dignity. This is the characteristic disposition of the Swiss
who inhabit the Alps; alternately violent and mild: and experiencing, as
the extremes of a delighted or vexed imagination happen to prevail, the
same vicissitudes as their climate. The rude scenes of greatness which
these stupendous mountains and vast deserts afford, render the Swiss
violent in sentiment, and rough in manners; while the tranquillity of
their fields, and the smiling beauties of their vallies, soften their
minds, and render their hearts kind and benevolent.

English artists confess that the aspect of nature in Swisserland is too
sublime and majestic for the pencil of art faithfully to reach; but how
exquisite must be the enjoyments they feel upon those romantic hills,
in those delightful vallies, upon the charming borders of those still
and transparent lakes, where nature unfolds her various charms, and
appears in the highest pomp and splendor; where the majestic oaks, the
deep embowering elms, and dark green firs, which cover and adorn these
immense forests, are pleasingly interspersed with myrtles, almond trees,
jasmines, pomegranates, and vines, which offer their humbler beauties to
the view, and variegate the scene! Nature is in no country of the globe
more rich and various than in Swisserland. It was the scenery around
Zurich, and the beauties of its adjoining lake, that first inspired the
Idylls of the immortal Gessner.

These sublime beauties, while they elevate and inflame the heart, give
greater action and life to the imagination than softer scenes; in like
manner as a fine night affords a more august and solemn spectacle than
the mildest day.

In coming from Frescati, by the borders of the small lake of Nemi, which
lies in a deep valley, so closely sheltered by mountains and forest,
that the winds are scarcely permitted to disturb its surface, it is
impossible not to exclaim with an English poet, that here--

    “Black melancholy sits, and round her throws
    A death-like silence, and a dread repose:
    Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
    Shades every flower, and darkens every green;
    Deepens the murmurs of the falling floods,
    And breathes a browner horror on the woods.”

But how the soul expands, and every thought becomes serene and free,
when, from the garden of the Capuchins, near Albano, the eye suddenly
discovers the little melancholy lake, with Frescati and all its rural
vallies on one side: on the other, the handsome city of Albano, the
village and castle of Riccia and Gensano, with their hills beautifully
adorned with clusters of the richest vines: below, the extensive plains
of Campania, in the middle of which Rome, formerly the mistress of the
world, raises its majestic head; and lastly, beyond all these objects,
the hills of Tivoli, the Appenines, and the Mediterranean sea!

How often, on the approach of spring, has the magnificent valley, where
the ruins of the residence of Rodolpho de Hapsburg rise upon the side
of a hill, crowned with woods of variegated verdure, afforded me the
purest and most ineffable delight! There the rapid Aar descends in
torrents from the lofty mountains; sometimes forming a vast basin in the
vale; at others, precipitating through the narrow passages across the
rocks, winding its course majestically through the middle of the vast
and fertile plains: on the other side the Ruffs, and, lower down, the
Limmat, bring their tributary streams, and peaceably unite them with
the waters of the Aar. In the middle of this rich and verdant scene, I
beheld the Royal Solitude, where the remains of the emperor Albert I.
repose in silence, with those of many princes of the house of Austria,
counts, knights, and gentlemen, killed in battle by the gallant Swiss. At
a distance I discovered the valley where lie the ruins of the celebrated
city of Vindonissa, upon which I have frequently sat, and reflected upon
the vanity of human greatness. Beyond this magnificent country, ancient
castles raise their lofty heads upon the hills! and the far distant
horizon is terminated by the sublime summits of the Alps. In the midst of
all this grand scenery, my eyes were instinctively cast down into the
deep valley immediately below me, and continually fixed upon the little
village where I first drew my breath. It is thus that the sublime or
beautiful operates differently on the heart! the one exciting fear and
terror, the other creating only soft and agreeable sensations; but both
tending to enlarge the sphere of the imagination, and enabling us more
completely to seek enjoyment within ourselves.

Pleasures of this description may, indeed be enjoyed, without visiting
the romantic solitudes of either Swisserland or Italy. There is no
person who may not, while he is quietly traversing the hills and dales,
learn to feel how much the aspect of nature may, by the assistance of
the imagination, affect the heart. A fine view, the freshness of the
air, an unclouded sky, and the joys of the chase, give sensations of
health, and make every step seem too short. The privation of all ideas
of dependance, accompanied by domestic comfort, useful employments, and
innocent recreations, produce a strength of thought, and fertility of
imagination, which present to the mind the most agreeable images, and
touch the heart with the most delightful sensations. It is certainly
true, that a person possessed of a fine imagination may be much happier
in prison, than he could possibly be without imagination amidst the
most magnificent scenery. But even to a mind deprived of this happy
faculty, the lowest enjoyments of rural life, even the common scenery of
harvest time, is capable of performing miracles on his heart. Alas! who
has not experienced, in the hours of langor and disgust, the powerful
effects which a contemplation of the pleasures that surround the poorest
peasant’s cot is capable of affording! How fondly the heart participates
in all his homely joys! With what freedom, cordiality, and kindness, we
take him by the hand, and listen to his innocent and artless tales!--How
suddenly do we feel an interest in all his little concerns; an interest
which, while it unveils, refines and meliorates the latent inclinations
of our hearts!

The tranquillity of retired life, and the view of rural scenes,
frequently produce a quietude of disposition, which, while it renders
the noisy pleasures of the world insipid, enables the heart to seek the
charms of solitude with increased delight.

The happy indolence peculiar to Italians, who, under the pleasures of
a clear, unclouded sky, are always poor but never miserable, greatly
augments the feelings of the heart: the mildness of the climate, the
fertility of their soil, their peaceful religion, and their contented
nature, compensate for every thing. Dr. Moore, an English traveller,
whose works afford me great delight, says, that “the Italians are the
greatest loungers in the world; and while walking in the fields, or
stretched in the shade, seem to enjoy the serenity and genial warmth
of their climate with a degree of luxurious indulgence peculiar to
themselves. Without ever running into the daring excesses of the English,
or displaying the frisky vivacity of the French, or the stubborn phlegm
of the Germans, the Italian populace discover a species of sedate
sensibility to every source of enjoyment, from which, perhaps, they
derive a greater degree of happiness than any of the others.”

Relieved from every afflicting and tormenting object, it is, perhaps,
impossible for the mind not to resign itself to agreeable chimeras
and romantic sentiments: but this situation notwithstanding these
disadvantages, has its fair side. Romantic speculations may lead the mind
into certain extravagancies and errors from whence base and contemptible
passions may be engendered; may habituate it to a light and frivolous
style of thinking; and, by preventing it from directing its faculties
to rational ends, may obscure the prospect of true happiness; for the
soul cannot easily quit the illusion on which it dwells with such fond
delight; the ordinary duties of life, with its more noble and substantial
pleasures, are perhaps thereby obstructed: but it is very certain that
romantic sentiments do not always render the mind that possesses them
unhappy. Who, alas! is so completely happy in reality as he frequently
has been in imagination!

Rousseau, who, in the early part of his life, was extremely fond of
romances, feeling his mind hurried away by the love of those imaginary
objects with which that species of composition abounds, and perceiving
the facility with which they may be enjoyed, withdrew his attention from
every thing about him, and by this circumstance laid the foundation of
that taste for solitude which he preserved to an advanced period of
his life; a taste in appearance dictated by depression and disgust,
and attributed by him to the irresistible impulse of an affectionate,
fond, and tender heart, which, not being able to find in the regions of
philosophy and truth sentiments sufficiently warm and animated, was
constrained to seek its enjoyments in the sphere of fiction.

But the imagination, may, in retirement, indulge its wanderings to a
certain degree without the risk of injuring either the sentiments of the
mind or the sensations of the heart. Oh! if the friends of my youth in
Swisserland knew how frequently, during the silence of the night, I pass
with them those hours which are allotted to sleep; if they were apprized
that neither time nor absence can efface the remembrance of their former
kindness from my mind, and that this pleasing recollection tends to
dissipate my grief, and to cast the veil of oblivion over my woes; they
would, perhaps, also rejoice to find that I still live among them in
imagination, though I may be dead to them in reality.

The solitary man, whose heart is warmed with refined and noble
sentiments, cannot be unhappy.--While the stupid and vulgar bewail his
fate, and conceive him to be the victim of corroding care and loathed
melancholy, he frequently tastes the most delightful pleasure. The French
entertained a notion that Rousseau was a man of a gloomy and dejected
disposition; but he was certainly not so for many years of his life,
particularly when he wrote to M. de Malesherbes, the chancellor’s son,
in the following terms: “I cannot express to you, Sir, how sensibly I am
affected by perceiving that you think me the most unhappy of mankind;
for as the public will, no doubt, entertain the same sentiment of me as
you do, it is to me a source of real affliction!--Oh! if my sentiments
were really known, every individual would endeavor to follow my example.
Peace would then reign throughout the world; men would no longer seek to
destroy each other; and wickedness, by removing the great incentives to
it, no longer exist. But it may be asked, how I could find employment
in solitude?--I answer, in my own mind; in the whole universe; in every
thing that dies, in every thing that can exist; in all that the eye finds
beautiful in the real, or the imagination in the intellectual world.
I assembled about me every thing that is flattering to the heart, and
regulated my pleasures by the moderation of my desires. No! The most
voluptuous have never experienced such refined delights; and I have
always enjoyed my chimeras much more than if they had been realized.”

This is certainly the language of enthusiasm; but, ye stupid vulgar!
who would not prefer the warm fancy of this amiable philosopher to your
cold and creeping understandings?--Who would not willingly renounce your
vague conversation, your deceitful felicities, your boasted urbanity,
your noisy assemblies, puerile pastimes, and inveterate prejudices, for a
quiet and contented life in the bosom of a happy family?--Who would not
rather seek in the silence of the woods, or upon the daisied borders of a
peaceful lake, those pure and simple pleasures of nature, so delicious in
recollection, and productive of joys so pure, so affecting, so different
from your own?

Eclogues, which are representatives of rural happiness in its highest
perfection, are also fictions; but they are fictions of the most pleasing
and agreeable kind. True felicity must be sought in retirement, where
the soul, disengaged from the torments of the world, no longer feels
those artificial desires which render it unhappy both in prospect and
fruition. Content with little, satisfied with all, surrounded by love
and innocence, we perceive in retirement, the golden age, as described
by the poets, revived; while in the world every one regrets its loss.
The regret however, is unjust; for those enjoyments were not peculiar to
that happy period; and each individual may, whenever he pleases, form his
own Arcadia. The beauties of a crystal spring, a silent grove, a daisied
meadow, chasten the feelings of the heart, and afford at all times, to
those who have a taste for nature, a permanent and pure delight.

“The origin of poetry,” says Pope, “is ascribed to that age which
succeeded the creation of the world: as the keeping of flocks seems to
have been the first employment of mankind, the most ancient sort of
poetry was pastoral. It is natural to imagine, that the leisure of these
ancient shepherds admitting and inviting some diversion, none was so
proper to that solitary and sedentary life as singing, and that in their
songs they took occasion to celebrate their own felicity. From hence a
poem was invented, and afterward improved to a perfect image of that
happy time, which, by giving us an esteem for the virtues of a former
age, might recommend them to the present.”

These agreeable though fictitious descriptions of the age of innocence
and virtue, communicate joy and gladness to our hearts; and we bless
the poet, who, in the ecstacy of his felicity contributes to render
others as happy as himself. Sicily and Zurich have produced two of these
benefactors to mankind. The aspect of nature never appears more charming,
the bosom never heaves with such sweet delight, the heart never beats
more pleasantly, the soul never feels more perfect happiness than is
produced by reading the Idylls of Theocritus and Gessner.

By these easy simple modes the beauties of nature are made, by the
assistance of the imagination, to operate forcibly on the heart. The
mind, indeed, drawn away by these agreeable images, often resigns itself
too easily to the illusions of romance; but the ideas they create
generally amend the heart without injuring the understanding, and spread
some of the sweetest flowers along the most thorny paths of human life.

Leisure, the highest happiness upon earth, is seldom enjoyed with perfect
satisfaction, except in solitude. Indolence and indifference do not
always afford leisure: for true leisure is frequently found in that
interval of relaxation which divides a painful duty from the agreeable
occupations of literature and philosophy. P. Scipio was of this opinion
when he said, that _he was never less idle when he had most leisure_, and
that _he was never less alone than when he was alone_. Leisure is not
to be considered a state of intellectual torpidity, but a new incentive
to further activity; it is sought by strong and energetic minds, not
as _an end_, but as _a means_ of restoring lost activity; for whoever
seeks happiness in a situation merely quiescent, seeks for a phantom
that will elude his grasp. Leisure will never be found in mere rest; but
will follow those who seize the first impulse to activity; in which,
however, such employments as best suit the extent and nature of different
capacities, must be preferred to those which promise compensation without
labor, and enjoyment without pain.

Thus rural retirement dries up those streams of discontent which flow so
plentifully through public life; changes most frequently the bitterest
feeling into the sweetest pleasures; and inspires an ecstacy and content
unknown to the votaries of the world. The tranquillity of nature buries
in oblivion the criminal inclinations of the heart; renders it blithe,
tender, open, and confident; and, by wisely managing the passions, and
preventing an overheated imagination from fabricating fancied woes,
strengthens in it every virtuous sensation.

In towns, the solitude which is necessary to produce this advantage
cannot be conveniently practised. It seems indeed, no very difficult task
for a man to retire into his chamber, and by silent contemplation, to
raise his mind above the mean consideration of sensual objects; but few
men have sufficient resolution to perform it; for, within doors, matters
of business every moment occur, and interrupt the chain of reflection;
and without, whether alone or in company, a variety of accidents may
occasionally happen, which will confound our vain wisdom, aggravate the
painful feelings of the heart, and weaken the finer powers of the mind.

Rousseau was always miserable during his residence at Paris. This
extraordinary genius, it is true, wrote his immortal works in that
agitated metropolis; but the moment he quitted his study, and
wandered through the streets, his mind was bewildered by a variety of
heterogeneous sentiments, his recollection vanished; and this brilliant
writer and profound philosopher, who was so intimately acquainted with
the most intricate labyrinths of the human heart, was reduced to the
condition of a child. But in the country we issue from the house in
perfect safety, and feel increasing cheerfulness and satisfaction. Tired
with meditation, the rural recluse has only to open the doors of his
study, and enjoy his walk, while tranquillity attends his steps, and new
pleasures present themselves to his view on every turn. Beloved by all
around him, he extends his hand with cordial affection to every man he
meets. Nothing occurs to vex and irritate his mind. He runs no risk of
being tortured by the supercilious behavior of some haughty female proud
of her descent, or of enduring the arrogant egotism of an upstart peer:
is in no danger of being crushed beneath the rolling carriages of Indian
nabobs: nor dares frontless vice, on the authority of mouldy parchments,
attack his property, or presumptuous ignorance offer the least indignity
to his modest virtue.

A man, indeed, by avoiding the tumultuous intercourse of society, and
deriving his comforts from his own breast, may, even in Paris, or any
other metropolis, avoid these unpleasant apprehensions, if his nerves be
firm, and his constitution strong: for to a frame disjointed by nervous
affections every object is irritating, and every passion tremblingly
alive. The passions are the gales by which man must steer his course
through the troubled ocean of life; they fill the sails which give motion
to the soul; and when they become turbulent and impetuous, the vessel
is always in danger, and generally runs aground. The petty cares and
trifling vexations of life, however, give but shortlived disturbance
to a heart free from remorse. Philosophy teaches us to forget past
uneasiness, to forbear idle speculations of approaching felicity, and to
rest contented with present comforts, without refining away our existing
happiness by wishing that which is really good to be still better.
Every thing is much better than we imagine. A mind too anxious in the
expectation of happiness is seldom satisfied, and generally mixes with
its highest fruition a certain portion of discontent. The stream of
content must flow from a deliberate disposition in our minds to learn
what is good, and a determined resolution to seek for and enjoy it,
however small the portion may be.

The content, however, which men in general so confidently expect to find
in rural retirement, is not to be acquired by viewing objects either with
indiscriminate admiration or supine indifference. He who without labor,
and without a system of conduct previously digested and arranged, hopes
for happiness in solitude, will yawn with equal fatigue at his cottage
in the country and his mansion in town; while he who keeps himself
continually employed, may in the deepest solitude, by the mere dint of
labor, attain true tranquillity and happiness.

Petrarch, in his solitude at Vaucluse, would have experienced this
tranquillity, if his bosom had not been disturbed by love; for he
perfectly understood the art of managing his time. “I rise,” said he,
“before the sun, and on the approach of day wander contemplatively
along the fields, or retire to study. I read, I write, I think, I
vanquish indolence, banish sleep, avoid luxury, and forget sensuality.
From morning till night I climb the barren mountains, traverse the
humid vallies, seek the deepest caves, or walk, accompanied only by my
thoughts, along the banks of my river. I have no society to distract my
mind; and men daily become less annoying to me; for I place them either
far before or far behind me. I recollect what is past, and contemplate
on what is to come. I have found an excellent expedient to detach my mind
from the world. I cultivate a fondness for my place of residence, and I
am persuaded that I could be happy any where except at Avignon. In my
retreat at Vaucluse, where I am at present, I occasionally find Athens,
Rome, or Florence, as the one or the other of those places happens
to please the prevailing disposition of my mind. Here I enjoy all my
friends, as well as those who have long since entered the vale of death,
and of whom I have no knowledge, but what their works afford.”

What character, however luxurious, ever felt the same content at any
splendid entertainment, as Rousseau experienced in his humble meal! “I
return home,” says he, “with tired feet, but with a contented mind, and
experience the calmest repose in resigning myself to the impression of
objects, without exercising thought, indulging imagination, or doing any
thing to interrupt the peaceful felicity of my station. The table is
ready spread on my lawn, and furnished with refreshments. Surrounded by
my small and happy family, I eat my supper with healthy appetite, and
without any appearance of servitude or dependance to annoy the love and
kindness by which we are united. My faithful dog is not a subservient
slave, but a firm friend, from whom, as we always feel the same
inclination, I never exact obedience. The gaiety of the mind throughout
the evening testifies that I live alone throughout the day; for, being
seldom pleased with others, and never, when visiters have disturbed me,
with myself, I sit, during the whole evening of the day when company
has interrupted me, either grumbling or in silence: so at least my good
housekeeper has remarked; and since she mentioned it, I have from my
own observation found it universally true. Having thus made my humble
and cheerful meal, I take a few turns round my little garden, or play
some favorite air upon my spinette, and experience upon my pillow a soft
content, more sweet, if possible, than even undisturbed repose.”

At the village of Richterswyl, situated a few leagues from Zurich, and
surrounded by every object the most smiling, beautiful, and romantic
that Swisserland presents, dwells a celebrated physician. His soul, like
the scenery of nature which surrounds him, is tranquil and sublime.
His habitation is the temple of health, of friendship, and of every
peaceful virtue. The village rises on the borders of the lake, at a place
where two projecting points form a fine bay of nearly half a league. On
the opposite shores, the lake, which is not quite a league in extent,
is enclosed from the north to the east by pleasant hills covered with
vineyards, intermixed with fertile meadows, orchards, fields, groves, and
thickets, with little hamlets, churches, villas, and cottages scattered
up and down the scene. A wide and magnificent amphitheatre, which no
artist has yet attempted to paint, except in detached scenes, opens
itself from the east to the south. The view towards the higher part of
the lake, which on this side is four leagues long, presents to the eye
jutting points of land, detached aytes, the little town of Rapperschwyl,
built on the side of a hill, and a bridge which reaches from one side
of the lake to the other. Beyond the town the inexhaustible valley
extends itself in a half circle to the sight; and upon the foreground
rises a peak of land which swells as it extends into beautiful hills.
Behind them, at the distance of about half a league, is a range of
mountains covered with trees and verdure, and interspersed with villages
and detached houses; beyond which, at a still greater distance, are
discovered the fertile and majestic Alps, twisted one among the other,
and exhibiting, alternately, shades of the lightest and darkest azure:
and in the back ground high rocks, covered with eternal snows, lift
their towering heads, and touch the skies. On the south side of this
rich, enchanting, and incomparable scene, the amphitheatre is extended
by another range of mountains reaching toward the west; and at the
feet of these mountains, on the borders of the lake, lies the village
of Richterswyl, surrounded by rich fallows and fertile pastures, and
overhung by forests of firs. The streets of the village, which in itself
is extremely clean, are nearly paved; and the houses, which are mostly
built of stone, are painted on the outside. Pleasant walks are formed
along the banks of the lake, and lead quite round the town, through
groves of fruit-trees and shady forests, up to the very summit of the
hills. The traveller, struck with the sublime and beautiful scenery that
every where surrounds him, stops to contemplate with eager curiosity
the increasing beauties which ravish his sight; and while his bosom
swells with excess of pleasure, his suspended breath bespeaks his fear
of interrupting the fulness of his delight. Every acre of this charming
country is in the highest state of cultivation and improvement. Every
hand is at work; and men, women, and children, of every age and of every
description, are all usefully employed.

The two houses of the physician are each of them surrounded by a garden;
and although situated in the centre of the village, are as rurally
sequestered as if they had been built in the bosom of the country.
Through the gardens, and close beneath the chamber of my valued friend,
runs a pure and limpid stream, on the opposite of which, at an agreeable
distance, is the high road; where, almost daily, numbers of pilgrims
successively pass in their way to the hermitage. From the windows of
these houses, and from every part of the gardens, you behold, toward the
south, at the distance of about a league, the majestic Ezelberg rear its
lofty head, which is concealed in forests of deep green firs; while on
its declivity hangs a neat little village, with a handsome church, upon
the steeple of which the sun suspends his departing rays, and shows its
career is nearly finished. In the front is the lake of Zurich, whose
peaceful water is secured from the violence of tempests, and whose
transparent surface reflects the beauties of its delightful banks.

During the silence of the night, if you repair to the chamber windows
of this enchanting mansion, or walk through its gardens, to taste the
exhaling fragrance of the shrubs and flowers, while the moon, rising
in unclouded majesty over the summit of the mountains, reflects on the
smooth surface of the water a broad beam of light, you hear, during this
awful sleep of nature, the sound of the village clocks, echoing from the
opposite shores; and, on the Richterswyl side, the shrill proclamation
of the watchmen, blended occasionally with the barkings of the faithful
house-dog. At a distance you hear the boats gliding gently along the
stream, dividing the water with their oars, and perceive them, as they
cross the moon’s translucent beam, playing among the sparkling waves.

Riches and luxury are no where to be seen in the happy habitation of this
wise philanthropist. His chairs are made of straw; his tables are worked
from the wood of the country; and the plates and dishes on which he
entertains his friends are all of earthen-ware. Neatness and convenience
reign throughout. Drawings, paintings, and engravings, of which he has a
large well-chosen collection, are his sole expense. The earliest beams
of Aurora light the humble apartment where this philosophic sage sleeps
in undisturbed repose, and awake him to new enjoyments every day. As he
rises from his bed, the cooing of the turtle-doves, and the morning songs
of various kinds of birds, who make their nightly nests in an adjoining
aviary, salute his ears, and welcome his approach. The first hour of the
morning, and the last at night, are sacred to himself; but he devotes all
the intermediate hours of every day to a sick and afflicted multitude,
who daily attend him for advice and assistance. The benevolent exercise
of his professional skill, indeed, engrosses almost every moment of his
life, but it constitutes his highest happiness and joy. The inhabitants
of the mountains of Swisserland, and of the vallies of the Alps, flock to
his house, and endeavor in vain to find language capable of expressing
to him the grateful feelings of their hearts for the favors they receive
from him. Convinced of his affection, satisfied of his medical skill,
and believing that the good doctor is equally well acquainted with every
subject, they listen with the deepest attention to his words, answer
all his inquiries without the least hesitation or reserve, treasure up
his advice and counsel with more solicitude than if they were grains
of gold, and depart from his presence with more regret, comfort, hope,
resignation, and virtuous feelings, than if they had quitted their
confessor at the hermitage. It may perhaps be conceived, that after a day
spent in this manner, the happiness which this friend to mankind must
feel cannot in any degree be increased. But, when a simple, innocent,
and ingenuous country girl, whose mind has been almost distracted by the
fear of losing her beloved husband, enters his study, and seizing him
with transport by the hand, joyfully exclaims, “Oh! Sir, my dear husband,
ill as he was only two days since, is now quite recovered! Oh! my dear
Sir, how, how shall I thank you!” this philanthropic character feels that
transcending felicity, which ought to fill the bosom of a monarch in
rendering happiness to his people.

Of this description is the country of Swisserland, where doctor Hotze,
the ablest physician of the present age, resides; a physician and
philosopher, whose variety of knowledge, profound judgment, and great
experience, have raised him to an equal eminence with Trissot and
Hirtzel, the dearest friends of my heart. It is in this manner that he
passes the hours of his life, with uniformity and happiness. Surrounded,
except during the two hours I have already mentioned, by a crowd of
unfortunate fellow-creatures, who look up to him for relief, his mind,
active and full of vigor, never knows repose; but his labors are richly
rewarded by the high and refined felicity which fills his heart. Palaces,
alas! seldom contain such characters. Individuals, however, of every
description may cultivate and enjoy an equal degree of felicity, although
they do not reside among scenes so delightful as those which surround my
beloved Hotze at Richterswyl, as those of the convent of Capuchins near
Albano, or as those which surround the rural retreat of my sovereign
George III. at Windsor.

Content can only be found in the tranquillity of the heart; and in
solitude the bosom gladly opens to receive the wished-for inmate, and to
welcome its attendant virtues. While nature smiles around us, decorated
in all its beauties, the heart expands to the cheering scene; every
object appears in the most favorable and pleasing point of view; our
souls overflow with kind affections; the antipathies created by the
ingratitude of the world instantly vanish; we even forget the vain, the
wicked, the profligate characters with whom we were mixed; and being
perfectly at peace with ourselves, we feel ourselves at peace with all
mankind. But in society the rancorous contention which jarring interests
daily create, the heavy yoke which subordination is continually imposing,
“the oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,” and the shocks which
reason and good sense hourly receive from fools in power, and insolent
superiors, spread torrents of misery over human life, embitter the
happiness of their more worthy though inferior fellow-creatures, poison
all pleasure, break through social order, spread thorns in the paths of
virtue, and render the world a vale of tears.

Blockheads in power are of all other characters, the most baneful and
injurious; they confound all just distinctions, mistake one quality
for another; degrade every person and thing to their own level; and
in short, change white into black, and black into white. To escape
from the persecution of such characters, men even of fine talents and
ingenious dispositions must act like the fox of Saadi, of the Persian
poet. A person one day observing a fox running with uncommon speed to
earth, called out to him, “Reynard, where are you running in so great a
hurry! Have you been doing any mischief, for which you are apprehensive
of punishment?”--“No, Sir,” replied the fox, “my conscience is perfectly
clear, and does not reproach me with any thing; but I have just overheard
the hunters wish that they had _a camel_ to hunt this morning.”--“Well,
but how does that concern you? you are not _a camel_.”--“Oh, my good
Sir,” replied the fox, “are you not aware that sagacious heads have
always enemies at their heels? and if any one should point me out to
those sportsmen, and cry, _there runs a camel_, they would immediately
seize me without examining whether I was really the kind of animal the
informer had described me to be.” Reynard was certainly right in his
conclusion; for men are in general wicked in proportion as they are
ignorant or envious, and the only means of eluding their mischievous
intentions is to keep out of their way.

The simplicity, regularity, and serenity which accompany retirement,
moderate the warmest tempers, guard the heart against the intrusion of
inordinate desires, and at length render it invulnerable to the shafts of
malice and detraction; while the self-examination it necessarily imposes,
teaches us, by exhibiting to our view our own defects, to do justice
to the superior merit of others. The delightful solitudes of Lausanne
exhibit every where captivating examples of domestic felicity. The
industrious citizen, after having faithfully performed his daily task, is
sure of experiencing, on his return at evening to his wife and children,
real comfort and unalloyed content. The voice of slander, the neglect
of ingratitude, the contempt of superiors, and all the mortifications
attendant upon worldly intercourse, are forgot the moment he beholds his
happy family ready with open arms to receive him, and to bestow upon
their friend and benefactor the fond caresses he so justly merits. With
what exquisite delight his beating bosom feels their rapturous affection.
If his mind has been vexed by the crosses of life, the ostentation of
courts, the insolence of riches, the arrogance of power, or his temper
irritated and soured by the base practices of fraud, falsehood, or
hypocrisy, he no sooner mixes with those whom he cherishes and supports,
than a genial warmth reanimates his dejected heart, the tenderest
sentiments inspire his soul, and the truth, the freedom, the probity,
and the innocence by which he is surrounded, tranquillize his mind, and
reconcile him to his humble lot. Oh! observe him, all ye who are placed
in more elevated stations, whether ye enjoy the confidence of statesmen,
are the beloved companions of the great, the admired favorites of the
fair, the envied leaders of the public taste, of high birth, or of ample
fortunes; for if your rich and splendid homes be the seats of jealousy
and discord, and the bosoms of your families strangers to that content
which the wise and virtuous feel within walls of clay, and under roofs of
humble thatch, you are, in comparison, poor indeed.

Characters enervated by prosperity feel the smallest inconvenience as
a serious calamity, and, unable to bear the touch of rude and violent
hands, require to be treated, like young and tender flowers, with
delicacy, and attention; while those who have been educated in the
rough school of adversity, walk over the thorns of life with a firm
and intrepid step, and kick them from the path with indifference and
contempt. Superior to the false opinions and prejudices of the world,
they bear with patient fortitude the blow of misfortune, disregard all
trifling injuries, and look down with proud contempt on the malice of
their enemies, and the infidelity of their friends.

The lofty zephyr, the transparent spring, the well-stored river,
the umbrageous forest, the cooling grotto, and the daisied field,
however, are not always necessary to enable us to despise or forget the
consequences of adversity. The man who firmly keeps his course, and has
courage to live according to his own taste and inclinations, cannot be
affected by the little crosses of life, or by the obloquy or injustice
of mankind. What we do voluntarily always affords us more pleasure than
that which we do by compulsion. The restraints of the world and the
obligations of society, disgust liberal minds, and deprive them, even in
the midst of all their splendor and fortune, of that content they seek so
anxiously to obtain.

Solitude, indeed, not only tranquillizes the heart, renders it kind and
virtuous, and raises it above the malevolence of envy, wickedness,
and conceited ignorance, but affords advantages still more valuable.
Liberty, true liberty, flies from the tumultuous crowd, and the forced
connexions of the world. It has been truly observed, that in solitude man
recovers from the distraction which had torn him from himself; feels a
clear conception of what he once was, and may yet become; explores the
nature, and discovers the extent, of his freeborn character: rejects
every thing artificial; is guided by his own sentiments; no longer dreads
a severe master or imperious tyrant; and neither suffers the constraints
of business or the blandishments of pleasure, to disturb his repose;
but, breaking boldly through the shackles of servile habit and arbitrary
custom, thinks for himself with confidence and courage, and improves the
sensibility of his heart by the sentiments of his mind.

Madame de Stael considered it a great error, to imagine that freedom and
liberty could be indulged at court, where the mind, even on the most
trifling occasions, is obliged to observe a multitude of ceremonies,
where it is impossible to speak one’s thoughts, where our sentiments must
be adapted to those around us, where every person assumes a control over
us, and where we never have the smallest enjoyment of ourselves. “To
enjoy ourselves,” says she, “we must seek solitude. It was in the Bastile
that I first became acquainted with myself.”

A courtier, fearful of every person around him, is continually upon the
watch, and tormented incessantly by suspicion; but while his heart is
thus a prey to corroding anxiety, he is obliged to appear contented and
serene, and, like the old lady, is always lighting one taper to Michael
the archangel, and another to the devil, because he does not know for
which of them he may have most occasion. A man of a liberal, enlightened
mind, is as little calculated to perform the office of master of the
ceremonies, or to conduct the etiquette of a court, as a woman is to be
_a religieuse_.

Liberty and leisure render a rational and active mind indifferent to
every other kind of happiness. It was the love of liberty and solitude
which rendered the riches and honors of the world so odious to Petrarch.
Solicited at an advanced period of his life, to act as secretary to
several popes, under the tempting offer of great emolument, he replied,
“Riches when acquired at the expense of liberty, become the source of
real misery. A yoke formed of gold and silver is not less galling and
restrictive than one made of wood or iron.” And he frankly told his
friends and patrons, that to him there was no quantity of wealth equal in
value to his ease and liberty: that, as he had despised riches at a time
when he was most in need of them, it would be shameful in him to seek
them now, when he could more conveniently live without them: that every
man ought to apportion the provision for his journey according to the
distance he had to travel; and that, having almost reached the end of his
course, he ought to think more of his _reception at the inn_, than of his
_expenses on the road_.

Petrarch, disgusted by the vicious manners which surrounded the papal
chair, retired into solitude when he was only three-and-twenty years of
age, and in possession of that exterior, both with respect to person
and dress, which forms so essential a part in the character of an
accomplished courtier. Nature had decorated him with every pleasing
attribute. His fine form struck observers so forcibly, that they stopped
as he passed along to admire and point out his symmetry. His eyes were
bright and full of fire; his lively countenance proclaimed the vivacity
of the mind; the freshest color glowed on his cheeks; his features were
uncommonly expressive; and his whole appearance was manly, elegant,
and noble. The natural disposition of his heart, increased by the warm
climate of Italy, the fire of youth, the seductive charms of the various
beauties who resorted to the papal court, from every nation of Europe,
and especially the prevailing dissipation of the age, attached him,
very early in life, to the society of women. The decoration of dress
deeply engaged his attention; and the least spot or improper fold on
his garments, which were always of the lightest color, seemed to give
him real uneasiness. Every form which appeared inelegant was carefully
avoided, even in the fashion of his shoes; which were so extremely tight,
and cramped him to such a degree, that he would soon have been deprived
of the use of his feet, if he had not wisely recollected, that it was
much better to displease the eyes of the ladies than to make himself a
cripple. To prevent the dress of his hair from being discomposed, he
protected it with anxiety from the rudeness of the winds as he passed
along the streets. Devoted, however, as he was to the service of the
sex, he maintained a rival fondness for literature, and an inviolable
attachment to moral sentiment; and while he celebrated the charms of
his fair favorites in choice Italian, he reserved his knowledge of the
learned languages for subjects more serious and important. Nor did
he permit the warmth of his constitution, or the sensibility of his
heart, great and exquisite as they were, to debauch his mind, or betray
him into the most trifling indiscretion, without feeling the keenest
compunction and repentance. “I wish,” said he, “that I had a heart as
hard as adamant, rather than be so continually tormented by such seducing
passions.” The heart of this amiable young man, was, indeed, continually
assailed by the crowd of beauties that adorned the papal court; and the
power of their charms, and the facility with which his situation enabled
them to enjoy his company, rendered him in some degree their captive;
but, alarmed by the approaching torments and disquietudes of love, he
cautiously avoided their pleasing snares, and continued, previous to the
sight of his beloved Laura, to roam “free and unconquered through the
wilds of love.”

The practice of the civil law was at this period the only road to
eminence at Avignon; but Petrarch detested the venality of the
profession; and though he practised at the bar, and gained many causes
by his eloquence, he afterwards reproached himself with it. “In my
youth,” says he, “I devoted myself to the trade of selling words, or
rather fabricating falsehoods; but that which we do against our own
inclinations, is seldom attended with success; my fondness was for
solitude, and therefore I attended the practice of the bar with aversion
and disgust.” The secret consciousness however, which he entertained
of his own merit, gave him all the confidence natural to youth; and,
filling his mind with that lofty spirit which begets the presumption
of being equal to the highest achievements, he relinquished the _bar_
for the _church_; but his inveterate hatred of the manners of the
Episcopal court prevented his exertions, and retarded his promotion. “I
have no hope,” said he, in the thirty-fifth year of his age, “of making
my fortune in the court of the vicar of Jesus Christ; to accomplish
that, I must assiduously attend the palaces of the great, and practise
flattery, falsehood, and deceit.” A task of this kind was too painful
to his feelings to perform; not because he either hated the society of
men, or disliked advancement, but because he detested the means he must
necessarily have used to gratify his ambition. Glory was his warmest
wish, and he ardently endeavored to obtain it; not, indeed, by the ways
in which it is usually obtained, but by delighting to walk in the most
unfrequented paths, and of course, by retiring from the world. The
sacrifices he made to solitude were great and important; but his mind and
his heart were formed to enjoy the advantages it affords with a superior
degree of delight; a happiness which resulted to him from his hatred of a
profligate court, and from his love of liberty.

The love of liberty was the secret cause which gave the mind of Rousseau
so inveterate a disgust to society, and became in solitude the spring
of all his pleasures. His Letters to Malesherbes are as remarkable for
the discovery they make of his real disposition, as his Confessions,
which have been as much misunderstood as his character. “I mistook
for a great length of time,” says he, in one of these letters, “the
cause of that invincible disgust which I always felt in my intercourse
with the world. I attributed it to the mortification of not possessing
that quick and ready talent necessary to display in conversation the
little knowledge I possessed; and this reflected an idea, that I did
not hold that reputation in the opinion of mankind which I conceived
I merited. But although, after scribbling many ridiculous things, and
perceiving myself sought after by all the world, and honored with much
more consideration than even my own ridiculous vanity would have led me
to expect, I found that I was in no danger of being taken for a fool;
yet, still feeling the same disgust rather augmented than diminished, I
concluded that it must arise from some other cause, and that these were
not the kind of enjoyments which I must look for. What then, in fact,
was the cause of it? It was no other than that invincible spirit of
liberty which nothing can overcome, and in competition with which, honor,
fortune, and even fame itself, are to me as nothing. It is certain that
this spirit of liberty is engendered less by pride than by indolence; but
this indolence is incredible; it is alarmed at every thing; it renders
the most trifling duties of civil life insupportable. To be obliged to
speak a word, to write a letter, or to pay a visit, are to me, from
the moment the obligation arises, the severest punishments. This is the
reason why, although the ordinary commerce of men is odious to me, the
pleasures of private friendship are so dear to my heart; for in the
indulgence of private friendships there are no duties to perform; we have
only to follow the feelings of the heart, and all is done. This is the
reason also why I have so much dreaded to accept of favors; for every
act of kindness demands an acknowledgment, and I feel that my heart is
ungrateful only because gratitude becomes a duty. The kind of happiness,
in short, which pleases me best, does not consist so much in doing what
I wish, as in avoiding that which is disagreeable to me. Active life
affords no temptations to me. I would much rather do nothing at all than
that which I dislike; and I have frequently thought that I should not
have lived very unhappily even in the Bastile, provided I was free from
any other constraint than that of merely residing within the walls.”

An English author asks, “Why are the inhabitants of the rich plains of
Lombardy, where nature pours her gifts in such profusion, less opulent
than those of the mountains of Swisserland?--Because freedom, whose
influence is more benign than sunshine and zephyrs; who covers the rugged
rock with soil, drains the sickly swamp, and clothes the brown heath
in verdure; who dresses the laborer’s face with smiles, and makes him
behold his increasing family with delight and exultation--Freedom has
abandoned the fertile fields of Lombardy, and dwells among the mountains
of Swisserland.” This observation, though dressed in such enthusiastic
expressions, is literally true at Uri, Schwitz, Underwalde, Zug, Glaris,
and Appenzel; for those who have more than their wants require are
_rich_; and those who are enabled to think, to speak, and to act as
inclination may dictate, are _free_.

Competency and liberty, therefore, are the true sweeteners of life. That
state of mind, so rarely possessed, in which a man can sincerely say, _I
have enough_, is the highest attainment of philosophy. Happiness does
not consist in having much, but in having sufficient. This is the reason
why kings and princes are seldom happy; for they always desire more than
they possess, and are urged incessantly to attempt more than it is in
their power to achieve. He who wants little has always enough. “I am
contented,” says Petrarch, in a letter to his friends, the cardinals
Talleyrand and Bologna: “I desire nothing more; I enjoy every thing that
is necessary to life. Cincinnatus, Curtius, Fabricius, and Regulus, after
having conquered nations, and led kings in triumph, were not so rich as I
am. But I should always be poor if I were to open a door to my passions.
Luxury, ambition, avarice know no bounds, and desire is an unfathomable
abyss. I have clothes to cover me; victuals to support me; horses to
carry me; lands to lie down or walk upon while I live, and to receive my
remains when I die. What more was any Roman emperor possessed of?--My
body is healthy; and being engaged in toil, is less rebellious against my
mind. I have books of every kind, which are to me inestimable treasures;
they fill my soul with a voluptuous delight, untinctured with remorse.
I have friends whom I consider more precious than any thing I possess,
provided their counsels do not tend to abridge my liberty: and I know of
no other enemies than those which envy has raised against me.”

Solitude not only restrains inordinate desires, but discovers to mankind
their real wants; and where a simplicity of manners prevails, the real
wants of men are not only few, but easily satisfied; for being ignorant
of those desires which luxury creates, they can have no idea of indulging
them. An old country curate, who had all his life resided upon a lofty
mountain near the lake of Thun, in the canton of Berne, was one day
presented with a moor-cock. The good old man, ignorant that such a bird
existed, consulted with his cook-maid in what manner this rarity was to
be disposed of, and they both agreed to bury it in the garden. If we were
all, alas! as ignorant of the delicious flavor of moor-cocks, we might be
all as happy and contented as the simple pastor of the mountain near the
lake of Thun.

The man who confines his desires to his real wants, is more wise, more
rich, and more contented, than any other mortal existing. The system
upon which he acts is, like his soul, replete with simplicity and true
greatness; and seeking his felicity in innocent obscurity and peaceful
retirement, he devotes his mind to the love of truth, and finds his
highest happiness in a contented heart.

A calm and tranquil life renders the indulgence of sensual pleasures
less dangerous. The theatre of sensuality exhibits scenes of waste and
brutality, of noisy mirth and tumultuous riot; presents to observation
pernicious goblets, overloaded tables, lascivious dancing, receptacles
for disease, tombs with faded roses, and all the dismal haunts of pain.
But to him who retires in detestation from such gross delights, the joys
of sense are of a more elevated kind; soft, sublime, pure, permanent, and
tranquil.

Petrarch one day inviting his friend, the cardinal Colonna, to visit his
retirement at Vaucluse, wrote to him, “If you prefer the tranquillity
of the country to the noise of the town, come here and enjoy yourself.
Do not be alarmed by the simplicity of my table, or the hardness of my
beds. Kings themselves are frequently disgusted by the luxury in which
they live, and sigh for comforts of a more homely kind. Change of scene
is always pleasing; and pleasures, by occasional interruption, frequently
become more lively. If, however, you should not accord with these
sentiments you may bring with you the most exquisite viands, the wines of
Vesuvius, silver dishes, and every thing else that the indulgence of your
senses requires. Leave the rest to me. I promise to provide you with a
bed of the finest turf, a cooling shade, the music of the nightingales,
figs, raisins, water drawn from the freshest springs; and, in short,
every thing that the hand of Nature prepares for the lap of genuine
pleasure.”

Ah! who would not willingly renounce those things which only produce
disquietude in the mind, for those which render it contented! The art of
occasionally diverting the imagination, taste, and passions, affords new
and unknown enjoyments to the mind and confers pleasure without pain,
and luxury without repentance. The senses deadened by satiety, revive
to new enjoyments. The lively twitter of the groves, and the murmur of
the brooks, yield a more delicious pleasure to the ear than the music of
the opera, or the compositions of the ablest masters. The eye reposes
more agreeably on the concave firmament, on an expanse of waters, on
mountains covered with rocks, than it does on all the glare of balls and
assemblies. In short, the mind enjoys in solitude objects which were
before insupportable, and reclining on the bosom of simplicity, easily
renounces every vain delight. Petrarch wrote from Vaucluse to one of
his friends, “I have made war against my corporeal powers, for I find
they are my enemies. My eyes, which have rendered me guilty of so many
follies, are now confined to the view of a single woman, old, black, and
sunburnt. If Helen, or Lucretia had possessed such a face, Troy would
never have been reduced to ashes, nor Tarquin driven from the empire of
the world. But, to compensate these defects, she is faithful, submissive,
and industrious. She passes whole days in the fields, her shrivelled
skin defying the hottest rays of the sun. My wardrobe still contains
fine clothes, but I never wear them; and you would take me for a common
laborer or a simple shepherd; I, who formerly was so anxious about my
dress. But the reasons which then prevailed, no longer exist: the fetters
by which I was enslaved are broken: the eyes which I was anxious to
please are shut; and if they were still open, they would not perhaps, now
be able to maintain the same empire over my heart.”

Solitude, by stripping worldly objects of the false splendor in which
fancy arrays them, dispels all vain ambition from the mind. Accustomed to
rural delights and indifferent to every other kind of pleasure, a wise
man no longer thinks high offices and worldly advancement worthy of his
desires. A noble Roman was overwhelmed with tears on being obliged to
accept of the consulship, because it would deprive him for one year of
the opportunity of cultivating his fields. Cincinnatus, who was called
from the plough to the supreme command of the Roman legions, defeated the
enemies of his country, added to it new provinces, made his triumphal
entry into Rome, and at the expiration of sixteen days returned to his
plough. It is true, that the inmate of an humble cottage, who is forced
to earn his daily bread by labor, and the owner of a spacious mansion,
for whom every luxury is provided, are not held in equal estimation by
mankind. But let the man who has experienced both these situations,
be asked under which of them he felt the most content. The cares and
inquietudes of the palace are innumerably greater than those of the
cottage. In the former, discontent poisons every enjoyment; and its
superfluity is only misery in disguise. The princes of Germany do not
digest all the palatable poison which their cooks prepare, so well as a
peasant upon the heaths of Limbourg digests his buck-wheat pie. And those
who may differ from me in this opinion, will be forced to acknowledge,
that there is great truth in the reply which a pretty French country
girl, made to a young nobleman, who solicited her to abandon her rustic
taste, and retire with him to Paris: “Ah! my lord, the further we remove
from ourselves, the greater is our distance from happiness.”

Solitude, by moderating the selfish desires of the heart, and expelling
ambition from the breast, becomes a real asylum to the disappointed
statesman or discarded minister; for it is not every public minister who
can retire, like Neckar, through the portals of everlasting fame. Every
person, indeed, without distinction, ought to raise his grateful hands to
heaven, on being dismissed from the troubles of public life, to the calm
repose which the cultivation of his native fields, and the care of his
flocks and herds, afford. In France, however, when a minister, who has
incurred the displeasure of his sovereign, is ordered to _retire_, and
thereby enabled to visit an estate which he has decorated in the highest
style of rural elegance, this delightful retreat, alas! being considered
a place of exile, becomes intolerable to his mind: he no longer
fancies himself its master; is incapable of relishing its enchanting
beauties; repose flies from his pillow; and turning with aversion from
every object, he dies at length, the victim of spleen, petulance, and
dejection. But in England it is just the reverse. There a minister is
congratulated on retiring, like a man who has happily escaped from a
dangerous malady. He feels himself still surrounded by many friends much
more worthy than his adherents while in power; for while those were
bound to him by temporary considerations of interest, these are attached
to him by real and permanent esteem. Thanks, generous Britons! for the
examples you have given to us of men sufficiently bold and independent
to weigh events in the scales of reason, and to guide themselves by the
intrinsic and real merits of each case: for notwithstanding the freedom
with which many Englishmen have arraigned the dispensations of the
Supreme Being; notwithstanding the mockery and ridicule with which they
have so frequently insulted virtue, good manners, and decorum; there are
many more among them, who, especially at an advanced period of their
lives, perfectly understand the art of living by themselves; and in their
tranquil and delightful villas think with more dignity, and live with
more real happiness, than the haughtiest noble in the zenith of his power.

Of the ministers who retire from the administration of public affairs,
the majority finish their days in cultivating their gardens, in improving
their estates, and, like the excellent de la Roche, at Spire, certainly
possess more content with the shovel and the rake, than they enjoyed in
the most prosperous hours in their administration.

It has, indeed, been said, that observations like these are common to
persons who, ignorant of the manners of the world, and the characters of
men, love to moralize on, and recommend a contempt of, human greatness;
but that rural innocence, the pure and simple pleasures of nature, and
an uninterrupted repose, are very seldom the companions of this boasted
solitude. Those who maintain this opinion, assert, that man, though
surrounded with difficulties, and obliged to employ every art and cunning
to attain his ends, feels with his success the pleasing power which
attaches to the character of master, and fondly indulges in the exercise
of sovereignty. Enabled to create and to destroy, to plant and to root
up, to make alterations when and where he pleases, he may grub up a
vineyard, and plant an English grove on its site; erect hills where hills
never were seen; level eminences to the ground; compel the stream to flow
as his inclination shall direct; force woods and shrubberies to grow
where he pleases; graft or lop as it shall strike his fancy; open views
and shut out boundaries; construct ruins where buildings never existed;
erect temples of which he alone is the high priest; and build hermitages
in which he may seclude himself at pleasure. It is said, however, that
this is not a reward for the restraints he formerly experienced, but a
natural inclination; for that a minister must be, from the habits of his
life, fond of command and sovereignty, whether he continues at the head
of an extensive empire, or directs the management of a poultry yard.

It would most undoubtedly discover a great ignorance of the world, and
of the nature of man, to contend that it is necessary to renounce all
the inclinations of the human heart, in order to enjoy the advantages of
solitude. That which nature has implanted in the human breast must there
remain. If, therefore a minister, in his retirement, is not satiated
with the exercise of power and authority, but still fondly wishes for
command, let him require obedience from his chickens, provided such a
gratification is essential to his happiness and tends to suppress the
desire of again exposing himself to those tempests and shipwrecks which
he can only avoid in the safe harbor of rural life. An ex-minister must
sooner or later, learn to despise the appearances of human greatness,
when he discovers that true greatness frequently begins at that period of
life which statesmen are apt to consider a dreary void; that the regret
of being no longer able to do more good, is only ambition in disguise;
and that the inhabitants of the country, in cultivating their cabbages
and potatoes, are a hundred times happier than the greatest minister.

Nothing contributes more to the advancement of earthly felicity, than a
reliance on those maxims which teach us to _do as much good as possible_,
and _to take things just as we find them_; for it is certainly true
that no characters are so unhappy as those who are continually finding
fault with every thing they see. My barber at Hanover, while he was
preparing to shave me, exclaimed, with a deep sigh, “_It is terribly hot
to day_,” “You place heaven,” said I to him, “in great difficulties.
For these nine months last past, you have regularly told me every other
day, _It is terribly cold to day_.” Cannot the Almighty, then any longer
govern the universe, without these gentlemen barbers finding something
to be discontented with? “Is it not,” I asked him, “much better to take
the seasons as they change, and to receive with equal gratitude, from
the hand of God, the winter’s cold, and the summer’s warmth?” “Oh!
certainly,” replied the barber.

Competency, and content, therefore, may in general, be considered as the
basis of earthly happiness; and solitude, in many instances, favors both
the one and the other.

Solitude not only refines the enjoyments of friendship, but enables us to
acquire friends from whom nothing can alienate our souls, and to whose
arms we never fly in vain.

The friends of Petrarch sometimes apologized to him for their long
absence. “It is impossible for us,” said they, “to follow your example;
the life you lead at Vaucluse is contrary to human nature. In winter
you sit like an owl in the chimney corner. In summer you are running
incessantly about the fields.” Petrarch smiled at these observations.
“These people,” said he, “consider the pleasures of the world as the
supreme good; and cannot bear the idea of renouncing them. I have friends
whose society is extremely agreeable to me: they are of all ages, and of
every country. They have distinguished themselves both in the cabinet
and in the field, and obtained high honors for their knowledge of the
sciences. It is easy to gain access to them, for they are always at
my service; and I admit them to my company, and dismiss them from it
whenever I please. They are never troublesome, but immediately answer
every question I ask them. Some relate to me the events of past ages,
while others reveal to me the secrets of nature. Some teach me how to
live, and others how to die. Some, by their vivacity, drive away my
cares, and exhilarate my spirits; while others give fortitude to my
mind, and teach me the important lesson how to restrain my desires, and
to depend on myself. They open to me, in short, the various avenues of
all the arts and sciences; and upon their information I safely rely in
all emergencies. In return for all these services, they only ask me to
accommodate them with a convenient chamber in some corner of my humble
habitation, where they may repose in peace: for these friends are more
delighted with the tranquillity of retirement, than with the tumults of
society.”

Love! the most precious gift of heaven,

    “The cordial drop Heav’n in our cup has thrown,
    To make the bitter load of life go down,”

appears to merit a distinguished rank among the advantages of solitude.

Love voluntarily unites itself with the aspect of beautiful nature. The
view of a pleasing landscape makes the heart beat with the tenderest
emotions. The lonely mountain and the silent grove increase the
susceptibility of the female bosom, inspire the mind with rapturous
enthusiasm, and, sooner or later, draw aside and subjugate the heart.

Women feel the pure and tranquil pleasures of rural life with a higher
sensibility than men. They enjoy more exquisitely the beauties of a
lonely walk, the freshness of a shady forest, and admire with higher
ecstacy the charms of nature. Solitude is to them the school of true
philosophy. In England, at least, where the face of the country is so
beautiful, and where the taste of its inhabitants is hourly adding to it
new embellishments, the love of rural solitude is certainly stronger in
the women than the men. A nobleman who employs the day in riding over
his estates or in following the hounds, does not enjoy the pleasures
of rural life with the same delight as his lady, who devotes her time,
in her romantic pleasure grounds, to needle work, or to the reading of
some instructive, interesting work. In this happy country, indeed, where
the people, in general, love the enjoyments of the mind, the calm of
rural retirement is doubly valuable, and its delights more exquisite.
The learning which has of late years so considerably increased among
the ladies of Germany, is certainly to be attributed to their love of
retirement: for, among those who pass their time in the country, we find
much more true wit and rational sentiment, than among the _beaux esprits_
of the metropolis.

Minds, indeed, apparently insensible in the atmosphere of a metropolis,
unfold themselves with rapture in the country. This is the reason why
the return of spring fills every tender breast with love. “What can more
resemble love,” says a celebrated German philosopher, “than the feeling
with which my soul is inspired at the sight of this magnificent valley,
thus illuminated by the setting sun!” Rousseau felt an inexpressible
delight on viewing the first appearances of spring: the earliest blossoms
of that charming season gave new life and vigor to his mind; the
tenderest dispositions of his heart were awakened and augmented by the
soft verdure it presented to his eyes; and the charms of his mistress
were assimilated with the beauties that surrounded him on every side. The
view of an extensive and pleasing prospect softened his sorrows; and he
breathed his sighs with exquisite delight amidst the rising flowers of
his garden, and the rich fruits of his orchard.

Lovers constantly seek the rural grove to indulge, in the tranquillity
of retirement, the uninterrupted contemplation of the beloved object
which forms the sole happiness of their lives. Of what importance to them
are all the transactions of the world, or, indeed, any thing that does
not tend to indulge the passion that fills their hearts? Silent groves,
embowering glades, or the lonely borders of murmuring streams, where they
may freely resign themselves to their fond reflections, are the only
confidants of their souls. A lovely shepherdess, offering her fostering
bosom to the infant she is nursing, while at her side her well-beloved
partner sits dividing with her his morsel of hard black bread, is an
hundred times more happy than all the fops of the town: for love inspires
his mind, in the highest degree, with all that is elevated, delightful
and affecting in nature; and warms the coldest bosoms with the greatest
sensibility and the highest rapture.

Love’s softest images spring up anew in solitude. The remembrance of
these emotions which the first blush of conscious tenderness, the first
gentle pressure of the hand, the first dread of interruption, create,
recurs incessantly! Time, it is said, extinguishes the flame of love;
but solitude renews the fire, and calls forth those agents which lie
long concealed, and only wait a favorable moment to display their
powers. The whole course of youthful feeling again beams forth; and the
mind--delicious recollection!--fondly retracing the first affection
of the heart, fills the bosom with an indelible sense of those high
ecstacies which a connoisseur has said, with as much truth as energy,
proclaim, for the first time, that happy discovery, that fortunate
moment, when two lovers first perceive their mutual fondness.

Herder mentions a certain cast of people in Asia, whose mythology thus
divided the felicities of eternity. “That men, after death, were, in the
celestial regions, immediately the objects of female love during the
course of a thousand years; first by tender looks, then by a balmy kiss,
and afterwards, by immediate alliance.”

It was this noble and sublime species of affection that Wieland, in the
warmest moments of impassioned youth felt for an amiable, sensible, and
beautiful lady of Zurich; for that extraordinary genius was perfectly
satisfied, that the metaphysical effects of love, begin with the first
sigh, and expire, to a certain degree, with the first kiss. I one day
asked this young lady when it was that Wieland had saluted her for the
first time? “Wieland,” replied the amiable girl, “did not kiss my hand
for the first time until four years after our acquaintance commenced.”

Young persons, in general, however, do not, like Wieland, adopt the
mystic refinements of love. Yielding to the sentiments which the passion
inspires, and less acquainted with its metaphysical nature, they feel
at an earlier age, in the tranquillity of solitude, that irresistible
impulse to the union of the sexes which the God of nature has so strongly
implanted in the human breast.

A lady who resided in great retirement, at a romantic cottage upon the
banks of the lake of Geneva, had three innocent and lovely daughters.
The eldest was about fourteen years of age, the youngest was about nine,
when they were presented with a tame bird, which hopped and flew about
the chamber the whole day, and formed the sole amusement and pleasure
of their lives. Placing themselves on their knees, they offered, with
unwearied delight, their little favorite, pieces of biscuit from their
fingers, and endeavored, by every means, to induce him to fly to, and
nestle in, their bosoms; but the bird, the moment he had got the biscuit,
with cunning coyness eluded their hopes, and hopped away. The little
favorite at length died. A year after this event, the youngest of the
three sisters said to her mother, “Oh, I remember that dear little bird!
I wish, mamma, you could procure me such a one to play with.” “Oh! no,”
replied her elder sister, “I should like to have a little dog to play
with better than any thing. I could catch a little dog, take him on my
knee, hug him in my arms. A bird affords me no pleasure; he perches a
little while on my finger, then flies away, and there is no catching him
again: but a little dog, oh! what pleasure.…”

I shall never forget the poor _religieuse_ in whose apartment I found
a breeding cage of canary birds, nor forgive myself for having burst
into a fit of laughter at the discovery. It was, alas! the suggestion of
nature; and who can resist what nature suggests? This mystic wandering of
religious minds, this celestial epilepsy of love, this premature effect
of solitude, is only the fond application of natural inclination raised
superior to all others.

Absence and tranquillity appear so favorable to the indulgence of this
pleasing passion, that lovers frequently quit the beloved object, to
reflect in solitude on her charms. Who does not recollect to have read,
in the Confessions of Rousseau, the story related by Madame de Luxemberg,
of a lover who quitted the presence of his mistress, only that he might
have the pleasure of writing to her. Rousseau replied to Madame de
Luxemberg, that he wished he had been that man; and his wish was founded
on a perfect knowledge of the passion: for who has ever been in love,
and does not know that there are moments when the pen is capable of
expressing the fine feelings of the heart with much greater effect than
the voice, with its miserable organ of speech? The tongue, even in its
happiest elocution, is never so persuasive as the speaking eyes, when
lovers gaze with silent ecstacy on each other’s charms.

Lovers not only express, but feel their passion with higher ecstacy and
happiness in solitude than in any other situation. What fashionable
lover ever painted his passion for a lovely mistress with such laconic
tenderness and effect, as the village chorister of Hanover did on the
death of a young and beautiful country girl with whom he was enamored,
when, after erecting in the cemetery of the cathedral, a sepulchral stone
to her memory, he carved, in an artless manner, the figure of a blooming
rose on its front, and inscribed beneath it these words: _C’est ainsi
qu’elle fut_.

It was at the feet of those rocks which overhung the celebrated retreat
at Vaucluse, that Petrarch composed his finest sonnets to deplore the
absence, or to complain of the cruelty of his beloved Laura. The Italians
are of opinion, that when love inspired his muse, his poetry soared far
beyond that of any poet who ever wrote before or since his time, either
in the Greek, the Latin, or the Tuscan languages. “Ah! how soft and
tender is this language of the heart!” they exclaim. “Petrarch alone was
acquainted with its power: he has added to the three graces a fourth--the
grace of delicacy.”

Love, however, when indulged in rural solitude or amidst the romantic
scenery of an ancient castle, and, assisted by the ardent imagination of
impetuous youth, frequently assumes a more bold and violent character.
Religious enthusiasm, blended with a saturnine disposition, forms, in
effervescent minds, a sublime and extraordinary compound of the feelings
of the heart. A youthful lover of this description, when deprived of the
smiles of his mistress, takes his first declaration of love from the text
of the apocalypse and thinks his passion an eternal melancholy; but when
he is inclined to sharpen the dart within his breast, his inspired mind
views in the beloved object the fairest model of divine perfection.

The lovers of this romantic cast, placed in some ancient solitary
castle, soar far beyond the common tribe, and, as their ideas refine,
their passions become proportionably sublime. Surrounded by stupendous
rocks, and impressed by the awful stilness of the scene, the beloved
youth is considered not merely as an amiable and virtuous man, but as a
god. The inspired mind of the fond female fancies her bosom to be the
sanctuary of love, and conceives her affection for the youthful idol of
her heart to be an emanation from heaven: a ray of the Divine Presence.
Ordinary lovers, without doubt, in spite of absence, unite their souls,
write by every post, seize all occasions to converse with, or hear from,
each other; but our more sublime and exalted female introduces into her
romance of passion every butterfly she meets with, and all the feathered
songsters of the groves; and, except in the object of her love, no longer
sees any thing as it really is. Reason and sense no longer guide: the
refinements of love direct all her movements; she tears the world from
its poles, and the sun from its axis; and to prove that all she does is
right, establishes for herself and her lover a new gospel, and a new
system of morality.

A lover, separated, perhaps, forever, from a mistress who has made the
most important sacrifices to his happiness; who was his only consolation
in affliction, his only comfort in calamity; whose kindness supported
his sinking fortitude; who remained his faithful and his only friend
in dire adversity and domestic sorrow; seeks, as his sole resource, a
slothful solitude. Nights passed in sleepless agonies; a distaste of
life, a desire of death, an abhorrence of all society, and a love of
dreary seclusion, drive him, day, after day, wandering, as chance may
direct, though the most solitary retirements far from the hated traces
of mankind. Were he, however, to wander from the Elbe to the lake of
Geneva; were he to seek relief in the frozen confines of the north, or
the burning regions of the west, to the utmost extremities of the earth
or seas, he would still be like the hind described by Virgil:

    “Stung with the stroke and madding with the pain
    She wildly flies from wood to wood in vain;
    Shoots o’er the Cretan lawn with many a bound,
    The cleaving dart still rankling in the wound.”

Petrarch, on returning to Vaucluse, felt with new and increasing stings
the passion which perturbed his breast. Immediately on his arrival at
this sequestered spot, the image of his beloved Laura incessantly haunted
his imagination. He beheld her at all times, in every place, and under a
thousand different forms. “Three times in the middle of the night when
every door was closed, she appeared to me,” says he, “at the feet of my
bed, with a steadfast look, as if confident of the power of her charms.
Fear spread a chilling dew over all my limbs. My blood thrilled through
my veins towards my heart. If any one had then entered my apartment with
a candle, they would have beheld me as pale as death, with every mark of
terror on my face. Rising before the break of day, with trembling limbs,
from my disordered bed, and hastily leaving my house, where every thing
created alarm, I climbed to the summit of the rocks, and ran wildly
through the woods, casting my eyes incessantly on every side, to see if
the form which had haunted my repose, still pursued me. Alas! I could
find no asylum. Places the most sequestered, where I fondly flattered
myself that I should be alone, presented her continually to my mind; and
I beheld her sometimes issuing from the hollow trunk of a tree, from the
concealed source of a spring, or from the dark cavity of a broken rock.
Fear rendered me insensible, and I neither know what I did, or where I
went.”

The heart of Petrarch was frequently stimulated by ideas of voluptuous
pleasure, even among the rocks of Vaucluse, where he sought an asylum
from love and Laura. He soon, however, banished sensuality from his mind,
and, by refining his passion, acquired that vivacity and heavenly purity
which breathes in every line of those immortal lyrics he composed among
the rocks. But the city of Avignon, in which the object thus tenderly
beloved resided, was not sufficiently distant from the place of his
retreat, and he visited it too frequently. A passion indeed, like that
which Petrarch felt, leaves the bosom, even when uncorrupted, totally
incapable of tranquillity. It is a violent fever of the soul, which
inflicts upon the body a complication of painful disorders. Let lovers,
therefore, while they possess some control over the passion which fills
their breasts, seat themselves on the borders of a river, and reflect
that love, like the stream, sometimes precipitates itself with violence
down the rocks; and sometimes flowing with soft tranquillity along the
plain, meanders through meadows, and loses itself beneath the peaceful
shades of solitary bowers.

The tranquillity of solitude, however, may, to a mind disposed to
resign itself with humility to all the dispensations of heaven, be
found not disadvantageous to the perturbations of love. A lover whom
death has bereaved of the dear object of his affection, seeks only
those places which his favorite inhabited; considers every other as
desert and forlorn; and expects that death alone is able to stop the
torrent of his tears. Such an indulgence of sorrow, however, cannot be
called a resignation to the will of God. A lover of this description is
attached solely to the irrecoverable object of his increasing sorrows.
His distracted mind fondly hopes that she may still return; he thinks
he hears her soft enchanting voice in every breeze; he sees her lovely
form approaching, and opens his expecting arms to clasp her once again
to his still throbbing breast. But he finds, alas! his hopes are vain:
the fancy-breathing form eludes his grasp, and convinces him that the
delightful vision was only the light and love-formed phantom of his
sorrow-sickened mind. A sad remembrance of her departed spirit is the
only comfort of his lingering life: he flies to the tomb where her mortal
remains were deposited, plants roses round her shrine, waters them with
his tears, cultivates them with the tenderest care, kisses them as
emblems of her blushing cheeks, and tastes, with sighing transports,
their balmy fragrance as the fancied odor of her ruby lips.

It must afford infinite pleasure to every philosophic mind, to reflect
on the victory which the virtuous Petrarch gained over the passion that
assailed his heart. During his retreat into Italy from love and Laura,
his friends in France used every endeavor to induce him to return. One
of them wrote to him:--“What demon possesses you;--How could you quit
a country in which you indulged all the propensities of youth, and
where the graceful figure which you formerly adorned with so much care,
procured you such unbounded admiration?--How can you live thus exiled
from Laura, whom you love with so much tenderness, and whose heart is so
deeply afflicted by your absence?”

Petrarch replied: “Your anxiety is vain: I am resolved to continue where
I am. I ride here safely at anchor; and all the hurricanes of eloquence
shall never drive me from it. How then can you expect to persuade me to
change this resolution, merely by placing before my eyes the deviations
of my youth which I ought to forget; by describing an illicit passion
which left me no other resource than a precipitate flight; and by
extolling the meretricious advantages of a handsome person, which too
long occupied my attention. These are follies I must no longer think
of. I am now rapidly approaching toward the last goal on the course
of life. Objects more serious and important now occupy my thoughts.
God forbid, that, listening to your flattering observations, I should
again throw myself into the snares of love, again put on a yoke which
so severely galled me!--The natural levity of youth apologizes, in some
degree, for the indiscretions it creates; but I should despise myself,
if I could now be tempted to revisit either the bower of love, or the
theatre of ambition. Your suggestions, however, have produced a proper
effect; for I consider them as the oblique censures of a friend upon my
past misconduct. The solicitudes of the gay and busy world no longer
disturb my mind; for my heart has tenaciously rooted all its fibres in
this delightful solitude, where I rove at large, free and unconstrained,
without inquietude or care. In summer I repose upon the verdant turf
beneath the shade of some embowering tree, or saunter along the enamelled
boarders of a cool, refreshing stream. At the approach of autumn I
seek the woods, and join the muses’ train. This mode of life is surely
preferable to a life at court, where nothing but disgusting jealousies
and corroding cares exist. I have now, in short, no wish, except that,
when death relieves me both from pleasure and from pain, I may recline
my head upon the bosom of a friend, whose eyes, while he performs the
last office of closing mine, will drop a deploring tear upon my departing
spirit, and convey my remains, with friendly care, to a decent tomb in my
native country.”

These were the sentiments of _the philosopher_: but, after a short
interval _the man_ returned once again to the city of Avignon, and only
visited his retreat at Vaucluse occasionally.

Petrarch, however, by these continued endeavors to subdue the violence
of his passion, acquired a sublimity and richness of imagination, which
distinguished his character, and gave him an ascendency over the age in
which he lived, greater than any of the literati have since attained.
To use the expression of the poet, he was capable of passing, with the
happiest facility,

    “From grave to gay, from lively to severe:”

and was enabled, as occasion required, to conceive the boldest
enterprises, and to execute them with the most heroic courage. He who
languished, sighed, and even wept with unmanly softness, at the feet
of his mistress, breathing only the tender and affectionate language
of gentle love, no sooner turned his thoughts toward the transactions
of Rome, than he assumed a higher tone, and not only wrote, but acted
with all the strength and spirit of the Augustan age. Monarchs have
relinquished the calls of hunger, and the charms of rest, to indulge
the tender luxuries his love-lorn muse afforded. But at a more advanced
age he was no longer a sighing minstrel, chaunting amorous verses to a
relentless fair; he was no longer an effeminate slave, that kissed the
chains of an imperious mistress, who treated him with disdain: he became
a zealous republican, who spread by his writings the spirit of liberty
throughout Italy, and sounded a loud alarm against tyranny and tyrants.
Great as a statesman, profound and judicious as a public minister, he
was consulted in the most important political transactions of Europe,
and frequently employed in the most arduous and difficult negotiations.
Zealously active in the cause of humanity, he anxiously endeavored, on
occasions, to extinguish the torch of discord. The greatest princes,
conscious of his extraordinary genius, solicited his company, and
endeavored, by listening to his precepts, to learn the noble art of
rendering their countries respectable, and their people happy.

These traits of Petrarch’s character clearly evince that, oppressed as he
was by the passion of love, he derived great advantages from solitude.
The retirement at Vaucluse was not, as is commonly imagined, a pretence
to be nearer the person of Laura, for Laura resided altogether at
Avignon; but a means of avoiding the frown of his mistress, and of flying
from the contagion of a corrupt court. Seated in his little garden,
which was situated at the foot of a lofty mountain, and surrounded by
a rapid stream, his soul rose superior to the adversities of his fate.
His disposition, indeed, was naturally restless and unquiet; but in his
tranquil moments, a sound judgment, joined to an exquisite sensibility,
enabled him to enjoy the delights of solitude with singular advantage;
and to find in his retreat at Vaucluse, the temple of peace, the
residence of calm repose, and a safe harbor against all the tempests of
the soul.

The flame of love, therefore, although it cannot be entirely
extinguished, may be greatly purified and refined by solitude. Man
indeed, ought not to extirpate the passions which the God of nature has
planted in the human heart, but to direct them to their proper ends.

To avoid such miseries as Petrarch endured, the pleasures of retirement
should be shared with some amiable female, who, better than the cold
precepts of philosophy, will beguile or banish, by the charms of
conversation, all the cares and torments of life.

It has been said by a very sensible author, that “the presence of one
thinking being like ourselves, whose bosom glows with sympathy, and whose
affection we possess, so far from destroying the advantages of solitude,
renders them more favorable. If, like me you owe your happiness to the
fond attention of a wife, you will soon be induced, by her kindness, by
her tender and unreserved communication of every sentiment of her mind,
every feeling of her heart, to forget the society of the world; and your
happiness will be as pleasingly diversified, as the employments and
vicissitudes of your lives.”

The orator who speaks so eloquently must have felt with exquisite
sensibility the pleasures he describes; “Here,” says he, “every kind
expression is remembered; the emotions of one heart correspond with
those of the other; every thought is treasured up; every testimony of
affection is returned; the happy pair enjoy in each other’s company
all the pleasures of the mind; and there is no felicity which does
not communicate itself to their hearts. To beings thus united by the
sincerest affection, and the closest friendship, every thing that is
said or done, every wish, and every event, becomes mutually important.
No jealous fears, no envious stings, disturb their happiness; faults are
pointed out with cautious tenderness and good nature; looks bespeak the
inclinations of the soul; every wish and every desire is anticipated;
every view and intention assimilated; and, the sentiments of one,
conforming to those of the other, each rejoices with cordiality at the
smallest advantage which the other acquires.”

Thus it is that the solitude which we share with an amiable object
produces tranquillity, satisfaction, and heartfelt joy; and makes the
humblest cottage a dwelling place of the purest pleasure.

Love, in the shades of retirement, while the mind and the heart are in
harmony with each other, inspires the noblest sentiments; raises the
understanding to the highest sphere of intellect: fills the bosom with
increased benevolence; destroys all the seeds of vice, and meliorates
and extends all the virtues. By its delightful influence the attack
of ill-humor is resisted; the violence of our passions abated; the
bitter cup of human affliction sweetened; all the injuries of the world
alleviated; and the sweetest flowers plentifully strewed along the
thorny paths of life. Every unhappy sufferer, whether the malady be of
the body or the mind, derives from this source extraordinary comfort
and consolation. At a time, alas! when every thing displeased me, when
every object was disgusting, when my sufferings had destroyed all the
energy and vigor of my soul, when grief had shut from my streaming eyes
the beauties of nature, and rendered the whole universe a dreary tomb,
the kind attentions of a wife were capable of conveying a secret charm,
a silent consolation to my mind. Oh! nothing can render the bowers of
retirement so serene and comfortable, or can so sweetly soften all our
woes, as a conviction that woman is not indifferent to our fate.

Solitude, it is true, will not completely heal every wound which this
imperious passion is capable of inflicting on the human heart; but it
teaches us to endure our pains without wishing for relief, and enables us
to convert them into soft sorrow and plaintive grief.

Both sexes in early youth, but particularly females from fifteen to
eighteen years of age, who possess high sensibilities, and lively
imaginations, generally feel during the solitude of rural retirement,
a soft and pleasing melancholy, when their bosoms begin to heave with
the first propensities of love. They wander every where in search of a
beloved object, and sigh for one alone, long before the heart is fixed in
its affection, or the mind conscious of its latent inclination. I have
frequently observed this disposition unaccompanied by any symptom of ill
health. It is an original malady. Rousseau felt its influence at Vevay,
upon the borders of the lake of Geneva. “My heart,” says he, “rushed
with ardor from my bosom into a thousand innocent felicities; and melting
into tenderness, I sighed and wept like a child. How frequently, stopping
to indulge my feelings, and seating myself on a piece of broken rock, did
I amuse myself with seeing my tears drop into the stream!”

Retirement, however, is not equally favorable to every species of
affliction. Some bosoms are so exquisitely alive to the sense of
misfortune, that the indelible remembrance of the object of their
affection preys upon their minds: the reading of a single line written
by the hand they loved, freezes their blood; the very sight of the tomb
which has swallowed up the remains of all their soul held dear, is
intolerable to their eyes. On such beings, alas! the heavens smile in
vain: to them the new-born flowers and the twittering groves, proclaiming
the approach of spring and the regeneration of vegetable nature, bring
no charms; the garden’s variegated hues irritate their feelings; and the
silent retreats, from which they once expected consolation, only increase
their pains. Such refined and exquisite feelings, the offspring of warm
and generous passion, are real misfortunes; and the malady they engender
requires to be treated with the mildest attention and the tenderest care.

But to minds of softer temper solitude possesses many powerful charms,
although the losses they deplore are equally great. Such characters feel,
indeed, a sense of their misfortune in its utmost possible extent, but
they soften its acuteness by yielding to the natural mildness of their
dispositions: they plant upon the fatal tomb the weeping willow and the
ephemeral rose; they erect _mausolea_; compose funeral dirges; and render
the very emblems of death, the means of consolation. Their hearts are
continually occupied by the idea of those whom their eyes deplore; and
they exist under the sensations of the truest and most sincere sorrow, in
a kind of middle state between earth and heaven. This species of sorrow
is of the happiest kind. Far be it from me to suppose it in the least
degree affected. But I call such characters happy mourners; because, from
the very frame and texture of their constitutions, grief does not destroy
the energy of their minds, but permits them to find consolation in those
things which, to minds differently constructed, would create aversion.
They feel a heavenly joy in pursuing employments which preserve the
memory of those who are the subjects of their sorrow.

Solitude will enable the heart to vanquish the most painful sense of
adversity, provided the mind will generously lend its aid, and fix its
attention to a different object. If men think there is any misfortune
from which they have no other resource than despair or death they deceive
themselves; for despair is no resource. Let such men retire to their
studies, and there seriously trace out a series of important and settled
truths, and their tears will no longer fall; but the weight of their
misfortunes will grow light, and sorrow fly from their breasts.

Solitude, by encouraging the enjoyments of the heart, by promoting
domestic felicity, and by creating a taste for rural scenery, subdues
impatience, and drives away ill-humor. Impatience is a stifled anger,
which men silently manifest by looks and gestures, and weak minds
ordinarily reveal by a shower of complaints. A grumbler is never further
from his proper sphere than when he is in company; solitude is his
only asylum. Ill-humor is an uneasy and insupportable condition, which
the soul frequently falls into when soured by a number of those petty
vexations which we daily experience in every step of our progress through
life; but we need only to shut the door against improper and disagreeable
intrusions, to avoid this scourge of happiness.

Vexations, indeed, of every kind, are much sooner quieted in the silence
of retirement than in the noise of the world. A cheerful disposition,
a placid temper, and well-regulated passions, will prevent worldly
vexations from interrupting our happiness. By these attainments, the
deepest melancholy, and most settled uneasiness of life, have been
frequently banished from the heart. It is true, that the progress in this
case is much more rapid in women than in men. The mind of a lively female
flies immediately to happiness, while that of a melancholy man still
creeps on with pain: the yielding bosoms of the fair are easily elevated
or depressed. These effects, it is true, may be produced by means less
abstracted than solitude; by any thing that strikes the senses, and
penetrates the heart. Men, on the contrary, augment the disease, and fix
it more firmly in the bosom, by brooding over its cause and consequences,
and are obliged to apply the most efficacious remedies, with unshaken
constancy, to effect a cure; for feeble prescriptions are, in such
cases, of no avail. The only chance, indeed, of success, is by exerting
every endeavor to place the body under the regimen of the mind. Vigorous
minds frequently banish the most inveterate evils, or form a powerful
shield against all the darts of fate, and, by braving every danger, drive
away those feelings by which others are irritated and destroyed; they
boldly turn their eyes from what things are, to what they ought to be;
and with determined resolution support the bodies they are designed to
animate; while weak minds surrender every thing committed to their care.

The soul, however, always follows what is most agreeable to its
ruling passion. Worldly men generally delight in gaming, feasting,
and debauchery; while those who are fond of solitude feel, from a
consciousness of its advantages, no enjoyments equal to those its
peaceful shades afford.

I now conclude my reflections upon the advantages of Solitude to
_the Heart_. May they give greater currency to useful sentiments,
to consolatory truths, and contribute in some degree to diffuse the
enjoyment of a happiness which is so much within our reach!




