
[Illustration]




                                SOLITUDE:

                                   BY
                           JOHN G. ZIMMERMAN.

                      With the Life of the Author.

                             [Illustration]

                              IN TWO PARTS.

                          NEW-YORK:--C. WELLS.
                            56, Gold-street.
                                  1840.




CONTENTS.


    CHAP.                                                             PAGE.

                                 PART I.

          Life of the author                                             9

       I. Introduction,                                                 15

      II. Influence of solitude upon the mind,                          19

     III. Influence of solitude upon the heart,                         60

      IV. General advantages of retirement,                            109

       V. Advantages of solitude in exile,                             134

      VI. Advantages of solitude in old age and on the bed of death,   138

                                PART II.

       I. Introduction,                                                149

      II. Of the motives to solitude,                                  157

     III. Disadvantages of solitude,                                   185

      IV. Influence of solitude on the imagination,                    200

       V. Effects of solitude on a melancholy mind,                    216

      VI. Influence of solitude on the passions,                       235

     VII. Of the danger of idleness in solitude,                       274

    VIII. Conclusion,                                                  279




PREFACE.


Weak and delicate minds may, perhaps, be alarmed by the title of this
work. The word _solitude_, may possibly engender melancholy ideas; but
they have only to read a few pages to be undeceived. The author is not
one of those extravagant misanthropists who expect that men, formed by
nature for the enjoyments of society, and impelled continually towards
it by a multitude of powerful and invincible propensities, should seek
refuge in forests, and inhabit the dreary cave or lonely cell; he is a
friend to the species, a rational philosopher, and the virtuous citizen,
who, encouraged by the esteem of his sovereign, endeavors to enlighten
the minds of his fellow creatures upon a subject of infinite importance
to them, the attainment of true felicity.

No writer appears more completely convinced than M. Zimmerman, that man
is born for society, or feels its duties with more refined sensibility.

It is the nature of human society, and its correspondent duties, which he
here undertakes to examine. The important characters of father, husband,
son, and citizen, impose on man a variety of obligations, which are
always dear to virtuous minds, and establish between him, his country,
his family, and his friends, relations too necessary and attractive to be
disregarded.

    “What wonder, therefore, since th’ endearing ties
    Of passion link the universal kind
    Of man so close; what wonder if to search
    This common nature through the various change
    Of sex, of age, and fortune, and the frame
    Of each peculiar, draw the busy mind
    With unresisted charms? The spacious west,
    And all the teeming regions of the south,
    Hold not a quarry to the curious flight,
    Of knowledge half so tempting or so fair,
    As man to man.”

But it is not amidst tumultuous joys and noisy pleasures; in the chimeras
of ambition, or the illusions of self-love; in the indulgence of feeling,
or the gratification of desire, that men must expect to feel the charms
of those mutual ties which link them so firmly to society. It is not
in such enjoyments that men can feel the dignity of those duties, the
performance of which nature has rendered productive of so many pleasures,
or hope to taste that true felicity which results from an independent
mind and a contented heart: a felicity seldom sought after, only because
it is so little known, but which every individual may find within his
own bosom. Who, alas! does not constantly experience the necessity of
entering into that sacred asylum to search for consolation under the real
or imaginary misfortunes of life, or to alleviate indeed more frequently
the fatigue of its painful pleasures? Yes, all men, from the mercenary
trader, who sinks under the anxiety of his daily task, to the proud
statesman, intoxicated by the incense of popular applause, experience the
desire of terminating their arduous career. Every bosom feels an anxiety
for repose, and fondly wishes to steal from the vortex of a busy and
perturbed life, to enjoy the tranquillity of solitude.

    “Hackney’d in business, wearied at that oar
    Which thousands, once chain’d fast to, quit no more,
    But which, when life at ebb, runs weak and low,
    All wish, or seem to wish, they could forego;
    The statesman, lawyer, merchant, man of trade,
    Pant for the refuge of a peaceful shade
    Where all his long anxieties forgot,
    Amidst the charms of a sequester’d spot,
    Or recollected only to gild o’er
    And add a smile to what was sweet before,
    He may possess the joys he thinks he sees,
    Lay his old age upon the lap of ease,
    Improve the remnant of his wasted span,
    And having liv’d a trifler, die a man.”

It is under the peaceful shades of solitude that the mind regenerates
and acquires fresh force; it is there alone that the happy can enjoy the
fulness of felicity, or the miserable forget their wo; it is there that
the bosom of sensibility experiences its most delicious emotions; it is
there that creative genius frees itself from the thraldom of society,
and surrenders itself to the impetuous rays of an ardent imagination. To
this desired goal all our ideas and desires perpetually tend. “There
is,” says Dr. Johnson, “scarcely any writer, who has not celebrated the
happiness of rural privacy, and delighted himself and his readers with
the melody of birds, the whisper of groves, and the murmurs of rivulets;
nor any man eminent for extent of capacity, or greatness of exploits,
that has not left behind him some memorials of lonely wisdom and silent
dignity.”

The original work from which the following pages are selected, consists
of four large volumes, which have acquired the universal approbation of
the German empire, and obtained the suffrages of an empress celebrated
for the superior brilliancy of her mind, and who has signified her
approbation in the most flattering manner.

On the 26th of January, 1785, a courier, dispatched by the Russian envoy
at Hamburg, presented M. Zimmerman with a small casket, in the name of
her majesty the empress of Russia. The casket contained a ring set round
with diamonds of an extraordinary size and lustre; and a gold medal
bearing on one side the portrait of the empress, and on the other the
date of the happy reformation of the Russian empire. This present the
empress accompanied with a letter, written with her own hand, containing
these remarkable words:--“To M. Zimmerman, counsellor of state, and
physician to his Britannic majesty, to thank him for the excellent
precepts he has given to mankind in his treatise upon solitude.”




LIFE OF ZIMMERMAN.


John George Zimmerman was born on the 8th day of December, 1728, at
Brugg, a small town in the canton of Berne.

His father, John Zimmerman, was eminently distinguished as an able and
eloquent member of the provincial council. His mother, who was equally
respected and beloved for her good sense, easy manners, and modest
virtues, was the daughter of the celebrated Pache, whose extraordinary
learning and great abilities, had contributed to advance him to a seat in
the parliament of Paris.

The father of Zimmerman undertook the arduous task of superintending his
education, and, by the assistance of able preceptors, instructed him in
the rudiments of all the useful and ornamental sciences, until he had
attained the age of fourteen years, when he sent him to the university of
Berne, where, under Kirchberger, the historian and professor of rhetoric,
and Altman, the celebrated Greek professor, he studied, for three
years, philology and the belles lettres, with unremitting assiduity and
attention.

Having passed nearly five years at the university, he began to think
of applying the stores of information he had acquired to the purposes
of active life; and after mentioning the subject cursorily to a few
relations, he immediately resolved to follow the practice of physic. The
extraordinary fame of Haller, who had recently been promoted by king
George II. to a professorship in the university of Gottingen, resounded
at this time throughout Europe: and Zimmerman determined to prosecute
his studies in physic under the auspices of this great and celebrated
master. He was admitted into the university on the 12th of September,
1747, and obtained his degree on the 14th of August, 1751. To relax his
mind from severer studies, he cultivated a complete knowledge of the
English language, and became so great a proficient in the polite and
elegant literature of this country, that the British poets, particularly
Shakspeare, Pope, and Thomson, were as familiar to him as his favorite
authors, Homer and Virgil. Every moment, in short, of the four years he
passed at Gottingen, was employed in the improvement of his mind; and so
early as the year 1751, he produced a work in which he discovered the
dawnings of that extraordinary genius which afterwards spread abroad with
so much effulgence.[1]

During the early part of his residence at Berne, he published many
excellent essays on various subjects in the Helvetic Journal;
particularly a work on the talents and erudition of Haller. This grateful
tribute, to the just merits of his friend and benefactor, he afterwards
enlarged into a complete history of his life and writings, as a scholar,
a philosopher, a physician, and a man.

The health of Haller, which had suffered greatly by the severity of
study, seemed to decline in proportion as his fame increased; and,
obtaining permission to leave Gottingen, he repaired to Berne, to try,
by the advice and assistance of Zimmerman, to restore, if possible, his
decayed constitution. The benefits he experienced in a short time were so
great, that he determined to relinquish his professorship, and to pass
the remainder of his days in that city. In the family of Haller, lived
a young lady, nearly related to him, whose maiden name was Mely, and
whose husband, M. Stek, had been sometime dead. Zimmerman became deeply
enamored of her charms: he offered her his hand in marriage; and they
were united at the altar in the bands of mutual affection.

Soon after his union with this amiable woman, the situation of physician
to the town of Brugg became vacant, which he was invited by the
inhabitants to fill; and he accordingly relinquished the pleasures and
advantages he enjoyed at Berne and returned to the place of his nativity,
with a view to settle himself there for life. His time, however, was not
so entirely engrossed by the duties of his profession, as to prevent him
from indulging his mind in the pursuits of literature; and he read almost
every work of reputed merit, whether of physic, or moral philosophy,
belles lettres, history, voyages, or even novels and romances, which the
various presses of Europe from time to time produced. The novels and
romances of England, in particular, gave him great delight.

But the amusements which Brugg afforded were extremely confined: and he
fell into a state of nervous langor, or rather into a peevish dejection
of spirits, neglecting society, and devoting himself almost entirely to a
retired and sedentary life.

Under these circumstances, this excellent and able man passed fourteen
years of an uneasy life; but neither his increasing practice, the
success of his literary pursuits,[2] the exhortations of his friends,
nor the endeavors of his family, were able to remove the melancholy and
discontent that preyed continually on his mind. After some fruitless
efforts to please him, he was in the beginning of April, 1768, appointed
by the interest of Dr. Tissot, and baron Hockstettin, to the post of
principal physician to the king of Great Britain, at Hanover; and he
departed from Brugg, to take possession of his new office, on the 4th of
July, in the same year. Here he was plunged into the deepest affliction
by the loss of his amiable wife, who after many years of lingering
sufferance, and pious resignation, expired in his arms, on the 23d of
June, 1770; an event which he has described in the following work,
with eloquent tenderness and sensibility. His children too, were to
him additional causes of the keenest anguish and the deepest distress.
His daughter had from her earliest infancy, discovered symptoms of
consumption, so strong and inveterate as to defy all the powers of
medicine, and which, in the summer of 1781, destroyed her life. The
character of this amiable girl, and the feelings of her afflicted father
on this melancholy event, his own pen has very affectingly described in
the following work.

But the state and condition of his son was still more distressing to his
feelings than even the death of his beloved daughter. This unhappy youth,
who, while he was at the university, discovered the finest fancy and the
soundest understanding, either from a malignant and inveterate species of
scrofula, with which he had been periodically tortured from his earliest
infancy, or from too close an application to study, fell very early in
life into a state of bodily infirmity and mental langor, which terminated
in the month of December, 1777, in a total derangement of his faculties;
and he has now continued, in spite of every endeavor to restore him, a
perfect idiot for more than twenty years.

The domestic comforts of Zimmerman were now almost entirely destroyed;
till at length, he fixed upon the daughter of M. Berger, the king’s
physician at Lunenbourg, and niece to baron de Berger, as a person in
every respect qualified to make him happy, and they were united to each
other in marriage about the beginning of October, 1782. Zimmerman was
nearly thirty years older than his bride: but genius and good sense are
always young: and the similarity of their characters obliterated all
recollection of disparity of age.

It was at this period that he composed his great and favorite work on
solitude, thirty years after the publication of his first essay on the
subject. It consists of four volumes in quarto: the two first of which
were published in 1784; and the remaining volumes in 1786. “A work,”
says Tissot, “which will always be read with as much profit as pleasure,
as it contains the most sublime conceptions, the greatest sagacity of
observation, and extreme propriety of application, much ability in the
choice of examples, and (what I cannot commend too highly, because I can
say nothing that does him so much honor, nor give him any praise that
would be more gratifying to his own heart) a constant anxiety for the
interest of religion, with the sacred and solemn truths of which his mind
was most devoutly impressed.”

The king of Prussia, while he was reviewing his troops in Silesia, in the
autumn of the year 1785, caught a severe cold, which settled on his lungs
and in the course of nine months brought on symptoms of an approaching
dropsy. Zimmerman, by two very flattering letters of the 6th and 16th of
June, 1786, was solicited by his majesty to attend him, and he arrived at
Potzdam on the 23d of the same month; but he immediately discovered that
his royal patient had but little hopes of recovery; and, after trying
the effect of such medicines as he thought most likely to afford relief,
he returned to Hanover on the 11th of July following.[3] But it was not
Frederick alone who discovered his abilities. When in the year 1788, the
melancholy state of the king of England’s health alarmed the affection of
his subjects, and produced an anxiety throughout Europe for his recovery,
the government of Hanover dispatched Zimmerman to Holland, that he might
be nearer London, in case his presence there became necessary; and he
continued at the Hague until all danger was over.

Zimmerman was the first who had the courage to unveil the dangerous
principles of the new philosophers, and to exhibit to the eyes of the
German princes the risk they ran in neglecting to oppose the progress of
so formidable a league. He convinced many of them, and particularly the
emperor Leopold II. that the views of these _illuminated_ conspirators
were the destruction of Christianity, and the subversion of all regular
government. These exertions, while they contributed to lessen the danger
which threatened his adopted country, greatly impaired his health.

In the month of November, 1794, he was obliged to have recourse to
strong opiates to procure even a short repose: his appetite decreased;
his strength failed him; and he became so weak and emaciated, that,
in January 1795, he was induced to visit a few particular patients in
his carriage, it was painful to him to write a prescription, and he
frequently fainted while ascending to the room. These symptoms were
followed by a dizziness in his head, which obliged him to relinquish
all business. At length the axis of his brain gave way, and reduced him
to such a state of mental imbecility, that he was haunted continually
by an idea that the enemy was plundering his house, and that he and
his family were reduced to a state of misery and want. His medical
friends, particularly Dr. Wichman, by whom he was constantly attended,
contributed their advice and assistance to restore him to health; and
conceiving that a journey and a change of air were the best remedies
that could be applied, they sent him to Eutin, in the duchy of Holstein,
where he continued three months, and about the month of June, 1795,
returned to Hanover greatly recovered. But the fatal dart had infixed
itself too deeply to be entirely removed; he soon afterwards relapsed
into his former imbecility, and barely existed in lingering sufferance
for many months, refusing to take any medicines, and scarcely any food;
continually harassed and distressed by the cruel allusion of poverty,
which again haunted his imagination. At certain intervals his mind
seemed to recover only for the purpose of rendering him sensible of his
approaching dissolution; for he frequently said to his physicians, “My
death I perceive will be slow and painful;” and, about fourteen hours
before he died, he exclaimed, “Leave me to myself; I am dying.” At
length his emaciated body and exhausted mind sunk beneath the burden of
mortality, and he expired without a groan, on the 7th October, 1795, aged
66 years and ten months.




SOLITUDE; OR THE INFLUENCE OF OCCASIONAL RETIREMENT UPON THE MIND AND
HEART.




CHAPTER I.

_Introduction._


Solitude is that intellectual state in which the mind voluntarily
surrenders itself to its own reflections. The philosopher, therefore, who
withdraws his attention from every external object to the contemplation
of his own ideas, is not less solitary than he who abandons society, and
resigns himself entirely to the calm enjoyments of lonely life.

The word “solitude” does not necessarily import a total retreat from the
world and its concerns: the dome of domestic society, a rural village,
or the library of a learned friend, may respectively become the seat
of solitude, as well as the silent shade of some sequestered spot far
removed from all connection with mankind.

A person may be frequently solitary without being alone. The haughty
baron, proud of his illustrious descent, is solitary unless he is
surrounded by his equals: a profound reasoner is solitary at the tables
of the witty and the gay. The mind may be as abstracted amidst a numerous
assembly; as much withdrawn from every surrounding object; as retired
and concentrated in itself; as solitary, in short, as a monk in his
cloister, or a hermit in his cave. Solitude, indeed, may exist amidst the
tumultuous intercourse of an agitated city as well as in the peaceful
shades of rural retirement; at London and at Paris, as well as on the
plains of Thebes and the deserts of Nitria.

The mind, when withdrawn from external objects, adopts, freely and
extensively, the dictates of its own ideas, and implicitly follows
the taste, the temperament, the inclination, and the genius, of its
possessor. Sauntering through the cloisters of the Magdalen convent at
Hidelshiem, I could not observe, without a smile, an aviary of canary
birds, which had been bred in the cell of a female devotee. A gentleman
of Brabant, lived five-and-twenty years without ever going out of his
house, entertaining himself during that long period with forming a
magnificent cabinet of pictures and paintings. Even unfortunate captives,
who are doomed to perpetual imprisonment, may soften the rigors of their
fate, by resigning themselves, as far as their situation will permit, to
the ruling passion of their souls. Michael Ducret, the Swiss philosopher,
while he was confined in the castle of Aarburg, in the canton of Berne,
in Swisserland, measured the height of the Alps: and while the mind of
baron Trenck, during his imprisonment at Magdebourg, was with incessant
anxiety, fabricating projects to effect his escape, general Walrave,
the companion of his captivity, contentedly passed his time in feeding
chickens.

The human mind, in proportion as it is deprived of external resources,
sedulously labors to find within itself the means of happiness, learns
to rely with confidence on its own exertions, and gains with greater
certainty the power of being happy.

A work, therefore, on the subject of solitude, appeared to me likely to
facilitate man in his search after true felicity.

Unworthy, however, as the dissipation and pleasures of the world appear
to me to be, of the avidity with which they are pursued, I equally
disapprove of the extravagant system which inculcates a total dereliction
of society; which will be found, when seriously examined, to be equally
romantic and impracticable. To be able to live independent of all
assistance, except from our own power, is, I acknowledge, a noble effort
of the human mind; but it is equally great and dignified to learn the art
of enjoying the comforts of society with happiness to ourselves, and with
utility to others.

While, therefore, I exhort my readers to listen to the advantages of
_occasional retirement_, I warn them against that dangerous excess into
which some of the disciples of this philosophy have fallen; an excess
equally repugnant to reason and religion. May I happily steer through
all the dangers with which my subject is surrounded; sacrifice nothing
to prejudice; offer no violation to truth; and gain the approbation
of the judicious and reflecting! If affliction shall feel one ray of
comfort, or melancholy, released from a portion of its horrors, raise its
down cast head; if I shall convince the lover of rural life, that all
the finer springs of pleasure dry up and decay in the intense joys of
crowded cities, and that the warmest emotions of the heart become there
cold and torpid; if I shall evince the superior pleasures of the country;
how many resources rural life affords against the langors of indolence;
what purity of sentiment, what peaceful repose, what exalted happiness,
is inspired by verdant meads, and the view of lively flocks quitting
their rich pastures to seek, with the declining sun, their evening
folds: how highly the romantic scenery of a wild and striking country,
interspersed with cottages, the habitations of a happy, free, contented
race of men, elevates the soul; how far more interesting to the heart are
the joyful occupations of rural industry, than the dull and tasteless
entertainments of a dissipated city; how much more easily, in short, the
most excruciating sorrows are pleasingly subdued on the fragrant border
of a peaceful stream, than in the midst of those treacherous delights
which occupy the courts of kings--all my wishes will be accomplished, and
my happiness complete.

Retirement from the world may prove peculiarly beneficial at two periods
of life: in youth, to acquire the rudiments of useful information, to lay
the foundation of the character intended to be pursued, and to obtain
that train of thought which is to guide us through life; in age, to
cast a retrospective view on the course we have run; to reflect on the
events we have observed, the vicissitudes we have experienced: to enjoy
the flowers we have gathered on the way, and to congratulate ourselves
upon the tempests we have survived. Lord Bolingbroke, in his “Idea of a
Patriot King,” says, there is not a more profound nor a finer observation
in all lord Bacon’s works, than the following: “We must choose betimes
such virtuous objects as are proportioned to the means we have of
pursuing them, and belong particularly to the stations we are in, and the
duties of those stations. We must determine and fix our minds in such
manner upon them, that the pursuit of them may become the business, and
the attainment of them the end of our whole lives. Thus we shall imitate
the great operations of nature, and not the feeble, slow, and imperfect
operations of art. We must not proceed in forming the moral character, as
a statuary proceeds in forming a statue, who works sometimes on the face,
sometimes on one part, and sometimes on an other; but we must proceed,
and it is in our power to proceed, as nature does in forming a flower, or
any other of her productions; _rudimenta partium omnium simul parit et
producit_: she throws out altogether, and at once, the whole system of
every being, and the rudiments of all the parts.”

It is, therefore, more especially to those youthful minds, who still
remain susceptible of virtuous impressions, that I here pretend to point
out the path which leads to true felicity. And if you acknowledge that
I have enlightened your mind, corrected your manners, and tranquillized
your heart, I shall congratulate myself on the success of my design, and
think my labors richly rewarded.

Believe me, all ye amiable youths, from whose minds the artifices
and gayeties of the world have not yet obliterated the precepts of a
virtuous education; who are yet uninfected with its inglorious vanities;
who, still ignorant of the tricks and blandishments of seduction, have
preserved the desire to perform some glorious action, and retained the
power to accomplish it; who, in the midst of feasting, dancing, and
assemblies, feel an inclination to escape from their unsatisfactory
delights; solitude will afford you a safe asylum. Let the voice of
experience recommend you to cultivate a fondness for domestic pleasures,
to incite and fortify your souls to noble deeds, to acquire that cool
judgment and intrepid spirit which enables you to form correct estimates
of the characters of mankind, and of the pleasures of society. But to
accomplish this high end, you must turn your eyes from those trifling and
insignificant examples which a degenerated race of men affords, and study
the illustrious characters of the ancient Greeks, the Romans, and the
Modern English. In what nation will you find more celebrated instances of
human greatness? What people possesses more valor, courage, firmness, and
knowledge; where do the arts and sciences shine with greater splendor, or
with more useful effect? But do not deceive yourselves by a belief that
you will acquire the character of an Englishman by wearing a cropped head
of hair; no, you must pluck the roots of vice from your mind, destroy
the seeds of weakness in your bosoms, and imitate the great examples of
heroic virtue which that nation so frequently affords. It is an ardent
love of liberty, undaunted courage, deep penetration, elevated sentiment,
and well cultivated understanding, that constitute the British character;
and not their cropped heads, half-boots, and round hats. It is virtue
alone, and not dress or titles, that can ennoble or adorn the human
character. Dress is an object too minute and trifling wholly to occupy
a rational mind; and an illustrious descent is only advantageous as it
renders the real merits of its immediate possessor more conspicuous.
Never, however, lose sight of this important truth, that _no one can be
truly great until he has gained a knowledge of himself_: a knowledge
which can only be acquired by _occasional retirement_.




