IV


IDEAL GENESIS AND DISSOLUTION OF THE 'PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY'



I


The conception of the so-called 'philosophy of history' is perpetually
opposed to and resisted by the deterministic conception of history. Not
only is this clearly to be seen from inspection, but it is also quite
evident logically, because the 'philosophy of history' represents the
transcendental conception of the real, determinism the immanent.

But on examining the facts it is not less certain that historical
determinism perpetually generates the 'philosophy of history'; nor
is this fact less evidently logical than the preceding, because
determinism is naturalism, and therefore immanent, certainly, but
insufficiently and falsely immanent. Hence it should rather be
said that it wishes to be, but is not, immanent, and whatever its
efforts may be in the contrary direction, it becomes converted into
transcendency. All this does not present any difficulty to one who
has clearly in mind the conceptions of the transcendent and of the
immanent, of the philosophy of history as transcendency and of the
deterministic or naturalistic conception of history as a false
immanence. But it will be of use to see in more detail how this process
of agreements and oppositions is developed and solved with reference to
the problem of history.

"First collect the facts, then connect them causally"; this is the way
that the work of the historian is represented in the deterministic
conception. _Après la collection des faits, la recherche des causes,_
to repeat the very common formula in the very words of one of the most
eloquent and picturesque theorists of that school, Taine. Facts are
brute, dense, real indeed, but not illumined with the light of science,
not intellectualized. This intelligible character must be conferred
upon them by means of the search for causes. But it is very well known
what happens when one fact is linked to another as its cause, forming a
chain of causes and effects: we thus inaugurate an infinite regression,
and we never succeed in finding the cause or causes to which we can
finally attach the chain that we have been so industriously putting
together.

Some, maybe many, of the theorists of history get out of the difficulty
in a truly simple manner: they break or let fall at a certain point
their chain, which is already broken at another point at the other
end (the effect which they have undertaken to consider). They operate
with their fragment of chain as though it were something perfect and
closed in itself, as though a straight line divided at two points
should include space and be a figure. Hence, too, the doctrine that we
find among the methodologists of history: that it is only necessary
for history to seek out 'proximate' causes. This doctrine is intended
to supply a logical foundation to the above process. But who can ever
say what are the 'proximate causes'? Thought, since it is admitted
that it is unfortunately obliged to think according to the chain of
causes, will never wish to know anything but 'true' causes, be they
near or distant in space and time (space, like time, _ne fait rien
à l'affaire_). In reality, this theory is a fig-leaf, placed there
to cover a proceeding of which the historian, who is a thinker and a
critic, is ashamed, an act of will which is useful, but which for that
very reason is wilful. The fig-leaf, however, is a sign of modesty, and
as such has its value, because, if shame be lost, there is a risk that
it will finally be declared that the 'causes' at which an arbitrary
halt has been made are the 'ultimate' causes, the 'true' causes, thus
raising the caprice of the individual to the rank of an act creative
of the world, treating it as though it were God, the God of certain
theologians, whose caprice is truth. I should not wish again to quote
Taine just after having said this, for he is a most estimable author,
not on account of his mental constitution, but of his enthusiastic
faith in science; yet it suits me to quote him nevertheless. Taine,
in his search for causes, having reached a cause which he sometimes
calls the 'race' and sometimes the 'age,' as for instance in his
history of English literature, when he reaches the concept of the
'man of the North' or 'German,' with the character and intellect that
would be suitable to such a person--coldness of the senses, love
of abstract ideas, grossness of taste, and contempt for order and
regularity--gravely affirms: _Là s'arrête la recherche: on est tombé
sur quelque disposition primitive, sur quelque trait propre à toutes
les sensations, à toutes les conceptions d'un siècle ou d'une race, sur
quelque particularité inséparable de toutes les démarches de son esprit
et de son cour. Ce sont là les grandes causes, les causes universelles
et permanentes._ What that primitive and insurmountable thing contained
was known to Taine's imagination, but criticism is ignorant of it; for
criticism demands that the genesis of the facts or groups of facts
designated as 'age' and 'race' should be given, and in demanding their
genesis declares that they are neither 'universal' nor 'permanent,'
because no universal and permanent 'facts' are known, as far as I
am aware, certainly not _le Germain_ and _l'homme du Nord_; nor are
mummies facts, though they last some thousands of years, but not for
ever--they change gradually, but they do change.

Thus whoever adopts the deterministic conception of history, provided
that he decides to abstain from cutting short the inquiry that he has
undertaken in an arbitrary and fanciful manner, is of necessity obliged
to recognize that the method adopted does not attain the desired end.
And since he has begun to think history, although by means of an
insufficient method, no course remains to him save that of beginning
all over again and following a different path, or that of going
forward but changing his direction. The naturalistic presupposition,
which still holds its ground ("first collect the facts, then seek
the causes": what is more evident and more unavoidable than that?),
necessarily leads to the second alternative. But to adopt the second
alternative is to supersede determinism, it is to transcend nature
and its causes, it is to propose a method opposite to that hitherto
followed--that is to say, to renounce the category of cause for
another, which cannot be anything but that of end, an extrinsic and
transcendental end, which is the analogous opposite, corresponding to
the cause. Now the search for the transcendental end is the 'philosophy
of history.'

The consequent naturalist (I mean by this he who 'continues to think,'
or, as is generally said, to draw the consequences) cannot avoid this
inquiry, nor does he ever avoid it, in whatever manner he conceive
his new inquiry. This he cannot even do, when he tries, by declaring
that the end or 'ultimate cause' is unknowable, because (as elsewhere
remarked) an unknowable affirmed is an unknowable in some way known.
Naturalism is always crowned with a philosophy of history, whatever
its mode of formulation: whether it explain the universe as composed
of atoms that strike one another and produce history by means of their
various shocks and gyrations, to which they can also put an end by
returning to their primitive state of dispersion, whether the hidden
God be termed Matter or the Unconscious or something else, or whether,
finally, He be conceived as an Intelligence which avails itself of
the chain of causes in order to actualize His counsels. And every
philosopher of history is on the other hand a naturalist, because he
is a dualist and conceives a God and a world, an idea and a fact in
addition to or beneath the Idea, a kingdom of ends and a kingdom or
sub-kingdom of causes, a celestial city and one that is more or less
diabolical or terrene. Take any deterministic historical work and you
will find or discover in it, explicit or understood, transcendency (in
Taine, for example, it goes by the name of 'race' or of '_siècle,_'
which are true and proper deities); take any work of 'philosophy of
history' and dualism and naturalism will be found there (in Hegel, for
example, when he admits rebellious and impotent facts which resist or
are unworthy the dominion of the idea). And we shall see more and more
clearly how from the entrails of naturalism comes inevitably forth the
'philosophy of history.'



II


But the 'philosophy of history' is just as contradictory as the
deterministic conception from which it arises and to which it is
opposed. Having both accepted and superseded the method of linking
brute facts together, it no longer finds facts to link (for these
have already been linked together, as well as might be, by means
of the category of cause), but brute facts, on which it must confer
rather a 'meaning' than a linking, representing them as aspects of a
transcendental process, a theophany. Now those facts, in so far as
they are brute facts, are mute, and the transcendency of the process
requires an organ, not that of thought that thinks or produces facts,
but an extra-logical organ, in order to be conceived and represented
(such, for example, as thought which proceeds abstractly _a priori,_
in the manner of Fichte), and this is not to be found in the spirit,
save as a negative moment, as the void of effective logical thought.
The void of logical thought is immediately filled with _praxis,_ or
what is called sentiment, which then appears as poetry, by theoretical
refraction. There is an evident poetical character running through all
'philosophies of history.' Those of antiquity represented historical
events as strife between the gods of certain peoples or of certain
races or protectors of certain individuals, or between the god of light
and truth and the powers of darkness and lies. They thus expressed the
aspirations of peoples, groups, or individuals toward hegemony, or of
man toward goodness and truth. The most modern of modern forms is that
inspired by various national and ethical feelings (the Italian, the
Germanic, the Slav, etc.), or which represents the course of history as
leading to the kingdom of liberty, or as the passage from the Eden of
primitive communism, through the Middle Ages of slavery, servitude, and
wages, toward the restoration of communism, which shall no longer be
unconscious but conscious, no longer Edenic but human. In poetry, facts
are no longer facts but words, not reality but images, and so there
would be no occasion to censure them, if it remained pure poetry.
But it does not so remain, because those images and words are placed
there as ideas and facts--that is to say, as myths: progress, liberty,
economy, technique, science are myths, in so far as they are looked
upon as agents external to the facts. They are myths no less than God
and the Devil, Mars and Venus, Jove and Baal, or any other cruder forms
of divinity. And this is the reason why the deterministic conception,
after it has produced the 'philosophy of history,' which opposes it,
is obliged to oppose its own daughter in its turn, and to appeal from
the realm of ends to that of causal connexions, from imagination to
observation, from myths to facts.

The reciprocal confutation of historical determinism and the philosophy
of history, which makes of each a void or a nothing--that is to say,
a single void or nothing--seems to the eclectics as usual to be the
reciprocal fulfilment of two entities, which effect or should effect
an alliance for mutual support. And since eclecticism flourishes in
contemporary philosophy, mutato nomine, it is not surprising that
besides the duty of investigating the causes to history also is
assigned that of ascertaining the 'meaning' or the 'general plan' of
the course of history (see the works on the philosophy of history of
Labriola, Simmel, and Rickert). Since, too, writers on method are
wont to be empirical and therefore eclectic, we find that with them
also history is divided into the history which unites and criticizes
documents and reconstructs events, and 'philosophy of history' (see
Bernheim's manual, typical of all of them). Finally, since ordinary
thought is eclectic, nothing is more easy than to find agreement as to
the thesis that simple history, which presents the series of facts,
does not suffice, but that it is necessary that thought should return
to the already constituted chain of events, in order to discover
there the hidden design and to answer the questions as to whence we
come and whither we go. This amounts to saying that a 'philosophy of
history' must be posited side by side with history. This eclecticism,
which gives substance to two opposite voids and makes them join
hands, sometimes attempts to surpass itself and to mingle those two
fallacious sciences or parts of science. Then we hear 'philosophy of
history' defended, but with the caution that it must be conducted with
'scientific' and 'positive' method, by means of the search for the
cause, thus revealing the action of divine reason or providence.[1]
Ordinary thought quickly consents to this programme, but afterward
fails to carry it out.[2]

There is nothing new here either for those who know: 'philosophy
of history' to be constructed by means of 'positive methods,'
transcendency to be demonstrated by means of the methods of false
immanence, is the exact equivalent in the field of historical studies
to that "metaphysic to be constructed by means of the experimental
method" which was recommended by the neocritics (Zeller and others),
for it claimed, not indeed to supersede two voids that reciprocally
confute one another, but to make them agree together, and, after
having given substance to them, to combine them in a single substance.
I should not like to describe the impossibilities contained in the
above as the prodigies of an alchemist (the metaphor seems to be too
lofty), but rather as the medleys of bad cooks.


[1] See, for example, the work of Flint; but since, less radical than
Flint, Hegel and the Hegelians themselves also ended in admitting the
concourse of the two opposed methods, traces of this perversion are
also to be found in their 'philosophies of history.' Here, too, is to
be noted the false analogy by which Hegel was led to discover the same
relation between a priori and historical facts as between mathematics
and natural facts: _Man muss mit dem Kreise dessen, worin die
Prinzipien fallen, wenn man es so nennen will, a priori vertraut sein,
so gut als Kepler mit den Ellipsen, mit Kuben und Quadraten und mit den
Gedanken von Verhältnissen derselben_ a priori _schon vorher bekannt
sein musste, ehe er aus den empirischen Daten seine unsterblichen
Gesetze, welche aus Bestimmungen jener Kreise von Vorstellungen
bestehen, erfinden konnte._ (_Cf. Vorles. üb. d. Philos, d. Gesch.,_
ed. Brunstäd, pp. 107-108.)

[2] Not even the above-mentioned Flint carried it out, for he lost
him-self in preliminaries of historical documentation and never
proceeded to the promised construction.



III


The true remedy for the contradictions of historical determinism and of
the 'philosophy of history' is quite other than this. To obtain it, we
must accept the result of the preceding confutation, which shows that
both are futile, and reject, as lacking thought, both the 'designs'
of the philosophy of history and the causal chains of determinism.
When these two shadows have been dispersed we shall find ourselves
at the starting-place: we are again face to face with disconnected
brute facts, with facts that are connected, but not understood, for
which determinism had tried to employ the cement of causality, the
'philosophy of history,' the magic wand of finality. What shall we
do with these facts? How shall we make them clear rather than dense
as they were, organic rather than inorganic, intelligible rather
than unintelligible? Truly, it seems difficult to do anything with
them, especially to effect their desired transformation. The spirit
is helpless before that which is, or is supposed to be, external to
it. And when facts are understood in that way we are apt to assume
again that attitude of contempt of the philosophers for history which
has been well-nigh constant since antiquity almost to the end of the
eighteenth century (for Aristotle history was "less philosophical" and
less serious than poetry, for Sextus Empiricus it was "unmethodical
material"; Kant did not feel or understand history). The attitude
amounts to this: leave ideas to the philosophers and brute facts to the
historians--let us be satisfied with serious things and leave their
toys to the children.

But before having recourse to such a temptation, it will be prudent
to ask counsel of methodical doubt (which is always most useful), and
to direct the attention precisely upon those brute and disconnected
facts from which the causal method claims to start and before which we,
who are now abandoned by it and by its complement, the philosophy of
history, appear to find ourselves again. Methodical doubt will suggest
above all things the thought that those facts are a _presupposition_
that has _not been proved_, and it will lead to the inquiry as to
_whether the proof can be obtained_. Having attempted the proof, we
shall finally arrive at the conclusion that _those facts really do not
exist._

For who, as a matter of fact, affirms their existence? Precisely the
spirit, at the moment when it is about to undertake the search for
causes. But when accomplishing that act the spirit does not already
possess the brute facts (_d'abord la collection des faits_) and then
seek the causes (_après, la recherche des causes_); but it makes
the _facts brute_ by that very act--that is to say, it posits them
itself in that way, because it is of use to it so to posit them.
The search for causes, undertaken by history, is not in any way
different from the procedure of naturalism, already several times
illustrated, which abstractly analyses and classifies reality. And
to illustrate abstractly and to classify implies at the same time to
judge in classifying--that is to say, to treat facts, not as acts of
the spirit, conscious in the spirit that thinks them, but as external
brute facts. The _Divine Comedy_ is that poem which we create again
in our imagination in all its particulars as we read it and which we
understand critically as a particular determination of the spirit,
and to which we therefore assign its place in history, with all its
surroundings and all its relations. But when this actuality of our
thought and imagination has come to an end--that is to say, when that
mental process is completed--we are able, by means of a new act of
the spirit, separately to analyse its elements. Thus, for instance,
we shall classify the concepts relating to 'Florentine civilization,'
or to 'political poetry,' and say that the _Divine Comedy_ was an
effect of Florentine civilization, and this in its turn an effect
of the strife of the communes, and the like. We shall also thus
have prepared the way for those absurd problems which used to annoy
de Sanctis so much in relation to the work of Dante, and which he
admirably described when he said that they arise only when lively
æsthetic expression has grown cold and poetical work has fallen into
the hands of dullards addicted to trifles. But if we stop in time and
do not enter the path of those absurdities, if we restrict ourselves
purely and simply to the naturalistic moment, to classification, and
to the classificatory judgment (which is also causal connexion), in an
altogether practical manner, without drawing any deductions from it, we
shall have done nothing that is not perfectly legitimate; indeed, we
shall be exercising our right and bowing to a rational necessity, which
is that of naturalizing, when naturalization is of use, but not beyond
those limits. Thus the materialization of the facts and the external
or causal binding of them together are altogether justified as pure
naturalism. And even the maxim which bids us to stop at 'proximate'
causes--that is to say, not to force classification so far that it
loses all practical utility--will find its justification. To place
the concept of the _Divine Comedy_ in relation to that of 'Florentine
civilization' may be of use, but it will be of no use whatever,
or infinitely less use, to place it in relation to the class of
'Indo-European civilization' or to the 'civilization of the white man.'



IV


Let us then return with greater confidence to the point of departure,
the true point of departure--that is to say, not to that of facts
already disorganized and naturalized, but to that of the mind
that thinks and constructs the fact. Let us raise up the debased
countenances of the calumniated 'brute facts,' and we shall see the
light of thought resplendent upon their foreheads. And that true point
of departure will reveal itself not merely as a point of departure, but
both as a point of arrival and of departure, not as the first step in
historical construction, but the whole of history in its construction,
which is also its self-construction. Historical determinism, and all
the more 'philosophy of history,' leave the _reality of history_ behind
them, though they directed their journey thither, a journey which
became so erratic and so full of useless repetitions.

We shall make the ingenuous Taine confess that what we are saying
is the truth when we ask him what he means by the _collection des
faits_ and learn from him in reply that the collection in question
consists of two stages or moments, in the first of which documents
are revived in order to attain, _à travers la distance des temps,
l'homme vivant, agissant, doué de passions, muni d'habitudes, avec
sa voix et sa physionomie, avec ses gestes et ses habits, distinct
et complet comme celui que tout à l'heure nous avons quitté dans la
rue;_ and in the second is sought and found _sous l'homme extérieur
l'homme intérieur, "l'homme invisible," "le centre," "le groupe des
facultés et des sentiments qui produit le reste," "le drame intérieur,"
"la psychologie."_ Something very different, then, from collections
de faits I If the things mentioned by our author really do come to
pass, if we really do make live again in imagination individuals and
events, and if we think what is within them--that is to say, if we
think the synthesis of intuition and concept, which is thought in its
concreteness--history is already achieved: what more is wanted? There
is nothing more to seek. Taine replies: "We must seek causes." That is
to say, we must slay the living 'fact' thought by thought, separate
its abstract elements--a useful thing, no doubt, but useful for memory
and practice. Or, as is the custom of Taine, we must misunderstand and
exaggerate the value of the function of this abstract analysis, to lose
ourselves in the mythology of races and ages, or in other different but
none the less similar things. Let us beware how we slay poor facts, if
we wish to think as historians, and in so far as we are such and really
think in that way we shall not feel the necessity for having recourse
either to the extrinsic bond of causes, historical determinism, or to
that which is equally extrinsic of transcendental ends, philosophy of
history. The fact historically thought has no cause and no end outside
itself, but only in itself, coincident with its real qualities and with
its qualitative reality. Because (it is well to note in passing) the
determination of facts as real facts indeed, but of _unknown nature_,
asserted but not understood, is itself also an illusion of naturalism
(which thus heralds its other illusion, that of the 'philosophy of
history'). In thought, reality and quality, existence and essence, are
all one, and it is not possible to affirm a fact as real without at the
same time knowing what fact it is--that is, without qualifying it.

Returning to and remaining in or moving in the concrete fact, or,
rather, making of oneself thought that thinks the fact concretely, we
experience the continual formation and the continual progress of our
historical thought and also make clear to ourselves the history of
historiography, which proceeds in the same manner. And we see how (I
limit myself to this, in order not to allow the eye to wander too far)
from the days of the Greeks to our own historical understanding has
always been enriching and deepening itself, not because abstract causes
and transcendental ends of human things have ever been recovered,
but only because an ever increasing consciousness of them has been
acquired. Politics and morality, religion and philosophy and art,
science and culture and economy, have become more complex concepts and
at the same time better determined and unified both in themselves and
with respect to the whole. Correlatively with this, the histories of
these forms of activity have become ever more complex and more firmly
united. We know 'the causes' of civilization as little as did the
Greeks; and we know as little as they of the god or gods who control
the fortunes of humanity. But we know the theory of civilization better
than did the Greeks, and, for instance, we know (as they did not know,
or did not know with equal clearness and security) that poetry is an
eternal form of the theoretic spirit, that regression or decadence is a
relative concept, that the world is not divided into ideas and shadows
of ideas, or into potencies and acts, that slavery is not a category
of the real, but a historical form of economic, and so forth. Thus it
no longer occurs to anyone (save to the survivals or fossils, still to
be found among us) to write the history of poetry on the principle of
the pedagogic ends that the poets are supposed to have had in view:
on the contrary, we strive to determine the forms expressive of their
sentiments. We are not at all bewildered when we find ourselves before
what are called 'decadences,' but we seek out what new and greater
thing was being developed by means of their dialectic. We do not
consider the work of man to be miserable and illusory, and aspiration
and admiration for the skies and for the ascesis joined thereunto
and averse to earth as alone worthy of admiration and imitation. We
recognize the reality of power in the act, and in the shadows the
solidity of the ideas, and on earth heaven. Finally, we do not find
that the possibility of social life is lost owing to the disappearance
of the system of slavery. Such a disappearance would have been the
catastrophe of reality, if slaves were natural to reality--and so forth.

This conception of history and the consideration of historiographical
work in itself make it possible for us to be just toward historical
determinism and to the 'philosophy of history,' which, by their
continual reappearance, have continually pointed to the gaps in our
knowledge, both historical and philosophical, and with their false
provisional solutions have heralded the correct solutions of the new
problems which we have been propounding. Nor has it been said that
they will henceforth cease to exercise such a function (which is the
beneficial function of Utopias of every sort). And although historical
determinism and the 'philosophy of history' have no history, because
they do not develop, they yet receive a content from the relation in
which they stand to history, which does develop--that is to say,
history develops in them, notwithstanding their covering, extrinsic
to their content, which compels to think even him who proposes to
schematize and to imagine without thinking. For there is a great
difference between the determinism that can now appear, after Descartes
and Vico and Kant and Hegel, and that which appeared after Aristotle;
between the philosophy of history of Hegel and Marx and that of
gnosticism and Christianity. Transcendency and false immanency are at
work in both these conceptions respectively; but the abstract forms
and mythologies that have appeared in more mature epochs of thought
contain this new maturity in themselves. In proof of this, let us
pause but a moment (passing by the various forms of naturalism) at
the case of the 'philosophy of history.' We observe already a great
difference between the philosophy of history, as it appears in the
Homeric world, and that of Herodotus, with whom the conception of the
anger of the gods is a simulacrum of the moral law, which spares the
humble and treads the proud underfoot; from Herodotus to the Fate of
the Stoics, a law to which the gods themselves are subjected, and from
this to the conception of Providence, which appears in late antiquity
as wisdom that rules the world; from this pagan providence again to
Christianity, which is divine justice, evangelical preparation, and
educative care of the human race, and so on, to the refined providence
of the theologians, which as a rule excludes divine intervention
and operates by means of secondary causes, to that of Vico, which
operates as dialectic of the spirit, to the Idea of Hegel, which is the
gradual conquest of the consciousness of self, which liberty achieves
during the course of history, till we finally reach the mythology of
progress and of civilization, which still persists and is supposed to
tend toward the final abolition of prejudices and superstitions, to
be carried out by means of the increasing power and divulgation of
positive science.

In this way the 'philosophy of history' and historical determinism
sometimes attain to the thinness and transparency of a veil, which
covers and at the same time reveals the concreteness of the real in
thought. Mechanical causes thus appear idealized, transcendent deities
humanized, and facts are in great part divested of their brutal aspect.
But however thin the veil may be, it remains a veil, and however
clear the truth may be, it is not altogether clear, for at bottom
the false persuasion still persists that history is constructed with
the 'material' of brute facts, with the 'cement' of causes, and with
the 'magic' of ends, as with three successive or concurrent methods.
The same thing occurs with religion, which in lofty minds liberates
itself almost altogether from vulgar beliefs, as do its ethics from the
heteronomy of the divine command and from the utilitarianism of rewards
and punishments. Almost altogether, but not altogether, and for this
reason religion will never be philosophy, save by negating itself, and
thus the 'philosophy of history' and historical determinism will become
history only by negating themselves. The reason is that as long as they
proceed in a positive manner dualism will also persist, and with it the
torment of scepticism and agnosticism as a consequence.

The negation of the philosophy of history, in history understood
concretely, is its ideal dissolution, and since that so-called
philosophy is nothing but an abstract and negative moment, our reason
for affirming that _the philosophy of history_ is dead is clear. It
is dead in its positivity, dead as a body of doctrine, dead in this
way, with all the other conceptions and forms of the transcendental.
I do not wish to attach to my brief (but in my opinion sufficient)
treatment of the argument the addition of an explanation which to some
will appear to be (as it appears to me) but little philosophical and
even somewhat trivial. Notwithstanding, since I prefer the accusation
of semi-triviality to that of equivocation, I shall add that since the
criticism of the 'concepts' of cause and transcendental finality does
not forbid the use of these 'words,' when they are simple words (to
talk, for example, in an imaginative way of liberty as of a goddess, or
to say, when about to undertake a study of Dante, that our intention is
to 'seek the cause' or 'causes' of this or that work or act of his),
so nothing forbids our continuing to talk of 'philosophy of history'
and of philosophizing history, meaning the necessity of treating or of
a better treatment of this or that historical problem. Neither does
anything forbid our calling the researches of historical gnoseology
'philosophy of history,' although in this case we are treating the
history, not properly of _history_, but of _historiography_, two things
which are wont to be designated with the same word in Italian as in
other languages. Neither do we wish to prevent the statement (as did a
German professor years ago) that the 'philosophy of history' must be
treated as 'sociology'--that is to say, the adornment with that ancient
title of so-called sociology, the empirical science of the state, of
society and of culture.

These denominations are all permissible in virtue of the same right
as that invoked by the adventurer Casanova when he went before the
magistrates in order to justify himself for having changed his
name--"the right of every man to the letters of the alphabet." But the
question treated above is not one of the letters of the alphabet. The
'philosophy of history,' of which we have briefly shown the genesis and
the dissolution, is not one that is used in various senses, but a most
definite mode of conceiving history--the transcendental mode.




