Part I.

The Visible and Invisible Worlds, The Four Kingdoms, Man and the Method
of Evolution. Spirit, Soul and Body; Thought, Memory and Soul-growth.
The conscious, subconscious and superconscious mind. The science of
death, the beneficence of purgatory, life in heaven. Rebirth and the
Law of Consequence.

Part II.

The Scheme of Evolution. The Path of Evolution. The Work of Evolution.
Genesis and Evolution of Our Solar System. Chaos the seed-ground of
Cosmos, Birth of the Planets, Planetary Spirits. Evolution of the
Earth. The Moon, the eighth sphere—retrogression. Occult Analysis of
Genesis. The Nebular Theory.

Part III.

Christ and His Mission. The Star of Bethlehem, the Mystery of Golgotha
and the cleansing blood. Future Development and Initiation. Alchemy
and Soul-growth. The Method of Acquiring First-hand Knowledge. Western
Methods for Western People. Esoteric Training. Christian Rosenkreuz and
the Order of Rosicrucians. The Rosicrucian Initiation.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

The Rosicrucian Philosophy

IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Price $2.00, Postfree.


A book of ready reference upon all mystic matters, which ought to
be in the library of every occult student. It covers 432 pages; has
a considerable number of illuminating diagrams, is printed on fine
paper in clear type, reinforced binding of cloth with the beautiful
Rosicrucian Symbols stamped upon the cover in red, black and gold; and
the three edges are also gold.


_PARTIAL LIST OF SUBJECTS_

 _Section I._—_Life on Earth._ Social Conditions, Marriage, Children,
 Sleep and Dreams, Health and Disease

 _Section II._—_Life After Death._ Cremation. Purgatory, The First
 Heaven, The Second Heaven, The Third Heaven, Guardian Angels.

 _Section III._—_Rebirth._ The Law of Rebirth, The Law of Causation,
 Transmigration.

 _Section IV._—_The Bible Teachings._ The Creation, The Fall, The
 Immaculate Conception, Sayings of Christ.

 _Section V._—_Spiritualistic Phenomena._ Mediumship, Obsession,
 Materialization.

 _Section VI._—_Clairvoyance._ Dangers of Psychism, True Spiritual
 Unfoldment, Initiation.

 _Section VIII._—_Animals_. Their Life Here and Hereafter.

It is truly _AN OCCULT INFORMATION BUREAU_!

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

How Shall We Know Christ When he Comes?

By Max Heindel

15c Postfree.


The title indicates sufficiently the scope of the book.

It is direct and to _the point_ like all the writings of this author.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

The Rosicrucian Mysteries

_AN ELEMENTARY EXPOSITION_

BY MAX HEINDEL

  200 pp. cloth.       $1.50 postfree.

This is the Book for the Busy Man

who is seeking a solution to the Great Mystery called Life, but lacks
leisure to wade through volumes of metaphysical speculations. The lucid
and logical explanations carry conviction—they bear

_THE STAMP OF TRUTH_

Nevertheless, the language is so simple, clear and devoid of
technicalities that _a child can understand_ its message. It is
therefore specially suited to beginners, but advanced students will find

  _THE MYSTERY OF LIGHT
  COLOR AND CONSCIOUSNESS_,
  and similar subjects of vital interest.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Christ or Buddha?

Annet C. Rich.

Foreword by Max Heindel.

30c. Postfree.


The idea that India is the main repository of occult knowledge is held
by many who have forsaken the Christian Religion to embrace Hinduism.
“Christ or Buddha?” shows most clearly that

_THE WESTERN WISDOM TEACHINGS_

throw a light upon the problems of life which is much more intense,
far-reaching and soul satisfying in every respect than that of the
Eastern teachings. A partial list of contents will indicate its scope.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Freemasonry and Catholicism

By MAX HEINDEL

_An Esoteric Exposition of the Cosmic Facts underlying these two Great
Institutions, as determined by Occult Investigation_


Describes the influence of each of these institutions upon the
evolution of mankind and the ultimate destiny of each.

The building of King Solomon’s Temple has always remained a theme of
great interest; but add to this the story of the Queen of Sheba and the
real builder of the Temple, Hiram Abiff, so seldom read of in current
literature, and truly one is confronted by a story of exquisite and
transcendent interest.

To have read this book is to have delved deep into the past and to have
gained a glimpse into the mysteries that have puzzled philosophers in
ages gone by. Only a Mystic and a trained Seer who has the divine gift
of reading the Akashic Records of the past could give such a lucid
description of this great subject.


_THIS BOOK SHOULD BE IN EVERY MASON’S LIBRARY_


  Bound in cloth.      98 pages.      Price $1.00

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

The Web of Destiny

HOW MADE AND UNMADE

INCLUDING

The Occult Effect of our Emotions

Prayer—A Magic Invocation

Practical Methods of Achieving Success

By Max Heindel


175 pp. Cloth Bound

Two Dollars Postfree


These four series of lessons in one volume are the collected fruits of
a Mystic’s investigations showing the unseen forces which shape our
destiny.

This valuable information is now given for the first time in book form.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Rosicrucian Interpretation of Christianity

ANCIENT TRUTHS IN MODERN DRESS

Price 10c Each, Postfree


  No. 1. The Riddle of Life and Death.
  No. 2. Where Are the Dead?
  No. 3. Spiritual Sight and the Spiritual Worlds.
  No. 4. Sleep, Dreams, Trance, Hypnotism, Mediumship and Insanity.
  No. 5. Death and Life in Purgatory.
  No. 6. Life and Activity in Heaven.
  No. 7. Birth a Fourfold Event.
  No. 8. The Science of Nutrition, Health and Protracted Youth.
  No. 9. The Astronomical Allegories of the Bible.
  No. 10. Astrology; Its Scope and Limitations.
  No. 11. Spiritual Sight and Insight.
  No. 12. Parsifal.
  No. 13. The Angels as Factors in Evolution.
  No. 14. Lucifer, Tempter or Benefactor?
  No. 15. The Mystery of Golgotha and the Cleansing Blood.
  No. 16. The Star of Bethlehem; A Mystic Fact.
  No. 17. The Mystery of the Holy Grail.
  No. 18. The Lord’s Prayer.
  No. 19. The Coming Force; Vril or What?
  No. 20. Fellowship and the Coming Race.

These lectures are particularly suitable for beginners. Read
consecutively, they give a comprehensive outline of our philosophy.

_THEY FIT THE POCKET_

and allow a busy man to utilize time on cars en route to or from
business.

_GIVE ONE TO A FRIEND_

It is an inexpensive and a helpful gift.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Mysteries of the Great Operas

BY MAX HEINDEL

Faust, Parsifal, The Ring of the Niebelung, Tannhauser, Lohengrin


The Secret Teachings concealed in the Great Myths as embodied in the
major operas are here interpreted. The Evolutionary Plan and Methods
of Spiritual Unfoldment are shown to lie hidden in the imagery of Folk
Tales. The treatment of this subject adapts the book to the use of the
musician and student of folklore as well as to the occultist.

  Bound in Cloth with the usual three colored
  gold covers used on all Rosicrucian
  Fellowship Books.
  $2.00 Postfree

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

In the Land of The Living Dead

AN OCCULT STORY

BY PRENTISS TUCKER


This is a fascinating story of a young mystic’s experiences during
the Great War, both upon the seen and the unseen planes. The
author possesses great aptitude for portraying conditions upon the
superphysical planes so that the layman can form a concrete conception
regarding them.

Published by The Rosicrucian Fellowship

  168 Pages      Cloth Bound      $1.50 postfree.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

The Message of the Stars

MAX AND AUGUSTA HEINDEL

  708 pp.      Cloth.      $3.50, Postpaid


This book gives a complete system of reading the horoscope for
character and the various fortunes of life. The progressed horoscope,
and the art of prediction are fully dealt with. An exposition of
Medical Astrology and a system of diagnosing disease from the
horoscope, used for many years by the authors in their extensive and
successful practice, are included, and also a number of articles on
the philosophy of Astrology. The subject of Medical Astrology is
illustrated by 36 example horoscopes.

A new index has been added to both Natal and Medical Astrology. This
will be invaluable to the student in quickly locating any desired
information in either department.

This book is the classic of modern Astrology. It is set in a most
attractive style, printed on fine paper, with durable binding, the
cover stamped in colors like other Rosicrucian textbooks.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Simplified Scientific Astrology

BY MAX HEINDEL

_Fourth Edition, Revised and Enlarged_

WITH MAX HEINDEL’S PORTRAIT

  198 pp.      Bound in Cloth.      $1.50 Postpaid.


A complete textbook on the art of erecting a horoscope, making the
process simple and easy for beginners. It also includes a

Philosophic Encyclopedia

—AND—

Tables of Planetary Hours

The Philosophic Encyclopedia fills a long felt want of both beginners
and advanced students for information concerning the underlying reasons
for astrological dicta. It is a mine of knowledge arranged in such a
manner as to be instantly accessible.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Simplified Scientific Ephemeris

_1860 TO DATE._ _PRICE_, 25c _EACH YEAR_

The increasing difficulty experienced by Astrologers in obtaining
Ephemerides has induced us to enter the field and produce

A Better Ephemeris

AT HALF THE PRICE USUALLY CHARGED BY OTHERS

The type is as large as used in this book, the print is clear and
beautiful. It will save eye strain.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

SIMPLIFIED

Scientific Tables of Houses

Latitudes 25 to 60 Degrees, Inclusive

  Volume 1.
  25-36 degrees

  Volume 2.
  37-48 degrees

  Volume 3.
  49-60 degrees


WITH LONGITUDES and LATITUDES

of about

FIFTEEN HUNDRED CITIES OF THE WORLD

50c each volume postpaid.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Earthbound

BY AUGUSTA FOSS HEINDEL


This is a new lecture in our Rosicrucian Christianity Series. It is
a very interesting description of the soul who is earthbound after
death, the conditions which surround him on the superphysical planes,
his activities there, and the causes which hold him in that state.
The dangers of the ouija board, as affording a field of operation for
earthbound spirits, are also described.

  13 Pages.      Paper Bound.      Price 10c.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

The Mystical Interpretation of Christmas

BY MAX HEINDEL


Five dissertations in one volume, upon this most interesting Subject of
CHRISTMAS from the Mystical Viewpoint, showing the occult significance
of this great event.

  Attractively Bound in Heavy Paper.      $1.00 postfree.

                      ――――――――――――――――――――――――――

Correspondence Courses

IN

CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM AND ASTROLOGY


_Christian Mysticism_: A correspondence course of twelve lessons upon
the _Rosicrucian Philosophy_, using the _Cosmo-Conception_ by Max
Heindel, as a textbook. This philosophy gives a logical analysis of the
origin, evolution, and future development of the world and man, showing
both the spiritual and scientific aspects. It is entirely Christian,
aiming to make religion a _living factor in the world_ and to lead to
Christ those who cannot reach Him by faith alone.

This course is open to all who are interested.


_Astrology_: We want to _help you to help others_, and for that reason
we have instituted a correspondence course in Astrology. Astrology is
to us a phase of religion, a Divine Science. We teach it to others on
condition that they will not prostitute it for gain.

_Anyone who is not engaged in fortune telling_ or similar methods of
commercializing spiritual knowledge may be admitted to this course.

  Address:—

  —SECRETARY—

  The Rosicrucian Fellowship, Oceanside, California.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation have been standardised but all other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged.

The entry “Catalogue of Publications” has been added to the Table of
Contents.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gleaning of a Mystic, by Max Heindel

