
                         Gleanings of a Mystic

                                  BY
                              MAX HEINDEL

                       [Illustration: Colophon]

                         A SERIES OF ESSAYS ON
                          PRACTICAL MYSTICISM


                             FIRST EDITION


                      THE ROSICRUCIAN FELLOWSHIP

                      International Headquarters
                             Mt. Ecclesia
                         Oceanside, California

                                London:
                 L. N. Fowler & Co., 7 Imperial Arcade
                            Ludgate Circus




                           COPYRIGHT, 1922.
                                  BY
                           MRS. MAX HEINDEL.


                           FELLOWSHIP PRESS
                           OCEANSIDE, CALIF.




Foreword


The contents of this book are among the last writings of Max Heindel,
the mystic. They contain some of his deepest thoughts, and are the
result of years of research and occult investigation. He, too, could
say as did Parsifal: “Through error and through suffering I came,
through many failures and through countless woes.” At last he was given
the living water with which he was able to quench the spiritual thirst
of many souls. He also developed to their depths pity and love, and
could feel the heart throbs of suffering humanity.

Strong souls are usually endowed with great energy and impulse, and
through these very forces, they forge to the front ranks though they
often suffer much. As a result they are filled with compassion for
others. The writer of these lessons sacrificed his physical body on the
altar of service.

In writing the books and monthly lessons of the Fellowship, in
his lectures and class work, and in the arduous pioneer work of
establishing Headquarters within the short span of ten years, Max
Heindel accomplished more than many who are blessed with perfect
health could have accomplished in a lifetime. His first book, his
masterpiece, “The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception,” was written under the
direct guidance of the Elder Brothers of the Rose Cross. It carries
a vital message to the world. It satisfies not alone the intellect,
but also the heart. His “Freemasonry and Catholicism,” has found its
way into many Masonic libraries. The occultist has received much from
the book entitled, “The Web of Destiny,” which is a mine of mystical
knowledge and helpful occult truths. It is also a guide to the
investigator, establishing danger signals for the venturesome ones who
wish to take heaven by storm. To the science of astrology he has given
more in a few years than has previously been discovered in centuries.
His two valuable works, “Simplified Scientific Astrology” and “The
Message of the Stars,” deal largely with the spiritual and medical
aspects of astrology. The latter gives methods of diagnosis and healing
which form a valuable addition to the works of other authors, both
ancient and modern. These books may be found in the libraries of many
doctors of the old school.

In “Gleanings of a Mystic” are found twenty-four lessons which were
formerly sent out to students. It is the wish of the writer of this
introduction that these lessons may carry a message of love and cheer
to the soul-hungry reader and hope to the disconsolate one.

  —_Augusta Foss Heindel._




Table of Contents


  Chapter I.

  Initiation: What It Is and Is Not—Part I.                            7


  Chapter II.

  Initiation: What It Is and Is Not—Part II.                          14


  Chapter III.

  The Sacrament of Communion—Part I.                                  21


  Chapter IV.

  The Sacrament of Communion—Part II.                                 28


  Chapter V.

  The Sacrament of Baptism.                                           37


  Chapter VI.

  The Sacrament of Marriage.                                          46


  Chapter VII.

  The Unpardonable Sin and Lost Souls.                                54


  Chapter VIII.

  The Immaculate Conception.                                          61


  Chapter IX.

  The Coming Christ.                                                  69


  Chapter X.

  The Coming Age.                                                     77


  Chapter XI.

  Meat and Drink as Factors in Evolution.                             85

  Chapter XII.

  A Living Sacrifice.                                                 94


  Chapter XIII.

  Magic, White and Black.                                            101


  Chapter XIV.

  Our Invisible Government.                                          108


  Chapter XV.

  Practical Precepts for Practical People.                           114


  Chapter XVI.

  Sound, Silence, and Soul Growth.                                   121


  Chapter XVII.

  The “Mysterium Magnum” of the Rose Cross.                          130


  Chapter XVIII.

  Stumbling Blocks.                                                  138


  Chapter XIX.

  The Lock of Upliftment.                                            147


  Chapter XX.

  The Cosmic Meaning of Easter—Part I.                               153


  Chapter XXI.

  The Cosmic Meaning of Easter—Part II.                              160


  Chapter XXII.

  The Newborn Christ.                                                167


  Chapter XXIII.

  Why I am a Rosicrucian.                                            173


  Chapter XXIV.

  The Object of the Rosicrucian Fellowship.                          180

  Catalogue of Publications.




Chapter I

INITIATION: WHAT IT IS AND IS NOT


PART I

It is no rare occurrence to receive questions relating to Initiation,
and we are also frequently asked to state whether this order or that
society is genuine, and whether the initiations they offer to all
comers who have the price are _bona fide_. For that reason it seems
necessary to write a treatise on the subject so that students of the
Rosicrucian Fellowship may have an official statement for reference and
guidance in the future.

In the first place let it be clearly understood that we consider it
reprehensible to express condemnation of any society or order, no
matter what its practices. It may be perfectly sincere and honest
_according to its light_. We do not believe that we rise in the opinion
of discriminating men and women by speaking in disparaging terms of
others; neither are we laboring under the delusion that _we_ have all
the truth and other societies are plunged in Egyptian darkness. We
reiterate what we have often said before, that all religions have
been given to mankind by the Recording Angels, who know the spiritual
requirements of each class, nation, and race, and have the intelligence
to give to each a form of worship perfectly suited to its particular
need; that thus Hinduism is suited to the Hindu, Mohammedanism to
the Arab, and the Christian religion to those born in the Western
Hemisphere.

The Mystery Schools of each religion furnish to the more advanced
members of the race or nation embracing it a higher teaching, which,
_if lived_, advances them into a higher sphere of spirituality than
their brethren. But as the religion of the backward races is of a lower
order than the religion of the pioneers, the Christian nations, so also
the _Mystery Teaching of the East is more elementary than that of the
West_, and the Hindu or Chinese Initiate is on a correspondingly lower
rung of the ladder of attainment than the Western Mystic. Please ponder
this well so that you may not fall a victim to misguided people who try
to persuade others that the Christian religion is crude compared with
oriental cults. Ever westward in the wake of the shining sun, the light
of the world, has gone the star of empire, and is it not reasonable to
suppose that the spiritual light has kept pace with civilization, or
even preceded it as thought precedes action? We hold that such is the
case, that the Christian religion is the loftiest yet given to man, and
that to repudiate the Christian religion, esoteric or exoteric, for any
of the older systems is analogous to preferring the older textbooks of
science to the newer ones which embrace discoveries to date.

Neither are the practices of Eastern aspirants to the higher life to
be imitated by Westerners; we refer particularly to the breathing
exercises. They are both beneficial and necessary to the unfoldment
of the Hindu, but it is otherwise with the Western aspirant. To him
it is dangerous to practice breathing exercises for soul unfoldment;
they will even prove subversive of soul growth, and they are, moreover,
absolutely unnecessary. The reason is this:

During involution the threefold spirit has become gradually incrusted
in a threefold body. In the Atlantean Epoch man was at the nadir of
materiality. We are just now rounding the lowest point on the arc of
involution, and starting upward on the arc of evolution. At this point,
then, all mankind is immured in this earthly prison house to such a
degree that spiritual vibrations are almost killed. This is, of course,
particularly true of the backward races and the lower classes in the
Western world. The atoms in such backward race bodies are vibrating at
an exceedingly low rate, and when in the course of time one of these
people develops to a point where it is possible to further him upon
the path of attainment, it is necessary to raise this vibratory pitch
of the atom so that the vital body, which is the medium of occult
growth, may to a certain extent be liberated from the deadening force
of the physical atom. This result is attained by means of breathing
exercises, which in time accelerate the vibration of the atom, and
allow the spiritual growth necessary to the individual to take place.

These exercises may also be used by a great number of people in
the Western world, particularly those who are not at all concerned
about their spiritual advancement. But even among those who desire
soul growth there are many who are not yet at the point where the
atoms of their bodies have evolved to such a pitch of vibration that
acceleration beyond the usual measure would injure them. Here the
breathing exercises would do no harm; but if given to a person who
is really at the point where he can enter the path of advancement
ordinarily mapped out for the Hindu’s precocious brothers and sisters
in the West, in other words, when he is nearly ready for Initiation and
when he would be benefited _by spiritual exercises_, then the case is
far otherwise.

During the aeons which we have spent in evolution since the time when
we were in Hindu bodies, our atoms have accelerated their vibratory
pitch enormously, and as said in the case of one who is really nearly
ready for Initiation, the pitch of vibration is higher than that of the
average man or woman. Therefore he does not need breathing exercises
to _accelerate_ this pitch, but certain spiritual exercises suited to
him individually which will advance him on the proper path. If such
a person at this critical period meets some one who ignorantly or
unscrupulously gives him breathing exercises, and if he follows the
instructions accurately in the hope of _getting quick results_, he
will get them quickly but in a manner he has not looked for, since
the vibratory rate of the atoms in his body will in a very short time
become accelerated to such a pitch that it will seem to him as if he
were walking on air; then also an improper cleavage of the vital body
may take place, and either consumption or insanity follows. Now please
put this down where it will burn itself into your consciousness in
letters of fire: _Initiation is a spiritual process, and spiritual
progress cannot be accomplished by physical means, but only by
spiritual exercises._

There are many orders in the West which profess to _initiate anyone
who has the price_. Some of these orders have names closely resembling
our own, and we are constantly asked by students whether they are
affiliated with us. In order to settle this once and for all, please
note that the Rosicrucian Fellowship has constantly taught that _no
spiritual gift may ever be traded for money_. If you bear this in mind,
you may know we have no connection with any order which demands money
for the transference of spiritual power. He who has something to give
of a truly spiritual nature will not barter it for money. I received
a particular injunction to this effect from the Elder Brothers in the
Rosicrucian Temple, when they told me to go to the English speaking
world as their messenger, a claim I do not expect you to believe _save
as you see it justified by fruits_.

Now, however, about Initiation: What is it? Is it ceremony as claimed
by these other orders? If so, any order can certainly invent ceremonies
of a more or less elaborate kind. They may by flowing robes and
clashing swords appeal to the emotions; they may appeal to the sense
of wonder and awe by rattling chains and by deep sounding gongs, and
thus produce in their members an “_occult feeling_.” Many revel in the
adventures and experiences of the hero in “The Brother of the Third
Degree,” thinking that this is surely Initiation, but I tell you that
it is very far from being the case. _No ceremony can ever give to any
one that inward experience_ which constitutes Initiation, no matter how
much is charged or how fearful the oaths, how awful or beautiful the
ceremony, or how gorgeous the robes, any more than passing through a
ceremony can convert a sinner and make him a saint, for conversion is
to the exoteric religionist exactly what Initiation is in the higher
mysticism. Please consider this point thoroughly, and you will have the
key to the problem.

Do you think that any one could go to a person of depraved character
and agree to convert him for a certain sum and carry out his part of
the agreement? Surely you know that no amount of money could bring
about that change in a man’s character. Ask a true convert where he got
his religion and how he got it. One may tell you that he received it
upon the road as he was walking along; another says that the light and
the change came to him in the solitude of his room; another that the
_light struck_ him as it struck Paul upon the road to Damascus, and
forced him to change. Every one has a different experience, but it is
in every case _an inward experience_, and the outward manifestation of
that inward experience is that _it changes the man’s whole life_ from
the very least to the very greatest aspects.

So it is also with Initiation; it is an inward experience, entirely
_separate and apart from any ceremonial whatever_, and therefore it is
an absolute impossibility that any one could sell it to any one else.
Initiation changes a man’s whole life. It gives him a confidence that
he never possessed before. It clothes him with a mantle of authority
that never can be taken from him. No matter what the circumstances in
life, it sheds a light upon his whole being that is simply wonderful.
Nor can any ceremony effect such a change. We therefore hold that
anyone who offers initiation into an occult order by ceremonials to
every one who has the price, brands himself as an imposter. For the
true teacher, if he were approached by an aspirant with an offer of
money for spiritual attainment would answer indignantly in the words
used by Peter to Simon, the sorcerer, who offered him money for
spiritual powers: “Thy silver perish with thee.”




Chapter II

INITIATION: WHAT IT IS AND IS NOT


PART II

To obtain a better understanding of what constitutes Initiation and
what the prerequisites are, let the student first fix firmly in his
mind the fact that humanity as a whole is slowly progressing upon
the path of evolution, and thus very slowly, almost imperceptibly,
attaining higher and higher states of consciousness. The path of
evolution is a spiral when we regard it from the physical side only,
but a lemniscate when viewed in both its physical and spiritual
phases. (See the diagram of chemical caduceus in _The Rosicrucian
Cosmo-Conception_, page 410.) In the lemniscate, or figure 8, there
are two circles which converge to a central point, which circles may
be taken to symbolize the immortal spirit, the evolving ego. One of
the circles signifies its life in the physical world from birth to
death. During this span of time it sows a seed by every act and should
reap in return a certain amount of experience. But as we may sow seed
in the field and lose return on that which falls on stony ground,
among thorns, et cetera, so also may the seed of opportunity be wasted
because of neglect to till the soil and the life will then be barren
of fruit. Conversely, as diligence and care in cultivation increase
the productive power of garden seed enormously, so earnest application
to the business of life—improvement of opportunities to learn life’s
lessons and extract from our environment the experience it holds—brings
added opportunities; and at the end of the life-day the ego finds
itself at the door of death laden with the richest fruits of life.

The objective work of physical existence over, the race run, and
the day of action spent, the ego enters upon the subjective work of
assimilation accomplished during its sojourn in the invisible worlds,
which it traverses during the period from death to birth, symbolized by
the other ring of the lemniscate. As the method of accomplishing this
assimilation has been most minutely described in various parts of our
literature, it is needless to repeat it here. Suffice it to say that at
the time when an ego arrives at the central point in the lemniscate,
which divides the physical from the psychic worlds and which we call
the gate of birth or death according to whether the ego is entering
or leaving the realm where we, ourselves, happen to be at the time,
it has with it an aggregate of faculties or talents acquired in all
its previous lives, which it may then put to usury or bury during the
coming life-day as it sees fit; but upon the use it makes of what it
has, depends the amount of soul growth it makes.

If for many lives it caters mainly to the lower nature, which lives to
eat, drink, and be merry, or if it dreams its life away in metaphysical
speculations upon nature and God, sedulously abstaining from all
unnecessary action, it is gradually passed and left behind by the more
active and progressive. Great companies of these idlers form what we
know as “backward races”; while the active, alert, and wide-awake who
improve a larger percentage of their opportunities, are the pioneers.
Contrary to the commonly accepted idea, this applies also to those
engaged in industrial work. Their money-getting is only an incident,
an incentive, and entirely apart from this phase their work is as
spiritual as or even more so than that of those who spend their time in
prayer to the prejudice of useful work.

From what has been said, it will be clear that the method of soul
growth as accomplished by the process of evolution requires _action_ in
the physical life, followed in the post-mortem state by a _ruminating
process_, during which the lessons of life are extracted and thoroughly
incorporated into the consciousness of the ego, though the experiences
themselves are forgotten—as we forget our labor in learning the
multiplication table, though the faculty of using it remains.

This exceedingly slow and tedious process is perfectly suited to the
needs of the masses; but there are some who habitually exhaust the
experiences commonly given, thus requiring and meriting a larger scope
for their energies. Difference of temperament is responsible for their
division into two classes.

One class, led by their devotion to Christ, simply follow the dictates
of the heart in their work of love for their fellows—beautiful
characters, beacon lights of love in a suffering world, never actuated
by selfish motives, always ready to forego personal comfort to aid
others. Such were the saints; they worked as they prayed; they never
shirked in either direction. Nor are they dead today. The earth would
be a barren wilderness in spite of all its civilization did not their
beautiful feet circle it on errands of mercy, were not the lives of
sufferers made brighter by the light of hope which radiates from their
beautiful faces. Had they but the knowledge possessed by the other
class they would indeed outdistance all in the race for the Kingdom.

Mind is the predominating feature of the other class. In order to
aid it in its efforts toward attainment, mystery schools were early
established wherein the world drama was played to give the aspiring
soul while he was entranced, answers to the questions of the origin
and destiny of humanity. When awakened, he was instructed in the
sacred science of how to climb higher by following the method of
nature—which is God in manifestation—by sowing the seed of action,
meditating upon the experience, and incorporating the essential moral
to make thereby commensurate soul growth; also with this important
feature, that whereas in the ordinary course of things a whole life
is devoted to sowing and a whole post-mortem existence to ruminating
and incorporating the soul substance, this cycle of a thousand years,
more or less, may be reduced to a day, as held by the mystic maxim, “A
day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.” To be
explicit, whatever work has been done during a single day, if ruminated
over at night before crossing the neutral point between waking and
sleeping, may thus be incorporated into the consciousness of the spirit
as usable soul power. When that exercise is faithfully performed, the
sins of each day thus reviewed are actually blotted out, and the man
commences each day as if it were a new life, with the added soul power
gained in all the preceding days of his probationary life.

But!—yes, there is a great big _BUT; nature is not to be cheated_;
God is not to be mocked. “Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he
also reap.” Let no one think that the mere perfunctory review of the
happenings of a day with perhaps the light-hearted admission of,
“I wish I had not done that,” when reviewing a scene where he did
something palpably wrong, will save him from the wrath to come. When we
pass out of the body into purgatory at death and the panorama of our
past life unfolds in reverse order to show us first the effects and
then the causes which produced them, we feel in intensified measure
the pain we gave others; and unless we perform our exercises in a
similar manner _so that we live each evening our hell_ as merited that
day, acutely sensible of every pang we have inflicted, it will avail
nothing. We must also endeavor to feel in the same intense manner,
gratitude for kindness received from others, and approbation on account
of the good we ourselves have done.

Only thus are we really living the post-mortem existence and advancing
scientifically towards the goal of Initiation. The greatest danger of
the aspirant upon this path is that he may become enmeshed in the snare
of egotism, and his only safeguard is to cultivate the faculties of
faith, devotion, and an all-embracing sympathy. It is difficult, but it
can be done, and when it has been accomplished the man or woman becomes
a wonderful power for good in the world.

Now, if the student has pondered the preceding argument well, he has
probably grasped the analogy between the _long cycle_ of evolution
and the short _cycles_ or steps used upon the path of preparation. It
should be quite clear that no one can do this post-mortem work for him
and transmit to him the resulting soul growth, any more than one can
eat the physical food of another and transmit to him the sustenance
and growth. You think it preposterous when a priesthood offers to
shorten the sojourn of a soul in purgatory. How, then, can you believe
that anyone else can—no matter what the consideration—obviate the
necessity of a number of purgatorial existences for your benefit
and transmit to you at once the usable soul power you would have
acquired had you pursued the ordinary course of life to the day you
are ready for Initiation? Yet this is what the offer to initiate a
person not yet upon the threshold means. You must have the soul power
requisite for Initiation or no one can initiate you. If you have it,
you are upon the threshold by your own efforts, beholden to no one,
and may demand Initiation as a right which none would dare dispute or
withhold. If you have it not and could buy it, it would be cheap at
twenty-five million dollars, and the man who offers it for twenty-five
dollars is as ridiculous as his dupe. Please remember that if anyone
offers to initiate you into an occult order, no matter if he calls it
“Rosicrucian” or by any other name, his demand of an initiation fee at
once stamps him as an impostor, explanations to the effect that the
fee is used to purchase regalia, et cetera, are only added evidence
of the fraudulent nature of the order for it is said, “Initiation is
most emphatically not an outward ceremony, but an inward experience.”
I may further add that the Elder Brothers of the Rose Cross in the
Mystic Temple where I received the Light made it a condition that
their _sacred science must never be put in the balance against a
coin_. Freely had I received, and freely was I required to give. This
injunction I have obeyed, both in spirit and to the letter, as all know
who have had dealings with the Rosicrucian Fellowship.




Chapter III

THE SACRAMENT OF COMMUNION


PART I

To obtain a thorough understanding of the deep and far-reaching
significance of the manner in which the Sacrament of Communion was
instituted, it is necessary to consider the evolution of our planet
and of composite man, also the chemistry of foods and their influence
on humanity. For the sake of lucidity we will briefly recapitulate the
Rosicrucian teachings on the various points involved. They have been
given at length in the _Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception_ and our other
works.

The Virgin Spirits, which are now mankind, commenced their pilgrimage
through matter in the dawn of time, that by the friction of concrete
existence their latent powers might be transmuted to kinetic energy as
usable soul power. Three successive veils of increasingly dense matter
were acquired by the involving spirits during the Saturn, Sun, and Moon
Periods. Thus each spirit was separated from all other spirits, and the
consciousness which could not penetrate the prison wall of matter and
communicate with others was forced to turn inwards, and in so doing it
discovered—ITSELF. Thus self-consciousness was attained.

A further crystallization of the before mentioned veils took place in
the Earth Period during the Polarian, Hyperborean, and Lemurian Epochs.
In the Atlantean Epoch, mind was added as a focusing point between
spirit and body, completing the constitution of composite man, who was
then equipped to conquer the world and generate soul power by endeavor
and experience, each having free will and choice except as limited by
the laws of nature and his own previous acts.

During the time man-in-the-making was thus evolving, great creative
Hierarchies guided his every step. Absolutely nothing was left to
chance. Even the food he ate was chosen for him so that he might obtain
the appropriate material wherewith to build the various vehicles of
consciousness necessary to accomplish the process of soul growth. The
Bible mentions the various stages, though it misplaces Nimrod, making
him to symbolize the Atlantean kings who lived _before_ the Flood.

In the Polarian Epoch pure mineral matter became a constituent part of
man; thus _Adam_ was made of earth, that is, so far as his dense body
was concerned.

In the Hyperborean Epoch the vital body was added, and thus his
constitution became plantlike, and _Cain_, the man of that time, lived
on the fruits of the soil.

The Lemurian Epoch saw the evolution of a desire body, which made man
like the present animals. Then milk, the product of living animals, was
added to human diet. _Abel_ was a shepherd, but it is nowhere stated
that he killed an animal.

At that time mankind lived innocently and peacefully in the misty
atmosphere which enveloped the earth during the latter part of the
Lemurian Epoch, as described in the chapter on “Baptism.” Men were
then like children under the care of a common father, until the mind
was given to all in the beginning of Atlantis. Thought activity breaks
down tissue which must be replaced; the lower and more material the
thought, the greater the havoc and the more pressing the need for
albumen wherewith to make quick repairs. Hence necessity, the mother
of invention, inaugurated the loathsome practice of flesh eating, and
so long as we continue to think along purely business or material
lines we shall have to go on using our stomachs as receptacles for the
decaying corpses of our murdered animal victims. Yet we shall see later
that flesh food has enabled us to make the wonderful material progress
achieved in the Western World, while the vegetarian Hindus and Chinese
have remained in an almost savage state. It seems sad to contemplate
that they will be forced to follow in our steps and shed the blood
of our fellow creatures when we shall have outgrown the barbarous
practice as we have ceased cannibalism.

The more spiritual we grow, the more our thoughts will harmonize
with the rhythm of our body, and the less albumen will be needed to
build tissue. Consequently, a vegetable diet will suffice our needs.
Pythagoras advised abstinence from legumes to _advanced_ scholars
because they are rich in albumen and apt to revive lower appetites.
Let not every student who reads this rashly conclude to eliminate
legumes from his diet. Most of us are not yet ready for such extremes;
we would not even advise all students to abstain entirely from meat.
The change should come from within. It may be safely stated, however,
that most people eat entirely too much meat for their good; but this
is in a certain sense a digression, so we will revert to the further
evolution of humanity in so far as it has a bearing upon the Sacrament
of Communion.

In due time the dense mist which enveloped the earth cooled,
condensed, and flooded the various basins. The atmosphere cleared, and
concurrently with this atmospheric change a physiological adaptation
in man took place. The gill clefts which had enabled him to breathe in
the dense water laden air (and which are seen in the human foetus to
this day) gradually atrophied, and their function was taken over by the
lungs, the pure air passing to and from them through the larynx. This
allowed the spirit, hitherto penned up within the veil of flesh, to
express itself in word and act.

There in the middle of Atlantis the sun first shone upon MAN as we
know him; there he was _first born_ into the world. Until then he had
been under the absolute control of great spiritual Hierarchies, mute,
without voice or choice in matters pertaining to his education, as a
child is now under the control of its parents.

But on the day when he finally emerged from the dense atmosphere of
Atlantis; when he first beheld the mountains silhouetted in clear,
sharp contours against the azure vault of heaven; when he first saw
the beauties of moor and meadow, the moving creatures, birds in the
air, and his fellow man; when his vision was undimmed by the partial
obscuration of the mist which had previously hampered perception;
above all, when he perceived HIMSELF as _separate_ and _apart from all
others_, there burst from his lips the glorious, triumphant cry, “I AM.”

At that point he had acquired faculties which equipped him to enter the
school of experience, the phenomenal world, as a free agent to learn
the lessons of life, untrammeled save by the _laws of nature_, which
are his safeguards, and the reaction of his own previous acts, which
become _destiny_.

The diet containing an excess of albumen from the flesh wherewith
he gorged himself, taxed his liver beyond capacity and clogged the
system, making him morose, sullen, and brutish. He was fast losing
the spiritual sight which revealed to him the guardian angels whom he
trusted, and he saw only the _forms_ of animals and men. The spirits
with whom he had lived in love and brotherhood during early Atlantis
were obscured by the veil of flesh. It was all so strange, and he
_feared_ them.

Therefore it became necessary to give him a _new food_ that could
aid his spirit to overpower the highly individualized molecules of
flesh (as explained in the _Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception_, chapter on
Assimilation, p. 457), brace it for battle with the world, and spur it
on to self-assertion.

As our visible bodies composed of chemical compounds can thrive only
upon chemical aliment, so it requires spirit to act upon spirit to aid
in breaking up the heavy proteid and in stimulating the drooping human
spirit.

The emergence from flooded Atlantis, the liberation of humanity from
the absolute rulership of visible superhuman guardians, their placement
under _the law of consequence and the laws of nature_, and _the gift
of_ WINE are described in the stories of Noah and Moses, which are
different accounts of the same event.

Both Noah and Moses led their followers through the water. Moses calls
heaven and earth to witness that he has placed before them the blessing
and the curse, exhorts them to choose the good or take the consequence
of their actions; then he leaves them.

The phenomenon of the rainbow requires that the sun be near the
horizon, the nearer the better; also a clear atmosphere, and a dark
rain cloud in the opposite quarter of the heavens. When under such
conditions an observer stands with his back to the sun, he may see
the sun’s rays refracted through the rain drops as a rainbow. In
early Atlantean times when there had been no rain as yet and the
atmosphere was a warm, moist fog through which the sun appeared as one
of our arc lamps on a foggy day, the phenomenon of the rainbow was an
impossibility. It could not have made its appearance until the mist
had condensed to rain, flooded the basins of the earth, and left the
atmosphere clear as described in the story of Noah, which thus points
_to the law of alternating cycles_ that brings day and night, summer
and winter, in unvarying sequence, and to which man is subject in the
present age.

Noah cultivated the vine and provided a spirit to stimulate man. Thus,
equipped with a composite constitution, a composite diet appropriate
thereto, and divine laws to guide them, mankind were left to their own
devices in the battle of life.




Chapter IV

THE SACRAMENT OF COMMUNION

“_In Remembrance of Me._”


PART II “The Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed took
bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it and said, Take, eat;
this is MY body, which is broken for you. This do in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying
This cup is the New Testament in MY blood. This do ye, as oft as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come. Wherefore,
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.... For
he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation
to himself.... For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sleep.”—I Cor. 11:23-30.

In the foregoing passages there is a deeply hidden esoteric meaning
which is particularly obscured in the English translation, but in the
German, Latin, and Greek, the student still has a hint as to what was
really intended by that last parting injunction of the Savior to His
disciples. Before examining this phase of the subject, let us first
consider the words, “in remembrance of me.” We shall then perhaps be
in better condition to understand what is meant by the “cup” and the
“bread.”

Suppose a man from a distant country comes into our midst and travels
about from place to place. Everywhere he will see small communities
gathering around the Table of the Lord to celebrate this most sacred of
all Christian rites, and should he ask why, he would be told that they
do this in remembrance of One who lived a life nobler than any other
has lived upon this earth; One who was kindness and love personified;
One who was the servant of all, regardless of gain or loss to self.
Should this stranger then compare the attitude of these religious
communities on Sunday at the celebration of this rite, with their civic
lives during the remainder of the week, what would he see?

Every one among us goes out into the world to fight the battle of
existence. Under the law of necessity we forget the love which should
be the ruling factor in Christian lives. Every man’s hand is against
his brother. Every one strives for position, wealth, and power that
goes with these attributes. We forget on Monday what we reverently
remembered on Sunday, and all the world is poor in consequence. We
also make a distinction between the bread and wine which we drink at
the so-called “Lord’s Table,” and the food of which we partake during
the intervals between attendance at Communion. But there is no warrant
in the Scriptures for any such distinction, as anyone may see, even
in the English version, by leaving out the words printed in italics
which have been inserted by the translators to give what they thought
was the sense of a passage. On the contrary, we are told that whether
we eat or drink, or whatever we do, all should be done to the glory of
God. Our every act should be a prayer. The perfunctory “grace” at meals
is in reality a blasphemy, and the silent thought of gratitude to the
Giver of daily bread is far to be preferred. When we remember at each
meal that it has been drawn from the substance of the earth, which is
the body of the indwelling Christ Spirit, we can properly understand
how that body is being broken for us daily, and we can appreciate the
loving kindness which prompted Him thus to give Himself for us; for let
us also remember that there is not a moment, day or night, that He is
not suffering because bound to this earth. When we thus eat and thus
realize the true situation, we are indeed declaring to ourselves the
death of the Lord, whose spirit is groaning and travailing, waiting
for the day of liberation when there shall be no need of such a dense
environment as we now require.

But there is another, a greater and more wonderful mystery hidden in
these words of the Christ. Richard Wagner, with the rare intuition of
the master musician, sensed this idea when he sat in meditation by
the Zurich Sea on a Good Friday, and there flashed into his mind the
thought, “What connection is there between the death of the Savior
and the millions of seeds sprouting forth from the earth at this time
of the year?” If we meditate upon that life which is annually poured
out in the spring, we see it as something gigantic and awe-inspiring;
a flood of life which transforms the globe from one of frozen death
to rejuvenated life in a short space of time; and the life which thus
diffuses itself in the budding of millions and millions of plants is
the life of the Earth Spirit.

From that come both the wheat and the grape. They are the body and
blood of the imprisoned Earth Spirit, given to sustain mankind during
the present phase of its evolution. We repudiate the contention of
people who claim that the world owes them a living, regardless of
their own efforts and without _material_ responsibility on their part,
but we nevertheless insist that there is a _spiritual_ responsibility
connected with the bread and wine given at the Lord’s Supper: _It must
be eaten worthily, otherwise, under pain of ill health and even death_.
This from the ordinary manner of reading would seem far-fetched,
but when we bring the light of esotericism to bear, examine other
translations of the Bible, and look at conditions in the world as we
find them today, we shall see that it is not so far-fetched after all.

To begin with, we must go back to the time when man lived under the
guardianship of the angels, unconsciously building the body which he
now uses. That was in ancient Lemuria. A brain was needed for the
evolution of thought, and a larynx for verbal expression of the same.
Therefore, half of the creative force was turned upwards and used by
man to form these organs. Thus mankind became single sexed and was
forced to seek a complement when it was necessary to create a new body
to serve as an instrument in a higher phase of evolution.

While the act of love was consummated under the wise guardianship of
the angels, man’s existence was free from sorrow, pain, and death. But
when, under the tutelage of the Lucifer Spirits, he ate of the Tree of
Knowledge and perpetuated the race without regard for interplanetary
lines of force, he transgressed the law, and the bodies thus formed
crystallized unduly, and became subject to death in a much more
perceptible manner than had hitherto been the case. Thus he was forced
to create new bodies more frequently as the span of life in them
shortened. Celestial warders of the creative force drove him from the
garden of _love_ into the wilderness of the world, and he was made
responsible for his actions under the cosmic _law_ which governs the
universe. Thus for ages he struggled on, seeking to work out his own
salvation, and the earth in consequence crystallized more and more.

Divine hierarchies, the Christ Spirit included, worked upon the
earth from without as the group spirit guides the animals under its
protectorate; but as Paul truly says, none could be justified under the
law, for under the law all sinned, and all must die. There is in the
old covenant no hope beyond the present, save a foreshadowing of _one
who is to come_ and restore righteousness. Thus John tells us that the
_law_ was given by Moses, and _grace_ came by the Lord Jesus Christ.
But _what is grace_? Can grace work contrary to law and abrogate it
entirely? Certainly not. The laws of God are steadfast and sure, or
the universe would become chaos. The law of gravity keeps our houses
in position relative to other houses, so that when we leave them we
may know of a surety that we shall find them in the same place upon
returning. Likewise all other departments in the universe are subject
to immutable laws.

As _law, apart from love, gave birth to sin, so the child of law,
tempered with love, is grace_. Take an example from our concrete social
conditions: We have laws which decree a certain penalty for a specified
offense, and when the law is carried out, we call it _justice_. But
long experience is beginning to teach us that justice, pure and simple,
is like the Colchian dragon’s teeth, and breeds strife and struggle
in increasing measure. The criminal, so-called, remains criminal and
becomes more and more hardened under the ministrations of law; but when
the milder regime of the present day allows one who has transgressed
to go under suspended sentence, then _he is under grace_ and not under
law. Thus, also the Christian, who aims to follow in the Master’s
steps, is emancipated from the law of sin by grace, provided he forsake
the path of sin.

It was the sin of our progenitors in ancient Lemuria that _they
scattered their seed_ regardless of law and without love. But it is
the privilege of the Christian to redeem himself by purity of life
in remembrance of the Lord. John says, “His seed remaineth in him,”
and this is the hidden meaning of the bread and wine. In the English
version we read simply: “This is the _cup_ of the New Testament,”
but in the German the word for cup is “_Kelch_,” and in the Latin,
“_Calix_,” both meaning the outer covering of the seed pod of the
flower. In the Greek we have a still more subtle meaning, not conveyed
in other languages, in the word “_poterion_,” a meaning which will be
evident when we consider the etymology of the word “pot.” This at once
gives us the same idea as the chalice or calix—a receptacle; and the
Latin “_potare_” (to drink) also shows that the “cup” is a receptacle
capable of holding a fluid. Our English words “potent” and “impotent,”
meaning to possess or to lack virile strength, further show the
meaning of this Greek word, which foreshadows the evolution from man
to superman.

We have already lived through a mineral, a plant, and an animal-like
existence before becoming human as we are today, and beyond us lie
still further evolutions where we shall approach the Divine more and
more. It will be readily conceded that it is our animal passions which
restrain us upon the path of attainment; the lower nature is constantly
warring against the higher self. At least in those who have experienced
a spiritual awakening, a war is being fought silently within, and
is all the more bitter for being suppressed. Goethe with masterly
art voiced that sentiment in the words of Faust, the aspiring soul,
speaking to his more materialistic friend, Wagner:

    “Thou by one sole impulse art possessed,
      Unconscious of the other still remain.
    Two souls, alas, are housed within my breast,
      And struggle there for undivided reign.
    One, to the earth with passionate desire,
      And closely clinging organs still adheres;
    Above the mists the other doth aspire
      With sacred ardor unto purer spheres.”

It was the knowledge of this absolute necessity of chastity (save
when procreation is the object) upon the part of those who have had
a spiritual awakening which dictated the words of Christ, and the
Apostle Paul stated an esoteric truth when he said that _those who
partook of the Communion without living the life were in danger of
sickness and death_. For just as under a spiritual tutelage, purity of
life may elevate the disciple wonderfully, so also unchastity has a
much stronger effect upon his more sensitized bodies than upon those
who are yet under the law, and have not became partakers of grace by
the cup of the New Covenant.




