CHAPTER VIII


[Spring has come.  You will find some verses to that effect at the end of
these notes.  If you are an impatient reader, skip to them at once.  In
reading aloud, omit, if you please, the sixth and seventh verses.  These
are parenthetical and digressive, and, unless your audience is of
superior intelligence, will confuse them.  Many people can ride on
horseback who find it hard to get on and to get off without assistance.
One has to dismount from an idea, and get into the saddle again, at every
parenthesis.]

—The old gentleman who sits opposite, finding that spring had fairly
come, mounted a white hat one day, and walked into the street.  It seems
to have been a premature or otherwise exceptionable exhibition, not
unlike that commemorated by the late Mr. Bayly.  When the old gentleman
came home, he looked very red in the face, and complained that he had
been “made sport of.”  By sympathizing questions, I learned from him that
a boy had called him “old daddy,” and asked him when he had his hat
whitewashed.

This incident led me to make some observations at table the next morning,
which I here repeat for the benefit of the readers of this record.

—The hat is the vulnerable point of the artificial integument.  I learned
this in early boyhood.  I was once equipped in a hat of Leghorn straw,
having a brim of much wider dimensions than were usual at that time, and
sent to school in that portion of my native town which lies nearest to
this metropolis.  On my way I was met by a “Port-chuck,” as we used to
call the young gentlemen of that locality, and the following dialogue
ensued.

                        [Picture: The Port-chuck]

_The Port-chuck_.  Hullo, You-sir, joo know th’ wuz gön-to be a race
to-morrah?

_Myself_.  No.  Who’s gön-to run, ’n’ wher’s’t gön-to be?

_The Port-chuck_.  Squire Mico ’n’ Doctor Wiliams, round the brim o’ your
hat.

These two much-respected gentlemen being the oldest inhabitants at that
time, and the alleged race-course being out of the question, the
Port-chuck also winking and thrusting his tongue into his cheek, I
perceived that I had been trifled with, and the effect has been to make
me sensitive and observant respecting this article of dress ever since.
Here is an axiom or two relating to it.

A hat which has been _popped_, or exploded by being sat down upon, is
never itself again afterwards.

It is a favorite illusion of sanguine natures to believe the contrary.

Shabby gentility has nothing so characteristic as its hat.  There is
always an unnatural calmness about its nap, and an unwholesome gloss,
suggestive of a wet brush.

The last effort of decayed fortune is expended in smoothing its
dilapidated castor.  The hat is the _ultimum moriens_ of
“respectability.”

—The old gentleman took all these remarks and maxims very pleasantly,
saying, however, that he had forgotten most of his French except the word
for potatoes,—_pummies de tare_.—_Ultimum moriens_, I told him, is old
Italian, and signifies _last thing to die_.  With this explanation he was
well contented, and looked quite calm when I saw him afterwards in the
entry with a black hat on his head and the white one in his hand.

                                * * * * *

—I think myself fortunate in having the Poet and the Professor for my
intimates.  We are so much together, that we no doubt think and talk a
good deal alike; yet our points of view are in many respects individual
and peculiar.  You know me well enough by this time.  I have not talked
with you so long for nothing and therefore I don’t think it necessary to
draw my own portrait.  But let me say a word or two about my friends.

The Professor considers himself, and I consider him, a very useful and
worthy kind of drudge.  I think he has a pride in his small
technicalities.  I know that he has a great idea of fidelity; and though
I suspect he laughs a little inwardly at times at the grand airs
“Science” puts on, as she stands marking time, but not getting on, while
the trumpets are blowing and the big drums beating,—yet I am sure he has
a liking for his specially, and a respect for its cultivators.

But I’ll tell you what the Professor said to the Poet the other day.—My
boy, said he, I can work a great deal cheaper than you, because I keep
all my goods in the lower story.  You have to hoist yours into the upper
chambers of the brain, and let them down again to your customers.  I take
mine in at the level of the ground, and send them off from my doorstep
almost without lifting.  I tell you, the higher a man has to carry the
raw material of thought before he works it up, the more it costs him in
blood, nerve, and muscle.  Coleridge knew all this very well when he
advised every literary man to have a profession.

—Sometimes I like to talk with one of them, and sometimes with the other.
After a while I get tired of both.  When a fit of intellectual disgust
comes over me, I will tell you what I have found admirable as a
diversion, in addition to boating and other amusements which I have
spoken of,—that is, working at my carpenter’s-bench.  Some mechanical
employment is the greatest possible relief, after the purely intellectual
faculties begin to tire.  When I was quarantined once at Marseilles, I
got to work immediately at carving a wooden wonder of loose rings on a
stick, and got so interested in it, that when we were set loose, I
“regained my freedom with a sigh,” because my toy was unfinished.

There are long seasons when I talk only with the Professor, and others
when I give myself wholly up to the Poet.  Now that my winter’s work is
over and spring is with us, I feel naturally drawn to the Poet’s company.
I don’t know anybody more alive to life than he is.  The passion of
poetry seizes on him every spring, he says,—yet oftentimes he complains,
that, when he feels most, he can sing least.

Then a fit of despondency comes over him.—I feel ashamed, sometimes,—said
he, the other day,—to think how far my worst songs fall below my best.
It sometimes seems to me, as I know it does to others who have told me
so, that they ought to be _all best_,—if not in actual execution, at
least in plan and motive.  I am grateful—he continued—for all such
criticisms.  A man is always pleased to have his most serious efforts
praised, and the highest aspect of his nature get the most sunshine.

Yet I am sure, that, in the nature of things, many minds must change
their key now and then, on penalty of getting out of tune or losing their
voices.  You know, I suppose,—he said,—what is meant by complementary
colors?  You know the effect, too, which the prolonged impression of any
one color has on the retina.  If you close your eyes after looking
steadily at a _red_ object, you see a _green_ image.

It is so with many minds,—I will not say with all.  After looking at one
aspect of external nature, or of any form of beauty or truth, when they
turn away, the _complementary_ aspect of the same object stamps itself
irresistibly and automatically upon the mind.  Shall they give expression
to this secondary mental state, or not?

When I contemplate—said my friend, the Poet—the infinite largeness of
comprehension belonging to the Central Intelligence, how remote the
creative conception is from all scholastic and ethical formulæ, I am led
to think that a healthy mind ought to change its mood from time to time,
and come down from its noblest condition,—never, of course, to degrade
itself by dwelling upon what is itself debasing, but to let its lower
faculties have a chance to air and exercise themselves.  After the first
and second floor have been out in the bright street dressed in all their
splendors, shall not our humble friends in the basement have their
holiday, and the cotton velvet and the thin-skinned jewelry—simple
adornments, but befitting the station of those who wear them—show
themselves to the crowd, who think them beautiful, as they ought to,
though the people up stairs know that they are cheap and perishable?

—I don’t know that I may not bring the Poet here, some day or other, and
let him speak for himself.  Still I think I can tell you what he says
quite as well as he could do it.—Oh,—he said to me, one day,—I am but a
hand-organ man,—say rather, a hand-organ.  Life turns the winch, and
fancy or accident pulls out the stops.  I come under your windows, some
fine spring morning, and play you one of my _adagio_ movements, and some
of you say,—This is good,—play us so always.  But, dear friends, if I did
not change the stop sometimes, the machine would wear out in one part and
rust in another.  How easily this or that tune flows!—you say,—there must
be no end of just such melodies in him.—I will open the poor machine for
you one moment, and you shall look.—Ah!  Every note marks where a spur of
steel has been driven in.  It is easy to grind out the song, but to plant
these bristling points which make it was the painful task of time.

I don’t like to say it,—he continued,—but poets commonly have no larger
stock of tunes than hand-organs; and when you hear them piping up under
your window, you know pretty well what to expect.  The more stops, the
better.  Do let them all be pulled out in their turn!

So spoke my friend, the Poet, and read me one of his stateliest songs,
and after it a gay _chanson_, and then a string of epigrams.  All
true,—he said,—all flowers of his soul; only one with the corolla spread,
and another with its disk half opened, and the third with the
heart-leaves covered up and only a petal or two showing its tip through
the calyx.  The water-lily is the type of the poet’s soul,—he told me.

—What do you think, Sir,—said the divinity-student,—opens the souls of
poets most fully?

Why, there must be the internal force and the external stimulus.  Neither
is enough by itself.  A rose will not flower in the dark, and a fern will
not flower anywhere.

What do I think is the true sunshine that opens the poet’s corolla?—I
don’t like to say.  They spoil a good many, I am afraid; or at least they
shine on a good many that never come to anything.

Who are _they_?—said the schoolmistress.

Women.  Their love first inspires the poet, and their praise is his best
reward.

The schoolmistress reddened a little, but looked pleased.—Did I really
think so?—I do think so; I never feel safe until I have pleased them; I
don’t think they are the first to see one’s defects, but they are the
first to catch the color and fragrance of a true poem.  Fit the same
intellect to a man and it is a bow-string,—to a woman and it is a
harp-string.  She is vibratile and resonant all over, so she stirs with
slighter musical tremblings of the air about her.—Ah, me!—said my friend,
the Poet, to me, the other day,—what color would it not have given to my
thoughts, and what thrice-washed whiteness to my words, had I been fed on
women’s praises!  I should have grown like Marvell’s fawn,—

    “Lilies without; roses within!”

But then,—he added,—we all think, _if_ so and so, we should have been
this or that, as you were saying the other day, in those rhymes of yours.

—I don’t think there are many poets in the sense of creators; but of
those sensitive natures which reflect themselves naturally in soft and
melodious words, pleading for sympathy with their joys and sorrows, every
literature is full.  Nature carves with her own hands the brain which
holds the creative imagination, but she casts the over-sensitive
creatures in scores from the same mould.

There are two kinds of poets, just as there are two kinds of blondes.
[Movement of curiosity among our ladies at table.—Please to tell us about
those blondes, said the schoolmistress.]  Why, there are blondes who are
such simply by deficiency of coloring matter,—_negative_ or _washed_
blondes, arrested by Nature on the way to become albinesses.  There are
others that are shot through with golden light, with tawny or fulvous
tinges in various degree,—_positive_ or _stained_ blondes, dipped in
yellow sunbeams, and as unlike in their mode of being to the others as an
orange is unlike a snowball.  The albino-style carries with it a wide
pupil and a sensitive retina.  The other, or the leonine blonde, has an
opaline fire in her clear eye, which the brunette can hardly match with
her quick glittering glances.

Just so we have the great sun-kindled, constructive imaginations, and a
far more numerous class of poets who have a certain kind of
moonlight-genius given them to compensate for their imperfection of
nature.  Their want of mental coloring-matter makes them sensitive to
those impressions which stronger minds neglect or never feel at all.
Many of them die young, and all of them are tinged with melancholy.
There is no more beautiful illustration of the principle of compensation
which marks the Divine benevolence than the fact that some of the holiest
lives and some of the sweetest songs are the growth of the infirmity
which unfits its subject for the rougher duties of life.  When one reads
the life of Cowper, or of Keats, or of Lucretia and Margaret Davidson,—of
so many gentle, sweet natures, born to weakness, and mostly dying before
their time,—one cannot help thinking that the human race dies out
singing, like the swan in the old story.  The French poet, Gilbert, who
died at the Hôtel Dieu, at the age of twenty-nine,—(killed by a key in
his throat, which he had swallowed when delirious in consequence of a
fall,)—this poor fellow was a very good example of the poet by excess of
sensibility.  I found, the other day, that some of my literary friends
had never heard of him, though I suppose few educated Frenchmen do not
know the lines which he wrote, a week before his death, upon a mean bed
in the great hospital of Paris.

    “Au banquet de la vie, infortuné convive,
       J’apparus un jour, et je meurs;
    Je meurs, et sur ma tombe, où lentement j’arrive,
       Nul ne viendra verser des pleurs.”

    At life’s gay banquet placed, a poor unhappy guest,
       One day I pass, then disappear;
    I die, and on the tomb where I at length shall rest
       No friend shall come to shed a tear.

You remember the same thing in other words some where in Kirke White’s
poems.  It is the burden of the plaintive songs of all these sweet
albino-poets.  “I shall die and be forgotten, and the world will go on
just as if I had never been;—and yet how I have loved! how I have longed!
how I have aspired!”  And so singing, their eyes grow brighter and
brighter, and their features thinner and thinner, until at last the veil
of flesh is threadbare, and, still singing, they drop it and pass onward.

                                * * * * *

—Our brains are seventy-year clocks.  The Angel of Life winds them up
once for all, then closes the case, and gives the key into the hand of
the Angel of the Resurrection.

Tic-tac! tic-tac! go the wheels of thought; our will cannot stop them;
they cannot stop themselves, sleep cannot still them; madness only makes
them go faster; death alone can break into the case, and, seizing the
ever-swinging pendulum, which we call the heart, silence at last the
clicking of the terrible escapement we have carried so long beneath our
wrinkled foreheads.

If we could only get at them, as we lie on our pillows and count the dead
beats of thought after thought and image after image jarring through the
overtired organ!  Will nobody block those wheels, uncouple that pinion,
cut the string that holds those weights, blow up the infernal machine
with gunpowder?  What a passion comes over us sometimes for silence and
rest!—that this dreadful mechanism, unwinding the endless tapestry of
time, embroidered with spectral figures of life and death, could have but
one brief holiday!  Who can wonder that men swing themselves off from
beams in hempen lassos?—that they jump off from parapets into the swift
and gurgling waters beneath?—that they take counsel of the grim friend
who has but to utter his one peremptory monosyllable and the restless
machine is shivered as a vase that is dashed upon a marble floor?  Under
that building which we pass every day there are strong dungeons, where
neither hook, nor bar, nor bed-cord, nor drinking-vessel from which a
sharp fragment may be shattered, shall by any chance be seen.  There is
nothing for it, when the brain is on fire with the whirling of its
wheels, but to spring against the stone wall and silence them with one
crash.  Ah, they remembered that,—the kind city fathers,—and the walls
are nicely padded, so that one can take such exercise as he likes without
damaging himself on the very plain and serviceable upholstery.  If
anybody would only contrive some kind of a lever that one could thrust in
among the works of this horrid automaton and check them, or alter their
rate of going, what would the world give for the discovery?

—From half a dime to a dime, according to the style of the place and the
quality of the liquor,—said the young fellow whom they call John.

You speak trivially, but not unwisely,—I said.  Unless the will maintain
a certain control over these movements, which it cannot stop, but can to
some extent regulate, men are very apt to try to get at the machine by
some indirect system of leverage or other.  They clap on the brakes by
means of opium; they change the maddening monotony of the rhythm by means
of fermented liquors.  It is because the brain is locked up and we cannot
touch its movement directly, that we thrust these coarse tools in through
any crevice, by which they may reach the interior, and so alter its rate
of going for a while, and at last spoil the machine.

Men who exercise chiefly those faculties of the mind which work
independently of the will,—poets and artists, for instance, who follow
their imagination in their creative moments, instead of keeping it in
hand as your logicians and practical men do with their reasoning
faculty,—such men are too apt to call in the mechanical appliances to
help them govern their intellects.

—He means they get drunk,—said the young fellow already alluded to by
name.

Do you think men of true genius are apt to indulge in the use of
inebriating fluids? said the divinity-student.

If you think you are strong enough to bear what I am going to say,—I
replied,—I will talk to you about this.  But mind, now, these are the
things that some foolish people call _dangerous_ subjects,—as if these
vices which burrow into people’s souls, as the Guinea-worm burrows into
the naked feet of West-Indian slaves, would be more mischievous when seen
than out of sight.  Now the true way to deal with those obstinate
animals, which are a dozen feet long, some of them, and no bigger than a
horse hair, is to get a piece of silk round their _heads_, and pull them
out very cautiously.  If you only break them off, they grow worse than
ever, and sometimes kill the person who has the misfortune to harbor one
of them.  Whence it is plain that the first thing to do is to find out
where the head lies.

Just so of all the vices, and particularly of this vice of intemperance.
What is the head of it, and where does it lie?  For you may depend upon
it, there is not one of these vices that has not a head of its own,—an
intelligence,—a meaning,—a certain virtue, I was going to say,—but that
might, perhaps, sound paradoxical.  I have heard an immense number of
moral physicians lay down the treatment of moral Guinea-worms, and the
vast majority of them would always insist that the creature had no head
at all, but was all body and tail.  So I have found a very common result
of their method to be that the string slipped, or that a piece only of
the creature was broken off, and the worm soon grew again, as bad as
ever.  The truth is, if the Devil could only appear in church by
attorney, and make the best statement that the facts would bear him out
in doing on behalf of his special virtues, (what we commonly call vices,)
the influence of good teachers would be much greater than it is.  For the
arguments by which the Devil prevails are precisely the ones that the
Devil-queller most rarely answers.  The way to argue down a vice is not
to tell lies about it,—to say that it has no attractions, when everybody
knows that it has,—but rather to let it make out its case just as it
certainly will in the moment of temptation, and then meet it with the
weapons furnished by the Divine armory.  Ithuriel did not spit the toad
on his spear, you remember, but touched him with it, and the blasted
angel took the sad glories of his true shape.  If he had shown fight
then, the fair spirits would have known how to deal with him.

That all spasmodic cerebral action is an evil is not perfectly clear.
Men get fairly intoxicated with music, with poetry, with religious
excitement, oftenest with love.  Ninon de l’Enclos said she was so easily
excited that her soup intoxicated her, and convalescents have been made
tipsy by a beef-steak.

There are forms and stages of alcoholic exaltation which, in themselves,
and without regard to their consequences, might be considered as positive
improvements of the persons affected.  When the sluggish intellect is
roused, the slow speech quickened, the cold nature warmed, the latent
sympathy developed, the flagging spirit kindled,—before the trains of
thought become confused or the will perverted, or the muscles
relaxed,—just at the moment when the whole human zoöphyte flowers out
like a full-blown rose, and is ripe for the subscription-paper or the
contribution-box,—it would be hard to say that a man was, at that very
time, worse, or less to be loved, than when driving a hard bargain with
all his meaner wits about him.  The difficulty is, that the alcoholic
virtues don’t wash; but until the water takes their colors out, the tints
are very much like those of the true celestial stuff.

[Here I was interrupted by a question which I am very unwilling to
report, but have confidence enough in those friends who examine these
records to commit to their candor.

_A person_ at table asked me whether I “went in for rum as a steady
drink?”—His manner made the question highly offensive, but I restrained
myself, and answered thus:—]

Rum I take to be the name which unwashed moralists apply alike to the
product distilled from molasses and the noblest juices of the vineyard.
Burgundy “in all its sunset glow” is rum.  Champagne, “the foaming wine
of Eastern France,” in rum.  Hock, which our friend, the Poet, speaks of
as

    “The Rhine’s breastmilk, gushing cold and bright,
    Pale as the moon, and maddening as her light,”

is rum.  Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to the
first miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion!  I address myself
to the company.—I believe in temperance, nay, almost in abstinence, as a
rule for healthy people.  I trust that I practice both.  But let me tell
you, there are companies of men of genius into which I sometimes go,
where the atmosphere of intellect and sentiment is so much more
stimulating than alcohol, that, if I thought fit to take wine, it would
be to keep me sober.

Among the gentlemen that I have known, few, if any, were ruined by
drinking.  My few drunken acquaintances were generally ruined before they
became drunkards.  The habit of drinking is often a vice, no
doubt,—sometimes a misfortune,—as when an almost irresistible hereditary
propensity exists to indulge in it,—but oftenest of all a _punishment_.

Empty heads,—heads without ideas in wholesome variety and sufficient
number to furnish food for the mental clockwork,—ill-regulated heads,
where the faculties are not under the control of the will,—these are the
ones that hold the brains which their owners are so apt to tamper with,
by introducing the appliances we have been talking about.  Now, when a
gentleman’s brain is empty or ill-regulated, it is, to a great extent,
his own fault; and so it is simple retribution, that, while he lies
slothfully sleeping or aimlessly dreaming, the fatal habit settles on him
like a vampyre, and sucks his blood, fanning him all the while with its
hot wings into deeper slumber or idler dreams!  I am not such a
hard-souled being as to apply this to the neglected poor, who have had no
chance to fill their heads with wholesome ideas, and to be taught the
lesson of self-government.  I trust the tariff of Heaven has an _ad
valorem_ scale for them—and all of us.

But to come back to poets and artists;—if they really are more prone to
the abuse of stimulants,—and I fear that this is true,—the reason of it
is only too clear.  A man abandons himself to a fine frenzy, and the
power which flows through him, as I once explained to you, makes him the
medium of a great poem or a great picture.  The creative action is not
voluntary at all, but automatic; we can only put the mind into the proper
attitude, and wait for the wind, that blows where it listeth, to breathe
over it.  Thus the true state of creative genius is allied to _reverie_,
or dreaming.  If mind and body were both healthy and had food enough and
fair play, I doubt whether any men would be more temperate than the
imaginative classes.  But body and mind often flag,—perhaps they are
ill-made to begin with, underfed with bread or ideas, overworked, or
abused in some way.  The automatic action, by which genius wrought its
wonders, fails.  There is only one thing which can rouse the machine; not
will,—that cannot reach it; nothing but a ruinous agent, which hurries
the wheels awhile and soon eats out the heart of the mechanism.  The
dreaming faculties are always the dangerous ones, because their mode of
action can be imitated by artificial excitement; the reasoning ones are
safe, because they imply continued voluntary effort.

I think you will find it true, that, before any vice can fasten on a man,
body, mind, or moral nature must be debilitated.  The mosses and fungi
gather on sickly trees, not thriving ones; and the odious parasites which
fasten on the human frame choose that which is already enfeebled.  Mr.
Walker, the hygeian humorist, declared that he had such a healthy skin it
was impossible for any impurity to stick to it, and maintained that it
was an absurdity to wash a face which was of necessity always clean.  I
don’t know how much fancy there was in this; but there is no fancy in
saying that the lassitude of tired-out operatives, and the languor of
imaginative natures in their periods of collapse, and the vacuity of
minds untrained to labor and discipline, fit the soul and body for the
germination of the seeds of intemperance.

Whenever the wandering demon of Drunkenness finds a ship adrift,—no
steady wind in its sails, no thoughtful pilot directing its course,—he
steps on board, takes the helm, and steers straight for the maelstrom.

                                * * * * *

—I wonder if you know the _terrible smile_?  [The young fellow whom they
call John winked very hard, and made a jocular remark, the sense of which
seemed to depend on some double meaning of the word _smile_.  The company
was curious to know what I meant.]

There are persons—I said—who no sooner come within sight of you than they
begin to smile, with an uncertain movement of the mouth, which conveys
the idea that they are thinking about themselves, and thinking, too, that
you are thinking they are thinking about themselves,—and so look at you
with a wretched mixture of self-consciousness, awkwardness, and attempts
to carry off both, which are betrayed by the cowardly behaviour of the
eye and the tell-tale weakness of the lips that characterize these
unfortunate beings.

—Why do you call them unfortunate, Sir?—asked the divinity-student.

Because it is evident that the consciousness of some imbecility or other
is at the bottom of this extraordinary expression.  I don’t think,
however, that these persons are commonly fools.  I have known a number,
and all of them were intelligent.  I think nothing conveys the idea of
_underbreeding_ more than this self-betraying smile.  Yet I think this
peculiar habit as well as that of _meaningless blushing_ may be fallen
into by very good people who met often, or sit opposite each other at
table.  A true gentleman’s face is infinitely removed from all such
paltriness,—calm-eyed, firm-mouthed.  I think Titian understood the look
of a gentleman as well as anybody that ever lived.  The portrait of a
young man holding a glove in his hand, in the Gallery of the Louvre, if
any of you have seen that collection, will remind you of what I mean.

—Do I think these people know the peculiar look they have?—I cannot say;
I hope not; I am afraid they would never forgive me, if they did.  The
worst of it is, the trick is catching; when one meets one of these
fellows, he feels a tendency to the same manifestation.  The Professor
tells me there is a muscular slip, a dependence of the _platysma
myoides_, which is called the _risorius Santorini_.

—Say that once more,—exclaimed the young fellow mentioned above.

The Professor says there is a little fleshy slip called Santorini’s
laughing muscle.  I would have it cut out of my face, if I were born with
one of those constitutional grins upon it.  Perhaps I am uncharitable in
my judgment of those sour-looking people I told you of the other day, and
of these smiling folks.  It may be that they are born with these looks,
as other people are with more generally recognized deformities.  Both are
bad enough, but I had rather meet three of the scowlers than one of the
smilers.

—There is another unfortunate way of looking, which is peculiar to that
amiable sex we do not like to find fault with.  There are some very
pretty, but, unhappily, very ill-bred women, who don’t understand the law
of the road with regard to handsome faces.  Nature and custom would, no
doubt, agree in conceding to all males the right of at least two distinct
looks at every comely female countenance, without any infraction of the
rules of courtesy or the sentiment of respect.  The first look is
necessary to define the person of the individual one meets so as to avoid
it in passing.  Any unusual attraction detected in a first glance is a
sufficient apology for a second,—not a prolonged and impertinent stare,
but an appreciating homage of the eyes, such as a stranger may
inoffensively yield to a passing image.  It is astonishing how morbidly
sensitive some vulgar beauties are to the slightest demonstration of this
kind.  When a lady walks the streets, she leaves her virtuous-indignation
countenance at home; she knows well enough that the street is a
picture-gallery, where pretty faces framed in pretty bonnets are meant to
be seen, and everybody has a right to see them.

—When we observe how the same features and style of person and character
descend from generation to generation, we can believe that some inherited
weakness may account for these peculiarities.  Little snapping-turtles
snap—so the great naturalist tells us—before they are out of the
egg-shell.  I am satisfied, that, much higher up in the scale of life,
character is distinctly shown at the age of -2 or -3 months.

—My friend, the Professor, has been full of eggs lately.  [This remark
excited a burst of hilarity which I did not allow to interrupt the course
of my observations.]  He has been reading the great book where he found
the fact about the little snapping-turtles mentioned above.  Some of the
things he has told me have suggested several odd analogies enough.

There are half a dozen men, or so, who carry in their brains the _ovarian
eggs_ of the next generation’s or century’s civilization.  These eggs are
not ready to be laid in the form of books as yet; some of them are hardly
ready to be put into the form of talk.  But as rudimentary ideas or
inchoate tendencies, there they are; and these are what must form the
future.  A man’s general notions are not good for much, unless he has a
crop of these intellectual ovarian eggs in his own brain, or knows them
as they exist in the minds of others.  One must be in the _habit_ of
talking with such persons to get at these rudimentary germs of thought;
for their development is necessarily imperfect, and they are moulded on
new patterns, which must be long and closely studied.  But these are the
men to talk with.  No fresh truth ever gets into a book.

—A good many fresh lies get in, anyhow,—said one of the company.

I proceeded in spite of the interruption.—All uttered thought, my friend,
the Professor, says, is of the nature of an excretion.  Its materials
have been taken in, and have acted upon the system, and been reacted on
by it; it has circulated and done its office in one mind before it is
given out for the benefit of others.  It may be milk or venom to other
minds; but, in either case, it is something which the producer has had
the use of and can part with.  A man instinctively tries to get rid of
his thought in conversation or in print so soon as it is matured; but it
is hard to get at it as it lies imbedded, a mere potentiality, the germ
of a germ, in his intellect.

—Where are the brains that are fullest of these ovarian eggs of
thought?—I decline mentioning individuals.  The producers of thought, who
are few, the “jobbers” of thought, who are many, and the retailers of
thought, who are numberless, are so mixed up in the popular apprehension,
that it would be hopeless to try to separate them before opinion has had
time to settle.  Follow the course of opinion on the great subjects of
human interest for a few generations or centuries, get its parallax, map
out a small arc of its movement, see where it tends, and then see who is
in advance of it or even with it; the world calls him hard names,
probably; but if you would find the _ova_ of the future, you must look
into the folds of his cerebral convolutions.

[The divinity-student looked a little puzzled at this suggestion, as if
he did not see exactly where he was to come out, if he computed his arc
too nicely.  I think it possible it might cut off a few corners of his
present belief, as it has cut off martyr-burning and witch-hanging;—but
time will show,—time will show, as the old gentleman opposite says.]

—Oh,—here is that copy of verses I told you about.

                               SPRING HAS COME.

                                _Intra Muros_.

    The sunbeams, lost for half a year,
       Slant through my pane their morning rays
    For dry Northwesters cold and clear,
       The East blows in its thin blue haze.

    And first the snowdrop’s bells are seen,
       Then close against the sheltering wall
    The tulip’s horn of dusky green,
       The peony’s dark unfolding ball.

    The golden-chaliced crocus burns;
       The long narcissus-blades appear;
    The cone-beaked hyacinth returns,
       And lights her blue-flamed chandelier.

    The willow’s whistling lashes, wrung
       By the wild winds of gusty March,
    With sallow leaflets lightly strung,
       Are swaying by the tufted larch.

    The elms have robed their slender spray
       With full-blown flower and embryo leaf;
    Wide o’er the clasping arch of day
       Soars like a cloud their hoary chief.

    —[See the proud tulip’s flaunting cup,
       That flames in glory for an hour,—
    Behold it withering,—then look up,—
       How meek the forest-monarch’s flower!—

    When wake the violets, Winter dies;
       When sprout the elm-buds, Spring is near;
    When lilacs blossom, Summer cries,
       “Bud, little roses!  Spring is here!”]

    The windows blush with fresh bouquets,
       Cut with the May-dew on their lips;
    The radish all its bloom displays,
       Pink as Aurora’s finger-tips.

    Nor less the flood of light that showers
       On beauty’s changed corolla-shades,—
    The walks are gay as bridal bowers
       With rows of many-petalled maids.

    The scarlet shell-fish click and clash
       In the blue barrow where they slide;
    The horseman, proud of streak and splash,
       Creeps homeward from his morning ride.

    Here comes the dealer’s awkward string,
       With neck in rope and tail in knot,—
    Rough colts, with careless country-swing,
       In lazy walk or slouching trot.

    —Wild filly from the mountain-side,
       Doomed to the close and chafing thills,
    Lend me thy long, untiring stride
       To seek with thee thy western hills!

    I hear the whispering voice of Spring,
       The thrush’s trill, the cat-bird’s cry,
    Like some poor bird with prisoned wing
       That sits and sings, but longs to fly.

    Oh for one spot of living green,—
       One little spot where leaves can grow,—
    To love unblamed, to walk unseen,
       To dream above, to sleep below!




