CHAPTER IV.

OF THE RELATION OF TRADITION TO PALÆTIOLOGY.


1. _Importance of Tradition._--SINCE the Palætiological
Sciences have it for their business to study the train of
past events produced by natural causes down to the present
time, the knowledge concerning such events which is supplied
by the remembrance and records of man, in whatever form,
must have an important bearing upon these sciences. All
changes in the condition and extent of land and sea, which
have taken place within man's observation, all effects of
deluges, sea-waves, rivers, springs, volcanoes, earthquakes,
and the like, which come within the reach of human history,
have a strong interest for the palætiologist. Nor is he less
concerned in all recorded instances of the modification of
the forms and habits of plants and animals, by the
operations of man, or by transfer from one land to another.
And when we come to the Palætiology of Language, of Art, of
Civilization, we find our subject still more closely
connected with history; for in truth these are historical,
no less than palætiological investigations. But, confining
ourselves at present to the material sciences, we may
observe that though the importance of the information which
tradition gives us, in the sciences now under our
consideration, as, for instance, geology, has long been
tacitly recognised; yet it is only recently that geologists
have employed themselves in collecting their historical
facts upon such a scale and with such comprehensive views as
are required by the interest and use of collections of this
kind. The Essay of Von {298} Hoff[19\10], _On the Natural
Alterations in the Surface of the Earth which are proved by
Tradition_, was the work which first opened the eyes of
geologists to the extent and importance of this kind of
investigation. Since that time the same path of research has
been pursued with great perseverance by others, especially
by Sir C. Lyell; and is now justly considered as an
essential portion of Geology.

[Note 19\10: Vol. i. 1822; vol. ii. 1824.]

2. _Connexion of Tradition and Science._--Events which we
might naturally expect to have some bearing on geology, are
narrated in the historical writings which, even on mere
human grounds, have the strongest claim to our respect as
records of the early history of the world, and are confirmed
by the traditions of various nations all over the globe;
namely, the formation of the earth and of its population,
and a subsequent deluge. It has been made a matter of
controversy how the narrative of these events is to be
understood, so as to make it agree with the facts which an
examination of the earth's surface and of its vegetable and
animal population discloses to us. Such controversies, when
they are considered as merely archæological, may occur in
any of the palætiological sciences. We may have to compare
and to reconcile the evidence of existing phenomena with
that of historical tradition. But under some circumstances
this process of conciliation may assume an interest of
another kind, on which we will make a few remarks.

3. _Natural and Providential History of the World._--We may
contemplate the existence of man upon the earth, his origin
and his progress, in the same manner as we contemplate the
existence of any other race of animals; namely, in a purely
palætiological view. We may consider how far our knowledge
of laws of causation enables us to explain his diffusion and
migration, his differences and resemblances, his actions and
works. And this is the view of man as a member of the
_Natural_ Course of Things. {299}

But man, at the same time the contemplator and the subject
of his own contemplation, endowed with faculties and powers
which make him a being of a different nature from other
animals, cannot help regarding his own actions and
enjoyments, his recollections and his hopes, under an aspect
quite different from any that we have yet had presented to
us. We have been endeavouring to place in a clear light the
Fundamental Ideas, such as that of Cause, on which depends
our knowledge of the natural course of things. But there are
other Ideas to which man necessarily refers his actions; he
is led by his nature, not only to consider his own actions,
and those of his fellow-men, as springing out of this or
that cause, leading to this or that material result; but
also as _good_ or _bad_, as what they _ought_ or _ought not_
to be. He has Ideas of moral relations as well as those
Ideas of material relations with which we have hitherto been
occupied. He is a moral as well as a natural agent.

Contemplating himself and the world around him by the light
of his Moral Ideas, man is led to the conviction that his
moral faculties were bestowed upon him by design and for a
purpose; that he is the subject of a Moral Government; that
the course of the world is directed by the Power which
governs it, to the unfolding and perfecting of man's moral
nature; that this guidance may be traced in the career of
individuals and of the world; that there is a _Providential_
as well as a Natural Course of Things.

Yet this view is beset by no small difficulties. The full
development of man's moral faculties;--the perfection of his
nature up to the measure of his own ideas;--the adaptation
of his moral being to an ultimate destination, by its
transit through a world full of moral evil, in which evil
each person has his share;--are effects for which the
economy of the world appears to contain no adequate
provision. Man, though aware of his moral nature, and ready
to believe in an ultimate destination of purity and
blessedness, is too feeble to resist the temptation of evil,
and too helpless to restore his purity when once lost. He
cannot but look for {300} some confirmation of that
providential order which he has begun to believe; some
provision for those deficiencies in his moral condition
which he has begun to feel.

He looks at the history of the world, and he finds that at a
certain period it offers to him the promise of what he
seeks. When the natural powers of man had been developed to
their full extent, and were beginning to exhibit symptoms of
decay;--when the intellectual progress of the world appeared
to have reached its limit, without supplying man's moral
needs;--we find the great Epoch in the Providential History
of the world. We find the announcement of a Dispensation by
which man's deficiencies shall be supplied and his
aspirations fulfilled: we find a provision for the
purification, the support, and the ultimate beatification of
those who use the provided means. And thus the providential
course of the world becomes consistent and intelligible.

4. _The Sacred Narrative._--But with the new Dispensation,
we receive, not only an account of its own scheme and
history, but also a written narrative of the providential
course of the world from the earliest times, and even from
its first creation. This narrative is recognized and
authorized by the new dispensation, and accredited by some
of the same evidences as the dispensation itself. That the
existence of such a sacred narrative should be a part of the
providential order of things, cannot but appear natural;
but, naturally also, the study of it leads to some
difficulties.

The Sacred Narrative in some of its earliest portions speaks
of natural objects and occurrences respecting them. In the
very beginning of the course of the world, we may readily
believe (indeed, as we have seen in the last chapter, our
scientific researches lead us to believe) that such
occurrences were very different from anything which now
takes place;--different to an extent and in a manner which
we cannot estimate. Now the narrative must speak of objects
and occurrences in the words and phrases which have derived
their meaning from their application to the existing natural
state of things. When applied to an initial {301}
supernatural state therefore, these words and phrases cannot
help being to us obscure and mysterious, perhaps ambiguous
and seemingly contradictory.

5. _Difficulties in interpreting the Sacred Narrative._--The
moral and providential relations of man's condition are so
much more important to him than mere natural relations, that
at first we may well suppose he will accept the Sacred
Narrative, as not only unquestionable in its true import,
but also as a guide in his views even of mere natural
things. He will try to modify the conceptions which he
entertains of objects and their properties, so that the
Sacred Narrative of the supernatural condition shall retain
the first meaning which he had put upon it in virtue of his
own habits in the usage of language.

But man is so constituted that he cannot persist in this
procedure. The powers and tendencies of his intellect are
such that he cannot help trying to attain true conceptions
of objects and their properties by the study of things
themselves. For instance, when he at first read of a
firmament dividing the waters above from the waters below,
he perhaps conceived a transparent floor in the skies, on
which the superior waters rested, which descend in rain; but
as his observations and his reasonings satisfied him that
such a floor could not exist, he became willing to allow (as
St. Augustine allowed) that the waters above the firmament
are in a state of vapour. And in like manner in other
subjects, men, as their views of nature became more distinct
and precise, modified, so far as it was necessary for
consistency's sake, their first rude interpretations of the
Sacred Narrative; so that, without in any degree losing its
import as a view of the providential course of the world, it
should be so conceived as not to contradict what they knew
of the natural order of things.

But this accommodation was not always made without painful
struggles and angry controversies. When men had conceived
the occurrences of the Sacred Narrative in a particular
manner, they could not readily and willingly adopt a new
mode of conception; and all attempts to recommend to them
such novelties, they {302} resisted as attacks upon the
sacredness of the Narrative. They had clothed their belief
of the workings of Providence in certain images; and they
clung to those images with the persuasion that, without
them, their belief could not subsist. Thus they imagined to
themselves that the earth was a flat floor, solidly and
broadly laid for the convenience of man; and they felt as if
the kindness of Providence was disparaged, when it was
maintained that the earth was a globe held together only by
the mutual attraction of its parts.

The most memorable instance of a struggle of this kind is to
be found in the circumstances which attended the
introduction of the Heliocentric Theory of Copernicus to
general acceptance. On this controversy I have already made
some remarks in the _History of Science_[20\10], and have
attempted to draw from it some lessons which may be useful
to us when any similar conflict of opinions may occur. I
will here add a few reflections with a similar view.

[Note 20\10: B. v. c. iii. sect. 4.]

6. _Such difficulties inevitable._--In the first place, I
remark that such modifications of the current interpretation
of the words of Scripture appear to be an inevitable
consequence of the progressive character of Natural Science.
Science is constantly teaching us to describe known facts in
new language; but the language of Scripture is always the
same. And not only so, but the language of Scripture is
necessarily adapted to the common state of man's
intellectual development, in which he is supposed not to be
possessed of science. Hence the phrases used by Scripture
are precisely those which science soon teaches man to
consider as inaccurate. Yet they are not, on that account,
the less fitted for their proper purpose: for if any terms
had been used, adapted to a more advanced state of
knowledge, they must have been unintelligible among those to
whom the Scripture was first addressed. If the Jews had been
told that water existed in the clouds in small drops, they
would have marvelled that it did {303} not constantly
descend; and to have explained the reason of this, would
have been to teach Atmology in the sacred writings. If they
had read in their Scripture that the earth was a sphere,
when it appeared to be a plain, they would only have been
disturbed in their thoughts or driven to some wild and
baseless imaginations, by a declaration to them so strange.
If the Divine Speaker, instead of saying that he would set
his bow in the clouds, had been made to declare that he
would give to water the property of refracting different
colours at different angles, how utterly unmeaning to the
hearers would the words have been! And in these cases, the
expressions, being unintelligible, startling, and
bewildering, would have been such as tended to unfit the
Sacred Narrative for its place in the providential
dispensation of the world.

Accordingly, in the great controversy which took place in
Galileo's time between the defenders of the then customary
interpretations of Scripture, and the assertors of the
Copernican system of the universe, when the innovators were
upbraided with maintaining opinions contrary to Scripture,
they replied that Scripture was not intended to teach men
astronomy, and that it expressed the acts of divine power in
images which were suited to the ideas of unscientific men.
To speak of the rising and setting and travelling of the
sun, of the fixity and of the foundations of the earth, was
to use the only language which would have made the Sacred
Narrative intelligible. To extract from these and the like
expressions doctrines of science, was, they declared, in the
highest degree unjustifiable; and such a course could lead,
they held, to no result but a weakening of the authority of
Scripture in proportion as its credit was identified with
that of these modes of applying it. And this judgment has
since been generally assented to by those who most reverence
and value the study of the designs of Providence as well as
that of the works of nature.

7. _Science tells us nothing concerning Creation._--Other
apparent difficulties arise from the accounts given in the
Scripture of the first origin of the world {304} in which we
live: for example, Light is represented as created before
the Sun. With regard to difficulties of this kind, it
appears that we may derive some instruction from the result
to which we were led in the last chapter;--namely, that in
the sciences which trace the progress of natural
occurrences, we can in no case go back to an origin, but in
every instance appear to find ourselves separated from it by
a state of things, and an order of events, of a kind
altogether different from those which come under our
experience. The thread of induction respecting the natural
course of the world snaps in our fingers, when we try to
ascertain where its beginning is. Since, then, science can
teach us nothing positive respecting the beginning of
things, she can neither contradict nor confirm what is
taught by Scripture on that subject; and thus, as it is
unworthy timidity in the lover of Scripture to fear
contradiction, so is it ungrounded presumption to look for
confirmation, in such cases. The providential history of the
world has its own beginning, and its own evidence; and we
can only render the system insecure, by making it lean on
our material sciences. If any one were to suggest that the
nebular hypothesis countenances the Scripture history of the
formation of this system, by showing how the luminous matter
of the sun might exist previous to the sun itself, we should
act wisely in rejecting such an attempt to weave together
these two heterogeneous threads;--the one a part of a
providential scheme, the other a fragment of a physical
speculation.

We shall best learn those lessons of the true philosophy of
science which it is our object to collect, by attending to
portions of science which have gone through such crises as
we are now considering; nor is it requisite, for this
purpose, to bring forwards any subjects which are still
under discussion. It may, however, be mentioned that such
maxims as we are now endeavouring to establish, and the one
before us in particular, bear with a peculiar force upon
those Palætiological Sciences of which we have been treating
in the present Book. {305}

8. _Scientific views, when familiar, do not disturb the
authority of Scripture._--There is another reflection which
may serve to console and encourage us in the painful
struggles which thus take place, between those who maintain
interpretations of Scripture already prevalent and those who
contend for such new ones as the new discoveries of science
require. It is this;--that though the new opinion is
resisted by one party as something destructive of the credit
of Scripture and the reverence which is its due, yet, in
fact, when the new interpretation has been generally
established and incorporated with men's current thoughts, it
ceases to disturb their views of the authority of the
Scripture or of the truth of its teaching. When the language
of Scripture, invested with its new meaning, has become
familiar to men, it is found that the ideas which it calls
up are quite as reconcileable as the former ones were, with
the most entire acceptance of the providential dispensation.
And when this has been found to be the case, all cultivated
persons look back with surprise at the mistake of those who
thought that the essence of the revelation was involved in
their own arbitrary version of some collateral circumstance
in the revealed narrative. At the present day, we can hardly
conceive how reasonable men could ever have imagined that
religious reflections on the stability of the earth, and the
beauty and use of the luminaries which revolve round it,
would be interfered with by an acknowledgment that this rest
and motion are apparent only[21\10]. And thus the authority
of revelation is not shaken by any changes introduced by the
progress of science in the mode of interpreting expressions
which describe physical objects and occurrences; provided
the new interpretation is admitted at a proper season, and
in a proper spirit; so as to soften, as much as possible,
both the public controversies and the private scruples which
almost inevitably accompany such an alteration.

[Note 21\10: I have here borrowed a sentence or two from my
own _History_.]

9. _When should old Interpretations be given up?_--But the
question then occurs, What is the proper {306} season for a
religious and enlightened commentator to make such a change
in the current interpretation of sacred Scripture? At what
period ought the established exposition of a passage to be
given up, and a new mode of understanding the passage, such
as is, or seems to be, required by new discoveries
respecting the laws of nature, accepted in its place? It is
plain, that to introduce such an alteration lightly and
hastily would be a procedure fraught with inconvenience; for
if the change were made in such a manner, it might be
afterwards discovered that it had been adopted without
sufficient reason, and that it was necessary to reinstate
the old exposition. And the minds of the readers of
Scripture, always to a certain extent and for a time
disturbed by the subversion of their long-established
notions, would be distressed without any need, and might be
seriously unsettled. While, on the other hand, a too
protracted and obstinate resistance to the innovation, on
the part of the scriptural expositors, would tend to
identify, at least in the minds of many, the authority of
the Scripture with the truth of the exposition; and
therefore would bring discredit upon the revealed word, when
the established interpretation was finally proved to be
untenable.

A rule on this subject, propounded by some of the most
enlightened dignitaries of the Roman Catholic church, on the
occasion of the great Copernican controversy begun by
Galileo, seems well worthy of our attention. The following
was the opinion given by Cardinal Bellarmine at the
time:--'When a _demonstration_ shall be found to establish the
earth's motion, it will be proper to interpret the sacred
Scriptures otherwise than they have hitherto been
interpreted in those passages where mention is made of the
stability of the earth and movement of the heavens.' This
appears to be a judicious and reasonable maxim for such
cases in general. So long as the supposed scientific
discovery is doubtful, the exposition of the meaning of
Scripture given by commentators of established credit is not
wantonly to be disturbed: but when a scientific theory,
irreconcileable with this ancient {307} interpretation, is
clearly proved, we must give up the interpretation, and seek
some new mode of understanding the passage in question, by
means of which it may be consistent with what we know; for
if it be not, our conception of the things so described is
no longer consistent with itself.

It may be said that this rule is indefinite, for who shall
decide when a new theory is completely demonstrated, and the
old interpretation become untenable? But to this we may
reply, that if the rule be assented to, its application will
not be very difficult. For when men have admitted as a
general rule, that the current interpretations of scriptural
expressions respecting natural objects and events may
possibly require, and in some cases certainly will require,
to be abandoned, and new ones admitted, they will hardly
allow themselves to contend for such interpretations as if
they were essential parts of revelation; and will look upon
the change of exposition, whether it come sooner or later,
without alarm or anger. And when men lend themselves to the
progress of truth in this spirit, it is not of any material
importance at what period a new and satisfactory
interpretation of the scriptural difficulty is found; since
a scientific exactness in our apprehension of the meaning of
such passages as are now referred to is very far from being
essential to our full acceptance of revelation.

10. _In what Spirit should the Change be accepted?_--Still
these revolutions in scriptural interpretation must always
have in them something which distresses and disturbs
religious communities. And such uneasy feelings will take a
different shape, according as the community acknowledges or
rejects a paramount interpretative authority in its
religious leaders. In the case in which the interpretation
of the Church is binding upon all its members, the more
placid minds rest in peace upon the ancient exposition, till
the spiritual authorities announce that the time for the
adoption of a new view has arrived; but in these
circumstances, the more stirring and inquisitive minds,
which cannot refrain from the pursuit of new truths {308}
and exact conceptions, are led to opinions which, being
contrary to those of the Church, are held to be sinful. On
the other hand, if the religious constitution of the
community allow and encourage each man to study and
interpret for himself the Sacred Writings, we are met by
evils of another kind. In this case, although, by the
unforced influence of admired commentators, there may
prevail a general agreement in the usual interpretation of
difficult passages, yet as each reader of the Scripture
looks upon the sense which he has adopted as being his own
interpretation, he maintains it, not with the tranquil
acquiescence of one who has deposited his judgment in the
hands of his Church, but with the keenness and strenuousness
of self-love. In such a state of things, though no judicial
severities can be employed against the innovators, there may
arise more angry controversies than in the other case.

It is impossible to overlook the lesson which here offers
itself, that it is in the highest degree unwise in the
friends of religion, whether individuals or communities,
unnecessarily to embark their credit in expositions of
Scripture on matters which appertain to natural Science. By
delivering physical doctrines as the teaching of revelation,
religion may lose much, but cannot gain anything. This maxim
of practical wisdom has often been urged by Christian
writers. Thus St. Augustine says[22\10]: 'In obscure matters
and things far removed from our senses, if we read anything,
even in the divine Scripture, which may produce diverse
opinions without damaging the faith which we cherish, let us
not rush headlong by positive assertion to either the one
opinion or the other; lest, when a more thorough discussion
has shown the opinion which we had adopted to be false, our
faith may fall with it: and we should be found contending,
not for the doctrine of the sacred Scriptures, but for our
own; endeavouring to make our doctrine to be that of the
Scriptures, instead of taking the doctrine of the Scriptures
to be ours.' And in nearly the same spirit, at the {309}
time of the Copernican controversy, it was thought proper to
append to the work of Copernicus a postil, to say that the
work was written to account for the phenomena, and that
people must not run on blindly and condemn either of the
opposite opinions. Even when the Inquisition, in 1616,
thought itself compelled to pronounce a decision upon this
subject, the verdict was delivered in very moderate
language;--that 'the doctrine of the earth's motion appeared
to be contrary to Scripture:' and yet, moderate as this
expression is, it has been blamed by judicious members of
the Roman church as deciding a point such as religious
authorities ought not to pretend to decide; and has brought
upon that church no ordinary weight of general condemnation.
Kepler pointed out, in his lively manner, the imprudence of
employing the force of religious authorities on such
subjects: _Acies dolabræ in ferrum illisa, postea nec in
lignum valet amplius. Capiat hoc cujus interest_. 'If you
_will_ try to chop iron, the axe becomes unable to cut even
wood. I warn those whom it concerns.'

[Note 22\10: Lib. i. _de Genesi_, cap. xviii.]

11. _In what Spirit should the Change be urged?_--But while
we thus endeavour to show in what manner the interpreters of
Scripture may most safely and most properly accept the
discoveries of science, we must not forget that there may be
errours committed on the other side also; and that men of
science, in bringing forward views which may for a time
disturb the minds of lovers of Scripture, should consider
themselves as bound by strict rules of candour, moderation,
and prudence. Intentionally to make their supposed
discoveries a means of discrediting, contradicting, or
slighting the sacred Scriptures, or the authority of
religion, is in them unpardonable. As men who make the
science of Truth the business of their lives, and are
persuaded of her genuine superiority, and certain of her
ultimate triumph, they are peculiarly bound to urge her
claims in a calm and temperate spirit; not forgetting that
there are other kinds of truth besides that which they
peculiarly study. They may properly reject authority in
matters of science; but they are to leave {310} it its
proper office in matters of religion. I may here again quote
Kepler's expressions: 'In Theology we balance authorities,
in Philosophy we weigh reasons. A holy man was Lactantius
who denied that the earth was round; a holy man was
Augustine, who granted the rotundity, but denied the
antipodes; a holy thing to me is the Inquisition, which
allows the smallness of the earth, but denies its motion;
but more holy to me is Truth; and hence I prove, from
philosophy, that the earth is round, and inhabited on every
side, of small size, and in motion among the stars,--and
this I do with no disrespect to the Doctors.' I the more
willingly quote such a passage from Kepler, because the
entire ingenuousness and sincere piety of his character does
not allow us to suspect him in anything of hypocrisy or
latent irony. That similar professions of respect may be
made ironically, we have a noted example in the celebrated
Introduction to _Galileo's Dialogue on the Copernican
System_; probably the part which was most offensive to the
authorities. 'Some years ago,' he begins, 'a wholesome edict
was promulgated at Rome, which, in order to check the
perilous scandals of the present age, imposed silence upon
the Pythagorean opinion of the mobility of the earth. There
were not wanting,' he proceeds, 'persons who rashly asserted
that this decree was the result, not of a judicious inquiry,
but of passion ill-informed; and complaints were heard that
councillors, utterly unacquainted with astronomical
observation, ought not to be allowed, with their sudden
prohibitions, to clip the wings of speculative intellects.
_At the hearing of rash lamentations like these, my zeal
could not keep silence._' And he then goes on to say, that
he wishes, in his _Dialogue_, to show that the subject had
been fully examined at Rome. Here the irony is quite
transparent, and the sarcasm glaringly obvious. I think we
may venture to say that this is not the temper in which
scientific questions should be treated; although by some,
perhaps, the prohibition of public discussion may be
considered as justifying any evasion which is likely to pass
unpunished. {311}

12. _Duty of Mutual Forbearance._--We may add, as a further
reason for mutual forbearance in such cases, that the true
interests of both parties are the same. The man of science
is concerned, no less than any other person, in the truth
and import of the divine dispensation; the religious man, no
less than the man of science, is, by the nature of his
intellect, incapable of believing two contradictory
declarations. Hence they have both alike a need for
understanding the Scripture in some way in which it shall be
consistent with their understanding of nature. It is for
their common advantage to conciliate, as Kepler says, the
finger and the tongue of God, his works and his word. And
they may find abundant reason to bear with each other, even
if they should adopt for this purpose different
interpretations, each finding one satisfactory to himself;
or if any one should decline employing his thoughts on such
subjects at all. I have elsewhere[23\10] quoted a passage
from Kepler[24\10] which appears to me written in a most
suitable spirit: 'I beseech my reader that, not unmindful of
the divine goodness bestowed upon man, he do with me praise
and celebrate the wisdom of the Creator, which I open to him
from a more inward explication of the form of the world,
from a searching of causes, from a detection of the errours
of vision; and that thus not only in the firmness and
stability of the earth may we perceive with gratitude the
preservation of all living things in nature as the gift of
God: but also that in its motion, so recondite, so
admirable, we may acknowledge the wisdom of the Creator. But
whoever is too dull to receive this science, or too weak to
believe the Copernican system without harm to his piety,
him, I say, I advise that, leaving the school of astronomy,
and condemning, if so he please, any doctrines of the
philosophers, he follow his own path, and desist from this
wandering through the universe; and that, lifting up his
natural eyes, with which alone he can see, {312} he pour
himself out from his own heart in worship of God the
Creator, being certain that he gives no less worship to God
than the astronomer, to whom God has given to see more
clearly with his inward eyes, and who, from what he has
himself discovered, both can and will glorify God.'

[Note 23\10: _Bridgewater Tr._ p. 314.]

[Note 24\10: _Com. Stell. Mart._ Introd.]

13. _Case of Galileo._--I may perhaps venture here to make a
remark or two upon this subject with reference to a charge
brought against a certain portion of the _History of the
Inductive Sciences_. Complaint has been made[25\10] that the
character of the Roman church, as shown in its behaviour
towards Galileo, is misrepresented in the account given of
it in the History of Astronomy. It is asserted that Galileo
provoked the condemnation he incurred; first, by
pertinaciously demanding the assent of the ecclesiastical
authorities to his opinion of the consistency of the
Copernican doctrine with Scripture; and afterwards by
contumaciously, and, as we have seen, contumeliously
violating the silence which the Church had enjoined upon
him. It is further declared that the statement which
represents it as the habit of the Roman church to dogmatize
on points of natural science is unfounded; as well as the
opinion that in consequence of this habit, new scientific
truths were promulgated less boldly in Italy than in other
countries. I shall reply very briefly on these subjects; for
the decision of them is by no means requisite in order to
establish the doctrines to which I have been led in the
present chapter, nor, I hope, to satisfy my reader that my
views have been collected from an impartial consideration of
scientific history.

[Note 25\10: _Dublin Review_, No. ix. July, 1838, p. 72.]

With regard to Galileo, I do not think it can be denied that
he obtruded his opinions upon the ecclesiastical authorities
in an unnecessary and imprudent manner. He was of an ardent
character, strongly convinced himself, and urged on still
more by the conviction which he produced among his
disciples, and {313} thus he became impatient for the
triumph of truth. This judgment of him has recently been
delivered by various independent authorities, and has
undoubtedly considerable foundation[26\10]. As to the
question whether authority in matters of natural science
were habitually claimed by the authorities of the Church of
Rome, I have to allow that I cannot produce instances which
establish such a habit. We, who have been accustomed to have
daily before our eyes the Monition which the Romish editors
of Newton thought it necessary to prefix--_Cæterum latis a
summo Pontifice contra telluris motum Decretis, nos obsequi
profitemur_--were not likely to conjecture that this was a
solitary instance of the interposition of the Papal
authority on such subjects. But although it would be easy to
find declarations of heresy delivered by Romish
Universities, and writers of great authority, against tenets
belonging to the natural sciences, I am not aware that any
other case can be adduced in which the Church or the Pope
can be shown to have pronounced such a sentence. I am well
contented to acknowledge this; for I should be far more
gratified by finding myself compelled to hold up the
seventeenth century as a model for the nineteenth in this
respect, than by having to sow enmity between the admirers
of the past and the present through any disparaging
contrast[27\10].

[Note 26\10: Besides the _Dublin Review_, I may quote the
_Edinburgh Review_, which I suppose will not be thought
likely to have a bias in favour of the exercise of
ecclesiastical authority in matters of science; though
certainly there is a puerility in the critic's phraseology
which does not add to the weight of his judgment. 'Galileo
contrived to surround the truth with every variety of
obstruction. The tide of knowledge, which had hitherto
advanced in peace, he crested with angry breakers, and he
involved in its surf both his friends and his foes.'--_Ed.
Rev._ No. cxxiii. p. 126.]

[Note 27\10: I may add that the most candid of the adherents
of the Church of Rome condemn the assumption of authority in
matters of science, made, in this one instance at least, by
the ecclesiastical tribunals. The author of the _Ages of
Faith_ (book viii. p. 248), says, 'A Congregation, it is to
be lamented, declared the new system to be opposed to
Scripture, and therefore heretical.']

{314} With respect to the attempt made in my History to
characterize the intellectual habits of Italy as produced by
her religious condition,--certainly it would ill become any
student of the history of science to speak slightingly of
that country, always the mother of sciences, always ready to
catch the dawn and hail the rising of any new light of
knowledge. But I think our admiration of this activity and
acuteness of mind is by no means inconsistent with the
opinion, that new truths were promulgated more boldly beyond
the Alps, and that the subtilty of the Italian intellect
loved to insinuate what the rough German bluntly asserted.
Of the decent duplicity with which forbidden opinions were
handled, the reviewer himself gives us instances, when he
boasts of the liberality with which Copernican professors
were placed in important stations by the ecclesiastical
authorities, soon after the doctrine of the motion of the
earth had been declared by the same authorities to be
contrary to Scripture. And in the same spirit is the process
of demanding from Galileo a public and official recantation
of opinions which he had repeatedly been told by his
ecclesiastical superiors he might hold as much as he
pleased. I think it is easy to believe that among persons so
little careful to reconcile public profession with private
conviction, official decorum was all that was demanded. When
Galileo had made his renunciation of the earth's motion on
his knees, he rose and said, as we are told, _E pur si
muove_--'and yet it _does_ move.' This is sometimes
represented as the heroic soliloquy of a mind cherishing its
conviction of the truth, in spite of persecution; I think we
may more naturally conceive it uttered as a playful epigram
in the ear of a cardinal's secretary, with a full knowledge
that it would be immediately repeated to his master[28\10].

[Note 28\10: I have somewhat further discussed the case of
Galileo in the later editions of the _History_, book v.
chap. iii. sect. 4.]

Besides the Ideas involved in the material sciences, {315}
of which we have already examined the principal ones, there
is one Idea or Conception which our Sciences do not indeed
include, but to which they not obscurely point; and the
importance of this Idea will make it proper to speak of it,
though this must be done very briefly.




{{316}}
