CHAPTER III.

SUCCESSIVE ATTEMPTS AT THE SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE
IDEA OF A MEDIUM.


1. IN what precedes, we have shown by various considerations
that we necessarily and universally assume the perception of
secondary qualities to take place by means of a medium
interjacent between the object and the person perceiving.
Perception is affected by various peculiarities, according
to the nature of the quality perceived: but in all cases a
medium is equally essential to the process.

This principle, which, as we have seen, is accepted as
evident by the common understanding of mankind, is confirmed
by all additional reflection and discipline of the mind, and
is the foundation of all the theories which have been
proposed concerning the processes by which the perception
takes place, and concerning the modifications of the
qualities thus perceived. The medium, and the mode in which
the impression is conveyed through the medium, seem to be
different for different qualities; but the existence of the
medium leads to certain necessary conditions or
alternatives, which have successively made their appearance
in science, in the course of the attempts of men to theorize
concerning the principal secondary qualities, sound, light,
and heat. We must now point out some of the ways, at first
imperfect and erroneous, in which the consequences of the
fundamental assumption were traced.

2. _Sound._--In all cases the medium of sensation, whatever
it is, is supposed to produce the effect of conveying
secondary qualities to our perception by means of its
primary qualities. It was conceived to operate {323} by the
size, form, and motion of its parts. This is a fundamental
principle of the class of sciences of which we have at
present to speak.

It was assumed from the first, as we have seen in the
passage lately quoted from Aristotle[21\4], that in the
conveyance of _sound_, the medium of communication was the
air. But although the first theorists were right so far,
that circumstance did not prevent their going entirely wrong
when they had further to determine the nature of the
process. It was conceived by Aristotle that the air acted
after the manner of a rigid body;--like a staff, which,
receiving an impulse at one end, transmits it to the other.
Now this is altogether an erroneous view of the manner in
which the air conveys the impulse by which sound is
perceived. An approach was made to the true view of this
process, by assimilating it to the diffusion of the little
circular waves which are produced on the surface of still
water when a stone is dropt into it. These little waves
begin from the point thus disturbed, and run outwards,
expanding on every side, in concentric circles, till they
are lost. The propagation of sound through the air from the
point where it is produced, was compared by Vitruvius to
this diffusion of circular waves in water; and thus the
notion of a propagation of impulse by the _waves_ of a fluid
was introduced, in the place of the former notion of the
impulse of an unyielding body.

[Note 21\4: _Supr._ p. 297.]

But though, taking an enlarged view of the nature of the
progress of a wave, this is a just representation of the
motion of air in conveying sound, we cannot suppose that the
process was, at the period of which we speak, rightly
understood. For the waves of water were contemplated only as
affecting the surface of the water; and as the air has no
surface, the communication must take place by means of an
internal motion, which can bear only a remote and obscure
resemblance to the waves which we see. And even with regard
to the waves of water, the mechanism by which they are {324}
produced and transferred was not at all understood; so that
the comparison employed by Vitruvius must be considered
rather as a loose analogy than as an exact scientific
explanation.

No correct account of such motions was given, till the
formation of the science of Mechanics in modern times had
enabled philosophers to understand more distinctly the mode
in which motion is propagated through a fluid, and to
discern the forces which the process calls into play, so as
to continue the motion once begun. Newton introduced into
this subject the exact and rigorous conception of an
_Undulation_, which is the true key to the explanation of
impulses conveyed through a fluid.

Even at the present day, the right apprehension of the
nature of an Undulation transmitted through a fluid is found
to be very difficult for all persons except those whose
minds have been duly disciplined by mathematical studies.
When we see a wave run along the surface of water, we are
apt to imagine at first that a portion of the fluid is
transferred bodily from one place to another. But with a
little consideration we may easily satisfy ourselves that
this is not so: for if we look at a field of standing corn,
when a breeze blows over it, we see waves like those of
water run along its surface. Yet it is clear that in this
case the separate stalks of corn only bend backwards and
forwards, and no portion of the grain is really conveyed
from one part of the field to the other. This is obvious
even to popular apprehension. The poet speaks of
  .  .  .  . The rye,
  That stoops its head when whirlwinds rave
  And springs again in eddying wave
  As each wild gust sweeps by.
Each particle of the mass in succession has a small motion
backwards and forwards; and by this means a large ridge made
by many such particles runs along the mass to any distance.
This is the true conception of an undulation in general.

Thus, when an Undulation is propagated in a fluid, it is not
_matter_, but _form_, which is transmitted from {325} one
place to another. The particles along the line of each wave
assume a certain arrangement, and this arrangement passes
from one part to another, the particles changing their
places only within narrow limits, so as to lend themselves
successively to the arrangements by which the successive
waves, and the intervals between the waves, are formed.

When such an Undulation is propagated through air, the wave
is composed, not, as in water, of particles which are higher
than the rest, but of particles which are closer to each
other than the rest. The wave is not a ridge of elevation,
but a line of condensation; and as in water we have
alternately elevated and depressed lines, we have in air
lines alternately condensed and rarefied. And the motion of
the particles is not, as in water, up and down, in a
direction transverse to that of the wave which runs
forwards; in the motion of an undulation through air the
motion of each particle is alternately forwards and
backwards, while the motion of the undulation is constantly
forwards.

This precise and detailed account of the Undulatory Motion
of air by which sound is transmitted was first given by
Newton. He further attempted to determine the motions of the
separate particles, and to point out the force by which each
particle affects the next, so as to continue the progress of
the undulation once begun. The motions of each particle must
be oscillatory; he assumed the oscillations to be governed
by the simplest law of oscillation which had come under the
notice of mathematicians, (that of small vibrations of a
pendulum;) and he proved that in this manner the forces
which are called into play by the contraction and expansion
of the parts of the elastic fluid are such as the
continuance of the motion requires.

Newton's proof of the exact law of Oscillatory Motion of the
aërial particles was not considered satisfactory by
succeeding mathematicians; for it was found that the same
result, the development of forces adequate to continue the
motion, would follow if any other law of the motion were
assumed. Cramer proved this by a sort of _parody_ on
Newton's proof, in which, by the {326} alteration of a few
phrases in this formula of demonstration, it was made to
establish an entirely different conclusion.

But the general conception of an Undulation as presented by
Newton was, as from its manifest mechanical truth it could
not fail to be, accepted by all mathematicians; and in
proportion as the methods of calculating the motions of
fluids were further improved, the necessary consequences of
this conception, in the communication of sound through air,
were traced by unexceptionable reasoning. This was
especially done by Euler and Lagrange, whose memoirs on such
motions of fluids are some of the most admirable examples
which exist, of refined mathematical methods applied to the
solution of difficult mechanical problems.

But the great step in the formation of the theory of sound
was undoubtedly that which we have noticed, the introduction
of the Conception of an Undulation such as we have attempted
to describe it:--a state, condition, or arrangement of the
particles of a fluid, which is transferred from one part of
space to another by means of small motions of the particles,
altogether distinct from the movement of the Undulation
itself. This is a conception which is not obvious to common
apprehension. It appears paradoxical at first sight to speak
of a large _wave_ (as the tide-wave) running up a river at
the rate of twenty miles an hour, while the _stream_ of the
river is all the while flowing downwards. Yet this is a very
common fact. And the conception of such a motion must be
fully mastered by all who would reason rightly concerning
the mechanical transmission of impressions through a medium.

We have described the motion of sound as produced by small
motions of the particle forwards and backwards, while the
waves, or condensed and rarefied lines, move constantly
forwards. It may be asked what right we have to suppose the
motion to be of this kind, since when sound is heard, no
such motions of the particles of air can be observed, even
by refined methods of observation. Thus Bacon declares
himself against the hypothesis of such a vibration, since,
as he remarks, it {327} cannot be perceived in any visible
impression upon the flame of a candle. And to this we reply,
that the supposition of this Vibration is made in virtue of
a principle which is involved in the original assumption of
a medium; namely, That _a Medium, in conveying Secondary
qualities, operates by means of its Primary qualities_, the
bulk, figure, motion, and other mechanical properties of its
parts. This is an Axiom belonging to the Idea of a Medium.
In virtue of this axiom it is demonstrable that the motion
of the air, when any how disturbed, must be such as is
supposed in our acoustical reasonings. For the elasticity of
the parts of the air, called into play by its expansion and
contraction, lead, by a mechanical necessity, to such a
motion as we have described. We may add that, by proper
contrivances, this motion may be made perceptible in its
visible effects. Thus the theory of sound, as an impression
conveyed through air, is established upon evident general
principles, although the mathematical calculations which are
requisite to investigate its consequences are, some of them,
of a very recondite kind.

3. _Light._--The early attempts to explain Vision
represented it as performed by means of material rays
proceeding _from_ the eye, by the help of which the eye felt
out the form and other visible qualities of an object, as a
blind man might do with his staff. But this opinion could
not keep its ground long: for it did not even explain the
fact that light is necessary to vision. Light, as a peculiar
medium, was next assumed as the machinery of vision; but the
mode in which the impression was conveyed through the medium
was left undetermined, and no advance was made towards sound
theory, on that subject, by the ancients.

In modern times, when the prevalent philosophy began to
assume a mechanical turn (as in the theories of Descartes),
light was conceived to be a material substance which is
emitted from luminous bodies, and which is also conveyed
from all bodies to the eye, so as to render them visible.
The various changes of direction by which the rays of light
are affected, (reflection, {328} refraction, &c.,) Descartes
explained, by considering the particles of light as small
globules, which change their direction when they impinge
upon other bodies, according to the laws of Mechanics.
Newton, with a much more profound knowledge of Mechanics
than Descartes possessed, adopted, in the most mature of his
speculations, nearly the same view of the nature of light;
and endeavoured to show that reflection, refraction, and
other properties of light, might be explained as the effects
which certain forces, emanating from the particles of
bodies, produce upon the luminiferous globules.

But though some of the properties of light could thus be
accounted for by the assumption of particles emitted from
luminous bodies, and reflected or refracted by forces, other
properties came into view which would not admit of the same
explanation. The phenomena of _diffraction_ (the fringes
which accompany shadows) could never be truly represented by
such an hypothesis, in spite of many attempts which were
made. And the _colours of thin plates_, which show the rays
of light to be affected by an alternation of two different
conditions at small intervals along their length, led Newton
himself to incline, often and strongly, to some hypothesis
of undulation. The _double refraction_ of Iceland spar, a
phenomenon in itself very complex, could, it was found by
Huyghens, be expressed with great simplicity by a certain
hypothesis of undulations.

Two hypotheses of the nature of the luminiferous medium were
thus brought under consideration; the one representing Light
as Matter emitted from the luminous object, the other, as
Undulations propagated through a fluid. These two hypotheses
remained in presence of each other during the whole of the
last century, neither of them gaining any material advantage
over the other, though the greater part of mathematicians,
following Newton, embraced the emission theory. But at the
beginning of the present century, an additional class of
phenomena, those of the _interference_ of two rays of light,
were brought under {329} consideration by Dr. Young; and
these phenomena were strongly in favour of the undulatory
theory, while they were irreconcilable with the hypothesis
of emission. If it had not been for the original bias of
Newton and his school to the other side, there can be little
doubt that from this period light as well as sound would
have been supposed to be propagated by undulations; although
in this case it was necessary to assume as the vehicle of
such undulations a special medium or _ether_. Several points
of the phenomena of vision no doubt remained unexplained by
the undulatory theory, as absorption, and the natural
colours of bodies; but such facts, though they did not
confirm, did not evidently contradict the theory of a
Luminiferous Ether; and the facts which such a theory did
explain, it explained with singular happiness and accuracy.

But before this Undulatory Theory could be generally
accepted, it was presented in an entirely new point of view
by being combined with the facts of _polarization_. The
general idea of polarization must be illustrated hereafter;
but we may here remark that Young and Fresnel, who had
adopted the undulatory theory, after being embarrassed for
some time by the new facts which were thus presented to
their notice, at last saw that these facts might be
explained by conceiving the vibrations to be transverse to
the ray, the motions of the particles being not backwards
and forwards in the line in which the impulse travels, but
to the right and left of that line. This conception of
_transverse vibrations_, though quite unforeseen, had
nothing in it which was at all difficult to reconcile with
the general notion of an undulation. We have described an
undulation, or wave, as a certain condition or arrangement
of the particles of the fluid successively transferred from
one part of space to another: and it is easily conceivable
that this arrangement or wave may be produced by a lateral
transfer of the particles from their quiescent positions.
This conception of transverse vibrations being accepted, it
was found that the explanation of the phenomena of
polarization and of those of interference led to the same
theory {330} with a correspondence truly wonderful; and this
coincidence in the views, collected from two quite distinct
classes of phenomena, was justly considered as an almost
demonstrative evidence of the truth of this undulatory
theory.

It remained to be considered whether the doctrine of
transverse vibrations in a fluid could be reconciled with
the principles of Mechanics. And it was found that by making
certain suppositions, in which no inherent improbability
existed, the hypothesis of transverse vibrations would
explain the laws, both of interference and of polarization
of light, in air and in crystals of all kinds, with a
surprizing fertility and fidelity.

Thus the Undulatory Theory of Light, like the Undulatory
Theory of Sound, is recommended by its conformity to the
fundamental principle of the Secondary Mechanical Sciences,
that the medium must be supposed to transmit its peculiar
impulses according to the laws of Mechanics. Although no one
had previously dreamt of qualities being conveyed through a
medium by such a process, yet when it is once suggested as
the only mode of explaining some of the phenomena, there is
nothing to prevent our accepting it entirely, as a
satisfactory theory for all the known laws of Light.

4. _Heat._--With regard to Heat as with regard to Light, a
fluid medium was necessarily assumed as the vehicle of the
property. During the last century, this medium was supposed
to be an emitted fluid. And many of the ascertained Laws of
Heat, those which prevail with regard to its radiation more
especially, were well explained by this hypothesis[22\4].
Other effects of heat, however, as for instance _latent
heat_[23\4], and the change of _consistence_ of
bodies[24\4], were not satisfactorily brought into connexion
with the hypothesis; while {331} _conduction_[25\4], which
at first did not appear to result from the fundamental
assumption, was to a certain extent explained as internal
radiation.

[Note 22\4: See the Account of the Theory of Exchanges,
_Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. x. c. i. sect. 2.]

[Note 23\4: _Ib._ c. ii. sect. 3.]

[Note 24\4: _Ib._ c. ii. sect. 2.]

[Note 25\4: _Ib._ c. i. sect. 7.]

But it was by no means clear that an Undulatory Theory of
Heat might not be made to explain these phenomena equally
well. Several philosophers inclined to such a theory; and
finally, Ampère showed that the doctrine that the heat of a
body consists in the undulations of its particles propagated
by means of the undulations of a medium, might be so
adjusted as to explain all which the theory of emission
could explain, and moreover to account for facts and laws
which were out of the reach of that theory. About the same
time it was discovered by Prof. Forbes and M. Nobili that
radiant heat is, under certain circumstances, polarized. Now
polarization had been most satisfactorily explained by means
of transverse undulations in the case of light; while all
attempts to modify the emission theory so as to include
polarization in it, had been found ineffectual. Hence this
discovery was justly considered as lending great countenance
to the opinion that Heat consists in the vibrations of its
proper medium.

But what is this medium? Is it the same by which the
impressions of Light are conveyed? This is a difficult
question; or rather it is one which we cannot at present
hope to answer with certainty. No doubt the connexion
between Light and Heat is so intimate and constant, that we
can hardly refrain from considering them as affections of
the same medium. But instead of attempting to erect our
systems on such loose and general views of connexion, it is
rather the business of the philosophers of the present day
to determine the laws of the operation of heat, and its real
relation to light, in order that we may afterwards be able
to connect the theories of the two qualities. Perhaps in a
more advanced state of our knowledge we may be able to state
it as an Axiom, that two Secondary Qualities, which are
intimately connected in their causes and effects, must be
affections of the same Medium. {332} But at present it does
not appear safe to proceed upon such a principle, although
many writers, in their speculations both concerning Light
and Heat, and concerning other properties, have not
hesitated to do so.

Some other consequences follow from the Idea of a Medium
which must be the subject of another chapter.



{{333}}
