BOOK III.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
MECHANICAL SCIENCES.




IT is only because we subject trains of phenomena, that is,
all change whatever, to the law of causality--to the
relation of cause and effect--that experience or empirical
knowledge becomes possible.

KANT, _Kr. d. R. V._ 11 Th. 1 Abth. 11 Buch. 2 Haupt.

Quicquid premit vel trahit alterum, tantundem ab eo premitur
vel trahitur ... Si corpus aliquod in corpus aliud impingens
motum ejus vi suâ quomodocunque mutaverit, idem quoque
vicissim in motu proprio eandem mutationem in partem
contrariam vi alterius (ob æqualitatem pressionis, mutuæ)
subibit ... Obtinet etiam hæc Lex in attractionibus.

NEWTON, _Princip._ ad init.



{{171}}
BOOK III.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES.


CHAPTER I.

OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES.


IN the History of the Sciences, that class of which we here
speak occupies a conspicuous and important place; coming
into notice immediately after those parts of Astronomy which
require for their cultivation merely the ideas of space,
time, motion, and number. It appears from our History, that
certain truths concerning the _equilibrium_ of bodies were
established by Archimedes;--that, after a long interval of
inactivity, his principles were extended and pursued further
in modern times:--and that to these doctrines concerning
equilibrium and the forces which produce it, (which
constitute the science _Statics_,) were added many other
doctrines concerning the _motions_ of bodies, considered
also as produced by forces, and thus the science of
_Dynamics_ was produced. The assemblage of these sciences
composes the province of _Mechanics_. Moreover, philosophers
have laboured to make out the laws of the equilibrium of
_fluid_ as well as solid bodies; and hence has arisen the
science of _Hydrostatics_. And the doctrines of Mechanics
have been found to have a most remarkable bearing upon the
motions of the heavenly bodies; with reference to which,
indeed, they were at first principally studied. The
explanation of those cosmical facts by means of mechanical
{172} principles and their consequences, forms the science
of _Physical Astronomy_. These are the principal examples of
mechanical science; although some other portions of Physics,
as Magnetism and Electrodynamics, introduce mechanical
doctrines very largely into their speculations.

Now in all these sciences we have to consider _Forces_. In
all mechanical reasonings forces enter, either as producing
motion, or as prevented from doing so by other forces. Thus
force, in its most general sense, is the _cause_ of motion,
or of tendency to motion; and in order to discover the
principles on which the mechanical sciences truly rest, we
must examine the nature and origin of our knowledge of Causes.

In these sciences, however, we have not to deal with Cause
in its more general acceptation, in which it applies to all
kinds of agency, material or immaterial;--to the influence
of thought and will, as well as of bodily pressure and
attractive force. Our business at present is only with such
causes as immediately operate upon matter. We shall
nevertheless, in the first place, consider the nature of
Cause in its most general form; and afterwards narrow our
speculations so as to direct them specially to the
mechanical sciences.



{{173}}
CHAPTER II.

OF THE IDEA OF CAUSE.


1. WE see in the world around us a constant succession of
causes and effects connected with each other. The laws of
this connexion we learn in a great measure from experience,
by observation of the occurrences which present themselves
to our notice, succeeding one another. But in doing this,
and in attending to this succession of appearances, of which
we are aware by means of our senses, we supply from our own
minds the Idea of Cause. This Idea, as we have already shown
with respect to other Ideas, is not derived from experience,
but has its origin in the mind itself;--is introduced into
our experience by the active, and not by the passive part of
our nature.

By Cause we mean some quality, power, or efficacy, by which
a state of things produces a succeeding state. Thus the
motion of bodies from rest is produced by a cause which we
call _Force_: and in the particular case in which bodies
fall to the earth, this force is termed _Gravity_. In these
cases, the Conceptions of Force and Gravity receive their
meaning from the Idea of Cause which they involve: for Force
is conceived as the Cause of Motion. That this Idea of Cause
is not derived from experience, we prove (as in former
cases) by this consideration: that we can make assertions,
involving this idea, which are rigorously necessary and
universal; whereas knowledge derived from experience can
only be true as far as experience goes, and can never
contain in itself any evidence whatever of its necessity. We
assert that 'Every event must have a cause:' and this
proposition we know to be true, not only probably, and
generally, and as far as we can see: {174} but we cannot
suppose it to be false in any single instance. We are as
certain of it as of the truths of arithmetic or geometry. We
cannot doubt that it must apply to all events past and
future, in every part of the universe, just as truly as to
those occurrences which we have ourselves observed. _What_
causes produce what effects;--what is the cause of any
particular event;--what will be the effect of any peculiar
process;--these are points on which experience may enlighten
us. Observation and experience may be requisite, to enable
us to judge respecting such matters. But that every event
has _some_ cause, Experience cannot prove any more than she
can disprove. She can add nothing to the evidence of the
truth, however often she may exemplify it. This doctrine,
then, cannot have been acquired by her teaching; and the
Idea of Cause, which the doctrine involves, and on which it
depends, cannot have come into our minds from the region of
observation.

2. That we do, in fact, apply the Idea of Cause in a more
extensive manner than could be justified, if it were derived
from experience only, is easily shown. For from the
principle that everything must have a cause, we not only
reason concerning the succession of the events which occur
in the progress of the world, and which form the course of
experience; but we infer that the world itself must have a
cause;--that the chain of events connected by common
causation, must have a First Cause of a nature different
from the events themselves. This we are entitled to do, if
our Idea of Cause be independent of, and superior to,
experience: but if we have no Idea of Cause except such as
we gather from experience, this reasoning is altogether
baseless and unmeaning.

3. Again; by the use of our powers of observation, we are
aware of a succession of appearances and events. But none of
our senses or powers of external observation can detect in
these appearances the power or quality which we call Cause.
Cause is that which connects one event with another; but no
sense or perception discloses to us, or can disclose, any
connexion {175} among the events which we observe. We see
that one occurrence follows another, but we can never see
anything which shows that one occurrence _must_ follow
another. We have already noticed[1\3], that this truth has
been urged by metaphysicians in modern times, and generally
assented to by those who examine carefully the connexion of
their own thoughts. The arguments are, indeed, obvious
enough. One ball strikes another and causes it to move
forwards. But by what compulsion? Where is the necessity? If
the mind can see any circumstance in this case which makes
the result inevitable, let this circumstance be pointed out.
But, in fact, there is no such discoverable necessity; for
we can conceive this event not to take place at all. The
struck ball may stand still, for aught we can see. 'But the
laws of motion will not allow it to do so.' Doubtless they
will not. But the laws of motion are learnt from experience,
and therefore can prove no necessity. Why should not the
laws of motion be other than they are? Are they necessarily
true? That they are necessarily such as do actually regulate
the impact of bodies, is at least no obvious truth; and
therefore this necessity cannot be, in common minds, the
ground of connecting the impact of one ball with the motion
of another. And assuredly, if this fail, no other ground of
such necessary connexion can be shown. In this case, then,
the events are not seen to be necessarily connected. But if
this case, where one ball moves another by impulse, be not
an instance of events exhibiting a necessary connexion, we
shall look in vain for any example of such a connexion.
There is, then, no case in which events can be observed to
be necessarily connected: our idea of causation, which
implies that the event is necessarily connected with the
cause, cannot be derived from observation.

[Note 1\3: Book 3. chap. ii.]

4. But it may be said, we have not any such Idea of Cause,
implying necessary connexion with effect, and a quality by
which this connexion is produced. {176} We see nothing but
the succession of events; and by _cause_ we mean nothing but
a certain succession of events;--namely, a constant,
unvarying succession. Cause and effect are only two events
of which the second invariably follows the first. We delude
ourselves when we imagine that our idea of causation
involves anything more.

To this I reply by asking, what then is the meaning of the
maxim above quoted, and allowed by all to be universally and
necessarily true, that every event must have a cause? Let us
put this maxim into the language of the explanation just
noticed; and it becomes this:--'Every event must have a
certain other event invariably preceding it.' But why must
it? Where is the necessity? Why must like events always be
preceded by like, except so far as other events interfere?
That there is such a necessity, no one can doubt. All will
allow that if a stone ascend because it is thrown upwards in
one case, a stone which ascends in another case has also
been thrown upwards, or has undergone some equivalent
operation. All will allow that in this sense, every kind of
event must have some other specific kind of event preceding
it. But this turn of men's thoughts shows that they see in
events a connexion which is not mere succession. They see in
cause and effect, not merely what does, often or always,
precede and follow, but what _must_ precede and follow. The
events are not only conjoined, they are connected. The cause
is more than the prelude, the effect is more than the
sequel, of the fact. The cause is conceived not as a mere
occasion; it is a power, an efficacy, which has a real
operation.

5. Thus we have drawn from the maxim, that Every Effect must
have a Cause, arguments to show that we have an Idea of
Cause which is not borrowed from experience, and which
involves more than mere succession. Similar arguments might
be derived from any other maxims of universal and necessary
validity, which we can obtain concerning Cause: as, for
example, the maxims that Causes are measured by their
Effects, and that Reaction is equal and opposite to {177}
Action. These maxims we shall soon have to examine; but we
may observe here, that the necessary truth which belongs to
them, shows that they, and the Ideas which they involve, are
not the mere fruits of observation; while their meaning,
including, as it does, something quite different from the
mere conception of succession of events, proves that such a
conception is far from containing the whole import and
signification of our Idea of Cause.

The progress of the opinions of philosophers on the points
discussed in this chapter, has been one of the most
remarkable parts of the history of Metaphysics in modern
times: and I shall therefore briefly notice some of its
features.



{{178}}
