BOOK VIII.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES.




WHERE a certain apparent difference between things (although
perhaps in itself of little moment) answers to we know not
what number of other differences, pervading not only their
known properties but properties yet undiscovered, it is not
optional but imperative to recognise this difference as the
foundation of a specific distinction.

JOHN S. MILL, _System of Logic_, b. 1, ch. vii. § 4.



{{95}}
BOOK VIII.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CLASSIFICATORY SCIENCES.


CHAPTER I.

THE IDEA OF LIKENESS AS GOVERNING THE USE OF COMMON NAMES.


1. _Object of the Chapter._--NOT only the Classificatory
Sciences, but the application of names to things in the
rudest and most unscientific manner, depends upon our
apprehending them as _like_ each other. We must therefore
endeavour to trace the influence and operation of the Idea
of Likeness in the common use of language, before we speak
of the conditions under which it acquires its utmost
exactness and efficacy.

It will be my object to show in this, as in previous cases,
that the impressions of sense are apprehended by acts of the
mind; and that these mental acts necessarily imply certain
relations which may be made the subjects of speculative
reasoning. We shall have, if we can, to seize and bring into
clear view the principles which the relation of _like_ and
_unlike_ involves, and the mode in which these principles
have been developed.

2. _Unity of the Individual._--But before we can attend to
several things as like or unlike, we must be able to
apprehend each of these by itself as _one thing_. {96} It
may at first sight perhaps appear that this apprehension
results immediately from the impressions on our senses,
without any act of our thoughts. A very little attention,
however, enables us to see that thus to single out special
objects requires a mental operation as well as a sensation.
How, for example, without an exertion of mental activity,
can we see one tree, in a forest where there are many? We
have, spread before us, a collection of colours and forms,
green and brown, dark and light, irregular and straight:
this is all that sensation gives or can give. But we
associate one brown trunk with one portion of the green
mass, excluding the rest, although the neighbouring leaves
are both nearer in contiguity and more similar in appearance
than is the stem. We thus have before us one tree; but this
unity is given by the mind itself. We see the green and the
brown, but we must _make_ the tree before we can see _it_.

That this composition of our sensations so as to form _one
thing_ implies an act of our own, will perhaps be more
readily allowed, if we once more turn our attention to the
manner in which we sometimes attempt to imitate and record
the objects of sight, by drawing. When we do this, as we
have already observed, we mark this unity of each object, by
drawing a line to separate the parts which we include from
those which we exclude;--an _Outline_. This line corresponds
to nothing which we see; the beginner in drawing has great
difficulty in discerning it; he has in fact to make it. It
is, as has been said by a painter of our own time[1\8], a
fiction: but it is a fiction employed to mark a real act of
the mind; to designate the singleness of the object in our
conception. As we have said elsewhere, we see lines, but
especially outlines, by mentally drawing them ourselves.

[Note 1\8: Phillips _On Painting_,--Design.]

The same act of conception which the outline thus represents
and commemorates in visible objects,--the same combination
of sensible impressions into a unit,--is exercised also with
regard to the objects of all {97} our senses: and the
singleness thus given to each object, is a necessary
preliminary to its being named or represented in any other
way.

But it may be said, Is it then by an arbitrary act of our
own that we put together the branches of the same tree, or
the limbs of the same animal? Have we equally the power and
the right to make the branch of the fir a part of the
neighbouring oak? Can we include in the outline of a man any
object with which he happens to be in contact?

Such suppositions are manifestly absurd. And the answer is,
that though we give unity to objects by an act of thought,
it is not by an _arbitrary_ act; but by a process subject to
certain conditions;--to conditions which exclude such
incongruous combinations as have just been spoken of.

What are these conditions which regulate our apprehension of
an object as one?--which determine what portion of our
impressions does, and what portion does not belong to the
same thing?

3. _Condition of Unity._--I reply, that the primary and
fundamental condition is, that we must be able to make
intelligible assertions respecting the object, and to
entertain that belief of which assertions are the
exposition. A tree _grows_, _sheds_ its leaves in autumn,
and _buds_ again in the spring, _waves_ in the wind, or
_falls_ before the storm. And to the tree belong all those
parts which must be included in order that such
declarations, and the thought which they convey, shall have
a coherent and permanent meaning. Those are _its_ branches
which wave and fall with _its_ trunk; those are _its_ leaves
which grow on _its_ branches. The permanent connexions which
we observe,--permanent, among unconnected changes which
affect the surrounding appearances,--are what we bind
together as belonging to one object. This permanence is the
condition of our conceiving the object _as_ one. The
connected changes may always be described by means of
assertions; and the connexion is seen in the identity of the
subject of successive predications; in the possibility of
applying many verbs to one substantive. We may {98}
therefore express the condition of the unity of an object to
be this: that _assertions concerning the object shall be
possible_: or rather we should say, that the acts of belief
which such assertions enunciate shall be possible.

It may seem to be superfluous to put in a form so abstract
and remote, the grounds of a process apparently so simple as
our conceiving an object to be one. But the same condition
to which we have thus been led, as the essential principle
of the unity of objects, namely, that propositions shall be
possible, will repeatedly occur in the present chapter; and
it may serve to illustrate our views, to show that this
condition pervades even the simplest cases.

4. _Kinds._--The mental synthesis of which we have thus
spoken, gives us our knowledge of _individual_ things; it
enables me to apprehend that particular tree or man which I
now see, or, by the help of memory, the tree or the man I
saw yesterday. But the knowledge with which we have mainly
here to do is not a knowledge of individuals but of kinds;
of such classes as are indicated by common names. We have to
make assertions concerning a tree or a man in general,
without regarding what is peculiar to this man or that tree.

Now it is clear that certain individual objects are all
called _man_, or all called _tree_, in virtue of some
resemblance which they have. If we had not the power of
perceiving in the appearances around us, likeness and
unlikeness, we could not consider objects as distributed
into kinds at all. The impressions of sense would throng
upon us, but being uncompared with each other, they would
flow away like the waves of the sea, and each vanish from
our contemplation when the sensation faded. That we do
apprehend surrounding objects as belonging to permanent
kinds, as being men and horses, oaks and roses, arises from
our having the idea of likeness, and from our applying it
habitually, and so far as such a classification requires.

Not only can we employ the idea of likeness in this manner,
but we apply it incessantly and universally to {99} the
whole mass and train of our sensations. For we have no
external sensations to which we cannot apply some language
or other; and all language necessarily implies recognition
of resemblances. We cannot call an object _green_ or _round_
without comparing in our thoughts its colour or its shape,
with a shape and a colour seen in other objects. All our
sensations, therefore, without any exception of kind or
time, are subject to this constant process of
classification; and the idea of likeness is perpetually
operating to distribute them into kinds, at least so far as
the use of language requires.

We come then again to the question, Upon what principle,
under what conditions, is the Idea of Likeness thus
operative? What are the limits of the classes thus formed?
Where does that similarity end, which induces and entitles
us to call a thing a _tree_? What universal rule is there
for the application of common names, so that we may not
apply them wrongly?

5. _Not made by Definitions._--Perhaps some one might expect
in answer to these inquiries a definition or a series of
definitions;--might imagine that some description of a tree
might be given which might show when the term was applicable
and when it was not; and that we might construct a body of
rules to which such descriptions must conform. But on
consideration it will be clear that the real solution of our
difficulty cannot be obtained in such a manner. For _first_;
such descriptions must be given in words, and must therefore
suppose that we have already satisfied ourselves how words
are to be used. If we define a tree to be 'a living thing
without the power of voluntary motion,' we shall be called
upon to define 'a living thing;' and it is manifest that
this renewal of the demand for definition might be repeated
indefinitely; and, therefore, we cannot in this way come to
a final principle. And in the _next_ place, most of those
who use language, even with great precision and consistency,
would find it difficult or impossible to give good
definitions even of a few of the general names which they
use; and therefore their practice cannot be regulated by any
{100} tacit reference to such definitions. That definitions
of terms are of great use and importance in their right
place, we shall soon see; but their place is not to regulate
the use of common language.

What then, once more, is this regulative principle? What
rules do men follow in the use of words, so as commonly to
avoid confusion and ambiguity? How do they come to
understand each other so well as they ordinarily do,
respecting the limits of classes never defined, and which
they cannot define? What is the common Convention, or
Condition to which they conform?

6. _Condition of the Use of Terms._--To this we reply, that
the Condition which regulates the use of language, is, that
it shall be capable of being used;--that is, that general
assertions shall be possible. The term _tree_ is applicable
as far as it is useful in expressing our knowledge
concerning trees:--thus we know that trees are fixed in the
ground, have a solid stem, branches, leaves, and many other
properties. With regard to all the objects which surround
us, we have an immense store of knowledge of such
properties, and we employ the names of the objects in such a
manner as enables us to express these properties.

But the connexion of such properties is variable and
indefinite. Some properties are constantly combined, others
occasionally only. The leaves of different oaks resemble
each other, the branches resemble far less, and may differ
very widely. The term _oak_ does not enable us to say that all
oaks have straight branches or all crooked. Terms can only
express properties as far as they are constant. Not only,
therefore, the accumulation of a vast mass of knowledge of
the properties and attributes of objects, but also an
observation of the habitual _connexion_ of such properties
is needed, to direct us to the consistent application of
terms:--to enable us to apply them so as to express truths.
But here again we are largely provided with the requisite
knowledge and observation by the common course of our
existence. The unintermitting stream of experience supplies
us with an incalculable {101} amount of such observed
connexions. All men have observed that the associations of
the same form of leaves are more constant than of the same
form of branches;--that though persons walk in different
attitudes, none go on all fours; and thus the term _oak_ is
so applied as to include those cases in which the leaves are
alike in form though the branches be unlike; and though we
should refuse to apply the term _man_ to a class of
creatures which habitually and without compulsion used four
legs, we make no scruple of affixing it to persons of very
different figures. The whole of human experience being
composed of such observed connexions, we have thus materials
even for the immense multiplicity of names which human
language contains; all which names are, as we have said,
regulated in their application by the condition of their
expressing such experience.

Thus amid the countless combinations of properties and
divisions of classes which the structure of language
implies, scarcely any are arbitrary or capricious. A word
which expressed a mere wanton collection of unconnected
attributes could hardly be called a _word_; for of such a
collection of properties no truth could be asserted, and the
word would disappear, for want of some occasion on which it
could be used. Though much of the fabric of language
appears, not unnaturally, fantastical and purely
conventional, it is in fact otherwise. The associations and
distinctions of phraseology are not more fanciful than is
requisite to make them correspond to the apparent caprices
of nature or of thought; and though much in language may be
called conventional, the conventions exist for the sake of
expressing some truth or opinion, and not for their own
sake. The principle, that _the condition of the use of terms
is the possibility of general, intelligible, consistent
assertions_, is true in the most complete and extensive sense.

7. _Terms may have different Uses._--The Terms with which we
are here most concerned are Names of Classes of natural
objects; and when we say that the principle and the limit of
such Names are their use in expressing propositions
concerning the classes, it is {102} clear that much will
depend on the kind of propositions which we mainly have to
express: and that the same name may have different limits,
according to the purpose we have in view. For example, is
the _whale_ properly included in the general term _fish_?
When men are concerned in catching marine animals, the main
features of the process are the same however the animals may
differ; hence whales are classed with fishes, and we speak
of the _whale-fishery_. But if we look at the analogies of
organization, we find that, according to these, the whale is
clearly not a fish, but a _beast_, (confining this term, for
the sake of distinctness, to suckling beasts or _mammals_).
In Natural History, therefore, the whale is not included
among fish. The indefinite and miscellaneous propositions
which language is employed to enunciate in the course of
common practical life, are replaced by a more coherent and
systematic collection of properties, when we come to aim at
scientific knowledge. But we shall hereafter consider the
principle of the classifications of Natural History; our
present subject is the application of the Idea of Likeness
in common practice and common language.

8. _Gradation of Kinds._--Common names, then, include many
individuals associated in virtue of resemblances, and of
permanently connected properties; and such names are
applicable as far as they serve to express such properties.
These collections of individuals are termed _Kinds_,
_Sorts_, _Classes_.

But this association of particulars is capable of degrees.
As individuals by their resemblances form Kinds, so kinds of
things, though different, may resemble each other so as to
be again associated in a higher Class; and there may be
several successive steps of such classification. _Man_,
_horse_, _tree_, _stone_, are each a name of a Kind; but
_animal_ includes the two first and excludes the others;
_living thing_ is a term which includes _animal_ and _tree_
but not _stone_; _body_ includes all the four. And such a
subordination of kinds may be traced very widely in the
arrangements of language. {103}

The condition of the use of the wider is the same as that of
the narrower Names of Classes;--they are good as far as they
serve to express true propositions. In common language,
though such an order of generality may in a variety of
instances be easily discerned, it is not systematically and
extensively referred to; but this subordination and
graduated comprehensiveness is the essence of the methods
and nomenclatures of Natural History, as we shall soon have
to show.

But such subordination is not without its use, even in
common cases, and when it is expressed in the terms of
common language. Thus _organized body_ is a term which
includes plants and animals; _animal_ includes beasts,
birds, fishes; _beast_ includes horses and dogs; _dogs_,
again, are greyhounds, spaniels, terriers.

9. _Characters of Kinds._--Now when we have such a Series of
Names and Classes, we find that we take for granted
irresistibly that each class has some _Character_ which
distinguishes it from other classes included in the superior
division. We ask what kind of beast a dog is; what kind of
animal a beast is; and we assume that such questions admit
of answer;--that each kind has some mark or marks by which
it may be described. And such descriptions may be given: an
animal is an organized body _having sensation and volition_;
man is a _reasonable_ animal. Whether or no we assent to the
exactness of these definitions, we allow the propriety of
their form. If we maintain these definitions to be wrong, we
must believe some others to be right, however difficult it
may be to hit upon them. We entertain a conviction that
there must be, among things so classed and named, a
possibility of defining each.

Now what is the foundation of this postulate? What is the
ground of this assumption, that there must exist a
definition which we have never seen, and which perhaps no
one has seen in a satisfactory form? The knowledge of this
definition is by no means necessary to our using the word
with propriety; for any one can make true assertions about
dogs, but who can define a {104} dog? And yet if the
definition be not necessary to enable us to use the word,
why is it necessary at all? I allow that we possess an
indestructible conviction that there must be such a
character of each kind as will supply a definition; but I
ask, on what this conviction rests.

I reply, that our persuasion that there must needs be
characteristic marks by which things can be defined in
words, is founded on the assumption of _the necessary
possibility of reasoning_.

The reference of any object or conception to its class
without definition, may give us a persuasion that it shares
the properties of its class, but such classing does not
enable us to reason upon those properties. When we consider
man as an animal, we ascribe to him in thought the
appetites, desires, affections, which we habitually include
in our notion of animal: but except we have expressed these
in some definition or acknowledged description of the term
_animal_, we can make no use of the persuasion in
ratiocination. But if we have described animals as 'being
impelled to action by appetites and passions,' we can not
only think, but say, 'man is an animal, and therefore he is
impelled to act by appetites and passions.' And if we add a
further definition, that 'man is a reasonable animal,' and
if it appear that 'reason implies conformity to a rule of
action,' we can then further infer that man's nature is to
conform the results of animal appetite and passion to a rule
of action.

The possibility of pursuing any such train of reasoning as
this, depends on the definitions, of _animal_ and of _man_,
which we have introduced; and the possibility of reasoning
concerning the objects around us being inevitably assumed by
us from the constitution of our nature, we assume
consequently the possibility of such definitions as may thus
form part of our deduction, and the existence of such
defining characters.

10. _Difficulty of Definitions._--But though men are, on
such grounds, led to make constant and importunate _demands_
for definitions of the terms which they employ in their
speculations, they are, in fact, far {105} from being able
to carry into complete effect the postulate on which they
proceed, that they must be able to find definitions which by
logical consequence shall lead to the truths they seek. The
postulate overlooks the process by which our classes of
things are formed and our names applied. This process
consisting, as we have already said, in observing permanent
connexions of properties, and in fixing them by the
attribution of names, is of the nature of the process of
Induction, of which we shall afterwards have to speak. And
the postulate is so far true, that this process of induction
being once performed, its result may usually be expressed by
means of a few definitions, and may thus lead by a deduction
to a train of real truths.

But in the subjects where we principally find such a
subordination of classes as we have spoken of, this process
of deduction is rarely of much prominence: for example, in
the branches of natural history. Yet it is in these subjects
that the existence and importance of these characteristic
marks, which we have spoken of, principally comes into view.
In treating of these marks, however, we enter upon methods
which are technical and scientific, not popular and common.
And before we make this transition, we have a remark to make
on the manner in which writers, without reference to physics
or natural history, have spoken of kinds, their
subordination, and their marks.

11. '_The Five Words._'--These things,--the Nature and
Relations of Classes,--were, in fact, the subjects of minute
and technical treatment by the logicians of the school of
Aristotle. Porphyry wrote an Introduction to the
_Categories_ of that philosopher, which is entitled _On the
Five Words_. The 'Five Words' are _Genus_, _Species_,
_Difference_, _Property_, _Accident_. Genus and Species are
superior and inferior classes, and are stated[2\8] to be
capable of repeated subordination. The 'most {106} general
Genus' is the widest class; the 'most special Species' the
narrowest. Between these are intermediate classes, which are
Genera with regard to those below, and Species with regard
to those above them. Thus Being is the most general Genus;
under this is Body; under Body is Living Body; under this
again Animal; under Animal is Rational Animal, or Man; under
Man are Socrates and Plato, and other individual men.

[Note 2\8: Porphyr. _Isagog._ c. 23.]

The _Difference_ is that which is added to the genus to make
the species; thus Rational is the Difference by which the
genus Animal is made the species Man; the Difference in this
Technical sense is the 'Specific,' or species-making
Difference[3\8]. It forms the Definition for the purposes of
logic, and corresponds to the 'Character' (specific or
generic) of the Natural Historians. Indeed several of them,
as, for instance, Linnæus, in his _Philosophia Botanica_,
always call these Characters the _Difference_, by a
traditional application of the Peripatetic terms of art.

[Note 3\8: εἰδοποιός.]

Of the other two words, the Property is that which though
not employed in defining the class, belongs to every part of
it[4\8]: it is, 'What happens to all the class, to it alone,
and at all times; as _to be capable of laughing_ is a
Property of man.'

[Note 4\8: _Isagog._ c. 4]

The Accident is that which may be present and absent without
the destruction of the subject, as to sleep is an Accident
(a thing which happens) to man.

I need not dwell further on this system of technicalities.
The most remarkable points in it are those which I have
already noticed; the doctrine of the successive
Subordination of genera, and the fixing attention upon the
Specific Difference. These doctrines, though invented in
order to make reasoning more systematic, and at a period
anterior to the existence of any Classificatory Science,
have, by a curious contrast with the intentions of their
founders, been of scarcely {107} any use in sciences of
_Reasoning_, but have been amply applied and developed in
the _Natural History_ which arose in later times.

We must now treat of the principles on which this science
(Natural History) proceeds, and explain what peculiar and
technical processes it employs in addition to those of
common thought and common language.



{{108}}
