CHAPTER II.

ON PECULIARITIES IN THE PERCEPTIONS OF THE DIFFERENT SENSES.


1. WE cannot doubt that we perceive all secondary qualities
by means of immediate impressions made, through the proper
medium of sensation, upon our organs. Hence all the senses
are sometimes vaguely spoken of as modifications of the
sense of feeling. It will, however, be seen, on reflection,
that this mode of speaking identifies in words things which
in our conceptions have nothing in common. No impression on
the organs of touch can be conceived as having any
resemblance to colour or smell. No effort, no ingenuity, can
enable us to describe the impressions of one sense in terms
borrowed from another.

The senses have, however, each its peculiar powers, and
these powers may be in some respects compared, so as to show
their leading resemblances and differences, and the
characteristic privileges and laws of each. This is what we
shall do as briefly as possible.


SECT. I.--_Prerogatives of Sight._

THE sight distinguishes colours, as the hearing
distinguishes tones; the sight estimates degrees of
brightness, the ear, degrees of loudness; but with several
resemblances, there are most remarkable differences between
these two senses.

2. _Position._--The sight has this peculiar prerogative,
that it apprehends the _place_ of its objects directly and
primarily. We see _where_ an object is at the same instant
that we see what it is. If we see two objects, we see their
relative position. We cannot help {303} perceiving that one
is above or below, to the right or to the left of the other,
if we perceive them at all.

There is nothing corresponding to this in sound. When we
hear a noise, we do not necessarily assign a place to it. It
may easily happen that we cannot tell from which side a
thunder-clap comes. And though we often can judge in what
direction a voice is heard, this is a matter of secondary
impression, and of inference from concomitant circumstances,
not a primary fact of sensation. The judgments which we form
concerning the position of sounding bodies are obtained by
the conscious or unconscious comparison of the impressions
made on the two ears, and on the bones of the head in
general; they are not inseparable conditions of hearing. We
may hear sounds, and be uncertain whether they are 'above,
around, or underneath!' but the moment anything visible
appears, however unexpected, we can say, 'see _where_ it
comes!'

Since we can see the relative position of things, we can see
_figure_, which is but the relative position of the
different parts of the boundary of the object. And thus the
whole visible world exhibits to us a scene of various
shapes, coloured and shaded according to their form and
position, but each having relations of position to all the
rest; and altogether, entirely filling up the whole range
which the eye can command.

3. _Distance._--The distance of objects from us is no matter
of immediate perception, but is a judgment and inference
formed from our sensations, in something of the same way as
our judgment of position by the ear, though more precise.
That this is so, was most distinctly shown by Berkeley, in
his _New Theory of Vision_. The elements on which we form
our judgment are, the effort by which we fix both eyes on
the same object, the effort by which we adjust each eye to
distinct vision, and the known forms, colours, and parts of
objects, as compared with their appearance. The right
interpretation of the information which these circumstances
give us respecting the true distances and forms of things,
is gradually learnt by experience, the lesson being begun in
our earliest infancy, and inculcated upon us every hour
during which we {304} use our eyes. The completeness with
which the lesson is learnt is truly admirable; for we forget
that our conclusion is obtained indirectly, and mistake a
judgment on evidence for an intuitive perception. This,
however, is not more surprizing than the rapidity and
unconsciousness of effort with which we understand the
meaning of the speech that we hear, or the book that we
read. In both cases, the habit of interpretation is become
as familiar as the act of perception. And this is the case
with regard to vision. We see the breadth of the street as
clearly and readily as we see the house on the other side of
it. We see the house to be square, however obliquely it be
presented to us. Indeed the difficulty is, to recover the
consciousness of our real and original sensations;--to
discover what is the _apparent_ relation of the lines which
appear before us. As we have already said, (book ii. chap.
6) in the common process of vision we suppose ourselves to
see that which cannot be seen; and when we would make a
picture of an object, the difficulty is to represent what is
visible and no more.

But perfect as is our habit of interpreting what we
perceive, we could not interpret if we did not perceive. If
the eye did not apprehend visible position, it could not
infer actual position, which is collected from visible
position as a consequence: if we did not see apparent
figure, we could not arrive at any opinion concerning real
form. The perception of place, which is the prerogative of
the eye, is the basis of all its other superiority.

The precision with which the eye can judge of apparent
position is remarkable. If we had before us two stars
distant from each other by one-twentieth of the moon's
diameter, we could easily decide the apparent direction of
the one from the other, as above or below, to the right or
left. Yet eight millions of stars might be placed in the
visible hemisphere of the sky at such distances from each
other; and thus the eye would recognize the relative
position in a portion of its range not greater than one
eight-millionth of the whole. Such is the accuracy of the
sense of vision in this {305} respect; and, indeed, we might
with truth have stated it much higher. Our judgment of the
position of distant objects in a landscape depends upon
features far more minute than the magnitude we have here
described.

As our object is to point out principally the differences of
the senses, we do not dwell upon the delicacy with which we
distinguish tints and shades, but proceed to another sense.


SECT. II.--_Prerogatives of Hearing._

THE sense of hearing has two remarkable prerogatives; it can
perceive a definite and peculiar relation between certain
tones, and it can clearly perceive two tones together; in
both these circumstances it is distinguished from vision,
and from the other senses.

4. _Musical intervals._--We perceive that two tones have, or
have not, certain definite relations to each other, which we
call _Concords_: one sound is a _Fifth_, an _Octave_, &c.,
above the other. And when this is the case, our perception
of the relation is extremely precise. It is easy to perceive
when a fifth is out of tune by one-twentieth of a tone; that
is, by one-seventieth of itself. To this there is nothing
analogous in vision. Colours have certain vague relations to
one another; they look well together, by contrast or by
resemblance; but this is an indefinite, and in most cases a
casual and variable feeling. The relation of _complementary_
colours to one another, as of red to green, is somewhat more
definite; but still, has nothing of the exactness and
peculiarity which belongs to a musical concord. In the case
of the two sounds, there is an exact point at which the
relation obtains; when by altering one note we pass this
point, the concord does not gradually fade away, but
instantly becomes a discord; and if we go further still, we
obtain another concord of quite a different character.

We learn from the theory of sound that concords occur when
the times of vibration of the notes have exact simple
ratios; an octave has these times as 1 to {306} 2; a fifth,
as 2 to 3. According to the undulatory theory of light, such
ratios occur in colours, yet the eye is not affected by them
in any peculiar way. The times of the undulations of certain
red and certain violet rays are as 2 to 3, but we do not
perceive any peculiar harmony or connexion between those
colours.

5. _Chords._--Again, the ear has this prerogative, that it
can apprehend two notes together, yet distinct. If two
notes, distant by a fifth from each other, are sounded on
two wind instruments, both they and their musical relation
are clearly perceived. There is not a mixture, but a
concord, a musical interval. In colours, the case is
otherwise. If blue and yellow fall on the same spot, they
form green; the colour is simple to the eye; it can no more
be decomposed by the vision than if it were the simple green
of the prismatic spectrum: it is impossible for us, by
sight, to tell whether it is so or not.

These are very remarkable differences of the two senses: two
colours can be compounded into an apparently simple one; two
sounds cannot: colours pass into each other by gradations
and intermediate tints; sounds pass from one concord to
another by no gradations: the most intolerable discord is
that which is near a concord. We shall hereafter see how
these differences affect the _scales_ of sound and of
colour.

6. _Rhythm._--We might remark, that as we see objects in
_space_, we hear sounds in _time_; and that we thus
introduce an arrangement among sounds which has several
analogies with the arrangement of objects in space. But the
conception of time does not seem to be peculiarly connected
with the sense of hearing; a faculty of apprehending tone
and time, or in musical phraseology _tune_ and _rhythm_, are
certainly very distinct. I shall not, therefore, here dwell
upon such analogies.

The other Senses have not any peculiar prerogatives, at
least none which bear on the formation of science. I may,
however, notice, in the feeling of heat, this circumstance;
that it presents us with two opposites, heat and cold, which
graduate into each other. This {307} is not quite peculiar,
for vision also exhibits to us white and black, which are
clearly opposites, and which pass into each other by the
shades of gray.


SECT. III.--_The Paradoxes of Vision._

7. _First Paradox of Vision. Upright Vision._--All our
senses appear to have this in common; That they act by means
of organs, in which a bundle of nerves receives the
impression of the appropriate medium of the sense. In the
construction of these organs there are great differences and
peculiarities, corresponding, in part at least, to the
differences in the information given. Moreover, in some
cases, as we have noted in the case of audible position and
visible distance, that which seems to be a perception is
really a judgment founded on perceptions of which we are not
directly aware. It will be seen, therefore, that with
respect to the peculiar powers of each sense, it may be
asked;--whether they can be explained by the construction of
the peculiar organ;--whether they are acquired judgments and
not direct perceptions;--or whether they are inexplicable in
either of these ways, and cannot, at present at least, be
resolved into anything but conditions of the intellectual
act of perception.

Two of these questions with regard to vision, have been much
discussed by psychological writers: the cause of our seeing
objects upright by inverted images on the retina; and of our
seeing single with two such images.

Physiologists have very completely explained the exquisitely
beautiful mechanism of the eye, considered as analogous to
an optical instrument; and it is indisputable that by means
of certain transparent lenses and humours, an inverted image
of the objects which are looked at is formed upon the
_retina_, or fine net-work of nerve, with which the back of
the eye is lined. We cannot doubt that the impression thus
produced on these nerves is essential to the act of vision;
and so far as we consider the nerves {308} themselves to
feel or perceive by contact, we may say that they perceive
this image, or the affections of light which it indicates.
But we cannot with any propriety say that _we_ perceive, or
that our mind perceives, this image; for we are not
conscious of it, and none but anatomists are aware of its
existence: we perceive _by means_ of it.

A difficulty has been raised, and dwelt upon in a most
unaccountable manner, arising from the neglect of this
obvious distinction. It has been asked, how is it that we
see an object, a man for instance, upright, when the
immediate object of our sensation, the image of the man on
our retina, is inverted? To this we must answer, that we see
him upright _because_ the image is inverted; that the
inverted image is the necessary means of seeing an upright
object. This is granted, and where then is the difficulty?
Perhaps it may be put thus: How is it that we do not judge
the man to be inverted, since the sensible image is so? To
this we may reply, that we have no notion of _upright_ or
inverted, except that which is founded on experience, and
that all our experience, without exception, must have taught
us that such a sensible image belongs to a man who is in an
upright position. Indeed, the contrary judgment is not
conceivable; a man is upright whose head is upwards and his
feet downwards. But what are the sensible images of
_upwards_ and _downwards_? Whatever be our standard of up
and down, the sensible representation of _up_ will be an
image moving on the retina towards the lower side, and the
sensible representation of _down_ will be a motion towards
the upper side. The head of the man's image is towards the
image of the sky, its feet are towards the image of the
ground; how then should it appear otherwise than upright? Do
we expect that the whole world should appear inverted? Be it
so: but if the whole be inverted, how is the relation of the
parts altered? Do we expect that we should think our own
persons in particular? This cannot be, for we look at them
as we do at other objects. Do we expect that things should
appear to fall {309} upwards? Surely not. For what do we
know of upwards, except that it is the direction in which
bodies do _not_ fall? In short, the whole of this
difficulty, though it has in no small degree embarrassed
metaphysicians, appears to result from a very palpable
confusion of ideas; from an attempt at comparison of what
_we_ see, with that which the retina feels, as if they were
separately presentable. It is a sufficient explanation to
say, that we do not see the image on the retina, but see by
_means_ of it. The perplexity does not require much more
skill to disentangle, than it does to see that a word
written in _black_ ink, may signify _white_[8\4].

[Note 8\4: The explanation of our seeing objects erect when
the image is inverted has been put very simply, by saying,
'We _call_ that the _lower_ end of an object which is next
the ground.' The observer cannot look into his own eye; he
knows _by experience_ what kind of image corresponds to a
man in an upright position. The anatomist tells him that
this image is _inverted_: but this does not disturb the
process of judging by experience. It does not appear why any
one should be perplexed at the notion of seeing objects
erect by means of inverted images, rather than at the notion
of seeing objects large by means of small images; or cubical
and pyramidal, by means of images on a spherical surface; or
green and red, by means of images on a black surface. Indeed
some persons have contrived to perplex themselves with these
latter questions, as well as the first.

The above explanation is not at all affected, as to its
substance, if we adopt Sir David Brewster's expression, and
say that the _line of visible direction_ is a line passing
through the center of the spherical surface of the retina,
and therefore of course perpendicular to the surface. In
speaking of 'the inverted image,' it has always been
supposed to be determined by such lines; and though the
point where they intersect may not have been ascertained
with exactness by previous physiologists, the philosophical
view of the matter was not in any degree vitiated by this
imperfection.]

8. _Second Paradox of Vision. Single Vision._--(1.) _Small
or Distant Objects._--The other difficulty, why with two
images on the retina we see only one object, is of a much
more real and important kind. This effect is manifestly
limited by certain circumstances of a very precise nature;
for if we direct our eyes at an object which is very near
the eye, we see {310} all other objects double. The fact is
not, therefore, that we are incapable of receiving two
impressions from the two images, but that, under certain
conditions, the two impressions form one. A little attention
shows us that these conditions are, that with both eyes we
should look at the same object; and again, we find that to
look at an object with either eye, is to direct the eye so
that the image falls on or near a particular point about the
middle of the retina. Thus these middle points in the two
retinas correspond, and we see an image single when the two
images fall on the corresponding points.

Again, as each eye judges of position, and as the two eyes
judge similarly, an object will be seen in the same place by
one eye and by the other, when the two images which it
produces are _similarly situated_ with regard to the
_corresponding points_ of the retina[9\4].

[Note 9\4: The explanation of single vision with two eyes
may be put in another form. Each eye judges immediately of
the relative position of all objects within the field of its
direct vision. Therefore when we look with both eyes at a
_distant_ prospect (so distant that the distance between the
eyes is small in comparison) the two prospects, being
similar collections of forms, will coincide altogether, if a
corresponding point in one and in the other coincide. If
this be the case, the two images of every object will fall
upon corresponding points of the retina, and will appear
single.

If the two prospects seen by the two eyes do not exactly
coincide, in consequence of nearness of the objects, or
distortion of the eyes, but if they nearly coincide, the
stronger image of an object absorbs the weaker, and the
object is seen single; yet modified by the combination, as
will be seen when we speak of the single vision of near
objects. When the two images of an object are considerably
apart, we see it double.

This explanation is not different in substance from the one
given in the text; but perhaps it is better to avoid the
assertion that the law of corresponding points is 'a
distinct and original principle of our constitution,' as I
had stated in the first edition. The simpler mode of stating
the law of our constitution appears to be to say, that each
eye determines similarly the position of objects; and that
when the positions of an object, as seen by the two eyes,
coincide (or nearly coincide) the object is seen single.]

This is the Law of Single Vision, at least so far as regards
small objects; namely, objects so small that in
contemplating them we consider their position only, {311}
and not their solid dimensions. Single vision in such cases
is a result of the law of vision simply: and it is a mistake
to call in, as some have done, the influence of habit and of
acquired judgments, in order to determine the result in such
cases.

To ascribe the apparent singleness of objects to the
impressions of vision corrected by the experience of
touch[10\4], would be to assert that a person who had not
been in the habit of handling what he saw, would see all
objects double; and also, to assert that a person beginning
with the double world which vision thus offers to him,
would, by the continued habit of handling objects, gradually
and at last learn to see them single. But all the facts of
the case show such suppositions to be utterly fantastical.
No one can, in this case, go back from the habitual judgment
of the singleness of objects, to the original and direct
perception of their doubleness, as the draughtsman goes back
from judgments to perception, in representing solid
distances and forms by means of perspective pictures. No one
can point out any case in which the habit is imperfectly
formed; even children of the most tender age look at an
object with both eyes, and see it as one.

[Note 10\4:  See Brown, vol. ii. p. 81.]

In cases when the eyes are distorted (in squinting), one eye
only is used, or if both are employed, there is double
vision; and thus any derangement of the correspondence of
motion in the two eyes will produce double-sightedness.

Brown is one of those[11\4] who assert that two images
suggest a single object because we have _always found_ two
images to belong to a single object. He urges as an
illustration, that the _two_ words 'he conquered,' by custom
excite exactly the same notion as the _one_ Latin word
'vicit;' and thus that two visual images, by the effect of
habit, produce the same belief of a single object as one
tactual impression. But in order to make this pretended
illustration of any value, it ought to be true that when a
person has thoroughly learnt the Latin language, he can no
longer distinguish {312} any separate meaning in 'he' and in
'conquered.' We can by no effort perceive the double
sensation, when we look _at_ the object with the two eyes.
Those who squint, learn by habit to see objects single: but
the habit which they acquire is that of attending to the
impressions of one eye only at once, not of combining the
two impressions. It is obvious, that if each eye spreads
before us the same visible scene, with the same objects and
the same relations of place, then, if one object in each
scene coincide, the whole of the two visible impressions
will be coincident. And here the remarkable circumstance is,
that not only each eye judges for itself of the relations of
position which come within its field of view; but that there
is a superior and more comprehensive faculty which combines
and compares the two fields of view; which asserts or denies
their coincidence; which contemplates, as in a relative
position to one another, these two visible worlds, in which
all other relative position is given. This power of
confronting two sets of visible images and figured spaces
before a purely intellectual tribunal, is one of the most
remarkable circumstances in the sense of vision.

[Note 11\4: _Lectures_, vol. ii. p. 81.]

9. (2.) _Near Objects._--We have hitherto spoken of the
singleness of objects whose images occupy corresponding
positions on the retina of the two eyes. But here occurs a
difficulty. If an object of moderate size, a small thick
book for example, be held at a little distance from the
eyes, it produces an image on the retina of each eye; and
these two images are perspective representations of the book
from different points of view, (the positions of the two
eyes,) and are therefore of different forms. Hence the two
images cannot occupy corresponding points of the retina
throughout their whole extent. If the central parts of the
two images occupy corresponding points, the boundaries of
the two wall not correspond. How is it then consistent with
the law above stated that in this case the object appears
single?

It may be observed, that the two images in such a case will
differ most widely when the object is not a {313} mere
surface, but a solid. If a book, for example, be held with
one of its upright edges towards the face, the right eye
will see one side more directly than the left eye, and the
left eye will see another side more directly, and the
outline of the two images upon the two retinas will exhibit
this difference. And it may be further observed, that this
difference in the images received by the two eyes, is a
plain and demonstrative evidence of the solidity of the
object seen; since nothing but a solid object could (without
some special contrivance) produce these different forms of
the images in the two eyes.

Hence the absence of exact coincidence in the two images on
the retina is the necessary condition of the solidity of the
object seen, and must be one of the indications by means of
which our vision apprehends an object as solid. And that
this is so, Mr. Wheatstone has proved experimentally, by
means of some most ingenious and striking contrivances. He
has devised[12\4] an instrument (the _stereoscope_) by which
two images (drawn in outline) differing exactly as much as
the two images of a solid body seen near the face would
differ, are conveyed, one to one eye, and the other to the
other. And it is found that when this is effected, the
object which the images represent is not only seen single,
but is apprehended as solid with a clearness and reality of
conviction quite distinct from any impression which a mere
perspective representation can give.

[Note 12\4: _Phil. Trans._ 1839.]

At the same time it is found that the object is then only
apprehended as single when the two images are such as are
capable of being excited by one single object placed in
solid space, and seen by the two eyes. If the images differ
more or otherwise than this condition allows, the result is,
that both are seen, their lines crossing and interfering
with one another.

It may be observed, too, that if an object be of such large
size as not to be taken in by a single glance of the eyes,
it is no longer apprehended as single by a direct act of
perception; but its parts are looked at {314} separately and
successively, and the impressions thus obtained are put
together by a succeeding act of the mind. Hence the objects
which are directly seen as solid, will be of moderate size;
in which case it is not difficult to show that the outlines
of the two images will differ from each other only slightly.

Hence we are led to the following, as the Law of Single
Vision for _near_ objects:--When the two images in the two
eyes are situated (part for part) nearly, but not exactly,
upon corresponding points, the object is apprehended as
single, if the two images are such as are or would be given
by a single solid object seen by the two eyes separately:
and in this case the object is necessarily apprehended as solid.

This law of vision does not contradict that stated above for
distant objects: for when an object is removed to a
considerable distance, the images in the two eyes coincide
exactly, and the object is seen as single, though without
any direct apprehension of its solidity. The first law is a
special case of the second. Under the condition of _exactly_
corresponding points, we have the perception of singleness,
but no evidence of solidity. Under the condition of _nearly_
corresponding points, we may have the perception of
singleness, and with it, of solidity.

We have before noted it as an important feature in our
visual perception, that while we have two distinct
impressions upon the sense, which we can contemplate
separately and alternately, (the impressions on the two
eyes,) we have a higher perceptive faculty which can
recognize these two impressions, exactly similar to each
other, as only two images of one and the same assemblage of
objects. But we now see that the faculty by which we
perceive visible objects can do much more than this:--it can
not only unite two impressions, and recognize them as
belonging to one object in virtue of their coincidence, but
it can also unite and identify them, even when they do not
exactly coincide. It can correct and adjust their small
difference, so that they are both apprehended as
representations of the same figure. It can infer from them a
real form, not {315} agreeing with either of them; and a
solid space, which they are quite incapable of exemplifying.
The visual faculty decides whether or not the two ocular
images can be pictures of the same solid object, and if they
can, it undoubtingly and necessarily accepts them as being
so. This faculty operates as if it had the power of calling
before it all possible solid figures, and of ascertaining by
trial whether any of those will, at the same time, fit both
the outlines which are given by the sense. It assumes the
reality of solid space, and, if it be possible, reconciles
the appearances with that reality. And thus an activity of
the mind of a very remarkable and peculiar kind is exercised
in the most common act of seeing.

10. It may be said that this doctrine, of such a visual
faculty as has been described, is very vague and obscure,
since we are not told what are its limits. It adjusts and
corrects figures which _nearly_ coincide, so as to identify
them. But _how_ nearly, it may be asked, must the figures
approach each other, in order that this adjustment may be
possible? What discrepance renders impossible the
reconcilement of which we speak? Is it not impossible to
give a definite answer to these questions, and therefore
impossible to lay down definitely such laws of vision as we
have stated? To this I reply, that the indefiniteness thus
objected to us, is no new difficulty, but one with which
philosophers are familiar, and to which they are already
reconciled. It is, in fact, no other than the indefiniteness
of the limits of distinct vision. How near to the face must
an object be brought, so that we shall cease to see it
distinctly? The distance, it will be answered, is
indefinite: it is different for different persons; and for
the same person, it varies with the degree of effort,
attention, and habit. But this indefiniteness is only the
indefiniteness, in another form, of the deviation of the two
ocular images from one another: and in reply to the question
concerning them we must still say, as before, that in
doubtful cases, the power of apprehending an object as
single, when this _can_ be done, will vary with effort,
attention, and habit. The assumption {316} that the apparent
object exists as a real figure, in real space, is to be
verified, if possible; but, in extreme cases, from the
unfitness of the point of view, or from any other cause of
visual confusion or deception, the existence of a real
object corresponding to the appearance may be doubtful; as
in any other kind of perception it may be doubtful whether
our senses, under disadvantageous circumstances, give us
true information. The vagueness of the limits, then, within
which this visual faculty can be successfully exercised, is
no valid argument against the existence of the faculty, or
the truth of the law which we have stated concerning its
action.


SECT. IV.--_The Perception of Visible Figure._

11. _Visible Figure._--There is one tenet on the subject of
vision which appears to me so extravagant and
unphilosophical, that I should not have thought it necessary
to notice it, if it had not been recently promulgated by a
writer of great acuteness in a book which has obtained, for
a metaphysical work, considerable circulation. I speak of
Brown's opinion[13\4] that we have no immediate perception
of visible figure. I confess myself unable to comprehend
fully the doctrine which he would substitute in the place of
the one commonly received. He states it thus[14\4]: 'When
the simple affection of sight is blended with the ideas of
suggestion [those arising from touch, &c.] in what are
termed the acquired perceptions of vision, as, for example,
in the perception of a sphere, it is colour only which is
blended with the large convexity, and not a small coloured
plane.' The doctrine which Brown asserts in this and similar
passages, appears to be, that we do not by vision perceive
_both_ colour and _figure_; but that the colour which we see
is blended with the figure which we learn the existence of
by other means, as by touch. But if this were possible when
we can call in other perceptions, how is it possible when we
cannot or do not touch the object? {317} Why does the moon
appear round, gibbous, or horned? What sense besides vision
suggests to us the idea of her figure? And even in objects
which we can reach, what is that circumstance in the sense
of vision which suggests to us that the colour belongs to
the sphere, except that we see the colour where we see the
sphere? If we do not see figure, we do not see position; for
figure is the relative position of the parts of a boundary.
If we do not see position, why do we ascribe the yellow
colour to the sphere on our left, rather than to the cube on
our right? We _associate_ the colour with the object, says
Dr. Brown; but if his opinion were true, we could not
associate two colours with two objects, for we could not
apprehend the colours as occupying two different places.

[Note 13\4: _Lectures_, vol. ii. p. 82.]

[Note 14\4: _Ib._ vol. ii. p. 90.]

The whole of Brown's reasoning on this subject is so
irreconcilable with the first facts of vision, that it is
difficult to conceive how it could proceed from a person who
has reasoned with great acuteness concerning touch. In order
to prove his assertion, he undertakes to examine the only
reasons which, he says[15\4], he can imagine for believing
the immediate perception of visible figure: (1) That it is
absolutely impossible, in our present sensations of sight,
to separate colour from extension; and (2) That there are,
in fact, figures on the retina corresponding to the apparent
figures of objects.

[Note 15\4: _Lectures_, vol. ii. p. 83.]

On the subject of the first reason, he says, that the figure
which we perceive as associated with colour, is the real,
and not the apparent figure. 'Is there,' he asks, 'the
slightest consciousness of a perception of visible figure,
corresponding to the affected portion of the retina?' To
which, though he seems to think an affirmative answer
impossible, we cannot hesitate to reply, that there is
undoubtedly such a consciousness; that though obscured by
being made the ground of habitual inference as to the real
figure, this consciousness is constantly referred to by the
draughtsman, and easily recalled by any one. We may separate
colour, he says {318} again[16\4], from the figures on the
retina, as we may separate it from length, breadth, and
thickness, which we do not see. But this is altogether
false: we cannot separate colour from length, breadth, and
thickness, _in any other way_, than by transferring it to
the visible figure which we do see. He cannot, he allows,
separate the colour from the visible form of the trunk of a
large oak; but just as little, he thinks, can he separate it
from the convex mass of the trunk, which (it is allowed on
all hands) he does not immediately see. But in this he is
mistaken: for if he were to make a _picture_ of the oak, he
would separate the colour from the convex shape, which he
does not imitate, but he could not separate it from the
visible figure, which he does imitate; and he would then
perceive that the fact that he _has not_ an immediate
perception of the convex form, is necessarily connected with
the fact that he _has_ an immediate perception of the
apparent figure; so far is the rejection of immediate
perception in the former case from being a reason for
rejecting it in the latter.

[Note 16\4: _Lectures_, vol. ii. p. 84.]

Again, with regard to the second argument. It does not, he
says, follow, that because a certain figured portion of the
retina is affected by light, we should see such a figure;
for if a certain figured portion of the olfactory organ were
affected by odours, we should not acquire by smell any
perception of such figure[17\4]. This is merely to say, that
because we do not perceive position and figure by one sense,
we cannot do so by another sense. But this again is
altogether erroneous. It is an office of our sight to inform
us of position, and consequently of figure; for this
purpose, the organ is so constructed that the position of
the object determines the position of the point of the
retina affected. There is nothing of this kind in the organ
of smell; objects in different positions and of different
forms do not affect different parts of the olfactory nerve,
or portions of different shape. Different objects, remote
from each other, if perceived by smell, affect the same
{319} part of the olfactory organs. This is all quite
intelligible; for it is not the office of smell to inform us
of position. Of what use or meaning would be the curious and
complex structure of the eye, if it gave us only such vague
and wandering notions of the colours and forms of the
flowers in a garden, as we receive from their odours when we
walk among them blindfold? It is, as we have said, the
_prerogative_ of vision to apprehend position: the places of
objects on the retina give this information. We do not
suppose that the affection of a certain shape of nervous
expanse will necessarily and in all cases give us the
impression of figure; but we know that in vision it does;
and it is clear that if we did not acquire our acquaintance
with visible figure in this way, we could not acquire it in
any way[18\4].

[Note 17\4: _Ib._ p. 87.]

[Note 18\4: When Brown says further (p. 87), that we can
indeed show the image in the dissected eye; but that 'it is
not in the dissected eye that vision takes place;' it is
difficult to see what his drift is. Does he doubt that there
is an image formed in the living as completely as in the
dissected eye?]

The whole of this strange mistake of Brown's appears to
arise from the fault already noticed;--that of considering
the image on the retina as the _object_ instead of the
_means_ of vision. This indeed is what he says: 'the true
object of vision is not the distant body itself, but the
light that has reached the expansive termination of the
optic nerve[19\4].' Even if this were so, we do not see why
we should not perceive the position of the impression on
this expanded nerve. But as we have already said, the
impression on the nerve is the means of vision, and enables
us to assign a place, or at least a direction, to the object
from which the light proceeds, and thus makes vision
possible. Brown, indeed, pursues his own peculiar view till
he involves the subject in utter confusion. Thus he
says[20\4], 'According to the common theory [that figure can
be perceived by the eye,] a visible sphere is at once to my
perception convex and plane; and if the sphere be a one, it
is perceived at once to be a sphere of {320} many feet in
diameter, and a plane circular surface of the diameter of a
quarter of an inch.' It is easy to deduce these and greater
absurdities, if we proceed on his strange and baseless
supposition that the object and the image on the retina are
_both_ perceived. But who is conscious of the image on the
retina in any other way than as he sees the object by means
of it?

[Note 19\4: _Lectures_, vol. ii. p. 57.]

[Note 20\4: _Ib._ vol. ii. p. 89.]

Brown seems to have imagined that he was analysing the
perception of figure 'in the same manner in which Berkeley
had analyzed the perception of distance. He ought to have
recollected that such an undertaking, to be successful,
required him to show _what_ elements he analyzed it _into_.
Berkeley analyzed the perception of real figure into the
interpretation of visible figure according to certain rules
which he distinctly stated. Brown analyzes the perception of
visible figure into no elements. Berkeley says, that we do
not directly perceive distance, but that we perceive
something else, from which we infer distance, namely,
visible figure and colour, and our own efforts in seeing;
Brown says, that we do not see figure, but infer it; what
then do we see, which we infer it from? To this he offers no
answer. He asserts the seeming perception of visible figure
to be a result of 'association;'--of 'suggestion.' But what
meaning can we attach to this? Suggestion requires something
which suggests; and not a hint is given what it is which
suggests position. Association implies two things
associated; what is the sensation which we associate with
form? What is that visual perception which is not figure,
and which we mistake for figure? What perception is it that
suggests a square to the eye? What impressions are those
which have been associated with a visible triangle, so that
the revival of the impressions revives the notion of the
triangle? Brown has nowhere pointed out such perceptions and
impressions; nor indeed was it possible for him to do so;
for the only visual perceptions which he allows to remain,
those of colour, most assuredly do not suggest visible
figures by their differences; red is not associated with
square rather than with round, or with round rather than
square. On the contrary, the {321} eye, constructed in a
very complex and wonderful manner in order that it may give
to us directly the perception of position as well as of
colour, has it for one of its prerogatives to give us this
information; and the perception of the relative position of
each part of the visible boundary of an object constitutes
the perception of its apparent figure; which faculty we
cannot deny to the eye without rejecting the plain and
constant evidence of our senses, making the mechanism of the
eye unmeaning, confounding the object with the means of
vision, and rendering the mental process of vision utterly
unintelligible.

Having sufficiently discussed the processes of perception, I
now return to the consideration of the Ideas which these
processes assume.



{{322}}
