BOOK V.



THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES.




En donnant à ces côtés le nom de _poles_, j'appelerai
_polarisation_ la modification qui donne à la lumière des
propriétés relatives à ces poles. J'ai tardé jusqu'à présent
à admettre ce terme dans la description des phénomènes
physiques dont il est question; je n'ai pas osé l'introduire
dans les mémoires où j'ai publié mes dernières expériences;
mais les variétés qu'offre ce nouveau phénomène, et la
difficulté de les décrire, me forcent à admettre cette
nouvelle expression, qui signifie simplement la modification
que la lumière a subie en acquérant de nouvelles propriétés
qui ne sont pas relatives à la direction du rayon, mais
seulement à ses côtés considérés à angles droits et dans un
plan perpendiculaire à sa direction.

Malus (1811), _Mém. de Inst._ tom. xi. p. 106.



{{359}}
BOOK V.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES.


CHAPTER I.

ATTEMPTS AT THE SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF
POLARITY.


1. IN some of the mechanical sciences, as Magnetism and
Optics, the phenomena are found to depend upon position (the
position of the magnet, or of the ray of light,) in a
peculiar alternate manner. This dependence, as it was first
apprehended, was represented by means of certain conceptions
of space and force, as for instance by considering the two
_Poles_ of a magnet. But in all such modes of representing
these alternations by the conceptions borrowed from other
ideas, a closer examination detected something superfluous
and something defective; and in proportion as the view which
philosophers took of this relation was gradually purified
from these incongruous elements, and was rendered more
general and abstract by the discovery of analogous
properties in new cases, it was perceived that the relation
could not be adequately apprehended without considering it
as involving a peculiar and independent Idea, which we may
designate by the term _Polarity_.

We shall trace some of the forms in which this Idea has
manifested itself in the history of science. In doing so we
shall not begin, as in other Books of this work we have
done, by speaking of the notion as it is {360} employed in
common use: for the relation of Polarity is of so abstract
and technical a nature, that it is not employed, at least in
any distinct and obvious manner, on any ordinary or
practical occasions. The idea belongs peculiarly to the
region of speculation: in persons of common habits of
thought it is probably almost or quite undeveloped; and even
most of those whose minds have been long occupied by
science, find a difficulty in apprehending it in its full
generality and abstraction, and stript of all irrelevant
hypothesis.

2. _Magnetism._--The name and the notion of _Poles_ were
first adopted in the case of a magnet. If we have two
magnets, their extremities attract and repel each other
alternatively. If the first end of the one attract the first
end of the other, it repels the second end, and conversely.
In order to express this rule conveniently, the two ends of
each magnet are called the _north pole_ and the _south pole_
respectively, the denominations being borrowed from the
poles of the earth and heavens. 'These poles,' as Gilbert
says[1\5], 'regulate the motions of the celestial spheres
and of the earth. In like manner the magnet has its poles, a
northern and a southern one; certain and determined points
constituted by nature in the stone, the primary terms of its
motions and effects, the limits and governors of many
actions and virtues.'

[Note 1\5: _De Magn._ lib. i. c. iii.]

The nature of the opposition of properties of which we speak
may be stated thus:
The North pole of one magnet attracts the South pole of another
magnet.
The North pole of one magnet _repels_ the North pole of another
magnet.
The South pole of one magnet repels the South pole of another
magnet.
The South pole of one magnet _attracts_ the North pole of
another magnet.

It will be observed that the contrariety of position which
is indicated by putting the South pole for the North pole in
either magnet, is accompanied by the {361} opposition of
mechanical effect which is expressed by changing attraction
into repulsion and repulsion into attraction: and thus we
have the general feature of Polarity,--A contrast of
properties corresponding to a contrast of positions.

3. _Electricity._--When the phenomena of Electricity came to
be studied, it appeared that they involved relations in some
respects Analogous to those of magnetism.

Two kinds of electricity were distinguished, the positive
and the negative; and it appeared that two bodies electrized
positively, or two electrized negatively, repelled each
other, like two north or two south magnetic poles; while a
positively and a negatively electrized body attracted each
other, like the north and south poles of two magnets. In
conductors of an oblong form, the electricity could easily
be made to distribute itself so that one end should be
positively and one end negatively electrized; and then such
conductors acted on each other exactly as magnets would do.

But in conductors, however electrized, there is no peculiar
point which can permanently be considered as the _pole_. The
distribution of electricity in the conductor depends upon
external circumstances: and thus, although the phenomena
offer the general character of _polarity_--alternative
results corresponding to alternative positions,--they cannot
be referred to poles. Some other mode of representing the
forces must be adopted than that which makes them emanate
from permanent points as in a magnet.

The phenomena of attraction and repulsion in electrized
bodies were conveniently represented by means of the
hypothesis of _two_ electric _fluids_, a positive and a
negative one, which were supposed to be distributed in the
bodies. Of these fluids, it was supposed that each repelled
its own parts and attracted those of the opposite fluid: and
it was found that this hypothesis explained all the obvious
laws of electric action. Here then we have the phenomena of
polarization explained by a new kind of machinery:--two
opposite fluids {362} distributed in bodies, and supplying
them, so to speak, with their polar forces. This hypothesis
not only explains electrical attraction, but also the
electrical spark: namely, thus: when two bodies, of which
the neighbouring surfaces are charged with the two opposite
fluids, approach near to each other, the mutual attraction
of the fluids becomes more and more intense, till at last
the excess of fluid on the one body breaks through the air
and rushes to the other body, in a form accompanied by light
and noise. When this transfer has taken place, the
attraction ceases, the positive and the negative fluid
having neutralized each other. Their effort was to unite;
and this union being effected, there is no longer any force
in action. Bodies in their natural unexcited condition may
be considered as occupied by a combination of the two
fluids: and hence we see how the production of either kind
of electricity is necessarily accompanied with the
production of an equivalent amount of the opposite kind.

4. _Voltaic Electricity._--Such is the case in Franklinic
electricity,--that which is excited by the common electrical
machine. In studying Voltaic electricity, we are led to the
conviction that the fluid which is in a condition of
momentary _equilibrium_ in electrized conductors, exists in
the state of a _Current_ in the voltaic circuit. And here we
find polar relations of a new kind existing among the
forces. Two voltaic Currents _attract_ each other when they
are moving in the _same_, and _repel_ each other when they
are moving in _opposite_, directions.

But we find, in addition to these, other polar relations of
a more abstruse kind, and which the supposition of two
fluids does not so readily explain. For instance, if such
fluids existed, distinct from each other, it might be
expected that it would be possible to exhibit one of them
separate from the other. Yet in all the phenomena of
electromotive currents, we attempt in vain to obtain one
kind of electricity separately. 'I have not,' says Mr.
Faraday[2\5], 'been able to find a {363} single fact which
could be adduced to prove the theory of two electricities
rather than one, in electric currents; or, admitting the
hypothesis of two electricities, have I been able to
perceive the slightest grounds that one electricity can be
more powerful than the other, or that it can be present
without the other, or that it can be varied or in the
slightest degree affected without a corresponding variation
in the other.' 'Thus,' he adds, 'the polar character of the
powers is rigorous and complete.' Thus, we too may remark,
all the superfluous and precarious parts gradually drop off
from the hypothesis which we devise in order to represent
polar phenomena; and the abstract notion of Polarity--of
equal and opposite powers called into existence by a common
condition--remains unincumbered with extraneous machinery.

[Note 2\5: _Researches_, 516.]

5. _Light._--Another very important example of the
application of the Idea of Polarity is that supplied by the
discovery of the polarization of light. A ray of light may,
by various processes, be modified, so that it has different
properties according to its different _sides_, although this
difference is not perceptible by any common effects. If, for
instance, a ray thus modified, pass perpendicularly through
a circular glass, and fall upon the eye, we may turn the
glass round and round in its frame, and we shall make no
difference in the brightness of the spot which we see. But
if, instead of a glass, we look through a longitudinal slice
of tourmaline, the spot is alternately dark and bright as we
turn the crystal through successive quadrants. Here we have
a contrast of Properties (dark and bright) corresponding to
a contrast of positions, (the position of a line east and
west being contrasted with the position north and south,)
which, as we have said, is the general character of
Polarity. It was with a view of expressing this character
that the term _Polarization_ was originally introduced.
Malus was forced by his discoveries into the use of this
expression. 'We find,' he says, in 1811, 'that light
acquires properties which are relative only to the sides of
the ray,--which are the same for the north and south sides
of the ray, (using {364} the points of the compass for
description's sake only,) and which are different when we go
from the north and south to the east or to the west sides of
the ray. I shall give the name of _poles_ to these sides of
the ray, and shall call _polarization_ the modification
which gives to light these properties relative to these
poles. I have _put off_ hitherto the admission of this term
into the description of the physical phenomena with which we
have to do: I did not _dare_ to introduce it into the
Memoirs in which I published my last observations: but the
variety of forms in which this new phenomenon appears, and
the difficulty of describing them, compel me to admit this
new expression; which signifies simply the modification
which light has undergone in acquiring new properties which
are not relative to the direction of the ray, but only to
its sides considered at right angles to each other, and in a
plane perpendicular to its direction.'

The theory which represents light as an emission of
particles was in vogue at the time when Malus published his
discoveries; and some of his followers in optical research
conceived that the phenomena which he thus described
rendered it necessary to ascribe poles and an axis to each
particle of light. On this hypothesis, light would be
polarized when the axes of all the particles were in the
same direction: and, making such a supposition, it may
easily be conceived capable of transmission through a
crystal whose axis is parallel to that of the luminous
particles, and intransmissible when the axis of the crystal
is in a position transverse to that of the particles.

The hypothesis of particles possessing _poles_ is a rude and
arbitrary assumption, in this as in other cases; but it
serves to convey the general notion of polarity, which is
the essential feature of the phenomena. The term
'polarization of light  has sometimes been complained of in
modern times as hypothetical and obscure. But the real cause
of obscurity was, that the Idea of Polarity was, till
lately, very imperfectly developed in men's minds. As we
have seen, the general notion of Polarity,--opposite
properties in opposite {365} directions,--exactly describes
the character of the optical phenomena to which the term is
applied.

It is to be recollected that in optics we never speak of the
_poles_, but of the _plane of polarization_ of a ray. The
word _sides_, which Newton and Malus have used, neither of
them appears to have been satisfied with; Newton, in
employing it, had recourse to the strange Gallicism of
speaking of the _coast_ of usual and of unusual refraction
of a crystal.

The modern theory of optics represents the plane of
polarization of light as depending, not on the position in
which the axes of the luminiferous particles lie, but on the
_direction_ of those _transverse vibrations_ in which light
consists. This theory is, as we have stated in the History,
recommended by an extraordinary series of successes in
accounting for the phenomena. And this hypothesis of
transverse vibrations shows us another mechanical mode,
(besides the hypothesis of particles with axes,) by which we
may represent the polarity of a ray. But we may remark that
the general notion of Polarity, as applied to light in such
cases, would subsist, even if the undulatory theory were
rejected. The idea is, as we have before said, independent
of all hypothetical machinery.

I need not here refer to the various ways in which light may
be polarized; as, for instance, by being reflected from the
surface of water, or of glass, at certain angles, by being
transmitted, through crystals, and in other ways. In all
cases the modification produced, the polarization, is
identically the same property. Nor need I mention the
various kinds of phenomena which appear as contrasts in the
result; for these are not merely light and dark, or white
and black, but red and green, and generally, a colour and
its _complementary_ colour, exhibited in many complex and
varied configurations. These multiplied modes in which
polarized light presents itself add nothing to the original
conception of Polarization: and I shall therefore pass on to
another subject.

6. _Crystallization._--Bodies which are perfectly
crystallized exhibit the most complete regularity and {366}
symmetry of form; and this regularity not only appears in
their outward shape, but pervades their whole texture, and
manifests itself in their cleavage, their transparency, and
in the uniform and determinate optical properties which
exist in every part, even in the smallest fragment of the
mass. If we conceive crystals as composed of particles, we
must suppose these particles to be arranged in the most
regular manner; for example, if we suppose each particle to
have an axis, we must suppose all these axes to be parallel;
for the direction of the axis of the particles is indicated
by the physical and optical properties of the crystal, and
therefore this direction must be the same for every portion
of the crystal. This parallelism of the axes of the
particles may be conceived to result from the circumstance
of each particle having poles, the opposite poles attracting
each other. In virtue of forces acting as this hypothesis
assumes, a collection of small _magnetic_ particles would
arrange themselves in parallel positions; and such a
collection of magnetic particles offers a sort of image of a
crystal. Thus we are led to conceive the particles of
crystals as polarized, and as determined in their
crystalline positions by polar forces. This mode of
apprehending the constitution of crystals has been adopted
by some of our most eminent philosophers. Thus Berzelius
says[3\5], 'It is demonstrated, that the regular forms of
bodies presuppose an effort of their atoms to touch each
other by preference in certain points; that is, they are
founded upon a Polarity;'--he adds, 'a polarity which can be
no other than an electric or magnetic polarity.' In this
latter clause we have the identity of different kinds of
polarity asserted; a principle which we shall speak of in
the next chapter. But we may remark, that even without
dwelling upon this connexion, any notion which we can form
of the structure of Crystals necessarily involves the idea
of Polarity. Whether this polarity necessarily requires us
to believe crystals to be composed of Atoms which exert an
effort to touch {367} each other in certain points by
preference, is another question. And, in agreement with what
has been said respecting other kinds of polarity, we shall
probably find, on a more profound examination of the
subject, that while the Idea of Polarity is essential, the
machinery by which it is thus expressed is precarious and
superfluous.

[Note 3\5: _Essay on the Theory of Chemical Properties_,
1820, p. 113.]

7. _Chemical Affinity._--We shall have, in the next Book, to
speak of Chemical Affinity at some length; but since the
ultimate views to which philosophers have been led, induce
them to consider the forces of Affinity as Polar Forces, we
must enumerate these among the examples of Polarity. In
chemical processes, opposites tend to unite, and to
neutralize each other by their union. Thus an _acid_ or an
_alkali_ combine with vehemence, and form a compound, a
neutral salt, which is neither acid nor alkaline.

This conception of contrariety and mutual neutralization,
involves the Idea of Polarity. In the conception as
entertained by the earlier chemists, the Idea enters very
obscurely: but in the attempts which have more recently been
made to connect this relation (of acid and base), with other
relations, the chemical elements have been conceived as
composed of particles which possess poles; _like_ poles
repelling, and _unlike_ attracting each other, as they do in
magnetic and electric phenomena. This is, however, a rude
and arbitrary way of expressing Polarity, and, as may be
easily shown, involves many difficulties which do not belong
to the Idea itself. Mr. Faraday, who has been led by his
researches to a conviction of the polar nature of the forces
of chemical affinity, has expressed their character in a
more general manner, and without any of the machinery of
particles indued with poles. According to his view, chemical
synthesis and analysis must always be conceived as taking
place in virtue of equal and opposite forces, by which the
particles are united or separated. These forces, by the very
circumstance of their being polar, may be transferred from
point to point. For if we conceive a string of particles,
and if the positive force of the first particle {368} be
liberated and brought into action, its negative force also
must be set free: this negative force neutralizes the
positive force of the next particle, and therefore the
negative force of this particle (before employed in
neutralizing its positive force) is set free: this is in the
same way transferred to the next particle, and so on. And
thus we have a positive force active at one extremity of a
line of particles, corresponding to a negative force at the
other extremity, all the intermediate particles reciprocally
neutralizing each other's action. This conception of the
transfer of chemical action was indeed at an earlier period
introduced by Grotthus[4\5], and confirmed by Davy. But in
Mr. Faraday's hands we see it divested of all that is
superfluous, and spoken of, not as a line of particles, but
as 'an axis of power, having [at every point] contrary
forces, exactly equal, in opposite directions.'

[Note 4\5: DUMAS, _Leçons sur la Philosophie Chimique_, p. 401.]

8. _General Remarks._--Thus, as we see, the notion of
Polarity is applicable to many large classes of phenomena.
Yet the Idea in a distinct and general form is only of late
growth among philosophers. It has gradually been abstracted
and refined from many extraneous hypotheses which were at
first supposed to be essential to it. We have noticed some
of these hypotheses;--as the poles of a _body_; the poles of
the _particles_ of a fluid; _two_ opposite fluids; a single
fluid in _excess_ and _defect_; transverse _vibrations_. To
these others might be added. Thus Dr. Prout[5\5] assumes
that the polarity of molecules results from their _rotation_
on their axes, the opposite motions of contiguous molecules
being the cause of opposite (positive and negative)
polarities.

[Note 5\5: _Bridgewater Treatise_, p. 559.]

But none of these hypotheses can be proved by the fact of
Polarity alone; and they have been in succession rejected
when they had been assumed on that ground. Thus Davy, in
1826, speaking of chemical forces says[6\5], 'In assuming
the idea of two ethereal, subtile, elastic {369} fluids,
attractive of the particles of each other, and repulsive as
to their own particles, capable of combining in different
proportions with bodies, and according to their proportions
giving them their specific qualities and rendering them
equivalent masses, it would be natural to refer the action
of the poles to the repulsions of the substances combined
with the excess of one fluid, and the attractions of those
united to the excess of the other fluid; and a history of
the phenomena, not unsatisfactory to the reason, might in
this way be made out. But as it is possible likewise to take
an entirely different view of the subject, on the idea of
the dependence of the results upon the primary attractive
powers of the parts of the combination on a single subtile
fluid, I shall not enter into any discussion on this obscure
part of the theory.' Which of these theories will best
represent the case, will depend upon the consideration of
other facts, in combination with the polar phenomena, as we
see in the history of optical theory. In like manner Mr.
Faraday proved by experiment[7\5] the errour of all theories
which ascribe electro-chemical decomposition to the
attraction of the poles of the voltaic battery.

[Note 6\5: _Phil. Tr._ 1826, p. 415.]

[Note 7\5: _Researches_, p. 495, &c.]

In order that they may distinctly image to themselves the
Idea of Polarity, men clothe it in some of the forms of
machinery above spoken of; yet every new attempt shows them
the unnecessary difficulties in which they thus involve
themselves. But on the other hand it is difficult to
apprehend this Idea divested of all machinery; and to
entertain it in such a form that it shall apply at the same
time to magnetism and electricity, galvanism and chemistry,
crystalline structure and light. The Idea of _Polarity_
becomes most pure and genuine, when we entirely reject the
conception of _Poles_, as Faraday has taught us to do in
considering electro-chemical decomposition; but it is only
by degrees and by effort that we can reach this point of
abstraction and generality. {370}

9. There is one other remark which we may here make. It was
a maxim commonly received in the ancient schools of
philosophy, that 'Like attracts Like:' but as we have seen,
the universal maxim of Polar Phenomena is, that Like
_repels_ Like, and attracts Unlike. The north pole attracts
the south pole, the positive fluid attracts the negative
fluid; opposite elements rush together; opposite motions
reduce each other to rest. The permanent and stable course
of things is that which results from the balance and
neutralization of contrary tendencies. Nature is constantly
labouring after repose by the effect of such tendencies; and
so far as Polar Forces enter into her economy, she seeks
harmony by means of discord, and unity by opposition.

Although the Idea of Polarity is as yet somewhat vague and
obscure, even in the minds of the cultivators of physical
science, it has nevertheless given birth to some general
principles which have been accepted as evident, and have had
great influence on the progress of science. These we shall
now consider.



{{371}}
