CHAPTER II.

OF TECHNICAL TERMS.


1. IT has already been stated that we gather knowledge from
the external world, when we are able to apply, to the facts
which we observe, some ideal conception, which gives unity
and connexion to multiplied and separate perceptions. We
have also shown that our conceptions, thus verified by
facts, may themselves be united and connected by a new bond
of the same nature; and that man may thus have to pursue his
way from truth to truth through a long progression of
discoveries, each resting on the preceding, and rising above it.

Each of these steps, in succession, is recorded, fixed, and
made available, by some peculiar form of words; and such
words, thus rendered precise in their meaning, and
appropriated to the service of science, we may call
_Technical Terms_. It is in a great measure by inventing
such Terms that men not only best express the discoveries
they have made, but also enable their followers to become so
familiar with these discoveries, and to possess them so
thoroughly, that they can readily use them in advancing to
ulterior generalizations.

Most of our ideal conceptions are described by exact and
constant words or phrases, such as those of which we here
speak. We have already had occasion to employ many of these.
Thus we have had instances of technical Terms expressing
geometrical conceptions, as _Ellipsis_, _Radius Vector_,
_Axis_, _Plane_, the Proportion of the _Inverse Square_, and
the like. Other Terms have described mechanical conceptions,
as _Accelerating Force_ and _Attraction_. Again, chemistry
exhibits (as do all sciences) a series of Terms which mark
the steps of our {55} progress. The views of the first real
founders of the science are recorded by the Terms which are
still in use, _Neutral Salts_, _Affinity_, and the like. The
establishment of Dalton's theory has produced the use of the
word _Atom_ in a peculiar sense, or of some other word, as
_Proportion_, in a sense equally technical. And Mr. Faraday
has found it necessary, in order to expound his
electro-chemical theory, to introduce such terms as _Anode_
and _Cathode_, _Anïon_ and _Cathïon_.

2. I need not adduce any further examples, for my object at
present is only to point out the use and influence of such
language: its rules and principles I shall hereafter try, in
some measure, to fix. But what we have here to remark is,
the extraordinary degree in which the progress of science is
facilitated, by thus investing each new discovery with a
compendious and steady form of expression. These terms soon
become part of the current language of all who take an
interest in speculation. However strange they may sound at
first, they soon grow familiar in our ears, and are used
without any effort, or any recollection of the difficulty
they once involved. They become as common as the phrases
which express our most frequent feelings and interests,
while yet they have incomparably more precision than belongs
to any terms which express feelings; and they carry with
them, in their import, the results of deep and laborious
trains of research. They convey the mental treasures of one
period to the generations that follow; and laden with this,
their precious freight, they sail safely across gulfs of
time in which empires have suffered shipwreck, and the
languages of common life have sunk into oblivion. We have
still in constant circulation among us the Terms which
belong to the geometry, the astronomy, the zoology, the
medicine of the Greeks, and the algebra and chemistry of the
Arabians. And we can in an instant, by means of a few words,
call to our own recollection, or convey to the apprehension
of another person, phenomena and relations of phenomena in
optics, mineralogy, chemistry, which are so complex and
abstruse, that it might seem to require the utmost subtlety
of the human mind to {56} grasp them, even if that were made
the sole object of its efforts. By this remarkable effect of
Technical Language, we have the results of all the labours
of past times not only always accessible, but so prepared
that we may (provided we are careful in the use of our
instrument) employ what is really useful and efficacious for
the purpose of further success, without being in any way
impeded or perplexed by the length and weight of the chain
of past connexions which we drag along with us.

By such means,--by the use of the Inductive Process, and by
the aid of Technical Terms,--man has been constantly
advancing in the path of scientific truth. In a succeeding
part of this work we shall endeavour to trace the general
rules of this advance, and to lay down the maxims by which
it may be most successfully guided and forwarded. But in
order that we may do this to the best advantage, we must
pursue still further the analysis of knowledge into its
elements; and this will be our employment in the first part
of the work.



{{57}}
CHAPTER III.

OF NECESSARY TRUTHS.


1. EVERY advance in human knowledge consists, as we have
seen, in adapting new ideal conceptions to ascertained
facts, and thus in superinducing the Form upon the Matter,
the active upon the passive processes of our minds. Every
such step introduces into our knowledge an additional
portion of the ideal element, and of those relations which
flow from the nature of Ideas. It is, therefore, important
for our purpose to examine more closely this element, and to
learn what the relations are which may thus come to form
part of our knowledge. An inquiry into those Ideas which
form the foundations of our sciences;--into the reality,
independence, extent, and principal heads of the knowledge
which we thus acquire; is a task on which we must now enter,
and which will employ us for several of the succeeding Books.

In this inquiry our object will be to pass in review all the
most important Fundamental Ideas which our sciences involve;
and to prove more distinctly in reference to each, what we
have already asserted with regard to all, that there are
everywhere involved in our knowledge acts of the mind as
well as impressions of sense; and that our knowledge
derives, from these acts, a generality, certainty, and
evidence which the senses could in no degree have supplied.
But before I proceed to do this in particular cases, I will
give some account of the argument in its general form.

We have already considered the separation of our knowledge
into its two elements,--Impressions of Sense and Ideas,--as
evidently indicated by this; that all knowledge possesses
characters which neither of these {58} elements alone could
bestow. Without our ideas, our sensations could have no
connexion; without external impressions, our ideas would
have no reality; and thus both ingredients of our knowledge
must exist.

2. There is another mode in which the distinction of the two
elements of knowledge appears, as I have already said (c. i.
sect. 2): namely in the distinction of _necessary_, and
_contingent_ or _experiential_, truths. For of these two
classes of truths, the difference arises from this;--that
the one class derives its nature from the one, and the other
from the other, of the two elements of knowledge. I have
already stated briefly the difference of these two kinds of
truths:--namely, that the former are truths which, we see,
must be true:--the latter are true, but so far as we can
see, might be otherwise. The former are true necessarily and
universally: the latter are learnt from experience and
limited by experience. Now with regard to the former kind of
truths, I wish to show that the universality and necessity
which distinguish them can by no means be derived from
experience; that these characters do in reality flow from
the ideas which these truths involve; and that when the
necessity of the truth is exhibited in the way of logical
demonstration, it is found to depend upon certain
fundamental principles, (Definitions and Axioms,) which may
thus be considered as expressing, in some measure, the
essential characters of our ideas. These fundamental
principles I shall afterwards proceed to discuss and to
exhibit in each of the principal departments of science.

I shall begin by considering Necessary Truths more fully
than I have yet done. As I have already said, necessary
truths are those in which we not only learn, that the
proposition _is_ true, but see that it _must be_ true; in
which the negation of the truth is not only false, but
impossible; in which we cannot, even by an effort of
imagination, or in a supposition, conceive the reverse of
that which is asserted.

3. That there are such truths cannot be doubted. We may
take, for example, all relations of number. Three and Two
added together make Five. We cannot {59} conceive it to be
otherwise. We cannot, by any freak of thought, imagine Three
and Two to make Seven.

It may be said that this assertion merely expresses what we
mean by our words; that it is a matter of definition; that
the proposition is an identical one.

But this is by no means so. The definition of Five is not
Three and Two, but Four and One. How does it appear that
Three and Two is the same number as Four and One? It is
evident that it is so; but _why_ is it evident?--not because
the proposition is identical; for if that were the reason,
all numerical propositions must be evident for the same
reason. If it be a matter of definition that 3 and 2 make 5,
it must be a matter of definition that 39 and 27 make 66.
But who will say that the definition of 66 is 39 and 27? Yet
the magnitude of the numbers can make no difference in the
ground of the truth. How do we know that the product of 13
and 17 is 4 less than the product of 15 and 15? We see that
it is so, if we perform certain operations by the rules of
arithmetic; but how do we know the truth of the rules of
arithmetic? If we divide 123375 by 987 according to the
process taught us at school, how are we assured that the
result is correct, and that the number 125 thus obtained is
really the number of times one number is contained in the
other?

The correctness of the rule, it may be replied, can be
rigorously demonstrated. It can be shown that the process
must inevitably give the true quotient.

Certainly this can be shown to be the case. And precisely
because it _can_ be shown that the result must be true, we
have here an example of a necessary truth; and this truth,
it appears, is not _therefore_ necessary because it is
itself evidently identical, however it may be possible to
prove it by reducing it to evidently identical propositions.
And the same is the case with all other numerical
propositions; for, as we have said, the nature of all of
them is the same.

Here, then, we have instances of truths which are not only
true, but demonstrably and necessarily true. Now such truths
are, in this respect at least, altogether {60} different
from truths, which, however certain they may be, are learnt
to be so only by the evidence of observation, interpreted,
as observation must be interpreted, by our own mental
faculties. There is no difficulty in finding examples of
these merely observed truths. We find that sugar dissolves
in water, and forms a transparent fluid, but no one will say
that we can see any reason beforehand why the result _must_
be so. We find that all animals which chew the cud have also
the divided hoof; but could any one have predicted that this
would be universally the case? or supposing the truth of the
rule to be known, can any one say that he cannot conceive
the facts as occurring otherwise? Water expands when it
crystallizes, some other substances contract in the same
circumstances; but can any one know that this will be so
otherwise than by observation? We have here propositions
_rigorously_ true, (we will assume,) but can any one say
they are _necessarily_ true? These, and the great mass of
the doctrines established by induction, are actual, but so
far as we can see, accidental laws; results determined by
some unknown selection, not demonstrable consequences of the
essence of things, inevitable and perceived to be
inevitable. According to the phraseology which has been
frequently used by philosophical writers, they are
_contingent_, not necessary truths.

It is requisite to insist upon this opposition, because no
insight can be obtained into the true nature of knowledge,
and the mode of arriving at it, by any one who does not
clearly appreciate the distinction. The separation of truths
which are learnt by observation, and truths which can be
seen to be true by a pure act of thought, is one of the
first and most essential steps in our examination of the
nature of truth, and the mode of its discovery. If any one
does not clearly comprehend this distinction of necessary
and contingent truths, he will not be able to go along with
us in our researches into the foundations of human
knowledge; nor, indeed, to pursue with success any
speculation on the subject. But, in fact, this distinction
is one that can hardly fail to be at once understood. It
{61} is insisted upon by almost all the best modern, as well
as ancient, metaphysicians[5\1], as of primary importance.
And if any person does not fully apprehend, at first, the
different kinds of truth thus pointed out, let him study, to
some extent, those sciences which have necessary truth for
their subject, as geometry, or the properties of numbers, so
as to obtain a familiar acquaintance with such truth; and he
will then hardly fail to see how different the evidence of
the propositions which occur in these sciences, is from the
evidence of the facts which are merely learnt from
experience. That the year goes through its course in 365
days, can only be known by observation of the sun or stars:
that 365 days is 52 weeks and a day, it requires no
experience, but only a little thought to perceive. That bees
build their cells in the form of hexagons, we cannot know
without looking at them; that regular hexagons may be
arranged so as to fill space, may be proved with the utmost
rigour, even if there were not in existence such a thing as
a material hexagon.

[Note 5\1: Aristotle, Dr Whately, Dugald Stewart, &c.]

4. As I have already said, one mode in which we may express
the difference of necessary truths and truths of experience,
is, that necessary truths are those of which we cannot
distinctly conceive the contrary. We can very readily
conceive the contrary of experiential truths. We can
conceive the stars moving about the pole or across the sky
in any kind of curves with any velocities; we can conceive
the moon always appearing during the whole month as a
luminous disk, as she might do if her light were inherent
and not borrowed. But we cannot conceive one of the
parallelograms on the same base and between the same
parallels larger than the other; for we find that, if we
attempt to do this, when we separate the parallelograms into
parts, we have to conceive one triangle larger than another,
both having all their parts equal; which we cannot conceive
at all, if we conceive the triangles distinctly. We make
this impossibility more clear by conceiving {62} the
triangles to be placed so that two sides of the one coincide
with two sides of the other; and it is then seen, that in
order to conceive the triangles unequal, we must conceive
the two bases which have the same extremities both ways, to
be different lines, though both straight lines. This it is
impossible to conceive: we assent to the impossibility as an
axiom, when it is expressed by saying, that two straight
lines cannot inclose a space; and thus we cannot distinctly
conceive the contrary of the proposition just mentioned
respecting parallelograms.

But it is necessary, in applying this distinction, to bear
in mind the terms of it;--that we cannot _distinctly_
conceive the contrary of a necessary truth. For in a certain
loose, indistinct way, persons conceive the contrary of
necessary geometrical truths, when they erroneously conceive
false propositions to be true. Thus, Hobbes erroneously held
that he had discovered a means of geometrically 'doubling
the cube,' as it is called, that is, finding two mean
proportionals between two given lines; a problem which
cannot be solved by plane geometry. Hobbes not only proposed
a construction for this purpose, but obstinately maintained
that it was right, when it had been proved to be wrong. But
then, the discussion showed how indistinct the geometrical
conceptions of Hobbes were; for when his critics had proved
that one of the lines in his diagram would not meet the
other in the point which his reasoning supposed, but in
another point near to it; he maintained, in reply, that one
of these points was large enough to include the other, so
that they might be considered as the same point. Such a mode
of conceiving the opposite of a geometrical truth, forms no
exception to the assertion, that this opposite cannot be
distinctly conceived.

In like manner, the indistinct conceptions of children and
of rude savages do not invalidate the distinction of
necessary and experiential truths. Children and savages make
mistakes even with regard to numbers; and might easily
happen to assert that 27 and 38 are equal to 63 or 64. But
such mistakes cannot {63} make arithmetical truths cease to
be necessary truths. When any person conceives these numbers
and their addition distinctly, by resolving them into parts,
or in any other way, he sees that their sum is necessarily
65. If, on the ground of the possibility of children and
savages conceiving something different, it be held that this
is not a necessary truth, it must be held on the same
ground, that it is not a necessary truth that 7 and 4 are
equal to 11; for children and savages might be found so
unfamiliar with numbers as not to reject the assertion that
7 and 4 are 10, or even that 4 and 3 are 6, or 8. But I
suppose that no persons would on such grounds hold that
these arithmetical truths are truths known only by
experience.

5. I have taken examples of necessary truths from the
properties of number and space; but such truths exist no
less in other subjects, although the discipline of thought
which is requisite to perceive them distinctly, may not be
so usual among men with regard to the sciences of mechanics
and hydrostatics, as it is with regard to the sciences of
geometry and arithmetic. Yet every one may perceive that
there are such truths in mechanics. If I press the table
with my hand, the table presses my hand with an equal force:
here is a self-evident and necessary truth. In any machine,
constructed in whatever manner to increase the force which I
can exert, it is certain that what I gain in force I must
lose in the velocity which I communicate. This is not a
contingent truth, borrowed from and limited by observation;
for a man of sound mechanical views applies it with like
confidence, however novel be the construction of the
machine. When I come to speak of the ideas which are
involved in our mechanical knowledge, I may, perhaps, be
able to bring more clearly into view the necessary truth of
general propositions on such subjects. That reaction is
equal and opposite to action, is as necessarily true as that
two straight lines cannot inclose a space; it is as
impossible theoretically to make a perpetual motion by mere
mechanism as to make the diagonal of a square commensurable
with the side. {64}

6. Necessary truths must be _universal_ truths. If any
property belong to a right-angled triangle _necessarily_, it
must belong to _all_ right-angled triangles. And it shall be
proved in the following Chapter, that truths possessing
these two characters, of Necessity and Universality, cannot
possibly be the mere results of experience.

[Necessary truths are not considered as a portion of the
_Inductive_ Sciences. They are Deductions from our Ideas.
Thus the necessary truths which constitute the Science of
Geometry are Deductions from our Idea of Space: the
necessary truths which constitute the Science of Arithmetic
are Deductions from our notions of Number; which perhaps
involves necessarily the Idea of Time. But though we do not
call those Sciences _Inductive_ which involve properties of
Space, Number and Time alone, the properties of Space, Time
and Number enter in many very important ways into the
Inductive Sciences; and therefore the Ideas of Space, Time
and Number require to be considered in the first place. And
moreover the examination of these Ideas is an essential step
towards the examination of other Ideas: and the conditions
of the possibility and certainty of truth, which are
exemplified in Geometry and Arithmetic, open to us important
views respecting the conditions of the possibility and
certainty of all Scientific Truth. We shall therefore in the
next Book examine the Ideas on which the Pure Sciences,
Geometry and Arithmetic, are founded. But we must first say
a little more of Ideas in general.]



{{65}}
