CHAPTER IV.

OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA OF CAUSE.


1. _Causes are abstract Conceptions._--WE have now to
express, as well as we can, the fundamental character of
that Idea of Cause of which we have just proved the
existence. This may be done, at least for purposes of
reasoning, in this as in former instances, by means of
axioms. I shall state the principal axioms which belong to
this subject, referring the reader to his own thoughts for
the axiomatic evidence which belongs to them.

But I must first observe, that in order to express general
and abstract truths concerning cause and effect, these
terms, _cause_ and _effect_, must be understood in a general
and abstract manner. When one event gives rise to another,
the first _event_ is, in common language, often called the
cause, and the second the effect. Thus the meeting of two
billiard-balls may be said to be the cause of one of them
turning aside out of the path in which it was moving. For
our present purposes, however, we must not apply the term
cause to such occurrences as this meeting and turning, but
to a certain conception, _force_, abstracted from all such
special events, and considered as a quality or property by
which one body affects the motion of the other. And in like
manner in other cases, cause is to be conceived as some
abstract quality, power, or efficacy, by which change is
produced; a quality not identical with the events, but
disclosed by means of them. Not only is this abstract mode
of conceiving force and cause useful in expressing the
fundamental principles of science; but it supplies us with
the only mode by which such principles can be {185} stated
in a general manner, and made to lead to substantial truth
and real knowledge.

Understanding _cause_, therefore, in this sense, we proceed
to our Axioms.

2. First Axiom. _Nothing can take place without a Cause._

Every event, of whatever kind, must have a cause in the
sense of the term which we have just indicated; and that it
must, is a universal and necessary proposition to which we
irresistibly assent as soon as it is understood. We believe
each appearance to come into existence,--we conceive every
change to take place,--not only with something preceding it,
but something by which it is made to be what it is. An
effect without a cause;--an event without a preceding
condition involving the efficacy by which the event is
produced;--are suppositions which we cannot for a moment
admit. That the connexion of effect with cause is universal
and necessary, is a universal and constant conviction of
mankind. It persists in the minds of all men, undisturbed by
all the assaults of sophistry and skepticism; and, as we
have seen in the last chapter, remains unshaken, even when
its foundations seem to be ruined. This axiom expresses, to
a certain extent, our Idea of Cause; and when that idea is
clearly apprehended, the axiom requires no proof, and indeed
admits of none which makes it more evident. That
notwithstanding its simplicity, it is of use in our
speculations, we shall hereafter see; but in the first
place, we must consider the other axioms belonging to this
subject.

3. Second Axiom. _Effects are proportional to their Causes,
and Causes are measured by their Effects._

We have already said that _cause_ is that quality or power,
in the circumstances of each case, by which the effect is
produced; and this power, an abstract property of the
condition of things to which it belongs, can in no way fall
directly under the cognizance of the senses. Cause, of
whatever kind, is not apprehended as including objects and
events which share its nature by being co-extensive with
certain portions of it, as space and time are. It cannot
therefore, like them, be {186} measured by repetition of its
own parts, as space is measured by repetition of inches, and
time by repetition of minutes. Causes may be greater or
less; as, for instance, the force of a man is greater than
the force of a child. But how much is the one greater than
the other? How are we to compare the abstract conception,
force, in such cases as these?

To this, the obvious and only answer is, that we must
compare causes by means of their effects;--that we must
compare force by something which force can do. The child can
lift one fagot; the man can lift ten such fagots: we have
here a means of comparison. And whether or not the rule is
to be applied in this manner, that is, by the number of
things operated on, (a question which we shall have to
consider hereafter,) it is clear that this form of rule,
namely, a reference to some effect or other as our measure,
is the right, because the only possible form. The cause
determines the effect. The cause being the same, the effect
must be the same. The connexion of the two is governed by a
fixed and inviolable rule. It admits of no ambiguity. Every
degree of intensity in the cause has some peculiar
modification of the effect corresponding to it. Hence the
effect is an unfailing index of the amount of the cause; and
if it be a measurable effect, gives a measure of the cause.
We can have no other measure; but we need no other, for this
is exact, sufficient and complete.

It may be said, that various effects are produced by the
same cause. The sun's heat melts wax and expands
quicksilver. The force of gravity causes bodies to move
downwards if they are free, and to press down upon their
supports if they are supported. Which of the effects is to
be taken as the measure of heat, or of gravity, in these
cases? To this we reply, that if we had merely different
states of the same cause to compare, any of the effects
might be taken. The sun's heat on different days might be
measured by the expansion of quicksilver, or by the quantity
of wax melted. The force of gravity, if it were different at
different places, might be measured by the spaces through
which a given weight would bend an elastic {187} support, or
by the spaces through which a body would fall in a given
time. All these measures are consistent with the general
character of our idea of cause.

4. _Limitation of the Second Axiom._--But there may be
circumstances in the nature of the case which may further
determine the kind of effect which we must take for the
measure of the cause. For example, if causes are conceived
to be of such a nature as to be capable of addition, the
effects taken as their measure must conform to this
condition. This is the case with mechanical causes. The
weights of two bodies are the causes of the pressure which
they exert downwards; and these weights are capable of
addition. The weight of the two is the sum of the weight of
each. We are therefore not at liberty to say that weights
shall be measured by the spaces through which they bend a
certain elastic support, except we have first ascertained
that the whole weight bends it through a space equal to the
sum of the inflections produced by the separate weights.
Without this precaution, we might obtain inconsistent
results. Two weights, each of the magnitude 3 as measured by
their effects, might, if we took the inflections of a spring
for the effects, be together equal to 5 or to 7 by the same
kind of measurement. For the inflection produced by two
weights of 3 might, for aught we can see beforehand, be more
or less than twice as great as the inflection produced by
one weight of 3. That forces are capable of addition, is a
condition which limits, and, as we shall see, in some cases
rigorously fixes, the kind of effects which are to be taken
as their measures.

Causes which are thus capable of addition are to be measured
by the repeated addition of equal quantities. Two such
causes are _equal_ to each other when they produce exactly
the same effect. So far our axiom is applied directly. But
these two causes can be _added_ together; and being thus
added, they are _double_ of one of them; and the cause
composed by addition of _three_ such, is _three_ times as
great as the first; and so on for any measure whatever. By
this means, and by this {188} means only, we have a complete
and consistent measure of those causes which are so
conceived as to be subject to this condition of being added
and multiplied.

Causes are, in the present chapter, to be understood in the
widest sense of the term; and the axiom now under our
consideration applies to them, whenever they are of such a
nature as to admit of any measure at all. But the cases
which we have more particularly in view are _mechanical_
causes, the causes of the motion and of the equilibrium of
bodies. In these cases, forces are conceived as capable of
addition; and what has been said of the measure of causes in
such cases, applies peculiarly to mechanical forces. Two
weights, placed together, may be considered as a single
weight, equal to the _sum_ of the two. Two pressures,
pushing a body in the same direction at the same point, are
identical in all respects with some single pressure, their
_sum_, pushing in like manner; and this is true whether or
not they put the body in motion. In the cases of mechanical
forces, therefore, we take some certain effect, velocity
generated or weight supported, which may fix the _unit_ of
force; and we then measure all other forces by the
successive repetition of this unit, as we measure all spaces
by the successive repetition of our unit of lineal measure.

But these steps in the formation of the science of Mechanics
will be further explained, when we come to follow our axioms
concerning cause into their application in that science. At
present we have, perhaps, sufficiently explained the axiom
that causes are measured by their effects, and we now
proceed to a third axiom, also of great importance.

5. Third Axiom. _Reaction is equal and opposite to Action._

In the case of mechanical forces, the action of a cause
often takes place by an operation of one body upon another;
and in this case, the action is always and inevitably
accompanied by an _opposite_ action. If I press a stone with
my hand, the stone presses my hand in return. If one ball
strike another and put it in motion, the second ball
diminishes the motion of {189} the first. In these cases the
operation is mutual; the Action is accompanied by a
Reaction. And in all such cases the Reaction is a force of
exactly the same nature as the Action, exerted in an
opposite direction. A pressure exerted upon a body at rest
is resisted and balanced by another pressure; when the
pressure of one body puts another in motion, the body,
though it yields to the force, nevertheless exerts upon the
pressing body a force like that which it suffers.

Now the axiom asserts further, that this Reaction is
_equal_, as well as opposite, to the Action. For the
Reaction is an effect of the Action, and is determined by
it. And since the two, Action and Reaction, are forces of
the same nature, each may be considered as cause and as
effect; and they must, therefore, determine each other by a
common rule. But this consideration leads necessarily to
their equality: for since the rule is mutual, if we could
for an instant suppose the Reaction to be less than the
Action, we must, by the same rule, suppose the Action to be
less than the Reaction. And thus Action and Reaction, in
every such case, are rigorously equal to each other.

It is easily seen that this axiom is not a proposition which
is, or can be, proved by experience; but that its truth is
anterior to special observation, and depends on our
conception of Action and Reaction. Like our other axioms,
this has its source in an Idea; namely, the Idea of Cause,
under that particular condition in which cause and effect
are mutual. The necessary and universal truth which we
cannot help ascribing to the axiom, shows that it is not
derived from the stores of experience, which can never
contain truths of this character. Accordingly, it was
asserted with equal confidence and generality by those who
did not refer to experience for their principles, and by
those who did. Leonicus Tomæus, a commentator of Aristotle,
whose work was published in 1552, and therefore at a period
when no right opinions concerning mechanical reaction were
current, at least in his school, says, in his remarks on the
Author's Questions concerning the communication of motion,
that 'Reaction is equal and {190} contrary to Action.' The
same principle was taken for granted by all parties, in all
the controversies concerning the proper measure of force, of
which we shall have to speak: and would be rigorously true,
as a law of motion, whichever of the rival interpretations
of the measure of the term 'Action' we were to take.

6. _Extent of the Third Axiom._--It may naturally be asked
whether this third Axiom respecting causation extends to any
other cases than those of mechanical action, since the
notion of Cause in general has certainly a much wider
extent. For instance, when a hot body heats a cold one, is
there necessarily an equal reaction of the second body upon
the first? Does the snowball cool the boy's hand exactly as
much as the hand heats the snow? To this we reply, that, in
every case in which one body acts upon another by its
physical qualities, there must be some reaction. No body can
affect another without being itself also affected. But in
any physical change the _action_ exerted is an abstract term
which may be variously understood. The hot hand may _melt_ a
cool body, or may _warm_ it: which kind of effect is to be
taken as action? This remains to be determined by other
considerations.

In all cases of physical change produced by one body in
another, it is generally possible to assume such a meaning
of action, that the reaction shall be of the same nature as
the action; and when this is done, the third axiom of
causation, that reaction is equal to action, is universally
true. Thus if a hot body heat a cold one, the change may be
conceived as the transfer of a certain substance, _heat_ or
_caloric_, from the first body to the second. On this
supposition, the first body _loses_ just as much heat as the
other _gains_; action and reaction are equal. But if the
reaction be of a different kind to the action we can no
longer apply the axiom. If a hot body _melt_ a cold one, the
latter _cools_ the former: here, then, is reaction; but so
long as the action and reaction are stated in this form, we
cannot assert any equality between them.

In treating of the secondary mechanical sciences, we {191}
shall see further in what way we may conceive the physical
action of one body upon another, so that the same axioms
which are the basis of the science of Mechanics shall apply
to changes not at first sight manifestly mechanical.

The three axioms of causation which we have now stated are
the fundamental maxims of all reasoning concerning causes as
to their quantities; and it will be shown in the sequel that
these axioms form the basis of the science of Mechanics,
determining its form, extent, and certainty. We must,
however, in the first place, consider how we acquire those
conceptions upon which the axioms now established are to be
employed.

[2d Ed.] [The Axiom that _Reaction is equal and opposite to
Action_, may appear to be at variance with a maxim
concerning Cause which is commonly current; namely, that the
'Cause precedes Effect, and Effect follows Cause.' For it
may be said, if _A_, the Action, and _R_, the Reaction, can
be considered as mutually the cause of each other, _A_ must
precede _R_, and yet must follow it, which is impossible.
But to this I reply, that in those cases of direct Causation
to which the maxim applies, the Cause and Effect are not
successive, but simultaneous. If I press against some
obstacle, the obstacle resists and returns the pressure at
the instant it is exerted, not after any interval of time,
however small. The common maxim, that the effect follows the
cause, has arisen from the practice of considering, as
examples of cause and effect, not instantaneous forces or
causes, and the instantaneous changes which they produce;
but taking, instead of this latter, the _cumulative_ effects
produced in the course of time, and compared with like
results occurring without the action of the cause. Thus, if
we alter the length of a clock-pendulum, this change
produces, as its effect, a subsequent change of rate in the
clock: because the rate is measured by the accumulated
effects of the pendulum's gravity, before and after the
change. But the pendulum produces its mechanical effect upon
the escapement, at the moment of its contact, and each wheel
upon the next, at the moment of _its_ contact. As has {192}
been said in a Review of this work, 'The time lost in cases
of indirect physical causation is consumed in the movements
which take place among the parts of the mechanism in action,
by which the active forces so transformed into momentum are
transported over intervals of space to new points of action,
the motion of matter in such cases being regarded as a mere
carrier of force.' (_Quarterly Rev._ No. cxxxv. p. 212.)

This subject I have further treated in the _Memoirs of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society_, vol. vii. part iii.] [In
this Third Edition I add this discussion.]

_Discussion of the Question:--Are Cause and Effect
successive or simultaneous?_

I HAVE at various times laid before this Society
dissertations on the metaphysical grounds and elements of
our knowledge, and especially on the foundations of the
science of mechanics. As these speculations have not failed
to excite some attention, both here and elsewhere, I am
tempted to bring forward in the same manner some additional
disquisitions of the same kind. Indeed, the immediate
occasion of the present memoir is of itself an evidence that
such subjects are not supposed to be without their interest
for the general reader; for I am led to the views and
reasonings which I am now about to lay before the Society,
by some remarks in one of our most popular Reviews, (_The
Quarterly Review_, Article on the _History_ and _Philosophy
of the Inductive Sciences_, June 1841). A writer of singular
acuteness and comprehensiveness of view has there made
remarks upon the doctrines which I had delivered in the
_Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, which remarks appear
to me in the highest degree instructive and philosophical. I
am not, however, going here to discuss fully the doctrines
contained in this critique. With respect to its general
tendency, I will only observe, that the author does not
accept, in the form in which I had given it, the account of
the origin and ground of necessary and universal truths. I
had stated that our knowledge is derived from Sensations and
Ideas; and that Ideas, which are the conditions of
perception, such as _space_, _time_, _likeness_, _cause_,
make universal and necessary knowledge possible; whereas, if
knowledge were derived from Sensation alone, it could not
have those characters. I have moreover {193} enumerated a
long series of Fundamental Ideas as the bases of a
corresponding series of sciences, of which sciences I have
shown also, by an historical survey, that they claim to
possess universal truths, and have their claims allowed. I
have gone further: for I have stated the Axioms which flow
from these Fundamental Ideas, and which are the logical
grounds of necessity and universality in the truths of each
science, when the science is presented in the form of a
demonstrated system. The Reviewer does not assent to this
doctrine, nor to the argument by which it is supported;
namely, that Experience cannot lead to universal truths,
except by means of a universal Idea supplied by the mind,
and infused into the particular facts which observation
ministers. He considers that the existence of universal
truths in our knowledge may be explained otherwise. He holds
that it is a sufficient account of the matter to say that we
pass from special experience to universal truth in virtue of
'the inductive propensity--the irresistible impulse of the
mind to generalize _ad infinitum_.' I shall not here dwell
upon very strong reasons which may be assigned, as I
conceive, for not accepting this as a full and satisfactory
explanation of the difficulty. Instead of doing so, I shall
here content myself with remarking, that even if we adopt
the Reviewer's expressions, we must still contend that there
are _different forms_ of the _impulse of the mind to
generalize_, corresponding to each of the Fundamental Ideas
of our system. These Fundamental Ideas, if they be nothing
else, must at least be accepted as a classification of the
modes of action of the Inductive Propensity,--as so many
different paths and tendencies of the Generalizing Impulse:
and the Axioms which I have stated as the express results of
the Fundamental Ideas, and as the steps by which those Ideas
make universal truths possible, are still no less worthy of
notice, if they are stated as the results of our
Generalizing Impulse; and as the steps by which that
Impulse, in its many various forms, makes universal truths
possible. The Generalizing Impulse in that operation by
which it leads us to the Axioms of Geometry, and to those of
Mechanics, takes very different courses; and these courses
may well deserve to be separately studied. And perhaps, even
if we accept this view of the philosophy of our knowledge,
no simpler or clearer way can be found of describing and
distinguishing these fundamentally different operations of
the Inductive Propensity, than by saying, {194} that in the
one case it proceeds according to the Idea of Space, in
another according to the Idea of Mechanical Cause; and the
like phraseology may be employed for all the other cases.

This then being understood, my present object is to consider
some very remarkable, and, as appears to me, novel views of
the Idea of Cause which the Reviewer propounds. And these
may be best brought under our discussion by considering them
as an attempt to solve the question, Whether, according to
our fundamental apprehensions of the relation of Cause and
Effect, effect follows cause in the order of time, or is
simultaneous with it.

At first sight, this question may seem to be completely
decided by our fundamental convictions respecting cause and
effect, and by the axioms which have been propounded by
almost all writers, and have obtained universal currency
among reasoners on this subject. That the cause must precede
the effect,--that the effect must follow the cause,--are, it
might seem, self-evident truths, assumed and assented to by
all persons in all reasonings in which those notions occur.
Such a doctrine is commonly asserted in general terms, and
seems to be verified in all the applications of the idea of
cause. A heavy body produces motion by its weight; the
motion produced is subsequent in time to the pressure which
the weight exerts. In a machine, bodies push or strike each
other, and so produce a series of motions; each motion, in
this case, is the result of the motions and configurations
which have preceded it. The whole series of such motions
employs time; and this time is filled up and measured by the
series of causes and effects, the effects being, in their
turn, causes of other effects. This is the common mode of
apprehending the universal course of events, in which the
chain of causation, and the progress of time, are
contemplated as each the necessary condition and
accompaniment of the other.

But this, the Critic remarks, is not true in _direct_
causation. 'If the antecedence and consequence in question
be understood as the interposition of an interval of time,
however small, between the action of the cause and the
production of the effect, we regard it as inadmissible. In
the production of motion by force, for instance, though the
effect be cumulative with continued exertion of the cause,
yet each elementary or individual action is, to our
apprehension, _instanter_ accompanied with its corresponding
increment of momentum in the body moved. In all dynamical
{195} reasonings no one has ever thought of interposing an
instant of time between the action and its resulting
momentum; nor does it appear necessary.' This is so evident,
that it appears strange it should have the air of novelty;
yet, so far as I am aware, the matter has never before been
put in the same point of view. But this being the case, the
question occurs, how it is that time _seems_ to be employed
in the progress from cause to effect? How is it that the
opinion of the effect being subsequent to the cause has
generally obtained? And to this the Critic's answer is
obvious:--it is so in cases of indirect or of _cumulative_
effect. If a ball _A_ strikes another, _B_, and puts it in
motion, and _B_ strikes _C_, and puts it in motion, _A_'s
impact may be considered as the cause, though not the direct
cause, of _C_'s motion. Now time, namely the time of _B_'s
motion after it is struck by _A_, and before it strikes _C_,
intervenes between _A_'s impact and the beginning of _C_'s
motion: that is, between the cause and its effect. In this
sense, the effect is subsequent to the cause. Again, if a
body be put in motion by a series of impulses acting at
finite intervals of time, all in the same direction, the
motion at the end of all these intervals is the effect of
all the impulses, and exists after they have all acted. It
is the accumulated effect, and subsequent to each separate
action of the cause. But in this case, each impulse produces
its effect instantaneously, and the time is employed, not in
the transition from any cause to its effect, but in the
intervals between the action of the several causes, during
which intervals the body goes on with the velocity already
communicated to it. In each impulse, force produces motion:
and the motion goes on till a new change takes place, by the
same kind of action. The force may be said, in the language
employed by the Critic, to be transformed into momentum; and
in the successive impulses, successive portions of force are
thus transformed; while in the intervening intervals, the
force thus transformed into momentum is carried by the body
from one place to another, where a new change awaits it.
'The cause is absorbed and transformed into effect, and
therein treasured up.' Hence, as the Writer says, 'The time
lost in cases of indirect physical causation is that
consumed in the movements which take place among the parts
of the mechanism set in action, by which the active forces
so transformed into mechanism are transported over intervals
of space to new points of action, the motion of matter in
such cases being {196} regarded as a mere carrier of
force':--and when force is directly counteracted by force,
their mutual destruction must be conceived, as the Reviewer
says, to be instantaneous. We can therefore hardly resist
his conclusion, that men have been misled in assuming
sequence as a feature in the relation of cause and effect;
and we may readily assent to his suggestion, that sequence,
when observed, is to be held as a sure indication of
indirect action, accompanied with a movement of parts.

But yet if we turn for a moment to other kinds of causation,
we seem to be compelled at every step to recognize the truth
of the usual maxim upon this subject, that effects are
subsequent to causes. Is not poison, taken at a certain
moment, the cause of disorder and death which follow at a
_subsequent_ period? Is not a man's early prudence often the
cause of his prosperity in _later_ life, and his folly,
though for a moment it may produce gratification, _finally_
the cause of his ruin? And even in the case of mechanism,
if, in a clock which goes rightly, we alter the length of
the pendulum, is not this alteration the cause of an
alteration which _afterwards_ takes place in the rate of the
clock's going? Are not all these, and innumerable other
cases, instances in which the usual notion of the effect
following the cause is verified? and are they not
irreconcileable with the new doctrine of cause and effect
being simultaneous?

In order to disentangle this apparent confusion, let us
first consider the case last mentioned, of a clock, in which
some alteration is made which affects the rate of going.

So long as the parts of the clock remain unaltered, its rate
will remain unaltered; and any part which is considered as
capable of alteration, may be considered as, if we please,
the cause of the unaltered rate, by being itself unaltered.
But we do not usually introduce the positive idea of cause,
to correspond with this negation of change. If we speak of
the rate as unaltered, we may also say that it is so because
there is _no cause_ of alteration. The steady rate is the
indication of the absence of any cause of alteration; and
the rate of going measures the progress of time, in a state
of things in which causes of change are thus excluded. If an
alteration takes place in any part of the clock, once for
all, the rate is altered; but the new rate is steady as the
old rate was, and, like it, measures the uniform progress of
time. But the difference between the new rate and the old is
occasioned by {197} the difference of the parts of the
clock; and the new rate may very properly be said to be
caused by the change of the parts, and to be subsequent to
it: for it does prevail after the change, and does not
prevail before.

But how is this view to be reconciled with the one just
quoted from the Reviewer, and, as it appeared,
satisfactorily proved by him; according to which all
mechanical effects are simultaneous with their causes, and
not subsequent to them? We have here the two views in close
contact, and in seeming opposition.

In the going of a clock, the parts are in motion; and these
motions are determined by forces arising from the form and
connexion of the parts of the mechanism. Each of the forces
thus exerted at any instant produces its effect at the same
instant; and thus, so far as the term _cause_ refers to such
instantaneous forces, the cause and the effect are
simultaneous. But if such instantaneous forces act at
successive intervals of time, the motion during each
interval is unaltered, and by its uniform progress measures
the progress of time. And thus the motion of the machine
consists of a series of intervals, during each of which the
motion is uniform, and measures the time; separated from
each other by a series of changes, at each of which the
change measures the instantaneous force, and is simultaneous
with it. And if, in this case, we suppose, at any point of
time, the instantaneous forces to cease, the succession of
them being terminated, from that point of time the motion
would be uniform. And since the rate of the motion in each
interval of time is determined by the instantaneous force
which last acted and by the preceding motion, the rate of
the motion in each interval of time is determined by all the
preceding instantaneous forces. Hence, when the series of
instantaneous forces stops, the rate at which the motion
goes on permanently, from that point of time, is determined
by the antecedent series of such forces, which series may be
considered as an aggregate cause; and hence it appears, that
the _permanent_ effect is determined by the _aggregate_
cause; and in this sense the effect is subsequent to the
cause.

Thus we obtain, in this case, a solution of the difficulty
which is placed before us. The instantaneous effect or
change is simultaneous with the instantaneous force or cause
by which it is {198} produced. But if we consider a series
of such instantaneous forces as a single aggregate cause,
and the final condition as a permanent effect of this cause,
the effect is subsequent to the cause. In this case, the
cause is immediately succeeded by the effect. The cause acts
in time: the effect goes on in time. The times occupied by
the cause and by the effect succeed each other, the one
ending at the point of time at which the other begins. But
the time which the cause occupies is really composed of a
series of instants of uniform motion interposed between
instantaneous forces; and during the time that this series
of causes is going on, to make up the aggregate cause, a
series of effects is going on to make up the final effect.
There is a progressive cause and a progressive effect which
go on together, and occupy the same finite time; and this
simultaneous progression is composed of all the simultaneous
instantaneous steps of cause and effect. The aggregate cause
is the sum of the progression of causes; the final effect is
the last term of the progression of effects. At each step,
as the Reviewer says, cause is transformed into effect; and
it is treasured up in the results during the intermediate
intervals; and the time occupied is not the time which
intervenes between cause and effect at each step, but the
time which intervenes between these transformations.

I have supposed forces to act at distinct instants, and to
cease to act in the intervals between; and then, the
aggregate of such intervals to make up a finite time, during
which an aggregate force acts. But if the action of the
force be rigorously continuous, it will easily be seen that
all the consequences as to cause and effect will be the
same; the discontinuous action being merely the usual
artifice by which, in mathematical reasonings, we obtain
results respecting continuous changes. It will still be
true, that the uniform motion which takes place after a
continuous force has acted, is the effect subsequent to the
cause; while the change which takes place at any instant by
the action of the force, is the instantaneous effect
simultaneous with the cause.

It may be objected, that this solution does not appear
immediately to apply: for the motion of a clock is not
uniform during any portion of the time. The parts move by
intervals of varied motion and of rest; or by oscillations
backwards and forwards; and the succession of forces which
acts during any {199} oscillation, or any cycle of motion,
is repeated during the succeeding oscillation or cycle, and
so on indefinitely; and if an alteration be made in the
parts, it is not a change once for all, but recurs in its
operation in every cycle of the motion.

But it will be found that this circumstance does not prevent
the same explanation from being still applicable with a
slight modification. Instead of uniform motion in the
intervals of causation, we shall have to speak of _steady
going_: and instead of considering all the forces which
affect the motion as causes of change of uniform motion, we
shall have to speak of changes in the parts of the mechanism
as causes of _change of rate of going_. With this
modification, it will still be true, that any instantaneous
cause produces its instantaneous effect simultaneously,
while the permanent effect is subsequent to the change which
is its cause. The steady going of the clock is assumed as a
normal condition, in which it measures the progress of time;
and in this assumption, the notion of cause and effect is
not brought into view. But a steady rate thus denoting the
mean passage of time, a change in the rate indicates a cause
of change. The _change of rate_, as an instantaneous
_transition_ from one rate to another, is _simultaneous_
with the change in the parts. But then the _changed rate_ as
a continued _condition_ in which, no new change supervening,
the rate again measures the progress of time, is
_subsequent_ to the change of parts, for it begins when that
ends, and continues when the progress of that has ceased.

If, however, this be a satisfactory solution of the
difficulty in the case of mechanism, how shall we apply the
same views to the other cases? Growth, the effect of food,
is subsequent to the act of taking food; disorder, the
effect of poison, is subsequent to the introduction of
poison into the system. Can we say that the animal would
continue unchanged if it were not to take food; and that
food is the cause of a change, namely, of growth? This is
manifestly false; for if the animal were not to take food,
it would soon perish. But the analogy of the former case, of
the clock, will enable us to avoid this perplexity. As we
assumed a steady rate of going in the clock to be the
measure of time when we considered the effect of mechanism,
so we assume a steady rate of action in the animal functions
to be the measure of the progress of time when we consider
the causes which act upon the {200} development and health
of animals. Digestion, and of course nutrition, are a part
of this normal condition; they are involved in the steady
going of the animal mechanism, and we must suppose these
functions to go regularly on, in order that the animal may
preserve its character of animal. Food and digestion may be
considered as causes of the continued existence of the
animal, in the same way in which the form of the parts of a
clock is the cause of the steady going of a clock. And when
we come to consider causes of change, this kind of
causation, which produces a normal condition of things,
merely measuring the flow of time, is left out of our
account. We can conceive an uniform condition of animal
existence, the animal neither growing nor wasting. This
being taken as the normal condition, any deviation from this
condition indicates a cause, and is taken as the evidence
and measure of the cause of change. And thus, in a growing
animal, the food partly keeps the animal in continued animal
existence, and partly, and in addition to this, causes its
growth. Food, in the former view, is always circulating in
the system, and is supposed to be uniformly administered;
the cycles of nutrition being merged in the notion of
uniform existence, as the oscillations of the pendulum in a
clock are merged in the notion of uniform going; and the
elementary steps of nutrition which are, in this view,
supposed to take place at each instant, produce their
instantaneous effect, for they are requisite in the cycle of
animal processes which goes on from instant to instant. But
on the other hand, in considering growth, we compare the
state of an animal with a preceding state, and consider the
nutriment taken in the intervening time as the cause of the
change: hence this nutriment, as an aggregate, is considered
as the cause of growth of the animal; and in this view the
effect is subsequent to the cause. But yet here, as in the
case of mechanism, the progressive effect is simultaneous,
step by step, with the progressive cause. There is a series
of operations; as for instance, intussusception, digestion,
assimilation, growth: each of these is a progressive
operation; and in the progress of each operation, the steps
of the effect and the instantaneous forces are simultaneous.
But the end of one operation is the beginning of the next,
or at least in part, and hence we have time occupied by the
succession. The end of intussusception is the beginning of
digestion, the end of digestion the beginning of
assimilation, {201} and so on. These aggregate effects
succeed each other; and hence growth is subsequent to the
taking of food; though each instantaneous force of animal
life, no less than of mechanism, produces an effect
simultaneous with its action. Each of these separate
operations is an aggregate operation, and occupies time; and
each aggregate effect is a condition of the action of the
cause in the next operation.

Again; if an animal in a permanent condition, neither waxing
nor wasting, may be taken as the normal state in which the
functions of life measure time, in order that we may
consider growth as an effect, to be referred to food as
cause; we may, for other purposes, consider, as the normal
condition, an animal waxing and then wasting, according to
the usual law of animal life: and we must take this, the
healthy progress of an animal, as our normal condition, if
we have to consider causes which produce disease. If we have
to refer the morbid condition of an animal to the influence
of poison, for example, we must consider how far the
condition deviates from what it would have been if the
poison had not been taken into the frame. The usual progress
of the animal functions including its growth, is the measure
of time; the deviation from this usual progress is the
indication of cause; and the effect of the poison is
subsequent to the cause, because the poison acts through the
cycle of the animal functions just mentioned, which occupies
time; and because the taking the poison into the system, not
any subsequent action of the animal forces in the system, is
considered as the event which we must contemplate as a
cause. To resume the analogy of the clock: the rate of the
clock is altered by altering the parts; but this alteration
itself may occupy time; as if we alter the rate of a clock
by applying a drop of acid, which gradually eats off a part
of the pendulum, the corrosion, as an aggregate effect,
occupies time; and the rates before and after the change are
separated by this time. But the application of the drop is
the cause; and thus, in this case the final effect is
subsequent to the cause, though here, as in the case of
mechanism, the instantaneous forces always produce a
simultaneous effect.

Thus we have in every case a _uniform_ state, or a state
which is considered as uniform, or at least _normal_; and
which is taken as the indication and measure of _time_; and
we have also _change_, {202} which is contemplated as a
deviation from uniformity, and is taken as the indication
and measure of _cause_. The uniform state may be one which
never exists, being purely imaginary; as the case in which
no forces act; and the case in which animal functions go on
permanently, the animal neither growing nor wasting. The
normal state may also be a state in which change is
constantly taking place, as, in fact, even a state of motion
is a state of change; such states also are, in a further
sense, that of a clock going by starts, and that of an
animal constantly growing: in these cases the changes are
all merged in a wider view of uniformity, so that these are
taken as the normal states. And in all these cases,
successive changes which take place are separated by
intervals of time, measured by the normal progress; and each
change is produced by some _simultaneous_ instantaneous
cause. But taking the cause in a larger sense, we group
these instantaneous causes, and perhaps omit in our
contemplation some of the intervening intervals; and thus
assign the cause to a _preceding_, and the effect to a
_succeeding_ time.

I may observe further, as a corollary from what has been
said, that the measure of time is different, when we
consider different kinds of causation; and in each case, is
_homogeneous_ with the changes which causation effects. In
the consideration of mechanical causes, we measure time by
mechanical changes;--by uniform motion, or uniform
succession of cycles of motion; by the rotation of a wheel,
or the oscillation of a pendulum. But if we have to consider
physiological changes, the progress of time is
physiologically measured;--by the normal progress of vital
operations; by the circulation, digestion or development of
the organized body; by the pulse, or by the growth. These
different measures of time give to time, so far as it is
exhibited by facts and events, a different character in the
different cases. Phenomenal time has a different nature and
essence according to the kind of the changes which we
consider, and which gives us our sole phenomenal indication
of cause.

I fear that I am travelling into matters too abstruse and
metaphysical for the occasion: but before I conclude, I will
present one other aspect of the subject.

In stating the difficulty, I referred to cases of moral as
well as physical causation; as when prudence produces
prosperity, or {203} when folly produces ruin. It may be
asked, whether we are here to apply the same
explanation;--whether we are to assume a normal condition of
human existence, in which neither prudence nor folly are
displayed, neither prosperity nor adversity
produced;--whether we are to conceive the progress of such a
state to measure the progress of time, and deviations from
it to denote causes of the kind mentioned. It may be asked
further, whether, if we do make this supposition, we can
resolve the influence of such causes as prudence or
imprudence into instantaneous acts, which produce their
effects immediately: and which occupy time only by being
separated by intervals of the inactive normal moral
condition. To this I must here reply, that the discussion of
such questions would carry me too far, and would involve
speculations not included within the acknowledged domain of
this Society, from which I therefore abstain. But I may say,
before quitting the subject, that I do not think the
suppositions above suggested are untenable; and that in
order to include moral causation under the maxims of
causation in general, we must necessarily make some such
hypothesis. The peculiarity of that kind of causation which
the will and the character exert, and which is exerted upon
the will and the character, would make this case far more
complex and difficult than those already considered; but, at
the same time, would offer us the means of explaining what
may seem harsh, in the above analogy. For instance, we
should have to assume such a maxim as this: that in moral
causation, time is not to be measured by the flow of
mechanical or physiological events;--not by the clock, or by
the pulse. Moral causation has its own clock, its own pulse,
in the progress of man's moral being; and by this measure of
time is the relation of moral cause and effect to be
defined.

That in estimating moral causation, the progress of time is
necessarily estimated by moral changes, and not by
machinery,--by the progress of events, and not by the going
of the clock,--is a truth familiar as a practical maxim to
all who give their thoughts to dramatic or narrative
fictions. Who feels any thing incongruous or extravagantly
hurried in the progress of events in that great exhibition
of moral causation, the tragedy of Othello? If we were asked
what time those vast and terrible {204} and complex changes
of the being and feelings of the characters occupy, we
should say, that, measured on its own scale, the event is of
great extent;--that the transaction is of considerable
magnitude in all ways. But if, with previous critics, we
look into the progress of time by the day and the hour--what
is the measure of this history? Forty-eight hours.



{{205}}
