CHAPTER IV.

APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE IN CHEMISTRY.


1. _A Body is Equal to the Sum of its Elements._--FROM the
earliest periods of chemistry the balance has been
familiarly used to determine the proportions of the
ingredients and of the compound; and soon after the middle
of the last century, this practice was so studiously
followed, that Wenzel and Richter were thereby led to the
doctrine of Definite Proportions. But yet the full value and
significance of the balance, as an indispensable instrument
in chemical researches, was not understood till the gaseous,
as well as solid and fluid ingredients were taken into the
account. When this was done, it was found that the
principle, that the whole is equal to the sum of its parts,
of which, as we have seen, the necessary truth, in such
cases, flows from the idea of substance, could be applied in
the most rigorous manner. And conversely, it was found that
by the use of the balance, the chemist could decide, in
doubtful cases, which was a whole, and which were parts.

For chemistry considers all the changes which belong to her
province as compositions and decompositions of elements; but
still the question may occur, whether an observed change be
the one or the other. How can we distinguish whether the
process which we contemplate be composition or
decomposition?--whether the new body be formed by addition
of a new, or subtraction of an old element? Again; in the
case of decomposition, we may inquire, What are the ultimate
limits of our analysis? If we decompound bodies into others
more and more simple, how far can we carry this succession
{40} of processes? How far can we proceed in the road of
analysis? And in our actual course, what evidence have we
that our progress, as far as it has gone, has carried us
from the more complex to the more simple?

To this we reply, that the criterion which enables us to
distinguish, decidedly and finally, whether our process have
been a mere analysis of the proposed body into its
ingredients, or a synthesis of some of them with some new
element, is the principle stated above, that the weight of
the whole is equal to the weight of all the parts. And no
process of chemical analysis or synthesis can be considered
complete till it has been verified by this fact;--by finding
that the weight of the compound is the weight of its
supposed ingredients; or, that if there be an element which
we think we have detached from the whole, its loss is
betrayed by a corresponding diminution of weight.

I have already noticed what an important part this principle
has played in the great chemical controversy which ended in
the establishment of the oxygen theory. The calcination of a
metal was decided to be the union of oxygen with the metal,
and not the separation of phlogiston from it, because it was
found that in the process of calcination, the weight of the
metal increased, and increased exactly as much as the weight
of ambient air diminished. When oxygen and hydrogen were
exploded together, and a small quantity of water was
produced, it was held that this was really a synthesis of
water, because, when very great care was taken with the
process, the weight of the water which resulted was equal to
the weight of the gases which disappeared.

2. _Lavoisier._--It was when gases came to be considered as
entering largely into the composition of liquid and solid
bodies, that extreme accuracy in weighing was seen to be so
necessary to the true understanding of chemical processes.
It was in this manner discovered by Lavoisier and his
contemporaries that oxygen constitutes a large ingredient of
calcined metals, of acids, and of water. A countryman of
Lavoisier[30\6] {41} has not only given most just praise to
that great philosopher for having constantly tested all his
processes by a careful and skilful use of the balance, but
has also claimed for him the merit of having introduced the
maxim, that in chemical operations nothing is created and
nothing lost. But I think it is impossible to deny that this
maxim is assumed in all the attempts at analysis made by his
contemporaries, as well as by him. This maxim is indeed
included in any clear notion of analysis: it could not be
the result of the researches of any one chemist, but was the
governing principle of the reasonings of all. Lavoisier,
however, employed this principle with peculiar assiduity and
skill. In applying it, he does not confine himself to mere
additions and subtractions of the quantities of ingredients;
but often obtains his results by more complex processes. In
one of his investigations he says, 'I may consider the
ingredients which are brought together, and the result which
is obtained as an algebraical equation; and if I
successively suppose each of the quantities of this equation
to be unknown, I can obtain its value from the rest: and
thus I can rectify the experiment by the calculation, and
the calculation by the experiment. I have often taken
advantage of this method, in order to correct the first
results of my experiments, and to direct me in repeating
them with proper precautions.'

[Note 30\6: M. Dumas, _Leçons de la Philosophie Chimique_.
1837. p. 157.]

The maxim, that the whole is equal to the sum of all its
parts, is thus capable of most important and varied
employment in chemistry. But it may be applied in another
form to the exclusion of a class of speculations which are
often put forwards.

3. _Maxim respecting Imponderable Elements._--Several of the
phenomena which belong to bodies, as heat, light,
electricity, magnetism, have been explained hypothetically
by assuming the existence of certain fluids; but these
fluids have never been shown to have weight. Hence such
hypothetical fluids have been termed _imponderable
elements_. It is however plain, that so long as these fluids
appear to be without weight, they are not _elements_ of
bodies in the same {42} sense as those elements of which we
have hitherto been speaking. Indeed we may with good reason
doubt whether those phenomena depend upon transferable
fluids at all. We have seen strong reason to believe that
light is not matter, but only motion; and the same thing
appears to be probable with regard to heat. Nor is it at all
inconceivable that a similar hypothesis respecting
electricity and magnetism should hereafter be found tenable.
Now if heat, light, and those other agents, be not matter,
they are not _elements_ in such a sense as to be included in
the principle referred to above, That the body is equal to
the sum of its elements. Consequently the maxim just stated,
that in chemical operations nothing is created, nothing
annihilated, does not apply to Light and Heat. They are not
_things_. And whether heat can be produced where there was
no heat before, and light struck out from darkness, the
ideas of which we are at present treating do not enable us
to say. In reasoning respecting chemical synthesis and
analysis therefore, we shall only make confusion by
attempting to include in our conception the Light and Heat
which are produced and destroyed. Such phenomena may be very
proper subjects of study, as indeed they undoubtedly are;
but they cannot be studied to advantage by considering them
as sharing the nature of composition and decomposition.

Again: in all attempts to explain the processes of nature,
the proper course is, first to measure the facts with
precision, and then to endeavour to understand their cause.
Now the facts of chemical composition and decomposition, the
weights of the ingredients and of the compounds, are facts
measurable with the utmost precision and certainty. But it
is far otherwise with the light and heat which accompany
chemical processes. When combustion, deflagration,
explosion, takes place, how can we measure the light or the
heat? Even in cases of more tranquil action, though we can
apply the thermometer, what does the thermometer tell us
respecting the _quantity_ of the heat? Since then we have no
measure which is of any value as {43} regards such
circumstances in chemical changes, if we attempt to account
for these phenomena _on chemical principles_, we introduce,
into investigations in themselves perfectly precise and
mathematically rigorous, another class of reasonings, vague
and insecure, of which the only possible effect is to
vitiate the whole reasoning, and to make our conclusions
inevitably erroneous.

We are led then to this maxim: that _imponderable fluids
are_ not _to be admitted as chemical elements of bodies_[31\6].

[Note 31\6: See the answer to Sir William Hamilton's
objections, at the end of the last chapter.

Since we are thus warned by a sound view of the nature of
science, from considering chemical affinity as having any
hold upon imponderable elements, we are manifestly still
more decisively prohibited from supposing mechanical impulse
or pressure to have any effect upon such elements. To make
this supposition, is to connect the most subtle and
incorporeal objects which we know in nature by the most
gross material ties. This remark seems to be applicable to
M. Poisson's hypothesis that the electric fluid is retained
at the surface of bodies by the pressure of the
atmosphere.]

4. It appears, I think, that our best and most philosophical
chemists have proceeded upon this principle in their
investigations. In reasoning concerning the constitution of
bodies and the interpretation of chemical changes, the
attempts to include in these interpretations the heat or
cold produced, by the addition or subtraction of a certain
hypothetical 'caloric,' have become more and more rare among
men of science. Such statements, and the explanations often
put forwards of the light and heat which appear under
various circumstances in the form of fire, must be
considered as unessential parts of any sound theory.
Accordingly we find Mr. Faraday gradually relinquishing such
views. In January, 1834, he speaks generally of an
hypothesis of this kind[32\6]: 'I cannot refrain from
recalling here the beautiful idea put forth, I believe by
Berzelius, in his development of his views of the
electro-chemical theory of affinity, that the heat and light
evolved during cases of powerful combination {44} are the
consequence of the electric discharge which is at that
moment taking place.' But in April of the same year[33\6],
he observes, that in the combination of oxygen and hydrogen
to produce water, electric powers to a most enormous amount
are for the time active, but that the flame which is
produced gives but feeble traces of such powers. 'Such
phenomena,' therefore, he adds, 'may not, cannot, be taken
as evidences of the nature of the action; but are merely
incidental results, incomparably small in relation to the
forces concerned, and supplying no information of the way in
which the particles are active on each other, or in which
their forces are finally arranged.'

[Note 32\6: _Researches_, 870.]

[Note 33\6: _Researches_, 960.]

In pursuance of this maxim, we must consider as an
unessential part of the oxygen theory that portion of it,
much insisted upon by its author at the time, in which when
sulphur, for instance, combined with oxygen to produce
sulphuric acid, the combustion was accounted for by means of
the _caloric_ which was supposed to be _liberated_ from its
combination with oxygen.

5. _Controversy of the Composition of Water._--There is
another controversy of our times to which we may with great
propriety apply the maxim now before us. After the glory of
having first given a true view of the composition of water
had long rested tranquilly upon the names of Cavendish and
Lavoisier, a claim was made in favour of James Watt as the
real author of this discovery by his son, (Mr J. Watt,) and
his eulogist, (M. Arago[34\6]). It is not to our purpose
here to discuss the various questions which have arisen on
this subject respecting priority of publication, and
respecting the translation of opinions published at one time
into the language of another period. But if we look at
Watt's own statement of his views, given soon after those of
Cavendish had been published, we shall perceive that it is
marked by a violation of this maxim: we shall find that he
does admit imponderable fluids {45} as chemical elements;
and thus shows a vagueness and confusion in his idea of
chemical composition. With such imperfection in his views,
it is not surprising that Watt, not only did not anticipate,
but did not apprehend quite precisely the discovery of
Cavendish and Lavoisier. Watt's statement of his views is as
follows[35\6]:--'Are we not authorized to conclude that
water is composed of dephlogisticated air and phlogiston
deprived of part of their latent or elementary heat; that
dephlogisticated or pure air is composed of water deprived
of its phlogiston and united to elementary heat and light;
and that the latter are contained in it in a latent state,
so as not to be sensible to the thermometer or to the eye;
and if light be only a modification of heat, or a
circumstance attending it, or a component part of the
inflammable air, then pure or dephlogisticated air is
composed of water deprived of its phlogiston and united to
elementary heat?'

[Note 34\6: Éloge de James Watt, _Annuaire du Bur. des
Long._ 1839.]

[Note 35\6: _Phil. Trans._ 1784, p. 332.]

When we compare this doubtful and hypothetical statement,
involving so much that is extraneous and heterogeneous, with
the conclusion of Cavendish, in which there is nothing
hypothetical or superfluous, we may confidently assent to
the decision which has been pronounced by one[36\6] of our
own time in favour of Cavendish. And we may with pleasure
recognize, in this enlightened umpire, a due appreciation of
the value of the maxim on which we are now insisting.
'Cavendish,' says Mr. Vernon Harcourt, 'pared off {46} from
the hypotheses their theories of combustion, and _affinities
of imponderable for ponderable matter_, as complicating
chemical with physical considerations.'

[Note 36\6: The Rev. W. Vernon Harcourt, Address to the
British Association, 1839.--Since the first edition of this
work was published, and also since the second edition of the
_History of the Inductive Sciences_, Mr. Watt's
correspondence bearing upon the question of the Composition
of Water has been published by Mr. Muirhead. I do not find,
in this publication, any reason for withdrawing what I have
stated in the text above: but with reference to the
statement in the _History_, it appears that Mr. Cavendish's
claim to the discovery was not uncontested in his own time.
Mr. Watt had looked at the composition of water, as a
problem to be solved, perhaps more distinctly than Mr.
Cavendish had done; and he conceived himself wronged by Mr.
Cavendish's putting forwards his experiment as the first
solution of this problem.]

6. _Relation of Heat to Chemistry._--But while we thus
condemn the attempts to explain the thermotical phenomena of
chemical processes by means of chemical considerations, it
may be asked if we are altogether to renounce the hope of
understanding such phenomena? It is plain, it may be said,
that heat generated in chemical changes is always a very
important circumstance, and can sometimes be measured, and
perhaps reduced to laws; are we prohibited from speculating
concerning the causes of such circumstances and such laws?
And to this we reply, that we may properly attempt to
connect chemical with thermotical processes, _so far as_ we
have obtained a clear and probable view of the nature of the
thermotical processes. When our theory of Thermotics is
tolerably complete and certain, we may with propriety
undertake to connect it with our theory of Chemistry. But at
present we are not far enough advanced in our knowledge of
heat to make this attempt with any hope of success. We can
hardly expect to understand the part which heat plays in the
union of two bodies, when we cannot as yet comprehend in
what manner it produces the liquefaction or vaporization of
one body. We cannot look to account for Gay Lussac and
Dalton's Law, that all gases expand equally by heat, till we
learn how heat causes a gas to expand. We cannot hope to see
the grounds of Dulong and Petit's Law, that the specific
heat of all atoms is the same, till we know much more, not
only about atoms, but about specific heat. We have as yet no
thermotical theory which even professes to account for all
the prominent facts of the subject[37\6]: and the theories
which have been proposed are of the most diverse kind.
Laplace assumes particles of bodies surrounded by
atmospheres of caloric[38\6]; Cauchy makes heat consist in
longitudinal vibrations of the ether of which transverse
vibrations {47} produce light: in Ampère's theory[39\6],
heat consists in the vibrations of the particles of bodies.
And so long as we have nothing more certain in our
conceptions of heat than the alternative of these and other
precarious hypotheses, how can we expect to arrive at any
real knowledge, by connecting the results of such hypotheses
with the speculations of Chemistry, of which science the
theory is at least equally obscure?

[Note 37\6: _Hist. Ind. Sci._ b. x. c. 4.]

[Note 38\6: _Ib._]

[Note 39\6: _Hist. Ind. Sci._ b. x. c. 4.]

The largest attempts at chemical theory have been made in
the form of the Atomic Theory, to which I have just had
occasion to allude. I must, therefore, before quitting the
subject, say a few words respecting this theory.



{{48}}
