CHAPTER V.

OF THE CONCEPTION OF A FIRST CAUSE.


1. AT the end of the last chapter but one, we were led to
this result,--that we cannot, in any of the Palætiological
Sciences, ascend to a beginning which is of the same nature
as the existing cause of events, and which depends upon
causes that are still in operation. Philosophers never have
demonstrated, and probably never will be able to
demonstrate, what was the original condition of the solar
system, of the earth, of the vegetable and animal worlds, of
languages, of arts. On all these subjects the course of
investigation, followed backwards as far as our materials
allow us to pursue it, ends at last in an impenetrable
gloom. We strain our eyes in vain when we try, by our
natural faculties, to discern an origin.

2. Yet speculative men have been constantly employed in
attempts to arrive at that which thus seems to be placed out
of their reach. The Origin of Languages, the Origin of the
present Distribution of Plants and Animals, the Origin of
the Earth, have been common subjects of diligent and
persevering inquiry. Indeed inquiries respecting such
subjects have been, at least till lately, the usual form
which Palætiological researches have assumed. _Cosmogony_,
the Origin of the World, of which, in such speculations, the
earth was considered as a principal part, has been a
favourite study both of ancient and of modern times: and
most of the attempts at Geology previous to the present
period have been _Cosmogonies_ or _Geogonies_, rather than
that more genuine science which we have endeavoured to
delineate. Again: Glossology, though now an extensive body
of solid knowledge, was {317} mainly brought into being by
inquiries concerning the Original Language spoken by men;
and the nature of the first separation and diffusion of
languages, the first peopling of the earth by man and by
animals, were long sought after with ardent curiosity,
although of course with reference to the authority of the
Scriptures, as well as the evidence of natural phenomena.
Indeed the interest of such inquiries even yet is far from
being extinguished. The disposition to explore the past in
the hope of finding, by the light of natural reasoning as
well as by the aid of revelation, the origin of the present
course of things, appears to be unconquerable. 'What was the
beginning?' is a question which the human race cannot desist
from perpetually asking. And no failure in obtaining a
satisfactory answer can prevent inquisitive spirits from
again and again repeating the inquiry, although the blank
abyss into which it is uttered does not even return an echo.

3. What, then, is the reason of an attempt so pertinacious
yet so fruitless? By what motive are we impelled thus
constantly to seek what we can never find? Why are the
errour of our conjectures, the futility of our reasonings,
the precariousness of our interpretations, over and over
again proved to us in vain? Why is it impossible for us to
acquiesce in our ignorance and to relinquish the inquiry?
Why cannot we content ourselves with examining those links
of the chain of causes which are nearest to us,--those in
which the connexion is intelligible and clear; instead of
fixing our attention upon those remote portions where we can
no longer estimate its coherence? In short, why did not men
from the first take for the subject of their speculations
the Course of Nature rather than the Origin of Things?

To this we reply, that in doing what they have thus done, in
seeking what they have sought, men are impelled by an
intellectual necessity. They cannot conceive a Series of
connected occurrences without a Commencement; they cannot
help supposing a cause for the Whole, as well as a cause for
each part; they cannot be satisfied with a succession of
causes without {318} assuming a First Cause. Such an
assumption is necessarily impressed upon our minds by our
contemplation of a series of causes and effects; that _there
must be a First Cause_, is accepted by all intelligent
reasoners as an Axiom: and like other Axioms, its truth is
necessarily implied in the Idea which it involves.

4. The evidence of this axiom may be illustrated in several
ways. In the first place, the axiom is assumed in the
argument usually offered to prove the existence of the
Deity. Since, it is said, the world now exists, and since
nothing cannot produce something, something must have
existed from eternity. This Something is the First Cause: it
is God.

Now what I have to remark here is this:--the conclusiveness
of this argument, as a proof of the existence of one
independent, immutable Deity, depends entirely upon the
assumption of the axiom above stated. The World, a **series
of causes and effects, exists: therefore there must be, not
only this series of causes and effects, but also a First
Cause. It will be easily seen, that without the axiom, that
in every series of causes and effects there must be a First
Cause, the reasoning is altogether inconclusive.

5. Or to put the matter otherwise: The argument for the
existence of the Deity was stated thus: Something exists,
therefore something must have existed from eternity.
'Granted,' the opponent might say; 'but this something which
has existed from eternity, why may it not be this very
series of causes and effects which is now going on, and
which appears to contain in itself no indication of
beginning or end?' And thus, without the assumption of the
necessity of a First Cause, the force of the argument may be
resisted.

6. But, it may be asked, how do those who have written to
prove the existence of the Deity reply to such an objection
as the one just stated? It is natural to suppose that, on a
subject so interesting and so long discussed, all the
obvious arguments with their replies, have been fully
brought into view. What is the result in this case? {319}

The principal modes of replying to the above objection, that
the series of causes and effects which now exists, may have
existed from eternity, appear to be these.

In the first place, our minds cannot be satisfied with a
series of successive, dependent, causes and effects, without
something first and independent. We pass from effect to
cause, and from that to a higher cause, in search of
something on which the mind can rest; but if we can do
nothing but repeat this process, there is no use in it. We
move our limbs, but make no advance. Our question is not
answered, but evaded. The mind cannot acquiesce in the
destiny thus presented to it, of being referred from event
to event, from object to object, along an interminable vista
of causation and time. Now this mode of stating the
reply,--to say that the mind _cannot thus be satisfied_,
appears to be equivalent to saying that the mind is
conscious of a Principle, in virtue of which such a view as
this must be rejected;--the mind takes refuge in the
assumption of a First Cause, from an employment inconsistent
with its own nature.

7. Or again, we may avoid the objection, by putting the
argument for the existence of a Deity in this form: The
series of causes and effects which we call the _world_, or
the _course of nature_, may be considered as a _whole_, and
this whole must have a cause of its existence. The whole
collection of objects and events may be comprehended as a
single effect, and of this effect there must be a cause.
This Cause of the Universe must be superior to, and
independent of the special events, which, happening in time,
make up the universe of which He is the cause. He must exist
and exercise causation, before these events can begin: He
must be the First Cause.

Although the argument is here somewhat modified in form, the
substance is the same as before. For the assumption that we
may consider the whole series of causes and effects as a
_single effect_, is equivalent to the assumption that
besides partial causes we must have a First Cause. And thus
the Idea of a First Cause, and {320} the axiom which asserts
its necessity, are recognized in the usual argumentation on
this subject.

8. This Idea of a First Cause, and the principle involved in
the Idea, have been the subject of discussion in another
manner. As we have already said, we assume as an axiom that
a First Cause must exist; and we assert that God, the First
Cause, exists eternal and immutable, by the necessity which
the axiom implies. Hence God is said to exist
necessarily;--to be a necessarily existing being. And when
this _necessary existence_ of God had been spoken of, it
soon began to be contemplated as a sufficient reason, and as
an absolute demonstration of His existence; without any need
of referring to the world as an effect, in order to arrive
at God as the cause. And thus men conceived that they had
obtained a proof of the existence of the Deity, _à priori_,
from Ideas, as well as _à posteriori_, from Effects.

9. Thus, Thomas Aquinas employs this reasoning to prove the
_eternity_ of God[29\10]: 'Oportet ponere aliquod primum
necessarium quod est per se ipsum necessarium; et hoc est
Deus, cum sit prima causa ut dictum est: igitur Deus æternus
est, cum omne necessarium per se sit æternum.' It is true
that the schoolmen never professed to be able to prove the
_existence_ of the Deity _à priori_: but they made use of
this conception of necessary existence in a manner which
approached very near to such an attempt. Thus Suarez[30\10]
discusses the question, 'Utrum aliquo modo possit _à priori_
demonstrari Deum esse.' And resolves the question in this
manner: 'Ad hunc ergo modum dicendum est: Demonstrato _à
posteriori_ Deum esse ens necessarium et a se, ex hoc
attributo posse _à priori_ demonstrari præter illud non
posse esse aliud ens necessarium et a se, et consequenter
demonstrari Deum esse.'

[Note 29\10: Aquin. _Cont. Gentil._ lib. i. c. xiv. p. 21.]

[Note 30\10: _Metaphys._ tom. ii. disp. xxix. sect. 3, p. 28.]

But in modern times attempts were made by Descartes and
Samuel Clarke, to prove the Divine {321} existence at once
_à priori_, from the conception of necessary existence;
which, it was argued, could not subsist without actual
existence. This argumentation was acutely and severely
criticised by Dr. Waterland.

10. Without dwelling upon a subject, the discussion of which
does not enter into the design of the present work, I may
remark that the question whether an _à priori_ proof of the
existence of a First Cause be possible, is a question
concerning the nature of our Ideas, and the evidence of the
axioms which they involve, of the same kind as many
questions which we have already had to discuss. Is our
Conception or Idea of a First Cause gathered from the
effects we see around us? It is plain that we must answer,
here as in other cases, that the Idea is not extracted from
the phenomena, but assumed in order that the phenomena may
become intelligible to the mind;--that the Idea is a
necessary one, inasmuch as it does not depend upon
observation for its evidence; but that it depends upon
observation for its development, since without some
observation, we cannot conceive the mind to be cognizant of
the relation of causation at all. In this respect, however,
the Idea of a First Cause is no less necessary than the
ideas of Space, or Time, or Cause in general. And whether we
call the reasoning derived from such a necessity an argument
_à priori_ or _à posteriori_, in either case it possesses
the genuine character of demonstration, being founded upon
axioms which command universal assent.

11. I have, however, spoken of our _Conception_ rather than
of our _Idea_ of a First Cause; for the notion of a First
Cause appears to be rather a modification of the Fundamental
Idea of Cause, which was formerly discussed, than a separate
and peculiar Idea. And the Axiom, _that there must be a
First Cause_, is recognised by most persons as an
application of the general Axiom of Causation, _that every
effect must have a Cause_; this latter Axiom being applied
to the World, considered in its totality, as a single
Effect. This distinction, however, between an Idea and a
Conception, is of no material consequence to our argument;
provided we {322} allow the maxim, that there must be a
First Cause, to be necessarily and evidently true; whether
it be thought better to speak of it as an independent Axiom,
or to consider it as derived from the general Axiom of Causation.

12. Thus we necessarily infer a First Cause, although the
Palætiological Sciences only point _towards_ it, and do not
lead us _to_ it. But I must observe further; that in each of
the series of events which form the subject of
Palætiological research, the First Cause is the _same_.
Without here resting upon reasoning founded upon our
Conception of a First Cause, I may remark that this identity
is proved by the close connexion of all the branches of
natural science, and the way in which the causes and the
events of each are interwoven with those which belong to the
others. We must needs believe that the First Cause which
produced the earth and its atmosphere is also the Cause of
the plants which clothe its surface; that the First Cause of
the vegetable and of the animal world are the same; that the
First Cause which produced light produced also eyes; that
the First Cause which produced air and organs of
articulation produced also language and the faculties by
which language is rendered possible: and if _those_
faculties, then also all man's other faculties;--the powers
by which, as we have said, he discerns right and wrong, and
recognises a providential as well as a natural course of
things. Nor can we think otherwise than that the Being who
gave these faculties, bestowed them for some
purpose;--bestowed them for that purpose which alone is
compatible with their nature:--the purpose, namely, of
guiding and elevating man in his present career, and of
preparing him for another state of being to which they
irresistibly direct his hopes. And thus, although, as we
have said, no one of the Palætiological Sciences can be
traced continuously to an Origin, yet they not only each
point to an Origin, but all to the same Origin. Their lines
are broken indeed, as they run backwards into the early
periods of the world, but yet they all appear to converge to
the same invisible point. And {323} this point, thus
indicated by the natural course of things, can be no other
than that which is disclosed to us as the starting-point of
the providential course of the world; for we are persuaded
by such reasons as have just been hinted, that the Creator
of the natural world can be no other than the Author and
Governor and Judge of the moral and spiritual world.

13. Thus we are led, by our material Sciences, and
especially by the Palætiological class of them, to the
borders of a higher region, and to a point of view from
which we have a prospect of other provinces of
knowledge;--to contemplations in which other faculties of
man are concerned besides his intellectual, other interests
involved besides those of speculation. On these it does not
belong to our present plan to dwell: but even such a brief
glance as we have taken of the connexion of material with
moral speculations may not be useless, since it may serve to
show that the principles of truth which we are now
laboriously collecting among the results of the physical
sciences, may possibly find some application in those parts
of knowledge towards which men most naturally look with
deeper interest and more serious reverence.


We have been employed hitherto in examining the materials of
knowledge, Facts and Ideas;--Facts in our former History,
and Ideas in the present History. We have dwelt at length on
this latter element; inasmuch as the consideration of it is,
on various accounts, and especially at the present time, by
far the most important, having hitherto been least
distinctly attended to as a special element of scientific
knowledge.

There still remains an important task, with a view to which
we have undertaken this survey of the past course of human
thought and discovery:--namely, the task of determining the
processes by which these materials may actually be made to
constitute knowledge. {324} We have surveyed the stones
which lie before us, partly built and partly ready for
building: we have found them exactly squared, and often
curiously covered with significant imagery and important
inscriptions. We have now to discover how they may best be
fitted into their places, and cemented together, so that
rising stage above stage, they may grow at last into that
fair and lofty temple of Truth, for which we cannot doubt
that they were intended by the Great Architect.

This task, the description of the processes by which
Scientific Truth is discovered and established, we shall, as
has already been said, entitle, in reference to previous
attempts of the same kind, _Novum Organum Renovatum_.


END OF VOL. II.



_Cambridge: Printed at the University Press._




Transcriber's Note

Whewell published the first edition of the _Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences_ in 1840, as a companion to the 1837
_History of the Inductive Sciences_. Revised second editions
of both works appeared in 1847. The third editions saw a
major reshaping of the _Philosophy_: a two volume _History
of Scientific Ideas_ (1858 - the present text, relying upon
resources kindly provided by the Internet Archive), _Novum
Organon Renovatum_ (1858), and _ On the Philosophy of
Discovery: chapters historical and critical_ (1860 - already
in Project Gutenberg's collection: #5155).

The present text has combined the two volumes into one continuous
text. Footnotes are numbered by Book and marked [m\n] where m =
the number of the note within the Book, and n = the number of the
Book. In the original, notes were numbered by chapter. Page numbers
appear in { }, or {{ }} where there is no printed number; where a
word was hyphenated across pages the number has been placed before
the word.

Superscripts are marked with ^.

There is one significant problem to report. For Book IX chapter VI,
the Table of Contents lists 20 articles, but the actual text has
only 19 numbered paragraphs. The text version leaves this
inconsistency untouched; in the htm version, a correction has been
made by numbering the paragraph beginning on p. 244 as #9, and
renumbering those that follow, thereby matching the descriptions in
the Table of Contents.

Other corrections to the text are marked with ** and are listed
below.

Location         Text of printed edition    Emendation
Vol. 1
p. 71            conlcusion                 conclusion
p. 87            vi.                        vii.
p. 157           sciences                   science
note 1\3         Book 1. chap. xii.         Book 3. chap. ii.
p. 231           Marriotte                  Mariotte
p. 377           Winter's                   Winterl's
Vol. 2
p. 22            ingedient                  ingredient
p. 124           wich                       which
p. 159           attemps                    attempts
p. 172           knowlege                   knowledge
note 60\9        Their.                     Theor.
p. 270           dfficulties                difficulties
p. 318           serious                    series





