BOOK IV.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
SECONDARY
MECHANICAL SCIENCES.




Πάσχοντος γάρ τι τοῦ αἰσθητικοῦ γίνεται τὸ ὁρᾶν· ὑπ' αὐτοῦ
μὲν οὖν τοῦ ὁρωμένου χρώματος ἀδύνατον· λείπεται δὴ ὑπὸ _τοῦ
μεταξύ_, ὥστ' ἀναγκαῖόν τι εἶναι _μεταξύ_· κενοῦ δὲ
γενομένου οὐχ ὅτι ἀκριβῶς, ἀλλ' ὅλως οὐθὲν ὀφθήσεται. δι' ἣν
μὲν οὖν αἰτίαν τὸ χρῶμα ἀναγκαῖον ἐν φωτὶ ὁρᾶσθαι, εἴρηται.
πῦρ δὲ ἐν ἀμφοῖν ὁρᾶται, καὶ ἐν σκότει καὶ ἐν φωτί, καὶ
τοῦτο _ἐξ ἀνάγκης_· τὸ γὰρ διαφανὲς ὑπὸ τούτου γίνεται
διαφανές. ὁ δ' αὐτὸς λόγος καὶ περὶ ψόφου καὶ ὀσμῆς ἐστιν·
οὐθὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν ἁπτόμενον τοῦ αἰσθητηρίου ποιεῖ τὴν
αἴσθησιν, ἀλλ' ὑπὸ μὲν ὀσμῆς καὶ ψόφου _τὸ μεταξὺ_ κινεῖται,
ὑπὸ δὲ τούτου τῶν αἰσθητηρίων ἑκάτερον· ὅταν δ' ἐπ' αὐτό τις
ἐπιθῇ τὸ αἰσθητήριον τὸ ψοφοῦν ἢ τὸ ὄζον, οὐδεμίαν αἴσθησιν
ποιήσει.

ARISTOT. _De Anima_, II. 7.



{{293}} BOOK IV.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES.


CHAPTER I.

OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM AS COMMONLY EMPLOYED.


1. _Of Primary and Secondary Qualities._--IN the same way in
which the mechanical sciences depend upon the Idea of Cause,
and have their principles regulated by the development of
that Idea, it will be found that the sciences which have for
their subject Sound, Light, and Heat, depend for _their_
principles upon the Fundamental Idea of Media by means of
which we perceive those qualities. Like the idea of cause,
this idea of a medium is unavoidably employed, more or less
distinctly, in the common, unscientific operations of the
understanding; and is recognized as an express principle in
the earliest speculative essays of man. But here also, as in
the case of the mechanical sciences, the development of the
idea, and the establishment of the scientific truths which
depend upon it, was the business of a succeeding period, and
was only executed by means of long and laborious researches,
conducted with a constant reference to experiment and
observation.

Among the most prominent manifestations of the influence of
the idea of a medium of which we have now to speak, is the
distinction of the qualities of bodies into _primary_, and
_secondary_ qualities. This distinction has {294} been
constantly spoken of in modern times: yet it has often been
a subject of discussion among metaphysicians whether there
be really such a distinction, and what the true difference
is. Locke states it thus[1\4]: Original or Primary qualities
of bodies are 'such as are utterly inseparable from the body
in what estate soever it may be,--such as sense constantly
finds in every particle of matter which has bulk enough to
be perceived, and the mind finds inseparable from every
particle of matter, though less than to make itself singly
perceived by our senses:' and he enumerates them as
solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest, and number.
Secondary qualities, on the other hand, are such 'which in
truth are nothing in the objects themselves, but powers to
produce various sensations in us by their primary qualities,
_i.e._ by the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of their
insensible parts, as colours, sounds, tastes, &c.'

[Note 1\4: _Essay_, b. ii. ch. viii. s. 9, 10.]

Dr. Reid[2\4], reconsidering this subject, puts the
difference in another way. There is, he says, a real
foundation for the distinction of Primary and Secondary
qualities, and it is this: 'That our senses give us a direct
and distinct notion of the primary qualities, and inform us
what they are in themselves; but of the secondary qualities,
our senses give us only a relative and obscure notion. They
inform us only that they are qualities that affect us in a
certain manner, that is, produce in us a certain sensation;
but as to what they are in themselves, our senses leave us
in the dark.'

[Note 2\4: _Essays_, b. ii. c. xvii.]

Dr. Brown[3\4] states the distinction somewhat otherwise. We
give the name of Matter, he observes, to that which has
extension and resistance: these, therefore, are Primary
qualities of matter, because they compose our definition of
it. All other qualities are Secondary, since they are
ascribed to bodies only because we find them associated with
the primary qualities which form our notion of those bodies.

[Note 3\4: _Lectures_, ii. 12.]

{295} It is not necessary to criticize very strictly these
various distinctions. If it were, it would be easy to find
objections to them. Thus Locke, it may be observed, does not
point out any _reason_ for believing that his secondary
qualities are produced by the primary. How are we to learn
that the colour of a rose arises from the bulk, figure,
texture, and motion of its particles? Certainly our senses
do not teach us this; and in what other way, on Locke's
principles, can we learn it? Reid's statement is not more
free from the same objection. How does it appear that our
notion of Warmth is relative to our own sensations more than
our notion of Solidity? And if we take Brown's account, we
may still ask whether our selection of certain qualities to
form our idea and definition of Matter be arbitrary and
without reason? If it be, how can it make a real
distinction? if it be not, what is the reason?

I do not press these objections, because I believe that any
of the above accounts of the distinction of Primary and
Secondary qualities is right in the main, however imperfect
it may be. The difference between such qualities as
Extension and Solidity on the one hand, and Colour or
Fragrance on the other, is assented to by all, with a
conviction so firm and indestructible, that there must be
some fundamental principle at the bottom of the belief,
however difficult it may be to clothe the principle in
words. That successive efforts to express the real nature of
the difference were made by men so clear-sighted and acute
as those whom I have quoted, even if none of them are
satisfactory, shows how strong and how deeply-seated is the
perception of truth which impels us to such attempts.

The most obvious mode of stating the difference of Primary
and Secondary qualities, as it naturally offers itself to
speculative minds, appears to be that employed by Locke,
slightly modified. Certain of the qualities of bodies, as
their bulk, figure, and motion, are perceived immediately in
the bodies themselves. Certain other qualities as sound,
colour, heat, are {296} perceived by means of some medium.
Our conviction that this is the case is spontaneous and
irresistible; and this difference of qualities immediately
and mediately perceived is the distinction of Primary and
Secondary qualities. We proceed further to examine this
conviction.

2. _The Idea of Externality._--In reasoning concerning the
Secondary Qualities of bodies, we are led to assume the
bodies to be external to us, and to be perceived by means of
some Medium intermediate between us and them. These
assumptions are fundamental conditions of perception,
inseparable from perception even in thought.

That objects are _external_ to us, that they are _without_
us, that they have _outness_, is as clear as it is that
these words have any meaning at all. This conviction is,
indeed, involved in the exercise of that faculty by which we
perceive all things as existing in space; for by this
faculty we place ourselves and other objects in one common
space, and thus they are exterior to us. It may be remarked
that this apprehension of objects as external to us,
although it assumes the idea of space, is far from being
implied in the idea of space. The objects which we
contemplate are considered as existing in space, and by that
means become invested with certain mutual relations of
position; but when we consider them as existing without
_us_, we make the additional step of supposing _ourselves_
and the objects to exist in one common space. The question
respecting the Ideal Theory of Berkeley has been mixed up
with the recognition of this condition of the externality of
objects. That philosopher maintained, as is well known, that
the perceptible qualities of bodies have no existence except
in a perceiving mind. This system has often been understood
as if he had imagined the world to be a kind of optical
illusion, like the images which we see when we shut our
eyes, appearing to be without us, though they are only in
our organs; and thus this Ideal System has been opposed to a
belief in an external world. In truth, however, no such
opposition exists. The Ideal System is an attempt to explain
the {297} mental process of perception, and to get over the
difficulty of mind being affected by matter. But the author
of that system did not deny that objects were perceived
under the conditions of space and mechanical
causation;--that they were _external_ and _material_ so far
as those words describe perceptible qualities. Berkeley's
system, however visionary or erroneous, did not prevent his
entertaining views as just, concerning optics or acoustics,
as if he had held any other doctrine of the nature of
perception.

But when Berkeley's theory was understood as a denial of the
existence of objects without us, how was it answered? If we
examine the answers which are given by Reid and other
philosophers to this hypothesis, it will be found that they
amount to this: that objects _are_ without us, since we
_perceive_ that they are so; that we perceive them to be
external, by the same act by which we perceive them to be
objects. And thus, in this stage of philosophical inquiry,
the externality of objects is recognized as one of the
inevitable conditions of our perception of them; and hence
the Idea of Externality is adopted as one of the necessary
foundations of all reasoning concerning all objects
whatever.

3. _Sensation by a Medium._--Objects, as we have just seen,
are necessarily apprehended as _without_ us; and in general,
as removed from us by a great or small distance. Yet they
affect our bodily senses; and this leads us irresistibly to
the conviction that they are perceived by means of something
intermediate. Vision, or hearing, or smell, or the warmth of
a fire, must be communicated to us by some Medium of
Sensation. This unavoidable belief appears in all attempts,
the earliest and the latest alike, to speculate upon such
subjects. Thus, for instance, Aristotle says[4\4], 'Seeing
takes place in virtue of some action which the sentient
organ suffers: now it cannot suffer action from the colour
of the object directly: the only remaining possible case
then is, that it is acted upon by an {298} intervening
Medium; there must then be an intervening Medium.' 'And the
same may be said,' he adds, 'concerning sounding and odorous
bodies; for these do not produce sensation by touching the
sentient organ, but the intervening Medium is acted on by
the sound or the smell, and the proper organ, by the Medium
... In sound the Medium is air; in smell we have no name for
it.' In the sense of taste, the necessity of a Medium is not
at first so obviously seen, because the object tasted is
brought into contact with the organ; but a little attention
convinces us that the taste of a solid body can only be
perceived when it is conveyed in some liquid vehicle. Till
the fruit is crushed, and till its juices are pressed out,
we do not distinguish its flavour. In the case of heat, it
is still more clear that we are compelled to suppose some
invisible fluid, or other means of communication, between
the distant body which warms us and ourselves.

[Note 4\4: Περὶ Ψυχῆς. ii. 7. See the motto to this Book.]

It may appear to some persons that the assumption of an
intermedium between the object perceived and the sentient
organ results from the principles which form the basis of
our mechanical reasonings,--that every change must have a
cause, and that bodies can act upon each other only by
contact. It cannot be denied that this principle does offer
itself very naturally as the ground of our belief in media
of sensation; and it appears to be referred to for this
purpose by Aristotle in the passage quoted above. But yet we
cannot but ask, Does the principle, that matter produces its
effect by contact only, manifestly apply here? When we so
apply it, we include _sensation_ among the _effects_ which
material contact produces;--a case so different from any
merely mechanical effect, that the principle, so employed,
appears to acquire a new signification. May we not, then,
rather say that we have here a new axiom,--That sensation
implies a material cause immediately acting on the
organ,--than a new application of our former
proposition,--That all mechanical change implies contact?

The solution of this doubt is not of any material
consequence to our reasonings; for whatever be the {299}
ground of the assumption, it is certain that we do assume
the existence of media by which the sensations of sight,
hearing, and the like, are produced; and it will be seen
shortly that principles inseparably connected with this
assumption are the basis of the sciences now before us.

This assumption makes its appearance in the physical
doctrines of all the schools of philosophy. It is exhibited
perhaps most prominently in the tenets of the Epicureans,
who were materialists, and extended to all kinds of
causation the axiom of the existence of a corporeal
mechanism by which alone the effect is produced. Thus,
according to them, vision is produced by certain images or
material films which flow from the object, strike upon the
eyes, and so become sensible. This opinion is urged with
great detail and earnestness by Lucretius, the poetical
expositor of the Epicurean creed among the Romans. His
fundamental conviction of the necessity of a material medium
is obviously the basis of his reasoning, though he attempts
to show the existence of such a medium by facts. Thus he
argues[5\4], that by shouting loud we make the throat sore;
which shows, he says, that the voice must be material, so
that it can hurt the passage in coming out.
  Haud igitur dubium est quin voces verbaque constent
  Corporeis e principiis ut lædere possint.

[Note 5\4: _De Rerum Naturâ_, Lib. iv. 529.]

4. _The Process of Perception of Secondary Qualities._--The
likenesses or representatives of objects by which they
affect our senses were called by some writers _species_, or
_sensible species_, a term which continued in use till the
revival of science. It may be observed that the conception
of these _species_ as films cast off from the object, and
retaining its shape, was different, as we have seen, from
the view which Aristotle took, though it has sometimes been
called the Peripatetic doctrine[6\4]. We may add that the
expression was latterly applied to express the supposition
of an emanation of any kind, and implied little {300} more
than that supposition of a Medium of which we are now
speaking. Thus Bacon, after reviewing the phenomena of
sound, says[7\4], 'Videntur motus soni fieri per _species
spirituales_: ita enim loquendum donec certius quippiam
inveniatur.'

[Note 6\4: Brown, vol. ii. p. 98.]

[Note 7\4: _Hist. Son. et Aud._ vol. ix. p. 87.]

Though the fundamental principles of several sciences depend
upon the assumption of a Medium of Perception, these
principles do not at all depend upon any special view of the
Process of our perceptions. The mechanism of that process is
a curious subject of consideration; but it belongs to
physiology, more properly than either to metaphysics, or to
those branches of physics of which we are now speaking. The
general nature of the process is the same for all the
senses. The object affects the appropriate intermedium; the
medium, through the proper organ, the eye, the ear, the
nose, affects the nerves of the particular sense; and, by
these, in some way, the sensation is conveyed to the mind,
But to treat the _impression_ upon the nerves as the _act_
of sensation which we have to consider, would be to mistake
our object, which is not the constitution of the human body,
but of the human mind. It would be to mistake one link of
the chain for the power which holds the end of the chain. No
anatomical analysis of the corporeal conditions of vision,
or hearing, or feeling warm, is necessary to the sciences of
Optics, or Acoustics, or Thermotics.

Not only is this physiological research an extraneous part
of our subject, but a partial pursuit of such a research may
mislead the inquirer. We perceive objects _by means of_
certain media, and _by means of_ certain impressions on the
nerves: but we cannot with propriety say that we perceive
either the media or the impressions on the nerves. What
person in the act of seeing is conscious of the little
coloured spaces on the retina? or of the motions of the
bones of the auditory apparatus whilst he is hearing?
Surely, no one. This may appear obvious enough, and yet a
writer of no common acuteness, Dr. Brown, has put forth
several {301} very strange opinions, all resting upon the
doctrine that the coloured spaces on the retina are the
_objects_ which we perceive; and there are some supposed
difficulties and paradoxes on the same subject which have
become quite celebrated (as upright vision with inverted
images), arising from the same confusion of thought.

As the consideration of the difficulties which have arisen
respecting the Philosophy of Perception may serve still
further to illustrate the principles on which we necessarily
reason respecting the secondary qualities of bodies, I shall
here devote a few pages to that subject.



{{302}}
