BOOK IX.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF
BIOLOGY.




LA vie est donc un TOURBILLON plus ou moins rapide, plus ou
moins compliqué, dont la direction est constante, et qui
entraine toujours des molecules de mêmes sorts, mais où les
molecules individuelles entrent et d'où elles sortent
continuellement, de manière que la _Forme_ du corps vivant
lui est plus essentielle que sa _Matière_.

Tant que ce mouvement subsiste, le corps où il s'exerce est
_vivant_; _il vit_. Lorsque le mouvement s'arrête sans
retour, le corps _meurt_.

CUVIER, _Règne Animal_, s. 12.


I REMEMBER, upon asking our famous Harvey, what induced him
to think of a circulation of the blood, he said, that
observing the valves in the veins of many parts of the body,
so placed as to give a free passage to the blood towards the
heart, but to oppose the passage of the venal blood the
contrary way, he imagined that so provident a cause as
nature had not thus placed so many valves without design;
and as no design seemed more probable than that the blood
could not well, because of the interposing valves, be sent
by the veins to the limbs, it should be sent through the
arteries and return through the veins when valves did not
oppose its course that way.

BOYLE, _On the Final Causes of Natural Things_. On the
Proposition: _'Tis often allowable for a naturalist, from the
manifest and apposite uses of the parts of animal bodies, to
collect some of the particular ends for which the Creator
designed them: and in some cases we may, from the known
nature and structure of the parts, draw particular
conjectures about the particular offices of them._



{{169}}
BOOK IX.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY.


CHAPTER I.

ANALOGY OF BIOLOGY WITH OTHER SCIENCES.


1. IN the History of the Sciences, after treating of the
Sciences of Classification, we proceeded to what are there
termed the Organical Sciences, including in this term
Physiology and Comparative Anatomy. A peculiar feature in
this group of sciences is that they involve the notion of
_living_ things. The notion of _Life_, however vague and
obscure it may be in men's minds, is apprehended as a
peculiar Idea, not resolvable into any other Ideas, such,
for instance, as Matter and Motion. The separation between
living creatures and inert matter, between organized and
unorganized beings, is conceived as a positive and
insurmountable barrier. The two classes of objects are
considered as of a distinct kind, produced and preserved by
different forces. Whether the Idea of Life is really thus
original and fundamental, and whether, if so, it be one Idea
only, or involve several, it must be the province of true
philosophy to determine. What we shall here offer may be
considered as an attempt to contribute something to the
determination of these questions; but we shall perhaps be
able to make it appear that science is at present only in
the course of its progress towards a complete solution of
such problems.

Since the main feature of those sciences of which we have
now to examine the philosophy is, that they {170} involve
the Idea of Life, it would be desirable to have them
designated by a name expressive of that circumstance. The
word _Physiology_, by which they have most commonly been
described, means _the Science of Nature_; and though it
would be easy to explain, by reference to history, the train
of thought by which the word was latterly restricted to
_Living Nature_, it is plain that the name is,
etymologically speaking, loose and improper. The term
_Biology_, which means exactly what we wish to express, _the
Science of Life_, has often been used, and has of late
become not uncommon among good winters. I shall therefore
venture to employ it, in most cases, rather than the word
_Physiology_.

2. As I have already intimated, one main inquiry belonging
to the Philosophy of Biology, is concerning the Fundamental
Idea or Ideas which the science involves. If we look back at
the course and the results of our disquisitions respecting
other sciences in this work, and assume, as we may
philosophically do, that there will be some general analogy
between those sciences and this, in their development and
progress, we shall be enabled to anticipate in some measure
the nature of the view which we shall now have to take. We
have seen that in other subjects the Fundamental Ideas on
which science depended, and the Conceptions derived from
these, were at first vague, obscure, and confused;--that by
gradual steps, by a constant union of thought and
observation, these conceptions become more and more clear,
more and more definite;--and that when they approached
complete distinctness and precision, there were made great
positive discoveries into which these conceptions entered;
and thus the new precision of thought was fixed and
perpetuated in some conspicuous and lasting truths. Thus we
have seen how the first confused mechanical conceptions
(Force, and the like,) were, from time to time, growing
clearer, down to the epoch of Newton;--how true conceptions
of Genera and of wider classes, gradually unfolded
themselves among the botanists of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries;--how the idea of Substance became
steady enough to govern the {171} theories of chemists only
at the epoch of Lavoisier;--how the Idea of Polarity,
although often used by physicists and chemists, is even now
somewhat vague and indistinct in the minds of the greater
part of speculators. In like manner we may expect to find
that the Idea of Life, if indeed _that_ be the governing
Idea of the Science which treats of Living Things, will be
found to have been gradually approaching towards a distinct
and definite form among the physiologists of all ages up to
the present day. And if this be the case, it may not be
considered superfluous, with reference to so interesting a
subject, if we employ some space in tracing historically the
steps of this progress;--the changes by which the originally
loose notion of Life, or of Vital Powers, became more nearly
an Idea suited to the purposes of science.

3. But we may safely carry this analogy between Biology and
other sciences somewhat further. We have seen, in other
sciences, that while men in their speculations were thus
tending towards a certain peculiar Idea, but before they as
yet saw clearly that it was peculiar and independent, they
naturally and inevitably clothed their speculations in
conceptions borrowed from some other extraneous idea. And
the unsatisfactoriness of all such attempts, and the
necessary consequence of this, a constant alteration and
succession of such inappropriate hypotheses, were
indications and aids of the progress which was going on
towards a more genuine form of the science. For instance, we
have seen that in chemistry, so long as men refused to
recognize a peculiar and distinct kind of power in the
_Affinity_ which binds together the elements of bodies, they
framed to themselves a series of hypotheses, each
constructed according to the prevalent ideas of the time, by
which they tried to represent the relation of the compound
to the ingredients:--first, supposing that the elements
bestowed upon the whole qualities _resembling_ their
own:--then giving up this supposition, and imagining that
the properties of the body depended upon the _shape_ of the
component particles;--then, as their view expanded, assuming
that it was {172} not the shape, but the mechanical _forces_
of the particles which gave the body its attributes;--and
finally acquiescing in, or rather reluctantly admitting, the
idea of _Affinity_, conceived as a peculiar power, different
not only from material contact, but from any mechanical or
dynamical attraction.

Now we cannot but think it very natural, if we find that the
history of Biology offers a series of occurrences of the
same nature. The notions of Life in general, or of any Vital
Functions or Vital Forces in particular, are obviously very
loose and vague as they exist in the minds of most men. The
discrepancies and controversies respecting the definitions
of all such terms, which are found in all works on
physiology, afford us abundant evidence that these notions
are not, at least not generally, apprehended with complete
clearness and steadiness. We shall therefore find approaches
and advances, intermediate steps, gradually leading up to
the greatest degree of distinctness which has yet been
attained. And in those stages of imperfect apprehension in
which the notions of Life and of Vital Powers are still too
loose and unformed to be applied independently, we may
expect to find them supported and embodied by means of
hypotheses borrowed from other subjects, and thus, made so
distinct and substantial as to supply at least a temporary
possibility of scientific reasoning upon the laws of life.

4. For example, if we suppose that men begin to speculate
upon the properties of living things, not acknowledging a
peculiar Vital Power, but making use successively of the
knowledge supplied by the study of other subjects, we may
easily imagine a series of hypotheses along which they would pass.

They would probably, first, in this as in other sciences,
have their thoughts occupied by vague and _mystical_ notions
in which material and spiritual agency, natural and
supernatural events, were mixed together without
discrimination, and without any clear notion at all. But as
they acquired a more genuine perception of the nature of
**knowledge, they would naturally try to explain vital
motions and processes by means of {173} such forces as they
had learnt the existence of from other sciences. They might
first have a _mechanical_ hypothesis, in which the
mechanical _Forces_ of the solids and fluids which compose
organized bodies should be referred to, as the most
important influences in the process of life. They might then
attend to the actions which the fluids exercise in virtue of
their _Affinity_, and might thus form a _chemical_ theory.
When they had proved the insufficience of these hypotheses,
borrowed from the powers which matter exhibits in other
cases, they might think themselves authorized to assume some
peculiar power or agency, still material, and thus they
would have the hypothesis of a _Vital Fluid_. And if they
were driven to reject this, they might think that there was
no resource but to assume an immaterial principle of life,
and thus they would arrive at the doctrine of an _Animal Soul_.

Now, through the cycle of hypotheses which we have thus
supposed, physiology has actually passed. The conclusions to
which the most philosophical minds have been led by a survey
of this progress is, that by the failure of all these
theories, men have exhausted this path of inquiry, and shown
that scientific truth is to be sought in some other manner.
But before I proceed further to illustrate this result, it
will be proper, as I have already stated, to exhibit
historically the various hypotheses which I have described.
In doing this I shall principally follow the _History of
Medicine_ of Sprengel. It is only by taking for my guide a
physiologist of acknowledged science and judgment, that I
can hope, on such a subject, to avoid errours of detail. I
proceed now to give in succession an account of the
Mystical, the Iatrochemical, the Iatromathematical, and the
Vital-Fluid Schools; and finally of the Psychical School,
who hold the Vital Powers to be derived from the Soul
(_Psyche_).



{{174}}
