CHAPTER IV.

OF THE IDEA OF NATURAL AFFINITY.


1. IN the Second Chapter of this Book it was shown that
although the Classificatory Sciences proceed ostensibly upon
the Idea of Resemblance as their main foundation, they
necessarily take for granted in the course of their progress
a further Idea of Natural Affinity. This appeared[79\8] by a
general consideration of the nature of Science, by the
recognition of natural species and genera, even in
Artificial Systems of Classification[80\8], and by the
**attempts of botanists to form a Natural System. It further
appeared that among the processes by which endeavours have
been made to frame a Natural System, some, as the method of
_Blind Trial_ and the method of _General Comparison_, have
been altogether unsuccessful, being founded only upon a
collection of resemblances, casual in the one case and
arbitrary in the other. In neither of these processes is
there employed any general principle by which we may be
definitely directed as to what resemblances we should
employ, or by which the result at which we arrive may be
verified and confirmed. Our object in the present chapter is
to show that the Idea of Natural Affinity supplies us with a
principle which may answer such purposes.

[Note 79\8: Art. 5.]

[Note 80\8: Art. 7.]

I shall first consider the Idea of Affinity as exemplified
in organized beings. In doing this, we may appear to take
for granted Ideas which have not yet come under our
discussion, as the Ideas of Organization, and Vital
Function; but it will be found that the principle to which
we are led is independent of these additional Ideas. {160}

2. We have already seen that the attempts to discover the
divisions which result from this Natural Affinity have led
to the consideration of the _Subordination of Characters_.
It is easy to see that some organs are more essential than
others to the existence of an organized being; the organs of
nutrition, for example, more essential than those of
locomotion. But at the same time it is clear that any
_arbitrary_ assumption of a certain scale of relative values
of different kinds of characters will lead only to an
Artificial System. This will happen, if, for example, we
begin by declaring the nutritive to be superior in
importance to the reproductive functions. It is clear that
this relation of importance of organs and functions must be
collected by the study of the organized beings; and cannot
be determined _à priori_, without depriving us of all right
to expect a general accordance between our system and the
arrangement of nature. We see, therefore, that our notion of
Natural Affinity involves in it this consequence;--that it
is not to be made out by an arbitrary subordination of characters.

3. The functions and actions of living things which we
separate from each other in our consideration, cannot be
severed in nature. Each function is essential; Life implies
a collection of movements, and ceases when any of these
movements is stopped. A change in the organization
subservient to one set of functions may lead necessarily to
a change in the organization belonging to others. We can
often see this necessary connexion; and from a comparison of
the forms of organized beings,--from the way in which their
structure changes in passing from one class to another, we
are led to the conviction that there is some general
principle which connects and graduates all such changes.
When the circulatory system changes, the nervous system
changes also: when the mode of locomotion changes, the
respiration is also modified.

4. These corresponding changes may be considered as ways in
which the living thing is fitted to its mode of life; as
marks of _adaptation to a purpose_; or, as it has been
otherwise expressed, as results of the {161} _conditions of
existence_. But at the present moment, we put forward these
correspondencies in a different light. We adduce them as
illustrations of what we mean by Affinity, and what we
consider as the tendency of a Natural Classification. It has
sometimes been asserted that if we were to classify any of
the departments of organized nature by means of one
function, and then by means of another, the two
classifications, if each strictly consistent with itself,
would be consistent with each other. Such an assertion is
perhaps more than we are entitled to make with confidence;
but it shows very well what is meant by Affinity. The
disposition to believe such a general identity of all
partial natural classifications, shows how readily we fix
upon the notion of Affinity, as a general result of the
causes which determine the forms of living things. When
these causes or principles, of whatever nature they are
conceived to be, vary so as to modify one part of the
organization of the being, they also modify another: and
thus the groups which exhibit this variation of the
fundamental principles of form, are the same, whether the
manifestation of the change be sought in one part or in
another of the organized structure. The groups thus formed
are related by Affinity; and in proportion as we find the
evidence of more functions and more organs to the propriety
of our groups, we are more and more satisfied that they are
Natural Classes. It appears, then, that our Idea of Affinity
involves the conviction of the _Coincidence of natural
arrangements formed on different functions_; and this,
rather than the principle of the Subordination of some
characters to others, is the true ground of the natural
method of Classification.

5. For example, Cuvier, after speaking of the Subordination
of Characters as the guide which he intends to follow in his
arrangement of animals, interprets this principle in such a
manner[81\8] as to make it agree nearly with the one just
stated: 'In pursuance of what has been said on methods in
general, we now require to {162} know what characters in
animals are the most influential, and therefore those which
must be made the grounds of the primary divisions.' 'These,'
he says, 'it is clear must be those which are taken from the
animal functions;--sensation and motion:'--But how does he
confirm this? Not by showing that the animal functions are
independent of, or predominant over, the vegetative, but by
observing that they follow the same gradations.
'Observation,' he continues, 'confirms this view, by showing
that the degrees of development and complication of the
animal functions agree with those of the vegetative. The
heart and the organs of the circulation are a sort of center
for the vegetative functions, as the brain and the trunk of
the nervous system are for the animal functions. Now we see
these two systems descend in the scale, and disappear the
one with the other. In the lowest animals, when there are no
longer any distinct nerves, there are also no longer
distinct fibres, and the organs of digestion are simply
hollowed out in the homogeneous mass of the body. The
muscular system disappears even before the nervous, in
insects; but in general the distribution of the medullary
masses corresponds to that of the muscular instruments; a
spinal cord, on which knots or ganglions represent so many
brains, corresponds to a body divided into numerous rings
and supported on pairs of members placed at different points
of the length, and so on.

[Note 81\8: _Règne Animal_, p. 55.]

'This _correspondence_ of the general forms which result
from the arrangement of the motive organs, from the
distribution of the nervous masses, and from the energy of
the circulatory system, must therefore form the ground of
the first great sections by which we divide the animal kingdom.'

6. Decandolle takes the same view. There must be, he says,
_an equilibrium_ of the different functions[82\8]. And he
exemplifies this by the case of the distinction of
monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants, which being at
first established by means of the organs of {163}
reproduction, was afterwards found to coincide with the
distinction of endogenous and exogenous, which depends on
the process of nutrition. 'Thus,' he adds, '_the natural
classes founded on one of the great functions of the
vegetable are necessarily the same as those which are
founded upon the other function_; and I find here a very
useful criterion to ascertain whether a class is natural:
namely, in order to announce that it is so, it must be
arrived at by the two roads which vegetable organization
presents. Thus I affirm,' he says, 'that the division of
monocotyledons from dicotyledons, and the distinction of
Gramineæ from Cyperaceæ, are real, because in these cases, I
arrive at the same result by the reproductive and the
nutritive organs; while the distinction of monopetalous and
polypetalous, of Rhodoraceæ and Ericineæ, appears to me
artificial, because I can arrive at it only by the
reproductive organs.'

[Note 82\8: _Theor. Elem._ p. 79.]

Thus the Correspondence of the indications of different
functions is the criterion of Natural Classes; and this
correspondence may be considered as one of the best and most
characteristic marks of the fundamental Idea of Affinity.
And the Maxim by which all Systems professing to be natural
must be tested is this:--that the _arrangement obtained from
one set of characters coincides with the arrangement
obtained from another set_.

This Idea of Affinity, as a natural connexion among various
species, of which connexion all particular resemblances are
indications, has principally influenced the attempts at
classifying the animal kingdom. The reason why the
classification in this branch of Natural History has been
more easy and certain than that of the vegetable world is,
as Decandolle says[83\8], that besides the functions of
nutrition and reproduction, which animals have in common
with plants, they have also in addition the function of
sensation; and thus have a new means of verification and
concordance. But we may add, as a further reason, that the
functions of {164} animals are necessarily much more obvious
and intelligible to us than those of vegetables, from their
clear resemblance to the operations which take place in our
own bodies, to which our attention has necessarily been
strongly directed.

[Note 83\8: _Theor. Elem._ p. 80.]

7. The question here offers itself, whether this Idea of
Natural Affinity is applicable to inorganic as well as to
organic bodies;--whether there be Natural Affinities among
Minerals. And to this we are now enabled to reply by
considering whether or not the principle just stated is
applicable in such cases. And the conclusion to which our
principle leads us is,--that there are such Natural
Affinities among Minerals, since there are different sets of
characters which may be taken, (and have by different
writers been taken,) as the basis of classification. The
hardness, specific gravity, colour, lustre, crystallization,
and other _external_ characters, as they are termed, form
one body of properties according to which minerals may be
classified; as has in fact been done by Mohs, Breithaupt,
and others. The _chemical_ constitution of the substances,
on the other hand, may be made the principle of their
arrangement, as was done by Haüy, and more recently, and on
a different scheme, by Berzelius. Which of these is the true
and natural classification? To this we answer, that _each_
of these arrangements is true and natural, then, and then
only, when it coincides with the other. An arrangement by
external characters which gives us classes possessing a
common chemical character;--a chemical order which brings
together like and separates unlike minerals;--such
classifications have the evidence of truth in their
agreement with one another. Every classification of minerals
which does not aim at and tend to such a result, is so far
merely arbitrary; and cannot be subservient to the
expression of general chemical and mineralogical truths,
which is the proper purpose of such a classification.

8. In the History of Mineralogy I have related the advances
which have been made among mineralogists and chemists in
modern times towards a System {165} possessing this
character of truth. I have there described the mixed systems
of Werner and Haüy;--the attempt made by Mohs to form a pure
Natural History system;--the first and second attempt of
Berzelius to form a pure chemical system; and the failure of
both these attempts. But the distinct separation of the two
elements of which science requires the coincidence threw a
very useful light upon the subject; and the succeeding mixed
systems, such as that of Naumann, approached much nearer to
the true conditions of the problem than any of the preceding
ones had done. Thus, as I have stated, several of Naumann's
groups have both a common chemical character and great
external resemblances. Such are his _Anhydrous Unmetallic
Haloids_--his _Anhydrous Metallic Haloids_--_Hydrous
Metallic Haloids_--_Oxides_ of metals--_Pyrites_--_Glances_--
Blendes_. The existence of such groups shows that we may hope
ultimately to obtain a classification of minerals which shall
be both chemically significant, and agreeable to the methods
of Natural History: although when we consider how very imperfect
as yet our knowledge of the chemical composition of minerals is,
we can hardly flatter ourselves that we shall arrive at such a
result very soon.

We have thus seen that in Mineralogy, as well as in the
sciences which treat of organized bodies, we may apply the
Idea of Natural Affinity; of which the fundamental maxim is,
that _arrangements obtained from different sets of
characters must coincide_.

Since the notion of Affinity is thus applicable to inorganic
as well as to organic bodies, it is plain that it is not a
mere modification of the Idea of Organization or Function,
although it may in some of its aspects appear to approach
near to these other Ideas. But these Ideas, or others which
are the foundation of them, necessarily enter in a very
prominent and fundamental manner into all the other parts of
Natural History. To the consideration of these, therefore,
we shall now proceed.




{{167}}
