BOOK I.


OF IDEAS IN GENERAL.


CHAPTER I.

OF THE FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY.


_Sect._ 1.--_Thoughts and Things._

IN order that we may do something towards determining the
nature and conditions of human knowledge, (which I have
already stated as the purpose of this work,) I shall have to
refer to an antithesis or opposition, which is familiar and
generally recognized, and in which the distinction of the
things opposed to each other is commonly considered very
clear and plain. I shall have to attempt to make this
opposition sharper and stronger than it is usually
conceived, and yet to shew that the distinction is far from
being so clear and definite as it is usually assumed to be:
I shall have to point the contrast, yet shew that the things
which are contrasted cannot be separated:--I must explain
that the antithesis is constant and essential, but yet that
there is no fixed and permanent line dividing its members. I
may thus appear, in different parts of my discussion, to be
proceeding in opposite directions, but I hope that the
reader who gives me a patient attention will see that both
steps lead to the point of view to which I wish to lead him.

The antithesis or opposition of which I speak is denoted,
with various modifications, by various pairs of terms: I
shall endeavour to shew the connexion of these different
modes of expression, and I will begin with that form which
is the simplest and most idiomatic. {24}

The simplest and most idiomatic expression of the antithesis
to which I refer is that in which we oppose to each other
THINGS and THOUGHTS. The opposition is familiar and plain.
Our thoughts are something which belongs to ourselves;
something which takes place within us; they are what we
think; they are actions of our minds. Things, on the
contrary, are something different from ourselves and
independent of us; something which is without us; they
_are_; we see them, touch them, and thus know that they
exist; but we do not make them by seeing or touching them,
as we make our _Thoughts_ by thinking them; we are passive,
and _Things_ act upon our organs of perception.

Now what I wish especially to remark is this: that in all
human KNOWLEDGE both Thoughts and Things are concerned. In
every part of my knowledge there must be some _thing_ about
which I know, and an internal act of _me_ who know. Thus, to
take simple yet definite parts of our knowledge, if I know
that a solar year consists of 365 days, or a lunar month of
30 days, I know something about the sun or the moon; namely,
that those objects perform certain revolutions and go
through certain changes, in those numbers of days; but I
count such numbers and conceive such revolutions and changes
by acts of my own thoughts. And both these elements of my
knowledge are indispensable. If there were not such external
Things as the sun and the moon I could not have any
knowledge of the progress of time as marked by them. And
however regular were the motions of the sun and moon, if I
could not count their appearances and combine their changes
into a cycle, or if I could not understand this when done by
other men, I could not know anything about a year or a
month. In the former case I might be conceived as a human
being, possessing the human powers of thinking and
reckoning, but kept in a dark world with nothing to mark the
progress of existence. The latter is the case of brute
animals, which see the sun and moon, but do not know how
many days make a month or a year, because they have not
human powers of thinking and reckoning. {25}

The two elements which are essential to our knowledge in the
above cases, are necessary to human knowledge in all cases.
In all cases, Knowledge implies a combination of Thoughts
and Things. Without this combination, it would not be
Knowledge. Without Thoughts, there could be no connexion;
without Things, there could be no reality. Thoughts and
Things are so intimately combined in our Knowledge, that we
do not look upon them as distinct. One single act of the
mind involves them both; and their contrast disappears in
their union.

But though Knowledge requires the union of these two
elements, Philosophy requires the separation of them, in
order that the nature and structure of Knowledge may be
seen. Therefore I begin by considering this separation. And
I now proceed to speak of another way of looking at the
antithesis of which I have spoken; and which I may, for the
reasons which I have just mentioned, call the FUNDAMENTAL
ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY.


_Sect._ 2.--_Necessary and Experiential Truths._

MOST persons are familiar with the distinction of
_necessary_ and _contingent_ truths. The former kind are
Truths which cannot but be true; as that 19 and 11 make
30;--that parallelograms upon the same base and between the
same parallels are equal;--that all the angles in the same
segment of a circle are equal. The latter are Truths which
_it happens_ (_contingit_) are true; but which, for anything
which we can see, might have been otherwise; as that a lunar
month contains 30 days, or that the stars revolve in circles
round the pole. The latter kind of Truths are learnt by
experience, and hence we may call them _Truths of
Experience_, or, for the sake of convenience, _Experiential_
Truths, in contrast with Necessary Truths.

Geometrical propositions are the most manifest examples of
Necessary Truths. All persons who have read and understood
the elements of geometry, know that the propositions above
stated (that parallelograms {26} upon the same base and
between the same parallels are equal; that all the angles in
the same segment of a circle are equal,) are necessarily
true; not only they are true, but they _must be_ true. The
meaning of the terms being understood, and the proof being
gone through, the truth of the propositions must be assented
to. We learn these propositions to be true by demonstrations
deduced from definitions and axioms; and when we have thus
learnt them, we see that they could not be otherwise. In the
same manner, the truths which concern numbers are necessary
truths: 19 and 11 not only _do_ make 30, but _must_ make
that number, and cannot make anything else. In the same
manner, it is a necessary truth that half the sum of two
numbers added to half their difference is equal to the
greater number.

It is easy to find examples of Experiential Truths;--
propositions which we know to be true, but know by
experience only. We know, in this way, that salt will
dissolve in water; that plants cannot live without light;--
in short, we know in this way all that we do know in
chemistry, physiology, and the material sciences in general.
I take the _Sciences_ as my examples of human knowledge,
rather than the common truths of daily life, or moral or
political truths; because, though the latter are more
generally interesting, the former are much more definite and
certain, and therefore better starting-points for our
speculations, as I have already said. And we may take
elementary astronomical truths as the most familiar examples
of Experiential Truths in the domain of science.

With these examples, the distinction of Necessary and
Experiential Truths is, I hope, clear. The former kind, we
see to be true by thinking about them, and see that they
could not be otherwise. The latter kind, men could never
have discovered to be true without looking at them; and
having so discovered them, still no one will pretend to say
they might not have been otherwise. For aught we can see,
the astronomical truths which express the motions and
periods of the sun, moon and stars, might have been
otherwise. If we had been placed in another part of the
solar system, our {27} experiential truths respecting days,
years, and the motions of the heavenly bodies, would have
been other than they are, as we know from astronomy itself.

It is evident that this distinction of Necessary and
Experiential Truths involves the same antithesis which we
have already considered;--the antithesis of Thoughts and
Things. Necessary Truths are derived from our own Thoughts:
Experiential truths are derived from our observation of
Things about us. The opposition of Necessary and
Experiential Truths is another aspect of the Fundamental
Antithesis of Philosophy.


_Sect._ 3.--_Deduction and Induction._

I HAVE already stated that geometrical truths are
established by demonstrations _deduced_ from definitions and
axioms. The term _Deduction_ is specially applied to such a
course of demonstration of truths from definitions and
axioms. In the case of the parallelograms upon the same base
and between the same parallels, we prove certain triangles
to be equal, by supposing them placed so that their two
bases have the same extremities; and hence, referring to an
Axiom respecting straight lines, we infer that the bases
coincide. We combine these equal triangles with other equal
spaces, and in this way make up both the one and the other
of the parallelograms, in such a manner as to shew that they
are equal. In this manner, going on step by step, deducing
the equality of the triangles from the axiom, and the
equality of the parallelograms from that of the triangles,
we travel to the conclusion. And this process of successive
deduction is the scheme of all geometrical proof. We begin
with Definitions of the notions which we reason about, and
with Axioms, or self-evident truths, respecting these
notions; and we get, by reasoning from these, other truths
which are demonstratively evident; and from these truths
again, others of the same kind, and so on. We begin with our
own Thoughts, which supply us with Axioms to start from; and
we reason from these, till we come to propositions {28}
which are applicable to the Things about us; as for
instance, the propositions respecting circles and spheres
applicable to the motions of the heavenly bodies. This is
_Deduction_, or _Deductive Reasoning_.

Experiential truths are acquired in a very different way. In
order to obtain such truths, we begin with Things. In order
to learn how many days there are in a year, or in a lunar
month, we must begin by observing the sun and the moon. We
must observe their changes day by day, and try to make the
cycle of change fit into some notion of number which we
supply from our own Thoughts. We shall find that a cycle of
30 days nearly will fit the changes of phase of the
moon;--that a cycle of 365 days nearly will fit the changes
of daily motion of the sun. Or, to go on to experiential
truths of which the discovery comes within the limits of the
history of science--we shall find (as Hipparchus found) that
the unequal motion of the sun among the stars, such as
observation shews it to be, may be fitly represented by the
notion of an _eccentric_;--a circle in which the sun has an
equable annual motion, the spectator not being in the center
of the circle. Again, in the same manner, at a later period,
Kepler started from more exact observations of the sun, and
compared them with a supposed motion in a certain ellipse;
and was able to shew that, not a circle about an eccentric
point, but an ellipse, supplied the mode of conception which
truly agreed with the motion of the sun about the earth; or
rather, as Copernicus had already shewn, of the earth about
the sun. In such cases, in which truths are obtained by
beginning from observation of external things and by finding
some notion with which the Things, as observed, agree, the
truths are said to be obtained by _Induction_. The process
is an _Inductive Process_.

The contrast of the Deductive and Inductive process is
obvious. In the former, we proceed at each step from general
truths to particular applications of them; in the latter,
from particular observations to a general truth which
includes them. In the former case we may be said to reason
_downwards_, in the latter case, {29} _upwards_; for general
notions are conceived as standing above particulars.
Necessary truths are proved, like arithmetical sums, by
adding together the portions of which they consist. An
inductive truth is proved, like the guess which answers a
riddle, by its agreeing with the facts described.
Demonstration is irresistible in its effect on the belief,
but does not produce surprize, because all the steps to the
conclusion are exhibited, before we arrive at the
conclusion. Inductive inference is not demonstrative, but it
is often more striking than demonstrative reasoning, because
the intermediate links between the particulars and the
inference are not shewn. Deductive truths are the results of
relations among our own Thoughts. Inductive truths are
relations which we discern among existing Things; and thus,
this opposition of Deduction and Induction is again an
aspect of the Fundamental Antithesis already spoken of.


_Sect._ 4.--_Theories and Facts._

GENERAL experiential Truths, such as we have just spoken of,
are called _Theories_, and the particular observations from
which they are collected, and which they include and
explain, are called _Facts_. Thus Hipparchus's doctrine,
that the sun moves in an eccentric about the earth, is _his
Theory_ of the Sun, or the _Eccentric Theory_. The doctrine
of Kepler, that the Earth moves in an Ellipse about the Sun,
is _Kepler's Theory_ of the Earth, the Elliptical Theory.
Newton's doctrine that this elliptical motion of the Earth
about the Sun is produced and governed by the Sun's
attraction upon the Earth, is the _Newtonian_ theory, the
_Theory of Attraction_. Each of these Theories was accepted,
because it included, connected and explained the _Facts_;
the Facts being, in the two former cases, the motions of the
Sun as observed; and in the other case, the elliptical
motion of the Earth as known by Kepler's Theory. This
antithesis of _Theory_ and _Fact_ is included in what has
just been said of Inductive Propositions. A Theory is an
Inductive Proposition, and the Facts {30} are the particular
observations from which, as I have said, such Propositions
are inferred by Induction. The Antithesis of Theory and Fact
implies the fundamental Antithesis of Thoughts and Things;
for a Theory (that is, a true Theory) may be described as a
Thought which is contemplated distinct from Things and seen
to agree with them; while a Fact is a combination of our
Thoughts with Things in so complete agreement that we do not
regard them as separate.

Thus the antithesis of Theory and Fact involves the
antithesis of Thoughts and Things, but is not identical with
it. Facts involve Thoughts, for we know Facts only by
thinking about them. The Fact that the year consists of 365
days; the Fact that the month consists of 30 days, cannot be
known to us, except we have the Thoughts of Time, Number and
Recurrence. But these Thoughts are so familiar, that we have
the fact in our mind as a simple Thing without attending to
the Thought which it involves. When we mould our Thoughts
into a Theory, we consider the thought as distinct from the
Facts; but yet, though distinct, not independent of them;
for it is a true Theory, only by including and agreeing with
the Facts.


_Sect._ 5.--_Ideas and Sensations._

WE have just seen that the antithesis of Theory and Fact,
although it involves the antithesis of Thoughts and Things,
is not identical with it. There are other modes of
expression also, which involve the same Fundamental
Antithesis, more or less modified. Of these, the pair of
words which in their relations appear to separate the
members of the antithesis most distinctly are _Ideas_ and
_Sensations_. We see and hear and touch external things, and
thus perceive them by our senses; but in perceiving them, we
connect the impressions of sense according to relations of
space, time, number, likeness, cause, &c. Now some at least
of these kinds of connexion, as space, time, number, may be
contemplated distinct from the things to which they are
applied; and so contemplated, I term them _Ideas_. And {31}
the other element, the impressions upon our senses which
they connect, are called _Sensations_.

I term space, time, cause, &c., _Ideas_, because they are
general relations among our sensations, apprehended by an
act of the mind, not by the senses simply. These relations
involve something beyond what the senses alone could
furnish. By the sense of sight we see various shades and
colours and shapes before us, but the _outlines_ by which
they are separated into distinct objects of definite forms,
are the work of the mind itself. And again, when we conceive
visible things, not only as surfaces of a certain form, but
as _solid bodies_, placed at various distances in space, we
again exert an act of the mind upon them. When we see a body
move, we see it move in a path or _orbit_, but this orbit is
not itself seen; it is constructed by the mind. In like
manner when we see the motions of a needle towards a magnet,
we do not _see_ the attraction or force which produces the
effects; but we infer the force, by having in our minds the
Idea of Cause. Such acts of thought, such _Ideas_, enter
into our perceptions of external things.

But though our perceptions of external things involve some
act of the mind, they must involve something else besides an
act of the mind. If we must exercise an act of thought in
order to see force exerted, or orbits described by bodies in
motion, or even in order to see bodies existing in space,
and to distinguish one kind of object from another, still
the act of thought alone does not make the Bodies. There
must be something besides, _on which_ the thought is
exerted. A colour, a form, a sound, are not produced by the
mind, however they may be moulded, combined, and interpreted
by our mental acts. A philosophical poet has spoken of
      All the world
  Of eye and ear, both what they half create,
  And what perceive.
But it is clear, that though they _half_ create, they do not
wholly create: there must be an external world of colour and
sound to give impressions to the eye and ear, as well as internal
powers by which we perceive {32} what is offered to our organs.
The mind is in some way passive as well as active: there are
objects without as well as faculties within;--Sensations,
as well as acts of Thought.

Indeed this is so far generally acknowledged, that according
to common apprehension, the mind is passive _rather_ than
active in acquiring the knowledge which it receives
concerning the material world. Its sensations are generally
considered more distinct than its operations. The world
without is held to be more clearly real than the faculties
within. That there is something different from ourselves,
something external to us, something independent of us,
something which no act of our minds can make or can destroy,
is held by all men to be at least as evident, as that our
minds can exert any effectual process in modifying and
appreciating the impressions made upon them. Most persons
are more likely to doubt whether the mind be always actively
applying Ideas to the objects which it perceives, than
whether it perceive them passively by means of Sensations.

But yet a little consideration will show us that an activity
of the mind, and an activity according to certain Ideas, is
requisite in all our knowledge of external objects. We see
objects, of various solid forms, and at various distances
from us. But we do not thus perceive them by sensation
alone. Our visual impressions cannot, of themselves, convey
to us a knowledge of solid form, or of distance from us.
Such knowledge is inferred from what we see:--inferred by
conceiving the objects as existing in space, and by applying
to them the Idea of Space. Again:--day after day passes,
till they make up a year: but we do not know that the days
are 365, except we count them; and thus apply to them our
Idea of Number. Again:--we see a needle drawn to a magnet:
but, in truth, the _drawing_ is what we cannot see. We see
the needle move, and infer the attraction, by applying to
the fact our Idea of Force, as the cause of motion.
Again:--we see two trees of different kinds; but we cannot
know that they are so, except by applying to them our Idea
of the resemblance {33} and difference which makes kinds.
And thus Ideas, as well as Sensations, necessarily enter
into all our knowledge of objects: and these two words
express, perhaps more exactly than any of the pairs before
mentioned, that Fundamental Antithesis, in the union of
which, as I have said, all knowledge consists.


_Sect._ 6.--_Reflexion and Sensation._

IT will hereafter be my business to show what the Ideas are,
which thus enter into our knowledge; and how each Idea has
been, as a matter of historical fact, introduced into the
Science to which it especially belongs. But before I proceed
to do this, I will notice some other terms, besides the
phrases already noticed, which have a reference, more or
less direct, to the Fundamental Antithesis of Ideas and
Sensations. I will mention some of these, in order that if
they should come under the reader's notice, he may not be
perplexed as to their bearing upon the view here presented
to him.

The celebrated doctrine of Locke, that all our 'Ideas,'
(that is, in his use of the word, all our objects of
thinking,) come from Sensation or Reflexion, will naturally
occur to the reader as connected with the antithesis of
which I have been speaking. But there is a great difference
between Locke's account of Sensation and Reflexion, and our
view of Sensation and Ideas. He is speaking of the origin of
our knowledge;--we, of its nature and composition. He is
content to say that all the knowledge which we do not
receive directly by Sensation, we obtain by Reflex Acts of
the mind, which make up his Reflexion. But we hold that
there is no Sensation without an act of the mind, and that
the mind's activity is not only reflexly exerted upon
itself, but directly upon objects, so as to perceive in them
connexions and relations which are not Sensations. He is
content to put together, under the name of Reflexion,
everything in our knowledge which is not Sensation: we are
to attempt to analyze all that is not Sensation; not only to
say it consists of Ideas, but {34} to point out what those
Ideas are, and to show the mode in which each of them enters
into our knowledge. His purpose was, to prove that there are
no Ideas, except the reflex acts of the mind: our endeavour
will be to show that the acts of the mind, both direct and
reflex, are governed by certain Laws, which may be
conveniently termed Ideas. His procedure was, to deny that
any knowledge could be derived from the mind alone: our
course will be, to show that in every part of our most
certain and exact knowledge, those who have added to our
knowledge in every age have referred to principles which the
mind itself supplies. I do not say that my view is contrary
to his: but it is altogether different from his. If I grant
that all our knowledge comes from Sensation and Reflexion,
still my task then is only begun; for I want further to
determine, in each science, what portion comes, not from
mere Sensation, but from those Ideas by the aid of which
either Sensation or Reflexion can lead to Science.

Locke's use of the word 'idea' is, as the reader will
perceive, different from ours. He uses the word, as he says,
which 'serves best to stand for whatsoever is the object of
the understanding when a man thinks.' 'I have used it,' he
adds, 'to express whatever is meant by _phantasm_, _notion_,
_species_, or whatever it is to which the mind can be
employed about in thinking.' It might be shown that this
separation of the _mind itself_ from the ideal _objects_
about which it is employed in thinking, may lead to very
erroneous results. But it may suffice to observe that we use
the word _Ideas_, in the manner already explained, to
express that element, supplied by the mind itself, which
must be combined with Sensation in order to produce
knowledge. For us, Ideas are not Objects of Thought, but
rather Laws of Thought. Ideas are not synonymous with
Notions; they are Principles which give to our Notions
whatever they contain of truth. But our use of the term
_Idea_ will be more fully explained hereafter. {35}


_Sect._ 7.--_Subjective and Objective._

THE Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy of which I have to
speak has been brought into great prominence in the writings
of modern German philosophers, and has conspicuously formed
the basis of their systems. They have indicated this
antithesis by the terms _subjective_ and _objective_.
According to the technical language of old writers, a thing
and its qualities are described as _subject_ and
_attributes_; and thus a man's faculties and acts are
attributes of which he is the _subject_. The mind is the
_subject_ in which ideas inhere. Moreover, the man's
faculties and acts are employed upon external _objects_; and
from objects all his sensations arise. Hence the part of a
man's knowledge which belongs to his own mind, is
_subjective_: that which flows in upon him from the world
external to him, is _objective_. And as in man's
contemplation of nature, there is always some act of thought
which depends upon himself, and some matter of thought which
is independent of him, there is, in every part of his
knowledge, a subjective and an objective element. The
combination of the two elements, the subjective or ideal,
and the objective or observed, is necessary, in order to
give us any insight into the laws of nature. But different
persons, according to their mental habits and constitution,
may be inclined to dwell by preference upon the one or the
other of these two elements. It may perhaps interest the
reader to see this difference of intellectual character
illustrated in two eminent men of genius of modern times,
Göthe and Schiller.

Göthe himself gives us the account to which I refer, in his
history of the progress of his speculations concerning the
Metamorphosis of Plants; a mode of viewing their structure
by which he explained, in a very striking and beautiful
manner, the relations of the different parts of a plant to
each other; as has been narrated in the _History of the
Inductive Sciences_. Göthe felt a delight in the passive
contemplation of nature, unmingled with the desire of
reasoning and theorizing; a delight such as naturally
belongs to those poets who {36} merely embody the images
which a fertile genius suggests, and do not mix with these
pictures, judgments and reflexions of their own. Schiller,
on the other hand, both by his own strong feeling of the
value of a moral purpose in poetry, and by his adoption of a
system of metaphysics in which the subjective element was
made very prominent, was well disposed to recognize fully
the authority of ideas over external impressions.

Göthe for a time felt a degree of estrangement towards
Schiller, arising from this contrariety in their views and
characters. But on one occasion they fell into discussion on
the study of natural history; and Göthe endeavoured to
impress upon his companion his persuasion that nature was to
be considered, not as composed of detached and incoherent
parts, but as active and alive, and unfolding herself in
each portion, in virtue of principles which pervade the
whole. Schiller objected that no such view of the objects of
natural history had been pointed out by observation, the
only guide which the natural historians recommended; and was
disposed on this account to think the whole of their study
narrow and shallow. 'Upon this,' says Göthe, 'I expounded to
him, in as lively a way as I could, the metamorphosis of
plants, drawing on paper for him, as I proceeded, a diagram
to represent that general form of a plant which shows itself
in so many and so various transformations. Schiller attended
and understood; and, accepting the explanation, he said,
"This is not observation, but an idea." I replied,' adds
Göthe, 'with some degree of irritation; for the point which
separated us was most luminously marked by this expression:
but I smothered my vexation, and merely said, "I was happy
to find that I had got ideas without knowing it; nay, that I
saw them before my eyes."' Göthe then goes on to say, that
he had been grieved to the very soul by maxims promulgated
by Schiller, that no observed fact ever could correspond
with an idea. Since he himself loved best to wander in the
domain of external observation, he had been led to look with
repugnance and hostility upon anything which professed to
depend upon ideas. 'Yet,' he {37} observes, 'it occurred to
me that if my Observation was identical with his Idea, there
must be some common ground on which we might meet.' They
went on with their mutual explanations, and became intimate
and lasting friends. 'And thus,' adds the poet, by means of
that mighty and interminable controversy between _object_
and _subject_, we two concluded an alliance which remained
unbroken, and produced much benefit to ourselves and others.'

The general diagram of a plant, of which Göthe here speaks,
must have been a combination of lines and marks expressing
the relations of position and equivalence among the elements
of vegetable forms, by which so many of their resemblances
and differences may be explained. Such a symbol is not an
Idea in that general sense in which we propose to use the
term, but is a particular modification of the general Ideas
of symmetry, developement, and the like; and we shall
hereafter see, according to the phraseology which we shall
explain in the next chapter, how such a diagram might
express the _ideal conception_ of a plant.

The antithesis of _subjective_ and _objective_ is very
familiar in the philosophical literature of Germany and
France; nor is it uncommon in any age of our own literature.
But though efforts have recently been made to give currency
among us to this phraseology, it has not been cordially
received, and has been much complained of as not of obvious
meaning. Nor is the complaint without ground: for when we
regard the mind as the _subject_ in which ideas inhere, it
becomes for us an _object_, and the antithesis vanishes. We
are not so much accustomed to use _subject_ in this sense,
as to make it a proper contrast to _object_. The combination
'_ideal_ and _objective_,' would more readily convey to a
modern reader the opposition which is intended between the
ideas of the mind itself, and the objects which it
contemplates around it.

To the antitheses already noticed--Thoughts and Things;
Necessary and Experiential Truths; Deduction and Induction;
Theory and Fact; Ideas and Sensations; Reflexion and
Sensation; Subjective and {38} Objective; we may add others,
by which distinctions depending more or less upon the
fundamental antithesis have been denoted. Thus we speak of
the _internal_ and _external_ sources of our knowledge; of
the world _within_ and the world _without_ us; of _Man_ and
_Nature_. Some of the more recent metaphysical writers of
Germany have divided the universe into the _Me_ and _Not-me_
(Ich and Nicht-ich). Upon such phraseology we may observe,
that to have the fundamental antithesis of which we speak
really understood, is of the highest consequence to
philosophy, but that little appears to be gained by
expressing it in any novel manner. The most weighty part of
the philosopher's task is to analyze the operations of the
mind; and in this task, it can aid us but little to call it,
instead of the _mind_, the _subject_, or the _me_.


_Sect._ 8.--_Matter and Form._

THERE are some other ways of expressing, or rather of
illustrating, the fundamental antithesis, which I may
briefly notice. The antithesis has been at different times
presented by means of various images. One of the most
ancient of these, and one which is still very instructive,
is that which speaks of Sensations as the _Matter_, and
Ideas as the _Form_, of our knowledge; just as ivory is the
matter, and a cube the form, of a die. This comparison has
the advantage of showing that two elements of an antithesis
which cannot be separated in fact, may yet be advantageously
separated in our reasonings. For Matter and Form cannot by
any means be detached from each other. All matter must have
some form; all form must be the form of some material thing.
If the ivory be not a cube, it must have a spherical or some
other form. And the cube, in order to be a cube, must be of
some material;--if not of ivory, of wood, or stone, for
instance, A figure without matter is merely a geometrical
conception;--a modification of the idea of space. Matter
without figure is a mere abstract term;--a supposed union of
certain sensible qualities which, so insulated {39} from
others, cannot exist. Yet the distinction of Matter and Form
is real; and, as a subject of contemplation, clear and
plain. Nor is the distinction by any means useless. The
speculations which treat of the two subjects, Matter and
Figure, are very different. Matter is the subject of the
sciences of Mechanics and Chemistry; Figure, of Geometry.
These two classes of Sciences have quite different sets of
principles. If we refuse to consider the Matter and the Form
of bodies separately, because we cannot exhibit Matter and
Form separately, we shut the door to all philosophy on such
subjects. In like manner, though Sensations and Ideas are
necessarily united in all our knowledge, they can be
considered as distinct; and this distinction is the basis of
all philosophy concerning knowledge.

This illustration of the relation of Ideas and Sensations
may enable us to estimate a doctrine which has been put
forwards at various times. In a certain school of
speculators there has existed a disposition to derive all
our Ideas from our Sensations, the term _Idea_, being, in
this school, used in its wider sense, so as to include all
modifications and limitations of our Fundamental Ideas. The
doctrines of this school have been summarily expressed by
saying that 'Every Idea is a transformed Sensation.' Now,
even supposing this assertion to be exactly true, we easily
see, from what has been said, how little we are likely to
answer the ends of philosophy by putting forward such a
maxim as one of primary importance. For we might say, in
like manner, that every statue is but a transformed block of
marble, or every edifice but a collection of transformed
stones. But what would these assertions avail us, if our
object were to trace the rules of art by which beautiful
statues were formed, or great works of architecture erected?
The question naturally occurs, What is the nature, the
principle, the law of this Transformation? In what faculty
resides the transforming power? What train of ideas of
beauty, and symmetry, and stability, in the mind of the
statuary or the architect, has produced those great works
which {40} mankind look upon as among their most valuable
possessions;--the Apollo of the Belvidere, the Parthenon,
the Cathedral of Cologne? When this is what we want to know,
how are we helped by learning that the Apollo is of Parian
marble, or the Cathedral of basaltic stone? We must know
much more than this, in order to acquire any insight into
the principles of statuary or of architecture. In like
manner, in order that we may make any progress in the
philosophy of knowledge, which is our purpose, we must
endeavour to learn something further respecting ideas than
that they are transformed sensations, even if they were this.

But, in reality, the assertion that our ideas are
transformed sensations, is erroneous as well as frivolous.
For it conveys, and is intended to convey, the opinion that
our sensations have one form which properly belongs to them;
and that, in order to become ideas, they are converted into
some other form. But the truth is, that our sensations, of
themselves, without some act of the mind, such as involves
what we have termed an Idea, have no form. We cannot see one
object without the idea of space; we cannot see two without
the idea of resemblance or difference; and space and
difference are not sensations. Thus, if we are to employ the
metaphor of Matter and Form, which is implied in the
expression to which I have referred, our sensations, from
their first reception, have their Form not _changed_, but
_given_ by our Ideas. Without the relations of thought which
we here term _Ideas_, the sensations are matter without
form. Matter without form cannot exist: and in like manner
sensations cannot become perceptions of objects, without
some formative power of the mind. By the very act of being
received as perceptions, they have a formative power
exercised upon them, the operation of which might be
expressed, by speaking of them, not as _transformed_, but
simply as _formed_;--as invested with form, instead of being
the mere formless material of perception. The word _inform_,
according to its Latin etymology, at first implied this
process by which matter is {41} invested with form. Thus
Virgil[1\1] speaks of the thunderbolt as _informed_ by the
hands of Brontes, and Steropes, and Pyracmon. And Dryden
introduces the word in another place:--
  Let others better mould the running mass
  Of metals, or _inform_ the breathing brass.
Even in this use of the word, the form is something superior
to the brute manner, and gives it a new significance and
purpose. And hence the term is again used to denote the
effect produced by an intelligent principle of a still
higher kind:--
  .  .  .  .  He _informed_
  This ill-shaped body with a daring soul.
And finally even the soul itself, in its original condition,
is looked upon as matter, when viewed with reference to
education and knowledge, by which it is afterwards moulded;
and hence these are, in our language, termed _information_.
If we confine ourselves to the first of these three uses of
the term, we may correct the erroneous opinion of which we
have just been speaking, and retain the metaphor by which it
is expressed, by saying, that ideas are not _transformed_,
but _informed_ sensations.

[Note 1\1: Ferrum exercebant vasto Cyclopes in Antro
Brontesque Steropesque et nudus membra Pyracmon;
His informatum manibus, jam parte polita
Fulmen erat.--_Æn._ viii. 424.]


_Sect._ 9.--_Man the Interpreter of Nature._

THERE is another image by which writers have represented the
acts of thought through which knowledge is obtained from the
observation of the external world. Nature is the Book, and
Man is the _Interpreter_. The facts of the external world
are marks, in which man discovers a meaning, and so reads
them. Man is the Interpreter of Nature, and Science is the
right Interpretation. And this image also is, in many
respects, {42} instructive. It exhibits to us the necessity
of both elements;--the marks which man has to look at, and
the knowledge of the alphabet and language which he must
possess and apply before he can find any meaning in what he
sees. Moreover this image presents to us, as the ideal
element, an activity of the mind of that very kind which we
wish to point out. Indeed the illustration is rather an
example than a comparison of the composition of our
knowledge. The letters and symbols which are presented to
the Interpreter are really objects of sensation: the notion
of letters as signs of words, the notion of connexions among
words by which they have meaning, really are among our
Ideas;--_Signs_ and _Meaning_ are Ideas, supplied by the
mind, and added to all that sensation can disclose in any
collection of visible marks. The Sciences are not
figuratively, but really, Interpretations of Nature. But
this image, whether taken as example or comparison, may
serve to show both the opposite character of the two
elements of knowledge, and their necessary combination, in
order that there may be knowledge.

This illustration may also serve to explain another point in
the conditions of human knowledge which we shall have to
notice:--namely, the very different degrees in which, in
different cases, we are conscious of the mental act by which
our sensations are converted into knowledge. For the same
difference occurs in reading an inscription. If the
inscription were entire and plain, in a language with which
we were familiar, we should be unconscious of any mental act
in reading it. We should seem to collect its meaning by the
sight alone. But if we had to decipher an ancient
inscription, of which only imperfect marks remained, with a
few entire letters among them, we should probably make
several suppositions as to the mode of reading it, before we
found any mode which was quite successful; and thus, our
guesses, being separate from the observed facts, and at
first not fully in agreement with them, we should be clearly
aware that the conjectured meaning, on the one hand, and the
observed marks on the other, were distinct things, though
these {43} two things would become united as elements of one
act of knowledge when we had hit upon the right conjecture.


_Sect._ 10.--_The Fundamental Antithesis inseparable._

THE illustration just referred to, as well as other ways of
considering the subject, may help us to get over a
difficulty which at first sight appears perplexing. We have
spoken of the common opposition of _Theory_ and _Fact_ as
important, and as involving what we have called the
Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy. But after all, it may
be asked, Is this distinction of Theory and Fact really
tenable? Is it not often difficult to say whether a special
part of our knowledge is a Fact or a Theory? Is it a Fact or
a Theory that the stars revolve round the pole? Is it a Fact
or a Theory that the earth is a globe revolving on its axis?
Is it a Fact or a Theory that the earth travels in an
ellipse round the sun? Is it a Fact or a Theory that the sun
attracts the earth? Is it a Fact or a Theory that the
loadstone attracts the needle? In all these cases, probably
some persons would answer one way, and some persons the
other. There are many persons by whom the doctrine of the
globular form of the earth, the doctrine of the earth's
elliptical orbit, the doctrine of the sun's attraction on
the earth, would be called _theories_, even if they allowed
them to be true theories. But yet if each of these
propositions be true, is it not a _fact_? And even with
regard to the simpler facts, as the motion of the stars
round the pole, although this may be a Fact to one who has
watched and measured the motions of the stars, one who has
not done this, and who has only carelessly looked at these
stars from time to time, may naturally speak of the circles
which the astronomer makes them describe as Theories. It
would seem, then, that we cannot in such cases expect
general assent, if we say, _This is a Fact and not a
Theory_, or _This is a Theory and not a Fact_. And the same
is true in a vast range of cases. It would seem, therefore,
that we cannot rest any reasoning upon this distinction of
Theory {44} and Fact; and we cannot avoid asking whether
there is any real distinction in this antithesis, and if so,
what it is.

To this I reply: the distinction between Theory (that is,
true Theory) and Fact, is this: that in Theory the Ideas are
considered as distinct from the Facts: in Facts, though
Ideas may be involved, they are not, in our apprehension,
separated from the sensations. In a Fact, the Ideas are
applied so readily and familiarly, and incorporated with the
sensations so entirely, that we do not see _them_, we see
_through them_. A person who carefully notes the motion of a
star all night, sees the circle which it describes, as he
sees the star, though the circle is, really, a result of his
own Ideas. A person who has in his mind the measures of
different lines and countries on the earth's surface, and
who can put them, together into one conception, finds that
they can make no figure but a globular one: to him, the
earth's globular form is a Fact, as much as the square form
of his chamber. A person to whom the grounds of believing
the earth to travel round the sun are as familiar as the
grounds for believing the movements of the mail-coaches in
this country, looks upon the former event as a Fact, just as
he looks upon the latter events as Facts. And a person who,
knowing the Fact of the earth's annual motion, refers it
distinctly to its mechanical cause, conceives the sun's
attraction as a Fact, just as he conceives as a Fact, the
action of the wind which turns the sails of a mill. He
cannot _see_ the force in either case; he supplies it out of
his own Ideas. And thus, a true Theory is a Fact; a Fact is
a familiar Theory. That which is a Fact under one aspect, is
a Theory under another. The most recondite Theories when
firmly established are Facts: the simplest Facts involve
something of the nature of Theory. Theory and Fact
correspond, in a certain degree, with Ideas and Sensations,
as to the nature of their opposition. But the Facts are
Facts, so far as the Ideas have been combined with the
Sensations and absorbed in them: the Theories are Theories,
so far as the Ideas are kept distinct from the Sensations,
and so far as it is {45} considered still a question whether
those can be made to agree with these.

We may, as I have said, illustrate this matter by
considering man as _interpreting_ the phenomena which he
sees. He often interprets without being aware that he does
so. Thus when we see the needle move towards the magnet, we
assert that the magnet exercises an attractive force on the
needle. But it is only by an interpretative act of our own
minds that we ascribe this motion to attraction. That, in
this case, a force is exerted--something of the nature of
the pull which we could apply by our own volition--is our
interpretation of the phenomena; although we may be
conscious of the act of interpretation, and may then regard
the attraction as a Fact.

Nor is it in such cases only that we interpret phenomena in
our own way, without being conscious of what we do. We see a
tree at a distance, and judge it to be a chestnut or a lime;
yet this is only an inference from the colour or form of the
mass according to preconceived classifications of our own.
Our lives are full of such unconscious interpretations. The
farmer recognizes a good or a bad soil; the artist a picture
of a favourite master; the geologist a rock of a known
locality, as we recognize the faces and voices of our
friends; that is, by judgments formed on what we see and
hear; but judgments in which we do not analyze the steps, or
distinguish the inference from the appearance. And in these
mixtures of observation and inference, we speak of the
judgment thus formed, as a Fact directly observed.

Even in the case in which our perceptions appear to be most
direct, and least to involve any interpretations of our
own,--in the simple process of seeing,--who does not know
how much we, by an act of the mind, add to that which our
senses receive? Does any one fancy that he sees a solid
cube? It is easy to show that the solidity of the figure,
the relative position of its faces and edges to each other,
are inferences of the spectator; no more conveyed to his
conviction by the eye alone, than they would be if he were
looking at {46} a painted representation of a cube. The
scene of nature is a picture without depth of substance, no
less than the scene of art; and in the one case as in the
other, it is the mind which, by an act of its own, discovers
that colour and shape denote distance and solidity. Most men
are unconscious of this perpetual habit of reading the
language of the external world, and translating as they
read. The draughtsman, indeed, is compelled, for his
purposes, to return back in thought from the solid bodies
which he has inferred, to the shapes of surface which he
really sees. He knows that there is a mask of theory over
the whole face of nature, if it be _theory_ to infer more
than we _see_. But other men, unaware of this masquerade,
hold it to be a fact that they see cubes and spheres,
spacious apartments and winding avenues. And these things
are facts to them, because they are unconscious of the
mental operation by which they have penetrated nature's
disguise.

And thus, we still have an intelligible distinction of Fact
and Theory, if we consider Theory as a conscious, and Fact
as an unconscious inference, from the phenomena which are
presented to our senses.

But still, Theory and Fact, Inference and Perception,
Reasoning and Observation, are antitheses in none of which
can we separate the two members by any fixed and definite line.

Even the simplest terms by which the antithesis is expressed
cannot be separated. Ideas and Sensations, Thoughts and
Things, Subject and Object, cannot in any case be applied
absolutely and exclusively. Our Sensations require Ideas to
bind them together, namely, Ideas of space, time, number,
and the like. If not so bound together, Sensations do not
give us any apprehension of Things or Objects. All Things,
all Objects, must exist in space and in time--must be one or
many. Now space, time, number, are not Sensations or Things.
They are something different from, and opposed to Sensations
and Things. We have termed them Ideas. It may be said they
are _Relations_ of Things, or of Sensations. But granting
this form of expression, still a _Relation_ is not a Thing
or a {47} Sensation; and therefore we must still have
another and opposite element, along with our Sensations. And
yet, though we have thus these two elements in every act of
perception, we cannot designate any portion of the act as
absolutely and exclusively belonging to one of the elements.
Perception involves Sensation, along with Ideas of time,
space, and the like; or, if any one prefers the expression,
we may say, Perception involves Sensations along with the
apprehension of Relations. Perception is Sensation, along
with such Ideas as make Sensation into an apprehension of
Things or Objects.

And as Perception of Objects implies Ideas,--as Observation
implies Reasoning;--so, on the other hand, Ideas cannot
exist where Sensation has not been; Reasoning cannot go on
when there has not been previous Observation. This is
evident from the necessary order of developement of the
human faculties. Sensation necessarily exists from the first
moments of our existence, and is constantly at work.
Observation begins before we can suppose the existence of
any Reasoning which is not involved in Observation. Hence,
at whatever period we consider our Ideas, we must consider
them as having been already engaged in connecting our
Sensations, and as having been modified by this employment.
By being so employed, our Ideas are unfolded and defined;
and such developement and definition cannot be separated
from the Ideas themselves. We cannot conceive space, without
boundaries or forms; now Forms involve Sensations. We cannot
conceive time, without events which mark the course of time;
but events involve Sensations. We cannot conceive number,
without conceiving things which are numbered; and Things
imply sensations. And the forms, things, events, which are
thus implied in our Ideas, having been the objects of
Sensation constantly in every part of our life, have
modified, unfolded, and fixed our Ideas, to an extent which
we cannot estimate, but which we must suppose to be
essential to the processes which at present go on in our
minds. We cannot say that Objects create Ideas; for to
perceive Objects we must already have Ideas. But we may {48}
say, that Objects and the constant Perception of Objects
have so far modified our Ideas, that we cannot, even in
thought, separate our Ideas from the perception of Objects.

We cannot say of any Ideas, as of the Idea of space, or
time, or number, that they are absolutely and exclusively
Ideas. We cannot conceive what space, or time, or number,
would be in our minds, if we had never perceived any Thing
or Things in space or time. We cannot conceive ourselves in
such a condition as never to have perceived any Thing or
Things in space or time. But, on the other hand, just as
little can we conceive ourselves becoming acquainted with
space and time or numbers as objects of Sensation. We cannot
reason without having the operations of our minds affected
by previous Sensations; but we cannot conceive Reasoning to
be merely a series of Sensations. In order to be used in
Reasoning, Sensation must become Observation; and, as we
have seen, Observation already involves Reasoning. In order
to be connected by our Ideas, Sensations must be Things or
Objects, and Things or Objects already include Ideas. And
thus, none of the terms by which the fundamental antithesis
is expressed can be absolutely and exclusively applied.

I will make a remark suggested by the views which have thus
been presented. Since, as we have just seen, none of the
terms which express the fundamental antithesis can be
applied absolutely and exclusively, the absolute application
of the antithesis in any particular case can never be a
conclusive or immoveable principle. This remark is the more
necessary to be borne in mind, as the terms of this
antithesis are often used in a vehement and peremptory
manner. Thus we are often told that such a thing is _a
Fact_; A FACT and not a Theory, with all the emphasis which,
in speaking or writing, tone or italics or capitals can
give. We see from what has been said, that when this is
urged, before we can estimate the truth, or the value of the
assertion, we must ask to whom is it a Fact? what habits of
thought, what previous information, what Ideas does it
imply, to conceive the Fact as a Fact? {49} Does not the
apprehension of the Fact imply assumptions which may with
equal justice be called Theory, and which are perhaps false
Theory? in which case, the Fact is no Fact. Did not the
ancients assert it as a Fact, that the earth stood still,
and the stars moved? and can any Fact have stronger apparent
evidence to justify persons in asserting it emphatically
than this had?

These remarks are by no means urged in order to show that no
Fact can be certainly known to be true; but only, to show
that no Fact can be certainly shown to be a Fact, merely by
calling it a Fact, however emphatically. There is by no
means any ground of general skepticism with regard to truth,
involved in the doctrine of the necessary combination of two
elements in all our knowledge. On the contrary, Ideas are
requisite to the essence, and Things to the reality of our
knowledge in every case. The proportions of Geometry and
Arithmetic are examples of knowledge respecting our Ideas of
space and number, with regard to which there is no room for
doubt. The doctrines of Astronomy are examples of truths not
less certain respecting the Facts of the external world.


_Sect._ 11.--_Successive Generalization._

IN the preceding pages we have been led to the doctrine,
that though, in the Antithesis of Theory and Fact, there is
involved an essential opposition; namely the opposition of
the thoughts within us and the phenomena without us; yet
that we cannot distinguish and define the members of this
antithesis separately. Theories become Facts, by becoming
certain and familiar: and thus, as our knowledge becomes
more sure and more extensive, we are constantly transferring
to the class of facts, opinions which were at first regarded
as theories.

Now we have further to remark, that in the progress of human
knowledge respecting any branch of speculation, there may be
several such steps in succession, each depending upon and
including the preceding. {50} The theoretical views which
one generation of discoverers establishes, become the facts
from which the next generation advances to new theories. As
men rise from the particular to the general, so, in the same
manner, they rise from what is general to what is more
general. Each induction supplies the materials of fresh
inductions; each generalization, with all that it embraces
in its circle, may be found to be but one of many circles,
comprehended within the circuit of some wider
generalization.

This remark has already been made, and illustrated, in the
_History of the Inductive Sciences_[2\1]; and, in truth, the
whole of the history of science is full of suggestions and
exemplifications of this course of things. It may be
convenient, however, to select a few instances which may
further explain and confirm this view of the progress of
scientific knowledge.

[Note 2\1: _Hist. Inductive Sciences_, b. vii. c. ii. sect. 5.]

The most conspicuous instance of this succession is to be
found in that science which has been progressive from the
beginning of the world to our own times, and which exhibits
by far the richest collection of successive discoveries: I
mean Astronomy. It is easy to see that each of these
successive discoveries depended on those antecedently made,
and that in each, the truths which were the highest point of
the knowledge of one age were the fundamental basis of the
efforts of the age which came next. Thus we find, in the
days of Greek discovery, Hipparchus and Ptolemy combining
and explaining the particular _facts_ of the motion of the
sun, moon, and planets, by means of the _theory_ of
epicycles and eccentrics;--a highly important step, which
gave an intelligible connexion and rule to the motions of
each of these luminaries. When these cycles and epicycles,
thus truly representing the apparent motions of the heavenly
bodies, had accumulated to an inconvenient amount, by the
discovery of many inequalities in the observed motions,
Copernicus showed that their effects might all be more
simply included, by making the sun the center of motion of
the planets, instead of {51} the earth. But in this new
view, he still retained the epicycles and eccentrics which
governed the motion of each body. Tycho Brahe's
observations, and Kepler's calculations, showed that,
besides the vast number of facts which the epicyclical
theory could account for, there were some which it would not
exactly include, and Kepler was led to the persuasion that
the planets move in ellipses. But this view of motion was at
first conceived by Kepler as a modification of the
conception of epicycles. On one occasion he blames himself
for not sooner seeing that such a modification was possible.
'What an absurdity on my part!' he cries[3\1]; 'as if
libration in the diameter of the epicycle might not come to
the same thing as motion in the ellipse.' But again;
Kepler's _laws_ of the elliptical motion of the planets were
established; and these laws immediately became the _facts_
on which the mathematicians had to found their mechanical
theories. From these facts, Newton, as we have related,
proved that the central force of the sun retains the planets
in their orbits, according to the law of the inverse square
of the distance. The same _law_ was shown to prevail in the
gravitation of the earth. It was shown, too, by induction
from the motions of Jupiter and Saturn, that the planets
attract each other; by calculations from the figure of the
earth, that the parts of the earth attract each other; and,
by considering the course of the tides, that the sun and
moon attract the waters of the ocean. And all these curious
discoveries being established as _facts_, the subject was
ready for another step of generalization. By an unparalleled
rapidity in the progress of discovery in this case, not only
were all the inductions which we have first mentioned made
by one individual, but the new advance, the higher flight,
the closing victory, fell to the lot of the same
extraordinary person.

[Note 3\1: _Hist. Inductive Sciences_, b. v. c. iv. sect. 3.]

The attraction of the sun upon the planets, of the moon upon
the earth, of the planets on each other, of the parts of the
earth on themselves, of the sun and {52} moon upon the
ocean;--all these truths, each of itself a great discovery,
were included by Newton in the higher _generalization_, of
the universal gravitation of matter, by which each particle
is drawn to every other according to the law of the inverse
square: and thus this long advance from discovery to
discovery, from truths to truths, each justly admired when
new, and then rightly used as old, was closed in a worthy
and consistent manner, by a truth which is the most worthy
admiration, because it includes all the researches of
preceding ages of Astronomy.

We may take another example of a succession of this kind
from the history of a science, which, though it has made
wonderful advances, has not yet reached its goal, as
physical astronomy appears to have done, but seems to have
before it a long prospect of future progress. I now refer to
Chemistry, in which I shall try to point out how the
preceding discoveries afforded the materials of the
succeeding; although this subordination and connexion is, in
this case, less familiar to men's minds than in Astronomy,
and is, perhaps, more difficult to present in a clear and
definite shape. Sylvius saw, in the facts which occur, when
an acid and an alkali are brought together, the evidence
that they neutralize each other. But cases of
neutralization, and acidification, and many other effects of
mixture of the ingredients of bodies, being thus viewed as
_facts_, had an aspect of unity and law given them by
Geoffroy and Bergman[4\1], who introduced the _conception_
of the Chemical Affinity or Elective Attraction, by which
certain elements select other elements, as if by preference.
That combustion, whether a chemical union or a chemical
separation of ingredients, is of the same nature with
acidification, was the doctrine of Beccher and Stahl, and
was soon established as a truth which must form a part of
every succeeding physical theory. That the rules of affinity
and chemical composition may include gaseous elements, was
established by Black and Cavendish. And all these truths,
thus brought to light by {53} chemical
discoverers,--affinity, the identity of acidification and
combustion, the importance of gaseous elements,--along with
all the facts respecting the weight of ingredients and
compounds which the balance disclosed,--were taken up,
connected, and included as _particulars_ in the oxygen
_theory_ of Lavoisier. Again, the results of this theory,
and the quantity of the several ingredients which entered
into each compound--(such results, for the most part, being
now no longer mere theoretical speculations, but recognized
facts)--were the _particulars_ from which Dalton derived
that wide law of chemical combination which we term the
Atomic _Theory_. And this law, soon generally accepted among
chemists, is already in its turn become one of the _facts_
included in Faraday's _Theory_ of the identity of Chemical
Affinity and Electric Attraction.

[Note 4\1: _Hist. Inductive Sciences_, b. xiv. c. iii.]

It is unnecessary to give further exemplifications of this
constant ascent from one step to a higher; this perpetual
conversion of true theories into the materials of other and
wider theories. It will hereafter be our business to
exhibit, in a more full and formal manner, the mode in which
this principle determines the whole scheme and structure of
all the most exact sciences. And thus, beginning with the
facts of sense, we gradually climb to the highest forms of
human knowledge, and obtain from experience and observation
a vast collection of the most wide and elevated truths.

There are, however, truths of a very different kind, to
which we must turn our attention, in order to pursue our
researches respecting the nature and grounds of our
knowledge. But before we do this, we must notice one more
feature in that progress of science which we have already in
part described.



{{54}}
