CHAPTER III.

SPECULATIONS FOUNDED UPON THE SYMMETRY OF CRYSTALS.


1. WHEN a crystal, as, for instance, a crystal of Galena,
(sulphuret of lead,) is readily divisible into smaller
cubes, and these into smaller ones, and so on without limit,
it is very natural to represent to ourselves the original
cube as really consisting of small cubical elements; and to
imagine that it is a philosophical account of the physical
structure of such a substance to say that it is made up of
cubical molecules. And when the Galena crystal has
externally the form of a cube, there is no difficulty in
such a conception; for the surface of the crystal is also
conceived as made up of the surfaces of its cubical
molecules. We conceive the crystal so constituted, as we
conceive a wall built of bricks.

But if, as often happens, the Galena crystal be an
octahedron, a further consideration is requisite in order to
understand its structure, pursuing still the same
hypothesis. The mineral is still, as in the other case,
readily cleavable into small cubes, having their corners
turned to the faces of the octahedron. Therefore these faces
can no longer be conceived as made up of the faces of
cubical elements of which the whole is constituted. If we
suppose a pile of such small cubes to be closely built
together, but with decreasing width above, so as to form a
pyramid, the face of such a pyramid will no longer be plane;
it will consist of a great number of the corners or edges of
the small elementary cubes. It would appear at first sight,
therefore, that such a face cannot represent the smooth
polished surface of a crystal. {81}

But when we come to look more closely, this difficulty
disappears. For how large are these elementary cubes? We
cannot tell, even supposing they really have any size. But
we know that they must be, at any rate, very small; so small
as to be inappreciable by our senses, for our senses find no
limit to the divisibility of minerals by cleavage. Hence the
surface of the pyramid above described would not consist of
visible corners or edges, but would be roughened by specks
of imperceptible size; or rather, by supposing these specks
to become still smaller, the roughness becomes smoothness.
And thus we may have a crystal with a smooth surface, made
up of small cubes in such a manner that their surfaces are
all oblique to the surface of the crystal.

Haüy, struck by some instances in which the supposition of
such a structure of crystals appeared to account happily for
several of their relations and properties, adopted and
propounded it as a general theory. The small elements, of
which he supposed crystals to be thus built up, he termed
_integrant molecules_. The form of these molecules might or
might not be the same as the _primitive form_ with which his
construction was supposed to begin; but there was, at any
rate, a close connexion between these forms, since both of
them were founded on the cleavage of the mineral. The tenet
that crystals are constituted in the manner which I have
been describing, I shall call the _Theory of Integrant
Molecules_, and I have now to make some remarks on the
grounds of this theory.

2. In the case of which I have spoken, the mineral used as
the example, Galena, readily splits into cubes, and cubes
are easily placed together so as to fit each other, and fill
the space which they occupy. The same is the case in the
mineral which suggested to Haüy his theory, namely, Calc
Spar. The crystals of this substance are readily divisible
into rhombohedrons, a form like a brick with oblique angles;
and such bricks can be built together so as to produce
crystals of all the immense varieties of form which Calc
Spar presents. This kind of masonry is equally possible in
many other {82} minerals; but as we go through the mineral
kingdom in our survey, we soon find cases which offer
difficulties. Some minerals cleave only in two directions,
some in one only; in such cases we cannot by cleavage obtain
an integrant molecule of definite form; one of its
dimensions, at least, must remain indeterminate and
arbitrary. Again, in some instances, we have more than three
different planes of cleavage, as in Fluor Spar, where we
have four. The solid, bounded by four planes, is a
tetrahedron; or if we take four _pairs_ of parallel faces,
an octahedron. But if we attempt to take either of these
forms for our integrant molecule, we are met by this
difficulty: that a collection of such forms will not fill
space. Perhaps this difficulty will be more readily
conceived by the general reader if it be contemplated with
reference to plane figures. It will readily be seen that a
number of equal squares may be put together so as to fill
the space which they occupy; but if we take a number of
equal regular octagons, we may easily convince ourselves
that no possible arrangement can make them cover a flat
space without leaving blank spots between. In like manner
octahedrons or tetrahedrons cannot be arranged in solid
space so as to fill it. They necessarily leave vacancies.
Hence the structure of Fluor Spar, and similar crystals, was
a serious obstacle in the way of the theory of integrant
molecules. That theory had been adopted in the first
instance because portions of the crystal, obtained by
cleavage, could be built up into a solid mass; but this
ground of the theory failed altogether in such instances as
I have described, and hence the theory, even upon the
representations of its adherents, had no longer any claim to
assent.

The doctrine of Integral Molecules, however, was by no means
given up at once, even in such instances. In this and in
other subjects, we may observe that a theory, once
constructed and carried into detail, has such a hold upon
the minds of those who have been in the habit of applying
it, that they will attempt to uphold it by introducing
suppositions inconsistent with {83} the original foundations
of the theory. Thus those who assert the Atomic Theory,
reconcile it with facts by taking the _halves of atoms_; and
thus the Theory of Integrant Molecules was maintained for
Fluor Spar, by representing the elementary octahedrons of
which crystals are built up, as touching each other only by
the _edges_. The contact of surface with surface amongst
integrant molecules had been the first basis of the theory;
but this supposition being here inapplicable, was replaced
by one which made the theory no longer a representation of
the facts (the cleavages), but a mere geometrical
construction. Although, however, the inapplicability of the
theory to such cases was thus, in some degree, disguised to
the disciples of Haüy, it was plain that, in the face of
such difficulties, the Theory of Integrant Molecules could
not hold its place as a philosophical truth. But it still
answered the purpose (a very valuable one, and one to which
crystallography is much indebted,) of an instrument for
calculating the geometrical relations of the parts of
crystals to each other: for the integrant molecules were
supposed to be placed layer above layer, each layer as we
ascend, _decreasing_ by a certain number of molecules and
rows of molecules; and the calculation of these _laws of
decrement_ was, in fact, the best mode then known of
determining the positions of the faces. The Theory of
Decrements served to express and to determine, in a great
number of the most obvious cases, _the laws of phenomena_ in
crystalline forms, though the Theory of Integrant Molecules
could not be maintained as a just view of the structure of
crystals.

3. The Theory of Integrant Molecules, however, involved this
just and important principle: that a true view of the
intimate structure of crystals must include and explain the
facts of crystallization, that is, crystalline form and
cleavage; and that it must take these into account,
according to their degree of _Symmetry_. So far all theories
concerning the elements of crystals must agree. And it was
soon seen that this was, in reality, all that had been
established by the investigations of Haüy and his school. I
have already, in the {84} _History_, quoted Weiss's
reflections on making this step. 'When in 1809,' he
says[5\7], 'I published my Dissertation, I shared the common
opinion as to the necessity of the assumption, and the
reality of the existence of a primitive form, at least in a
sense not very different from the usual sense of the
expression.' He then proceeds to relate that he sought a
ground for such an opinion, independent of the doctrine of
_Atoms_, which he, in common with a great number of
philosophers of that time in his own country, was disposed
to reject, inclining to believe that the properties of
bodies were determined by _Forces_ which acted in them, and
not by _Molecules_ of which they were composed. He adds,
that in pursuing this train of thought, he found, 'that out
of his Primitive Forms there was gradually unfolded to his
hands that which really governs them, and is not affected by
their casual fluctuations; namely, the Fundamental Relations
of their Dimensions,' or as we now may call them, _Axes of
Symmetry_. With reference to these Axes, he found, as he
goes on to say, that 'a multiplicity of internal
Oppositions, necessarily and mutually interdependent, are
developed in the crystalline mass, each Relation having its
own Polarity; so that the Crystalline Character is
co-extensive with these Polarities.' The character of these
polarities, whether manifested in crystalline faces,
cleavage, or any other incidents of crystallization, is
necessarily displayed in the degree and kind of Symmetry
which the crystal possesses: and thus this Symmetry, in all
our speculations concerning the structure of crystals,
necessarily takes the place of that enumeration of Primitive
Forms which were rejected as inconsistent with observed
facts, and destitute of sound scientific principle.

[Note 5\7: _Acad. Berlin._ 1816, p. 307.]

I may just notice here what I have stated in the History of
Mineralogy[6\7], that the distinction of systems of
crystallization, as introduced by Weiss and Mohs, was
strikingly confirmed by Sir David Brewster's discoveries
respecting the optical properties of minerals. {85} The
splendid phenomena which were produced by passing polarized
light through crystals, were found to vary according as the
crystals were of the Rhombohedral, Square Pyramidal, Oblong
Prismatic, or Tessular System. The Optical Symmetry exactly
corresponded with the Geometrical Symmetry. In the two
former Systems were crystals _uniaxal_ in respect of their
optical properties; the oblong prismatic, was _biaxal_;
while in the tessular, the want of a predominant axis
prevented the phenomena here spoken of from occurring at
all. The optical experiments must have led, and would have
led, to a classification of crystals into the above systems
or something nearly equivalent, even had they not been
already so arranged by attention to their forms.

[Note 6\7: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xv. c. v.]

4. While in Germany Weiss and Mohs with their disciples,
were gradually rejecting what was superfluous in the
previous crystallographical hypotheses, philosophers in
England were also trying to represent to themselves the
constitution of crystals in a manner which should be free
from the obviously arbitrary and untenable fictions of the
Haüyian school. These attempts, however, were not crowned
with much success. One mode of representing the structure of
crystals which suggested itself, was to reject the
polyhedral forms which Haüy gave to his integrant molecules,
and to conceive the elements of crystals as _spheres_, the
properties of the crystal being determined not by the
_surfaces_, but by the _position_ of the elements. This was
done by Wollaston, in the _Philosophical Transactions_ for
1813. He applied this view to the tessular system, in which,
indeed, the application is not difficult; and he showed that
octahedral and tetrahedral figures may be deduced from
symmetrical arrangements of equal spherules. But though in
doing this, he manifested a perception of the conditions of
the problem, he appeared to lose his hold on the real
question when he tried to pass on to other systems of
crystallization. For he accounted for the rhombohedral
system by supposing the spheres changed into _spheroids_.
Such a procedure involved him in a gratuitous and useless
hypothesis: for to what purpose do we introduce the {86}
arrangement of atoms (instead of their figure,) as a mode of
explaining the symmetry of the crystallization, when at the
next step we ascribe to the atom, by an arbitrary fiction, a
symmetry of figure of the same kind as that which we have to
explain? It is just as easy, and as allowable, to assume an
elementary rhombohedron, as to assume elementary spheroids,
of which the rhombohedrons are constructed.

5. Many hypotheses of the same kind might be adduced,
devised both by mineralogists and chemists. But almost all
such speculations have been pursued with a most surprising
neglect of the principle which obviously is the only sound
basis on which they can proceed. The principle is
this:--that _All hypotheses concerning the arrangement of
the elementary atoms of bodies in space must be constructed
with reference to the general facts of crystallization_. The
truth and importance of this principle can admit of no
doubt. For if we make any hypothesis concerning the mode of
connexion of the elementary particles of bodies, this must
be done with the view of representing to ourselves the
forces which connect them, and the results of these forces
as manifested in the properties of the bodies. Now the
forces which connect the particles of bodies so as to make
them crystalline, are manifestly chemical forces. It is only
definite chemical compounds which crystallize; and in
crystals the force of cohesion by which the particles are
held together cannot in any way be distinguished or
separated from the chemical force by which their elements
are combined. The elements are understood to be combined,
precisely because the result is a definite, apparently
homogeneous substance. The properties of the compound bodies
depend upon the elements and their mode of combination; for,
in fact, these include everything on which they can depend.
There are no other circumstances than these which can affect
the properties of a body. Therefore all those properties
which have reference to space, namely, the crystalline
properties, cannot depend upon anything else than the
arrangement of the elementary molecules in space. These {87}
properties are the facts which any hypothesis of the
arrangement of molecules must explain, or at least render
conceivable; and all such hypotheses, all constructions of
bodies by supposed arrangements of molecules, can have no
other philosophical object than to account for facts of this
kind. If they do not do this, they are mere arbitrary
geometrical fictions, which cannot be in any degree
confirmed or authorised by an examination of nature, and are
therefore not deserving of any regard.

6. Those philosophers who have endeavoured to represent the
mode in which bodies are constructed by the combination of
their chemical atoms, have often undertaken to show, not
only that the atoms are combined, but also in what positions
and configurations they are combined. And it is truly
remarkable, as I have already said, that they have done
this, almost in every instance, without any consideration of
the crystalline character of the resulting combinations;
from which alone we receive any light as to the relation of
their elements in space. Thus Dr. Dalton, in his _Elements
of Chemistry_, in which he gave to the world the Atomic
Theory as a representation of the doctrine of definite and
multiple proportions, also published a large collection of
Diagrams, exhibiting what he conceived to be the
configuration of the atoms in a great number of the most
common combinations of chemical elements. Now these
hypothetical diagrams do not in any way correspond, as to
the nature of their symmetry, with the compounds, as we find
them displaying their symmetry when they occur crystallized.
Carbonate of lime has in reality a triangular symmetry,
since it belongs to the rhombohedral system; Dr. Dalton's
carbonate of lime would be an oblique rhombic prism or
pyramid. Sulphate of baryta is really two-and-two membered;
Dr. Dalton's diagram makes it two-and-one membered. Alum is
really octahedral or tessular; but according to the diagram
it could not be so, since the two ends of the atom are not
symmetrical. And the same want of correspondence between the
facts and the hypothesis runs through the whole {88} system.
It need not surprise us that the theoretical arrangement of
atoms does not explain the facts of _crystallization_; for
to produce such an explanation would be a second step in
science quite as great as the first, the discovery of the
atomic theory in its _chemical_ sense. But we may allow
ourselves to be surprised that an utter discrepance between
all the facts of crystallization and the figures assumed in
the theory, did not suggest any doubt as to the soundness of
the mode of philosophizing by which this part of the theory
was constructed.

7. Some little accordance between the hypothetical
arrangements of chemical atoms and the facts of
crystallization, does appear to have been arrived at by some
of the theorists to whom we here refer, although by no means
enough to show a due conviction of the importance of the
principle stated above. Thus Wollaston, in the Essay above
noticed, after showing that a symmetrical arrangement of
equal spherules would give rise to octahedral and other
tessular figures, remarks, very properly, that the metals,
which are simple bodies, crystallize in such forms. M.
Ampère[7\7] also, in 1814, published a brief account of an
hypothesis of a somewhat similar nature, and stated himself
to have developed this speculation in a Memoir which has not
yet, so far as I am aware, been published. In this notice he
conceives bodies to be compounded of _molecules_, which,
arranged in a polyhedral form, constitute _particles_. These
_representative forms_ of the particles depend on chemical
laws. Thus the particles of oxygen, of hydrogen, and of
azote, are composed each of four molecules. Hence it is
collected that the particles of nitrous gas are composed of
two molecules of oxygen and two of azote; and similar
conclusions are drawn respecting other substances. These
conclusions, though expressed by means of the polyhedrons
thus introduced, are supported by chemical, rather than by
crystallographical comparisons. The author does, indeed,
appeal to the crystallization of sal {89} ammoniac as an
argument[8\7]; but as _all_ the forms which he introduces
appear to belong to the _tessular_ system of
crystallization, there is, in his reasonings, nothing
distinctive; and therefore nothing, crystallographically
speaking, of any weight on the side of this theory.

[Note 7\7: _Ann. de Chimie_, tom. xc. p. 43.]

[Note 8\7: _Ann. de Chimie_, tom. xc. p. 83.]

8. Any hypothesis which should introduce any principle of
chemical order among the actual forms of minerals, would
well deserve attention. At first sight, nothing can appear
more anomalous than the forms which occur. We have, indeed,
one broad fact, which has an encouraging aspect, the
tessular forms in which the pure metals crystallize. The
highest degree of chemical and of geometrical simplicity
coincide: irregularity disappears precisely where it is
excluded by the consideration above stated, that the
symmetry of chemical composition must determine the symmetry
of crystalline form[9\7].

[Note 9\7: Inasmuch as this law, that the simple metals
crystallize in tessular forms, is the most signal example of
that connexion between the chemical nature of a body and its
crystalline form, I in the former Edition stated it with as
much generality as I could find any ground for, and I should
have been glad if I could have added confirmation of the
law, derived from later observations. But the most recent
investigations of crystallographers appear to have afforded
exceptions rather than examples of the rule. Arsenic and
Tellurium are said to be _rhombohedral_. Antimony, stated by
Haüy to be octahedral (and therefore tessular), has been
found by more modern observers to be _rhombohedral_. Tin has
been obtained by Professor Miller in beautiful crystals
belonging to the _pyramidal_ system. Professor Nöggerath has
observed in Zinc, after cooling from fusion, hexagonal
cleavage, rendering it probable that the mineral
crystallized in _rhombohedrons_ having their axes vertical,
like ice. G. Rose conceives it highly probable that Osmium
and Iridium are _rhombohedral_. (Poggendorf. Bd. liv.)

But all the more perfect metals are tessular; namely, Gold,
Silver, Mercury, Platinum, Iron, Copper; also Bismuth [?]
Perhaps the observation in which the crystallization of Zinc
is affected by its position is, on that very account, no
sufficient evidence of its free crystallization. We can
hardly conceive a collection of perfectly simple, similar
particles to crystallize so as to have one pre-eminent axis,
without some extraneous action affecting them.]

But if we go on to any other class of crystalline forms, we
soon find ourselves lost in our attempts to {90} follow any
thread of order. We have indeed many large groups connected
by obvious analogies; as the rhombohedral carbonates of
lime, magnesia, iron, manganese;--the prismatic carbonates
and sulphates of lime, baryta, strontia, lead. But even in
these, we cannot form any plausible hypothesis of the
arrangement of the elements; and in other cases to which we
naturally turn, we can find nothing but confusion. For
instance, if we examine the oxides of metals:--those of iron
are rhombohedral and tessular; those of copper, tessular;
those of tin, of titanium, of manganese, square pyramidal;
those of antimony, prismatic; and we have other forms for
other substances.

It may be added, that if we take account of the optical
properties which, as we have already stated, have constant
relations to the crystalline forms, the confusion is still
further increased; for the optical dimensions vary in
amount, though not in symmetry, where chemistry can trace no
difference of composition.

9. We will not quit the subject, however, without noticing
the much more promising aspect which it has assumed by the
detection of such groups as are referred to in the last
article; or in other words, by Mitscherlich's discovery of
_Isomorphism_. According to that discovery, there are
various elements which may take the place of each other in
crystalline bodies, either without any alteration of the
crystalline form, or at most with only a slight alteration
of its dimensions. Such a group of elements we have in the
earths lime and magnesia, the protoxides of iron and
manganese: for the carbonates of all these bases occur
crystallized in forms of the rhombohedral system, the
characteristic angle being nearly the same in all. Now lime
and magnesia, by the discoveries of modern chemistry, are
really oxides of metals; and therefore all these carbonates
have a similar chemical constitution, while they have also a
similar crystalline form. Whether or no we can devise any
arrangement of molecules by which this connexion of the
chemical and the geometrical property can be represented, we
cannot help {91} considering the connexion as an extremely
important fact in the constitution of bodies; and such facts
are more likely than any other to give us some intelligible
view of the relations of the ultimate parts of bodies. The
same may be said of all the other isomorphous or
plesiomorphous groups[10\7]. For instance, we have a number
of minerals which belong to the same system of
crystallization, but in which the chemical composition
appears at first sight to be very various: namely, spinelle,
pleonaste, gahnite, franklinite, chromic iron oxide,
magnetic iron oxide: but Abich has shown that all these may
be reduced to a common chemical formula;--they are bioxides
of one set of bases, combined with trioxides of another set.
Perhaps some mathematician may be able to devise some
geometrical arrangement of such a group of elements which
may possess the properties of the tessular system.
Hypothetical arrangements of atoms, thus expressing both the
chemical and the crystalline symmetry which we know to
belong to the substance, would be valuable steps in
analytical science; and when they had been duly verified,
the hypotheses might easily be divested of their atomic
character.

[Note 10\7: See _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xv. c. vi.]

Thus, as we have already said, mineralogy, understood in its
wider sense, as the counterpart of chemistry, has for one of
its main objects to discover those Relations of the Elements
of bodies which have reference to Space. In this research,
the foundation of all sound speculation is the kind and
degree of Symmetry of form which we find in definite
chemical compounds: and the problem at present before the
inquirer is, to devise such arrangements of molecules as
shall answer the conditions alike of Chemistry and of
Crystallography.

We now proceed to the Classificatory Sciences, of which
Mineralogy is one, though hitherto by far the least
successful.



{{93}}
