CHAPTER XIV.

OF THE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS TO THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.


1. ALL objects in the world which can be made the subjects
of our contemplation are subordinate to the conditions of
Space, Time, and Number; and on this account, the doctrines
of pure mathematics have most numerous and extensive
applications in every department of our investigations of
nature. And there is a peculiarity in these Ideas, which has
caused the mathematical sciences to be, in all cases, the
first successful efforts of the awakening speculative powers
of nations at the commencement of their intellectual
progress. Conceptions derived from these Ideas are, from the
very first, perfectly precise and clear, so as to be fit
elements of scientific truths. This is not the case with the
other conceptions which form the subjects of scientific
inquiries. The conception of _statical force_, for instance,
was never presented in a distinct form till the works of
Archimedes appeared: the conception of _accelerating force_
was confused, in the mind of Kepler and his contemporaries,
and only became clear enough for purposes of sound
scientific reasoning in the succeeding century: the just
conception of chemical _composition_ of elements gradually,
in modern times, emerged from the erroneous and vague
notions of the ancients. If we take works published on such
subjects before the epoch when the foundations of the true
science were laid, we find the knowledge not only small, but
worthless. The writers did not see any evidence in what we
now consider as the axioms of the science; nor any
inconsistency where we now see self-contradiction. But this
was never the case with speculations concerning {160} space
and number. From their first rise, these were true as far as
they went. The Geometry and Arithmetic of the Greeks and
Indians, even in their first and most scanty form, contained
none but true propositions. Men's intuitions upon these
subjects never allowed them to slide into error and
confusion; and the truths to which they were led by the
first efforts of their faculties, so employed, form part of
the present stock of our mathematical knowledge.

2. But we are here not so much concerned with mathematics in
their pure form, as with their application to the phenomena
and laws of nature. And here also the very earliest history
of civilization presents to us some of the most remarkable
examples of man's success in his attempts to attain to
science. Space and time, position and motion, govern all
visible objects; but by far the most conspicuous examples of
the relations which arise out of such elements, are
displayed by the ever-moving luminaries of the sky, which
measure days, and months, and years, by their motions, and
man's place on the earth by their position. Hence the
sciences of space and number were from the first cultivated
with peculiar reference to Astronomy. I have elsewhere[18\2]
quoted Plato's remark,--that it is absurd to call the
science of the relations of space _geometry_, the measure of
the earth, since its most important office is to be found in
its application to the heavens. And on other occasions also
it appears how strongly he, who may be considered as the
representative of the scientific and speculative tendencies
of his time and country, had been impressed with the
conviction, that the formation of a science of the celestial
motions must depend entirely upon the progress of
mathematics. In the Epilogue to the Dialogue on the
Laws[19\2], he declares mathematical knowledge to be the
first and main requisite for the astronomer, and describes
the portions of it which he holds necessary for astronomical
speculators to cultivate. These seem to be, Plane Geometry,
Theoretical Arithmetic, the Application of Arithmetic {161}
to planes and to solids, and finally the doctrine of
Harmonics. Indeed the bias of Plato appears to be rather to
consider mathematics as the essence of the science of
astronomy, than as its instrument; and he seems disposed, in
this as in other things, to disparage observation, and to
aspire after a science founded upon demonstration alone. 'An
astronomer,' he says in the same place, 'must not be like
Hesiod and persons of that kind, whose astronomy consists in
noting the settings and risings of the stars; but he must be
one who understands the revolutions of the celestial
spheres, each performing its proper cycle.'

[Note 18\2: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iii. c. ii.]

[Note 19\2: _Epinomis_, p. 990.]

A large portion of the mathematics of the Greeks, so long as
their scientific activity continued, was directed towards
Astronomy. Besides many curious propositions of plane and
solid Geometry, to which their astronomers were led, their
Arithmetic, though very inconvenient in its fundamental
assumptions (as being sexagesimal not decimal), was
cultivated to a great extent; and the science of
Trigonometry, in which problems concerning the relations of
space were resolved by means of tables of numerical results
previously obtained, was created. Menelaus of Alexandria
wrote six Books on Chords, probably containing methods of
calculating Tables of these quantities; such Tables were
familiarly used by the later Greek astronomers. The same
author also wrote three Books on Spherical Trigonometry,
which are still extant.

3. The Greeks, however, in the first vigour of their pursuit
of mathematical truth, at the time of Plato and soon after,
had by no means confined themselves to those propositions
which had a visible bearing on the phenomena of nature; but
had followed out many beautiful trains of research,
concerning various kinds of figures, for the sake of their
beauty alone; as for instance in their doctrine of Conic
Sections, of which curves they had discovered all the
principal properties. But it is curious to remark, that
these investigations, thus pursued at first as mere matters
of curiosity and intellectual gratification, were destined,
two thousand years later, to play a very important part in
{162} establishing that system of the celestial motions
which succeeded the Platonic scheme of cycles and epicycles.
If the properties of the conic sections had not been
demonstrated by the Greeks, and thus rendered familiar to
the mathematicians of succeeding ages, Kepler would probably
not have been able to discover those laws respecting the
orbits and motions of the planets which were the occasion of
the greatest revolution that ever happened in the history of
science.

4. The Arabians, who, as I have elsewhere said, added little
of their own to the stores of science which they received
from the Greeks, did however make some very important
contributions in those portions of pure mathematics which
are subservient to astronomy. Their adoption of the Indian
mode of computation by means of the Ten Digits, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, and by the method of Local Values, instead
of the cumbrous sexagesimal arithmetic of the Greeks, was an
improvement by which the convenience and facility of
numerical calculations were immeasurably augmented. The
Arabians also rendered several of the processes of
trigonometry much more commodious, by using the Sine of an
arc instead of the Chord; an improvement which Albategnius
appears to claim for himself[20\2]; and by employing also
the Tangents of arcs, or, as they called them[21\2],
_upright shadows_.

[Note 20\2: Delambre, _Ast., M. A._, p. 12.]

[Note 21\2: _Ibid._ p. 17.]

5. The constant application of mathematical knowledge to the
researches of Astronomy, and the mutual influence of each
science on the progress of the other, has been still more
conspicuous in modern times. Newton's Method of Prime and
Ultimate Ratios, which we have already noticed as the first
correct exposition of the doctrine of a Limit, is stated in
a series of Lemmas, or preparatory theorems, prefixed to his
_Treatise on the System of the World_. Both the properties
of curve lines and the doctrines concerning force and
motion, which he had to establish, required that the common
mathematical processes should be methodized and extended. If
Newton had not been a most {163} expert and inventive
mathematician, as well as a profound and philosophical
thinker, he could never have made any one of those vast
strides in discovery of which the rapid succession in his
work strikes us with wonder[22\2]. And if we see that the
great task begun by him, goes on more slowly in the hands of
his immediate successors, and lingers a little before its
full completion, we perceive that this arises, in a great
measure, from the defect of the mathematical methods then
used. Newton's synthetical modes of investigation, as we
have elsewhere observed, were an instrument[23\2], powerful
indeed in his mighty hand, but too ponderous for other
persons to employ with effect. The countrymen of Newton
clung to it the longest, out of veneration for their master;
and English cultivators of physical astronomy were, on that
very account, left behind the progress of mathematical
science in France and Germany, by a wide interval, which
they have only recently recovered. On the Continent, the
advantages offered by a familiar use of symbols, and by
attention to their symmetry and other relations, were
accepted without reserve. In this manner the Differential
Calculus of Leibnitz, which was in its origin and
signification identical with the Method of Fluxions of
Newton, soon surpassed its rival in the extent and
generality of its application to problems. This Calculus was
applied to the science of mechanics, to which it, along with
the symmetrical use of co-ordinates, gave a new form; for it
was soon seen that the most difficult problems might in
general be reduced to finding integrals, which is the
reciprocal process of that by which differentials are found;
so that all difficulties of physical astronomy were reduced
to difficulties of symbolical calculation, these, indeed,
being often sufficiently stubborn. Clairaut, Euler, and
D'Alembert employed the increased resources of mathematical
science upon the Theory of the Moon, and other questions
relative to the system of the world; and thus began to
pursue such inquiries in the course in which mathematicians
{164} are still labouring up to the present day. This course
was not without its checks and perplexities. We have
elsewhere quoted[24\2] Clairaut's expression when he had
obtained the very complex differential equations which
contain the solution of the problem of the moon's motion:
'Now integrate them who can!' But in no very long time they
were integrated, at least approximately; and the methods of
approximation have since then been improved; so that now,
with a due expenditure of labour, they may be carried to any
extent which is thought desirable. If the methods of
astronomical observation should hereafter reach a higher
degree of exactness than they now profess, so that
irregularities in the motions of the sun, moon, and planets,
shall be detected which at present escape us, the
mathematical part of the theory of universal gravitation is
in such a condition that it can soon be brought into
comparison with the newly-observed facts. Indeed at present
the mathematical theory is in advance of such observations.
It can venture to suggest what may afterwards be detected,
as well as to explain what has already been observed. This
has happened recently; for Professor Airy has calculated the
law and amount of an inequality depending upon the mutual
attraction of the Earth and Venus; of which inequality (so
small is it,) it remains to be determined whether its effect
can be traced in the series of astronomical observations.

[Note 22\2: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vii. c. ii.]

[Note 23\2: _Ibid._ p. 175.]

[Note 24\2: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. vi. sect. 7.]

6. As the influence of mathematics upon the progress of
astronomy is thus seen in the cases in which theory and
observation confirm each other, so this influence appears in
another way, in the very few cases in which the facts have
not been fully reduced to an agreement with theory. The most
conspicuous case of this kind is the state of our knowledge
of the Tides. This is a portion of astronomy: for the
Newtonian theory asserts these curious phenomena to be the
result of the attraction of the sun and moon. Nor can there
be any doubt that this is true, as a general statement; yet
the subject is up to the present time a blot {165} on the
perfection of the theory of universal gravitation; for we
are very far from being able in this, as in the other parts
of astronomy, to show that theory will exactly account for
the time, and magnitude, and all other circumstances of the
phenomenon at every place on the earth's surface. And what
is the portion of our mathematics which is connected with
this solitary signal defect in astronomy? It is the
mathematics of the Motion of Fluids; a portion in which
extremely little progress has been made, and in which all
the more general problems of the subject have hitherto
remained entirely insoluble. The attempts of the greatest
mathematicians, Newton, Maclaurin, Bernoulli, Clairaut,
Laplace, to master such questions, all involve some
gratuitous assumption, which is introduced because the
problem cannot otherwise be mathematically dealt with: these
assumptions confessedly render the result defective, and how
defective, it is hard to say. And it was probably precisely
the absence of a theory which could be reasonably expected
to agree with the observations, which made Observations of
this very curious phenomenon, the Tides, to be so much
neglected as till very recently they were. Of late years
such observations have been pursued, and their results have
been resolved into empirical laws, so that the rules of the
phenomena have been ascertained, although the dependence of
these rules upon the lunar and solar forces has not been
shown. Here then we have a portion of our knowledge relating
to facts undoubtedly dependent upon universal gravitation,
in which Observation has outstripped Theory in her progress,
and is compelled to wait till her usual companion overtakes
her. This is a position of which Mathematical Theory has
usually been very impatient, and we may expect that she will
be no less so in the present instance.

7. It would be easy to show from the history of other
sciences, for example, Mechanics and Optics, how essential
the cultivation of pure mathematics has been to their
progress. The parabola was already familiar among
mathematicians when Galileo discovered that it was the
theoretical path of a Projectile; and the {166} extension
and generalization of the Laws of Motion could never have
been effected, unless the Differential and Integral Calculus
had been at hand, ready to trace the results of every
hypothesis which could be made. D'Alembert's mode of
expressing the Third Law of Motion in its most general
form[25\2], if it did not prove the law, at least reduced
the application of it to analytical processes which could be
performed in most of those cases in which they were needed.
In many instances the demands of mechanical science
suggested the extension of the methods of pure analysis. The
problem of Vibrating Strings gave rise to the Calculus of
Partial Differences, which was still further stimulated by
its application to the motions of fluids and other
mechanical problems. And we have in the writings of Lagrange
and Laplace other instances equally remarkable of new
analytical methods, to which mechanical problems, and
especially cosmical problems, have given occasion.

[Note 25\2: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. vi. sect. 7.]

8. The progress of Optics as a science has, in like manner,
been throughout dependent upon the progress of pure
mathematics. The first rise of Geometry was followed by some
advances, slight ones no doubt, in the doctrine of
Reflection and in Perspective. The law of Refraction was
traced to its consequences by means of Trigonometry, which
indeed was requisite to express the law in a simple form.
The steps made in Optical science by Descartes, Newton,
Euler, and Huyghens, required the geometrical skill which
those philosophers possessed. And if Young and Fresnel had
not been, each in his peculiar way, persons of eminent
mathematical endowments, they would not have been able to
bring the Theory of Undulations and Interferences into a
condition in which it could be tested by experiments. We may
see how unexpectedly recondite parts of pure mathematics may
bear upon physical science, by calling to mind a
circumstance already noticed in the History of
Science[26\2];--that Fresnel obtained one of the {167} most
curious confirmations of the theory (the laws of Circular
Polarization by reflection) through an interpretation of an
algebraical expression, which, according to the original
conventional meaning of the symbols, involved an impossible
quantity. We have already remarked, that in virtue of the
principle of the generality of symbolical language, such an
interpretation may often point out some real and important
analogy.

[Note 26\2: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. ix. c. xiii. sect. 2.]

9. From this rapid sketch it may be seen how important an
office in promoting the progress of the physical sciences
belongs to mathematics. Indeed in the progress of many
sciences, every step has been so intimately connected with
some advance in mathematics, that we can hardly be surprised
if some persons have considered mathematical reasoning to be
the most essential part of such sciences; and have
overlooked the other elements which enter into their
formation. How erroneous this view is we shall best see by
turning our attention to the other Ideas besides those of
space, number, and motion, which enter into some of the most
conspicuous and admired portions of what is termed exact
science; and by showing that the clear and distinct
development of such Ideas is quite as necessary to the
progress of exact and real knowledge as an acquaintance with
arithmetic and geometry.




{{169}}
