CHAPTER II.

OF THE THREE MEMBERS OF A PALÆTIOLOGICAL SCIENCE.


1. _Divisions of such Sciences._--IN each of the Sciences of
this class we consider some particular order of phenomena
now existing:--from our knowledge of the causes of change
among such phenomena, we endeavour to infer the causes which
have made this order of things what it is:--we ascend in
this manner to some previous stage of such phenomena;--and
from that, by a similar course of inference, to a still
earlier stage, and to its causes. Hence it will be seen that
each such science will consist of two parts,--the knowledge
of the Phenomena, and the knowledge of their Causes. And
such a division is, in fact, generally recognized in such
sciences: thus we have History, and the Philosophy of
History; we have Comparison of Languages, and the Theories
of the Origin and Progress of Language; we have Descriptive
Geology, and Theoretical or Physical Geology. In all these
cases, the relation between the two parts in these several
provinces of knowledge is nearly the same; and it may, on
some occasions at least, be useful to express the
distinction in a uniform or general manner. The
investigation of Causes has been termed _Ætiology_ by
philosophical writers, and this term we may use, in
contradistinction to the mere _Phenomenology_ of each such
department of knowledge. And thus we should have _Phenomenal
Geology_ and _Ætiological Geology_, for the two divisions of
the science which we have above termed _Descriptive_ and
_Theoretical Geology_.

2. _The Study of Causes._--But our knowledge respecting the
causes which actually _have_ produced any {264} order of
phenomena must be arrived at by ascertaining what the causes
of change in such matters _can_ do. In order to learn, for
example, what share earthquakes, and volcanoes, and the
beating of the ocean against its shores, ought to have in
our Theory of Geology, we must make out what effects these
agents of change are able to produce. And this must be done,
not hastily, or unsystematically, but in a careful and
connected manner; in short, this study of the causes of
change in each order of phenomena must become a distinct
body of Science, which must include a large amount of
knowledge, both comprehensive and precise, before it can be
applied to the construction of a theory. We must have an
Ætiology corresponding to each order of phenomena.

3. _Ætiology._--In the History of Geology, I have spoken of
the necessity for such an Ætiology with regard to geological
phenomena: this necessity I have compared with that which,
at the time of Kepler, required the formation of a separate
science of Dynamics (the doctrine of the Causes of Motion),
before Physical Astronomy could grow out of Phenomenal
Astronomy. In pursuance of this analogy, I have there given
the name of _Geological Dynamics_ to the science which
treats of the causes of geological change in general. But,
as I have there intimated, in a large portion of the subject
the changes are so utterly different in their nature from
any modification of motion, that the term _Dynamics_, so
applied, sounds harsh and strange. For in this science we
have to treat, not only of the subterraneous forces by which
parts of the earth's crust are shaken, elevated, or
ruptured, but also of the causes which may change the
climate of a portion of the earth's surface, making a
country hotter or colder than in former ages; again, we have
to treat of the causes which modify the forms and habits of
animals and vegetables, and of the extent to which the
effects of such causes can proceed; whether, for instance,
they can extinguish old species and produce new. These and
other similar investigations would not be naturally included
in the notion of _Dynamics_; and therefore it {265} might
perhaps be better to use the term _Ætiology_ when we wish to
group together all those researches which have it for their
object to determine the laws of such changes. In the same
manner the Comparison and History of Languages, if it is to
lead to any stable and exact knowledge, must have appended
to it an Ætiology, which aims at determining the nature and
the amount of the causes which really do produce changes in
language; as colonization, conquest, the mixture of races,
civilization, literature, and the like. And the same rule
applies to all sciences of this class. We shall now make a
few remarks on the characteristics of such branches of
science as those to which we are led by the above
considerations.

4. _Phenomenology requires Classification. Phenomenal
Geology._--The Phenomenal portions of each science imply
Classification, for no description of a large and varied
mass of phenomena can be useful or intelligible without
classification. A representation of phenomena, in order to
answer the purposes of science, must be systematic.
Accordingly, in giving the History of Descriptive or
Phenomenal Geology, I have called it _Systematic Geology_,
just as Classificatory Botany is termed _Systematic Botany_.
Moreover, as we have already seen, Classification can never
be an arbitrary process, but always implies some natural
connexion among the objects of the same Class; for if this
connexion did not exist, the Classes could not be made the
subjects of any true assertion. Yet though the classes of
phenomena which our system acknowledges must be such as
already exist in nature, the discovery of these classes is,
for the most part, very far from obvious or easy. To detect
the true principles of Natural Classes, and to select marks
by which these may be recognized, are steps which require
genius and good fortune, and which fall to the lot only of
the most eminent persons in each science. In the History, I
have pointed out Werner, William Smith, and Cuvier, as the
three great authors of Systematic Geology of Europe. The
mode of classifying the materials of the earth's surface
which was found, by these philosophers, fitted to {266}
enunciate such general facts as came under their notice, was
to consider the rocks and other materials as divided into
successive layers or strata, superimposed one on another,
and variously inclined and broken. The German geologist
distinguished his strata for the most part by their
mineralogical character; the other two, by the remains of
animals and plants which the rocks contained. After a
beginning had thus been made in giving a genuine scientific
form to phenomenal geology, other steps followed in rapid
succession, as has already been related in the
History[5\10]. The Classification of the Strata was fixed by
a suitable Nomenclature. Attempts were made to apply to
other countries the order of strata which had been found to
prevail in that first studied: and in this manner it was
ascertained what rocks in distant regions are the synonyms,
or _Equivalents_[6\10],--of each other. The knowledge thus
collected and systematized was exhibited in the form of
Geological Maps.

[Note 5\10: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xviii. c. iii.]

[Note 6\10: _Ib._ sect. 4.]

Moreover, among the phenomena of geology we have Laws of
Nature as well as Classes. The general form of
mountain-chains; the relations of the direction and
inclination of different chains to each other; the general
features of mineral veins, faults, and fissures; the
prevalent characters of slaty cleavage;--were the subjects
of laws established, or supposed to be established, by
extensive observation of facts. In like manner the organic
fossils discovered in the strata were found to follow
certain laws with reference to the climate which they
appeared to have lived in; and the evidence which they gave
of a regular zoological development. And thus, by the
assiduous labours of many accomplished and active
philosophers, Descriptive or Phenomenal Geology was carried
towards a state of completeness.

5. _Phenomenal Uranography._--In like manner in other
palætiological researches, as soon as they approach to an
exact and scientific form, we find the necessity of
constructing in the first place a science of {267}
classification and exact description, by means of which the
phenomena may be correctly represented and compared; and of
obtaining by this step a solid basis for an inquiry into the
causes which have produced them. Thus the Palætiology of the
Solar System has, in recent times, drawn the attention of
speculators; and a hypothesis has been started, that our sun
and his attendant planets have been produced by the
condensation of a mass of diffused matter, such as that
which constitutes the nebulous patches which we observe in
the starry heavens. But the sagest and most enlightened
astronomers have not failed to acknowledge, that to verify
or to disprove this conjecture, must be the work of many
ages of observation and thought. They have perceived also
that the first step of the labour requisite for the
advancement of this portion of science must be to obtain and
to record the most exact knowledge at present within our
reach, respecting the phenomena of these nebulæ, with which
we thus compare our own system; and, as a necessary element
of such knowledge, they have seen the importance of a
classification of these objects, and of others, such as
Double Stars, of the same kind. Sir William Herschel, who
first perceived the bearing of the phenomena of nebulæ upon
the history of the solar system, made the observation of
such objects his business, with truly admirable zeal and
skill; and in the account of the results of his labours,
gave a classification of Nebulæ; separating them into,
first, _Clusters of Stars_; second, _Resolvable Nebulæ_;
third, _Proper Nebulæ_; fourth, _Planetary Nebulæ_; fifth,
_Stellar Nebulæ_; sixth, _Nebulous Stars_[7\10]. And since,
in order to obtain from these remote appearances, any
probable knowledge respecting our own system, we must
discover whether they undergo any changes in the course of
ages, he devoted himself to the task of forming a record of
their number and appearance in his own time, that thus the
astronomers of succeeding generations might have a {268}
definite and exact standard with which to compare their
observations. Still, this task would have been executed only
for that part of the heavens which is visible in this
country, if this Hipparchus of the Nebulæ and Double Stars
had not left behind him a son who inherited all his father's
zeal and more than his father's knowledge. Sir John Herschel
in 1833 went to the Cape of Good Hope to complete what Sir
William Herschel left wanting; and in the course of five
years observed with care all the nebulæ and double stars of
the Southern hemisphere. This great _Herschelian Survey of
the Heavens_, the completion of which is the noblest
monument ever erected by a son to a father, must necessarily
be, to all ages, the basis of all speculations concerning
the history and origin of the solar system; and has
completed, so far as at present it can be completed, the
phenomenal portion of Astronomical Palætiology.

[Note 7\10: _Phil. Trans._ 1786 and 1789, and Sir J.
Herschel's _Astronomy_, Art. 616.]

6. _Phenomenal Geography of Plants and Animals._--Again,
there is another Palætiological Science, closely connected
with the speculations forced upon the geologist by the
organic fossils which he discovers imbedded in the strata of
the earth;--namely, the Science which has for its object the
Causes of the Diffusion and Distribution of the various
kinds of Plants and Animals. And the science also has for
its first portion and indispensable foundation a description
and classification of the existing phenomena. Such portions
of science have recently been cultivated with great zeal and
success, under the titles of the _Geography of Plants_, and
the _Geography of Animals_. And the results of the inquiries
thus undertaken have assumed a definite and scientific form
by leading to a division of the earth's surface into a
certain number of botanical and zoological _Provinces_, each
province occupied by its own peculiar vegetable and animal
population. We find, too, in the course of these
investigations, various general laws of the phenomena
offered to our notice; such, for instance, as this:--that
the difference of the animals originally occupying each
province, which is clear and entire for the higher orders of
{269} animals and plants, becomes more doubtful and
indistinct when we descend to the lower kinds of
organizations; as Infusoria and Zoophytes[8\10] in the
animal kingdom, Grasses and Mosses among vegetables. Again,
other laws discovered by those who have studied the
geography of plants are these:--that countries separated
from each other by wide tracts of sea, as the opposite
shores of the Mediterranean, the islands of the Indian and
Pacific Oceans, have usually much that is common in their
vegetation:--and again, that in parallel climates, analogous
tribes replace each other. It would be easy to adduce other
laws, but those already stated may serve to show the great
extent of the portions of knowledge which have just been
mentioned, even considered as merely Sciences of Phenomena.

[Note 8\10: Prichard, _Researches into the Physical History
of Mankind_, i. 55, 28.]

7. _Phenomenal Glossology._--It is not my purpose in the
present work to borrow my leading illustrations from any
portions of knowledge but those which are concerned with the
study of material nature; and I shall, therefore, not dwell
upon a branch of research, singularly interesting, and
closely connected with the one just mentioned, but dealing
with relations of thought rather than of things;--I mean the
Palætiology of Language;--the theory, so far as the facts
enable us to form a theory, of the causes which have led to
the resemblances and differences of human speech in various
regions and various ages. This, indeed, would be only a
portion of the study of the history and origin of the
diffusion of animals, if we were to include man among the
animals whose dispersion we thus investigate; for language
is one of the most clear and imperishable records of the
early events in the career of the human race. But the
peculiar nature of the faculty of speech, and the ideas
which the use of it involves, make it proper to treat
_Glossology_ as a distinct science. And of this science, the
first part must necessarily be, as in the other sciences of
this order, a {270} classification and comparison of
languages governed in many respects by the same rules, and
presenting the same **difficulties, as other sciences of
classification. Such, accordingly, has been the procedure of
the most philosophical glossologists. They have been led to
throw the languages of the earth into certain large classes
or _Families_, according to various kinds of resemblance; as
the _Semitic_ Family, to which belong Hebrew, Arabic,
Chaldean, Syrian, Phoenician, Ethiopian, and the like; the
_Indo-European_, which includes Sanskrit, Persian, Greek,
Latin, and German; the _Monosyllabic_ languages, Chinese,
Tibetan, Birman, Siamese; the _Polysynthetic_ languages, a
class including most of the North-American Indian dialects;
and others. And this work of classification has been the
result of the labour and study of many very profound
linguists, and has advanced gradually from step to step.
Thus the Indo-European Family was first formed on an
observation of the coincidences between Sanskrit, Greek, and
Latin; but it was soon found to include the Teutonic
languages, and more recently Dr. Prichard[9\10] has shown
beyond doubt that the Celtic must be included in the same
Family. Other general resemblances and differences of
languages have been marked by appropriate terms: thus August
von Schlegel has denominated them _synthetical_ and
_analytical_, according as they form their conjugations and
declensions by auxiliary verbs and prepositions, or by
changes in the word itself: and the _polysynthetic_
languages are so named by M. Duponceau, in consequence of
their still more complex mode of inflexion. Nor are there
wanting, in this science also, general laws of phenomena;
such, for instance, is the curious rule of the interchange
of consonants in the cognate words of Greek, Gothic, and
German, which has been discovered by James Grimm. All these
remarkable portions of knowledge, and the great works which
have appeared on Glossology, such, for example, as the
_Mithridates_ of Adelung and Vater, contain, for their
largest, and {271} hitherto probably their most valuable
part, the phenomenal portion of the science, the comparison
of languages as they now are. And beyond all doubt, until we
have brought this Comparative Philology to a considerable
degree of completeness, all our speculations respecting the
causes which have operated to produce the languages of the
earth must be idle and unsubstantial dreams.

[Note 9\10: Dr Prichard, _On the Eastern Origin of the
Celtic Nations_. 1831.]

Thus in all Palætiological Sciences, in all attempts to
trace back the history and discover the origin of the
present state of things, the portion of the science which
must first be formed is that which classifies the phenomena,
and discovers general laws prevailing among them. When this
work is performed, and not till then, we may begin to
speculate successfully concerning causes, and to make some
progress in our attempts to go back to an origin. We must
have a _Phenomenal_ science preparatory to each
_Ætiological_ one.

8. _The Study of Phenomena leads to Theory._--As we have
just said, we cannot, in any subject, speculate successfully
concerning the causes of the present state of things, till
we have obtained a tolerably complete and systematic view of
the phenomena. Yet in reality men have not in any instance
waited for this completeness and system in their knowledge
of facts before they have begun to form theories. Nor was it
natural, considering the speculative propensities of the
human mind, and how incessantly it is endeavouring to apply
the Idea of Cause, that it should thus restrain itself. I
have already noticed this in the History of Geology. 'While
we have been giving an account,' it is there said, 'of the
objects with which Descriptive Geology is occupied, it must
have been felt how difficult it is, in contemplating such
facts, to confine ourselves to description and
classification. Conjectures and reasonings respecting the
causes of the phenomena force themselves upon us at every
step; and even influence our classification and
nomenclature. Our Descriptive Geology impels us to construct
a Physical Geology.' And the same is the case with regard to
the other subjects which I have mentioned. The mere {272}
consideration of the different degrees of condensation of
different Nebulæ led Herschel and Laplace to contemplate the
hypothesis that our solar system is a condensed Nebula.
Immediately upon the division of the earth's surface into
botanical and zoological provinces, and even at an earlier
period, the opposite hypotheses of the Origin of all the
animals of each kind from a single pair, and of their
original diffusion all over the earth, were under
discussion. And the consideration of the families of
languages irresistibly led to speculations concerning the
Families of the earliest human inhabitants of the earth. In
all cases the contemplation of a very few phenomena, the
discovery of a very few steps in the history, made men wish
for and attempt to form a theory of the history from the
very beginning of things.

9. _No sound Theory without Ætiology._--But though man is
thus impelled by the natural propensities of his intellect
to trace each order of things to its causes, he does not at
first discern the only sure way of obtaining such knowledge:
he does not suspect how much labour and how much method are
requisite for success in this undertaking: he is not aware
that for each order of phenomena he must construct, by the
accumulated results of multiplied observation and distinct
thought, a separate Æiology. Thus, as I have elsewhere
remarked[10\10], when men had for the first time become
acquainted with some of the leading phenomena of Geology,
and had proceeded to speculate concerning the past changes
and revolutions by which such results had been produced,
they forthwith supposed themselves able to judge what would
be the effects of any of the obvious agents of change, as
Water or Volcanic Fire. It did not at first occur to them to
suspect that their common and extemporaneous judgment on
such points was by no means sufficient for sound knowledge.
They did not foresee that, before they could determine what
share these or any other causes had had in producing the
present condition of the earth, they must create {273} a
special science whose object should be to estimate the
general laws and effects of such assumed causes;--that
before they could obtain any sound Geological Theory, they
must carefully cultivate Geological Ætiology.

[Note 10\10: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xviii. c. v. sect. 1.]

The same disposition to proceed immediately from the facts
to the theory, without constructing, as an intermediate
step, a Science of Causes, might be pointed out in the other
sciences of this order. But in all of them this errour has
been corrected by the failures to which it led. It soon
appeared, for instance, that a more careful inquiry into the
effects which climate, food, habit and circumstances can
produce in animals, was requisite in order to determine how
the diversities of animals in different countries have
originated. The Ætiology of Animal Life (if we may be
allowed to give this name to that study of such causes of
change which is at present so zealously cultivated, and
which yet has no distinctive designation, except so far as
it coincides with the _Organic Geological Dynamics_ of our
History) is now perceived to be a necessary portion of all
attempts to construct a history of the earth and its
inhabitants.

10. _Cause, in Palætiology._--We are thus led to contemplate
a class of Sciences which are commenced with the study of
Causes. We have already considered sciences which depended
mainly upon the Idea of Cause, namely, the Mechanical
Sciences. But it is obvious that the Idea of Cause in the
researches now under our consideration must be employed in a
very different way from that in which we applied it
formerly. Force is the _Cause_ of motion, because force at
all times and under all circumstances, if not counteracted,
produces motion; but the Cause of the present condition and
elevation of the Alps, whatever it was, was manifested in a
series of events of which each happened but once, and
occupied its proper place in the series of time. The former
is _mechanical_, the latter _historical_, _cause_. In our
present investigations, we consider the events which we
contemplate, of whatever order they be, as forming a chain
which is extended {274} from the beginning of things down to
the present time; and the causes of which we now speak are
those which connect the successive links of this chain.
Every occurrence which has taken place in the history of the
solar system, or the earth, or its vegetable and animal
creation, or man, has been at the same time effect and
cause;--the effect of what preceded, the cause of what
succeeded. By being effect and cause, it has occupied some
certain portion of time; and the times which have thus been
occupied by effects and causes, summed up and taken
altogether, make up the total of Past Time. The Past has
been a series of events connected by this historical
causation, and the Present is the last term of this series.
The problem in the Palætiological Sciences, with which we
are here concerned, is, to determine the manner in which
each term is derived from the preceding, and thus, if
possible, to calculate backwards to the origin of the series.

11. _Various kinds of Cause._--Those modes by which one term
in the natural series of events is derived from
another,--the forms of historical causation,--the kinds of
connexion between the links of the infinite chain of
time,--are very various; nor need we attempt to enumerate
them. But these kinds of causation being distinguished from
each other, and separately studied, each becomes the subject
of a separate Ætiology. Thus the causes of change in the
earth's surface, residing in the elements, fire and water,
form the main subject of Geological Ætiology. The Ætiology
of the vegetable and animal kingdoms investigates the causes
by which the forms and distribution of species of plants and
animals are affected. The study of causes in Glossology
leads to an Ætiology of Language, which shall distinguish,
analyse, and estimate the causes by which certain changes
are produced in the languages of nations; in like manner we
may expect to have an Ætiology of Art, which shall
scrutinise the influences by which the various forms of art
have each given birth to its successor: by which, for
example, there have been brought into being those various
forms of architecture which we term Egyptian, {275} Doric,
Ionic, Roman, Byzantine, Romanesque, Gothic, Italian,
Elizabethan. It is easily seen by this slight survey how
manifold and diverse are the kinds of cause which the
Palætiological Sciences bring under our consideration. But
in each of those sciences we shall obtain solid and complete
systems of knowledge, only so far as we study, with steady
thought and careful observation, that peculiar kind of cause
which is appropriate to the phenomena under our
consideration.

12. _Hypothetical Order of Palætiological Causes._--The
various kinds of historical cause are not only connected
with each other by their common bearing upon the historical
sciences, but they form a kind of progression which we may
represent to ourselves as having acted in succession in the
hypothetical history of the earth and its inhabitants. Thus
assuming, merely as a momentary hypothesis, the origin of
the Solar System by the condensation of a Nebula, we have to
contemplate, first, the causes by which the luminous
incandescent diffused mass of which a nebula is supposed to
be constituted, is gradually condensed, cooled, collected
into definite masses, solidified, and each portion made to
revolve about its axis, and the whole to travel about
another body. We have no difficulty in ascribing the
globular form of each mass to the mutual attraction of its
particles: but when this form was once assumed, and covered
with a solid crust, are there, we may ask, in the
constitution of such a body, any causes at work by which the
crust might be again broken up and portions of it displaced,
and covered with other matter? Again, if we can thus explain
the origin of the Earth, can we with like success account
for the presence of the Atmosphere and the Waters of earth
and ocean? Supposing this done, we have then to consider by
what causes such a body could become stocked with vegetable
and animal Life; for there have not been wanting persons,
extravagant speculators, no doubt, who have conceived that
even this event in the history of the world might be the
work of natural causes. Supposing an origin given to life
{276} upon our earth, we have then, brought before us by
geological observations, a series of different forms of
vegetable and animal existence; occurring in different
strata, and, as the phenomena appear irresistibly to prove,
existing at successive periods: and we are compelled to
inquire what can have been the causes by which the forms of
each period have passed into those of the next. We find,
too, that strata, which must have been at first horizontal
and continuous, have undergone enormous dislocations and
ruptures, and we have to consider the possible effect of
aqueous and volcanic causes to produce such changes in the
earth's crust. We are thus led to the causes which have
produced the present state of things on the earth; and these
are causes to which we may hypothetically ascribe, not only
the form and position of the inert materials of the earth,
but also the nature and distribution of its animal and
vegetable population. Man too, no less than other animals,
is affected by the operation of such causes as we have
referred to, and must, therefore, be included in such
speculations. But man's history only begins, where that of
other animals ends, with his mere existence. They are
stationary, he is progressive. Other species of animals,
once brought into being, continue the same through all ages;
man is changing, from age to age, his language, his
thoughts, his works. Yet even these changes are bound
together by laws of causation; and these causes too may
become objects of scientific study. And such causes, though
not to be dwelt upon now, since we permit ourselves to found
our philosophy upon the material sciences only, must still,
when treated scientifically, fall within the principles of
our philosophy, and must be governed by the same general
rules to which all science is subject. And thus we are led
by a close and natural connexion, through a series of
causes, extending from those which regulate the
imperceptible changes of the remotest nebulæ in the heavens,
to those which determine the diversities of language, the
mutations of art, and even the progress of civilization,
polity, and literature. {277}

While I have been speaking of this supposed series of
events, including in its course the formation of the earth,
the introduction of animal and vegetable life, and the
revolutions by which one collection of species has succeeded
another, it must not be forgotten, that though I have thus
hypothetically spoken of these events as occurring by force
of natural causes, this has been done only that the true
efficacy of such causes might be brought under our
consideration and made the subject of scientific
examination. It may be found, that such occurrences as these
are quite inexplicable by the aid of any natural causes with
which we are acquainted; and thus, the result of our
investigations, conducted with strict regard to scientific
principles, may be, that we must either contemplate
supernatural influences as part of the past series of
events, or declare ourselves altogether unable to form this
series into a connected chain.

13. _Mode of Cultivating Ætiology:--In Geology._--In what
manner, it may be asked, is Ætiology, with regard to each
subject such as we have enumerated, to be cultivated? In
order to answer this question, we must, according to our
method of proceeding, take the most successful and complete
examples which we possess of such portions of science. But
in truth, we can as yet refer to few examples of this kind.
In Geology, it is only very recently, and principally
through the example and influence of Sir Charles Lyell, that
the Ætiology has been detached from the descriptive portion
of the science; and cultivated with direct attention: in
other sciences the separation has hardly yet been made. But
if we examine what has already been done in Geological
Ætiology, or as in the History it is termed, _Geological
Dynamics_, we shall find a number of different kinds of
investigation which, by the aid of our general principles
respecting the formation of sciences, may suffice to supply
very useful suggestions for Ætiology in general.

In Geological Ætiology, causes have been studied, in many
instances, by attending to their action in the phenomena of
the present state of things, and by inferring {278} from
this the nature and extent of the action which they may have
exercised in former times. This has been done, for example,
by Von Hoff, Sir Charles Lyell, and others, with regard to
the operations of rivers, seas, springs, glaciers, and other
aqueous causes of change, Again, the same course has been
followed by the same philosophers with respect to volcanoes,
earthquakes, and other violent agents. Sir Charles Lyell has
attempted to show, too, that there take place, in our own
time, not only violent agitations, but slow motions of parts
of the earth's crust, of the same kind and order with those
which have assisted in producing all anterior changes.

But while we thus seek instruction in the phenomena of the
present state of things, we are led to the question, What
are the limits of this 'present' period? For instance, among
the currents of lava which we trace as part of the shores of
Italy and Sicily, _which_ shall we select as belonging to
the existing order of things? In going backwards in time,
where shall we draw the line? and why at such particular
point? These questions are important, for our estimate of
the efficacy of known causes will vary with the extent of
the effects which we ascribe to them. Hence the mode in
which we group together rocks is not only a step in
geological classification, but is also important to
Ætiology. Thus, when the vast masses of trap rocks in the
Western Isles of Scotland and in other countries, which had
been maintained by the Wernerians to be of aqueous origin,
were, principally by the sagacity and industry of
Macculloch, identified as to their nature with the products
of recent volcanoes, the amount of effect which might
justifiably be ascribed to volcanic agency was materially
extended.

In other cases, instead of observing the current effects of
our geological causes, we have to estimate the results from
what we know of the causes themselves; as when, with
Herschel, we calculate the alterations in the temperature of
the earth which astronomical changes may possibly produce;
or when, with Fourier, we try to calculate the rate of
cooling of the earth's {279} surface, on the hypothesis of
an incandescent central mass. In other cases, again, we are
not able to calculate the effects of our causes rigorously,
but estimate them as well as we can; partly by physical
reasonings, and partly by comparison with such analogous
cases as we can find in the present state of things. Thus
Sir Charles Lyell infers the change of climate which would
result if land were transferred from the neighbourhood of
the poles to that of the equator, by reasonings on the power
of land and water to contain and communicate heat, supported
by a reference to the different actual climates of places,
lying under the same latitude, but under different
conditions as to the distribution of land and water.

Thus our Ætiology is constructed partly from calculation and
reasoning, partly from phenomena. But we may observe that
when we reason from phenomena to causes, we usually do so by
various steps; often ascending from phenomena to mere laws
of phenomena, before we can venture to connect the
phenomenon confidently with its cause. Thus the law of
subterranean heat, that it increases in descending below the
surface, is now well established, although the doctrine
which ascribes this effect to a central heat is not
universally assented to.

14. _In the Geography of Plants and Animals._--We may find
in other subjects also, considerable contributions towards
Ætiology, though not as yet a complete System of Science.
The Ætiology of Vegetables and Animals, indeed, has been
studied with great zeal in modern times, as an essential
preparative to geological theory; for how can we decide
whether any assumed causes have produced the succession of
species which we find in the earth's strata, except we know
what effect of this kind given causes can produce?
Accordingly, we find in Sir Charles Lyell's _Treatise on
Geology_ the most complete discussion of such questions as
belong to these subjects:--for example, the question whether
species can be transmuted into other species by the
long-continued influence of external causes, as climate,
food, domestication, combined with internal {280} causes, as
habits, appetencies, progressive tendencies. We may observe,
too, that as we have brought before us, the inquiry what
change difference of climate can produce in any species, we
have also the inverse problem, how far a different
development of the species, or a different collection of
species, proves a difference of climate. In the same way,
the geologist of the present day considers the question,
whether, in virtue of causes now in action, species are from
time to time extinguished; and in like manner, the
geologists of an earlier period discussed the question, now
long completely decided, whether fossil species in general
are really extinct species.

15. _In Languages._--Even with reference to the Ætiology of
Language, although this branch of science has hardly been
considered separately from the glossological investigations
in which it is employed or assumed to be employed, it might
perhaps be possible to point out causes or conditions of
change which, being general in their nature, must operate
upon all languages alike. Changes made for the sake of
euphony when words are modified and combined, occur in all
dialects. Who can doubt that such changes of consonants as
those by which the Greek roots become Gothic, and the
Gothic, German, have for their cause some general principle
in the pronunciation of each language? Again, we might
attempt to decide other questions of no small interest. Have
the terminations of verbs arisen from the accretion of
pronouns; or, on the other hand, does the modification of a
verb imply a simpler mental process than the insulation of a
pronoun, as Adam Smith has maintained? Again, when the
language of a nation is changed by the invasion and
permanent mixture of an enemy of different speech, is it
generally true that it is changed from a synthetic to an
analytical structure? I will mention only one more of these
wide and general glossological inquiries. Is it true, as Dr.
Prichard has suggested[11\10], that languages have become
more permanent as we come down {281} towards later times?
May we justifiably suppose, with him, that in the very
earliest times, nations, when they had separated from one
stock, might lose all traces of this common origin out of
their languages, though retaining strong evidences of it in
their mythology, social forms, and arts, as appears to be
the case with the ancient Egyptians and the Indians[12\10].

[Note 11\10: _Researches_, ii. 221.]

[Note 12\10: _Researches_, ii. 192.]

Large questions of this nature cannot be treated profitably
in any other way than by an assiduous study of the most
varied forms of living and dead languages. But on the other
hand, the study of languages should be prosecuted not only
by a direct comparison of one with another, but also with a
view to the formation of a science of causes and general
principles, embracing such discussions as I have pointed
out. It is only when such a science has been formed, that we
can hope to obtain any solid and certain results in the
Palætiology of Language;--to determine, with any degree of
substantial proof, what is the real evidence which the
wonderful faculty of speech, under its present developments
and forms, bears to the events which have taken place in its
own history, and in the history of man since his first origin.

16. _Construction of Theories._--When we have thus obtained,
with reference to any such subject as those we have here
spoken of, these two portions of science, a Systematic
Description of the Facts, and a rigorous Analysis of the
Causes,--the _Phenomenology_ and the _Ætiology_ of the
subject,--we are prepared for the third member which
completes the science, the _Theory_ of the actual facts. We
can then take a view of the events which really have
happened, discerning their connexion, interpreting their
evidence, supplying from the context the parts which are
unapparent. We can account for known facts by intelligible
causes; we can infer latent facts from manifest effects, so
as to obtain a distinct insight into the whole history of
events up to the present time, and to see the last result of
the whole in the present condition of things. {282} The term
_Theory_, when rigorously employed in such sciences as those
which we here consider, bears nearly the sense which I have
adopted: it implies a consistent and systematic view of the
actual facts, combined with a true apprehension of their
connexion and causes. Thus if we speak of 'a Theory of Mount
Etna,' or 'a Theory of the Paris Basin,' we mean a connected
and intelligible view of the events by which the rocks in
these localities have come into their present condition.
Undoubtedly the term _Theory_ has often been used in a
looser sense; and men have put forth '_Theories of the
Earth_,' which, instead of including the whole mass of
actual geological facts and their causes, only assigned, in
a vague manner, some causes by which some few phenomena
might, it was conceived, be accounted for. Perhaps the
portion of our Palætiological Sciences which we now wish to
designate, would be more generally understood if we were to
describe it as _Theoretical_ or _Philosophical History_; as
when we talk of 'the Theoretical History of Architecture,'
or 'the Philosophical History of Language.' And in the same
manner we might speak of the Theoretical History of the
Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms; meaning, a distinct account
of the events which have produced the present distribution
of species and families. But by whatever phrase we describe
this portion of science, it is plain that such a Theory,
such a Theoretical History, must result from the application
of causes well understood to facts well ascertained. And if
the term _Theory_ be here employed, we must recollect that
it is to be understood, not in its narrower sense as opposed
to facts, but in its wider signification, as including all
known facts and differing from them only in introducing
among them principles of intelligible connexion. The
Theories of which we now speak are true _Theories_,
precisely because they are identical with the total system
of the _Facts_.

17. _No sound Palætiological Theory yet extant._--It is not
to disparage unjustly the present state of science, to say
that as yet no such theory exists on any subject. 'Theories
of the Earth' have been {283} repeatedly published; but when
we consider that even the facts of geology have been
observed only on a small portion of the earth's surface, and
even within those narrow bounds very imperfectly studied, we
shall be able to judge how impossible it is that geologists
should have yet obtained a well-established Theoretical
History of the changes which have taken place in the crust
of the terrestrial globe from its first origin. Accordingly,
I have ventured in my History to designate the most
prominent of the Theories which have hitherto prevailed as
_premature_ geological theories[13\10]: and we shall soon
see that geological theory has not advanced beyond a few
conjectures, and that its cultivators are at present mainly
occupied with a controversy in which the two extreme
hypotheses which first offer themselves to men's minds are
opposed to each other. And if we have no theoretical History
of the Earth which merits any confidence, still less have we
any theoretical History of Language, or of the Arts, which
we can consider as satisfactory. The Theoretical History of
the Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms is closely connected with
that of the Earth on which they subsist, and must follow the
fortunes of Geology. And thus we may venture to say that no
Palætiological Science, as yet, possesses all its three
members. Indeed most of them are very far from having
completed and systematized their Phenomenology: in all, the
cultivation of Ætiology is but just begun, or is not begun;
in all, the Theory must reward the exertions of future,
probably of distant, generations.

[Note 13\10: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xviii. c. vii. sect. 3.]

But in the mean time we may derive some instruction from the
comparison of the two antagonist hypotheses of which I have spoken.



{{284}}
