CHAPTER V.

ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES,
_continued_.--VOLUNTARY MOTION.


1. WE formerly noticed the distinctions of _organic_ and
_animal_ functions, organic and animal forces, as one of the
most marked distinctions to which physiologists have been
led in their analysis of the vital powers. I have now taken
one of the former, the _organic_ class of functions, namely,
Nutrition; and have endeavoured to point out in some measure
the peculiar nature of the vital forces by which this
function is carried on. It may serve to show the extent and
the difficulty of this subject, if, before quitting it, I
offer a few remarks suggested by a function belonging to the
other class, the _animal_ functions. This I shall briefly do
with respect to _Voluntary Motion_.

2. In the History of Physiology, I have already related the
progress of the researches by which the organs employed in
voluntary motion became known to anatomists. It was
ascertained to the satisfaction of all physiologists, that
the immediate agents in such motion are the muscles; that
the muscles are in some way contracted, when the nerves
convey to them the agency of the will; and that thus the
limbs are moved. It was ascertained, also, that the nerves
convey sensations from the organs of sense inwards, so as to
make these sensations the object of the animal's
consciousness. In man and the higher animals, these
impressions upon the nerves are all conveyed to one internal
organ, the brain; and from this organ all impressions of the
will appear to proceed; and thus the brain is {223} the
center of animal life, towards which sensations converge,
and from which volitions diverge.

But this being the process, we are led to inquire how far we
can obtain any knowledge, or form any conception, of the
vital forces by means of which the process is carried on.
And here I have further stated in the History[87\9], that
the transfer of sensations and volitions along the nerves
was often represented as consisting in the motion of a
Nervous Fluid. I have related that the hypothesis of such a
fluid, conveying its impressions either by motions of
translation or of vibration, was countenanced by many great
names, as Newton, Haller, and even Cuvier. But I have
ventured to express my doubt whether this hypothesis can
have much value: 'for,' I have said, 'this principle cannot
be mechanical, chemical, or physical, and therefore cannot
be better understood by embodying it in a fluid. The
difficulty we have in conceiving what the force _is_, is not
got rid of by explaining the machinery by which it is
_transferred_.'

[Note 87\9: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii. c. v. s. 2.]

3. I may add, that no succeeding biological researches
appear to have diminished the force of these considerations.
In modern times, attempts have repeatedly been made to
identify the nervous fluid with electricity or galvanism.
But these attempts have not been satisfactory or conclusive
of the truth of such an identity: and Professor Müller
probably speaks the judgment of the most judicious
physiologists, when he states it as his opinion, after
examining the evidence[88\9], 'That the vital actions of the
nerves are not attended with the development of any galvanic
currents which our instruments can detect; and that the laws
of action of the nervous principle are totally different
from those of electricity.'

[Note 88\9: _Elem. Phys._ p. 640.]

That the powers by which the nerves are the instruments of
sensation, and the muscles of motion, are vital endowments,
incapable of being expressed or explained by any comparison
with mechanical, chemical, and electrical forces, is the
result which we should {224} expect to find, judging from
the whole analogy of science; and which thus is confirmed by
the history of physiology up to the present time. We
naturally, then, turn to inquire whether such peculiar vital
powers have been brought into view with any distinctness and
clearness.

4. The property by which muscles, under proper stimulation,
contract and produce motion, has been termed _Irritability_
or _Contractility_; the property by which nerves are
susceptible of their appropriate impressions has been termed
_Sensibility_. A very few words on each of these subjects
must suffice.

_Irritability._--I have, in the History of Physiology[89\9],
noticed that Glisson, a Cambridge professor, distinguished
the Irritation of muscles as a peculiar property, different
from any merely mechanical or physical action. I have
mentioned, also, that he divides Irritation into _natural_,
_vital_, and _animal_; and points out, though briefly, the
graduated differences of Irritability in different organs.
Although these opinions did not at first attract much
notice, about seventy years afterwards attention was
powerfully called to this vital force, _Irritability_, by
Haller. I shall borrow Sprengel's reflections on this subject.

[Note 89\9: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii. c. v.]

'Hitherto men had been led to see more and more clearly that
the cause of the bodily functions, the fundamental power of
the animal frame, is not to be sought in the mechanism, and
still less in the mixture of the parts. In this conviction,
they had had recourse partly to the quite supersensuous
principle of the Soul, partly to the half-material principle
of the Animal Spirits, in order to explain the bodily
motions. Glisson alone saw the necessity of assuming an
Original Power in the fibres, which, independent of the
influence of the animal spirits, should produce contraction
in them. And Gorter first held that this Original Power was
not to be confined to the muscles, but to be extended to all
parts of the living body. {225}

'But as yet the laws of this Power were not known, nor had
men come to an understanding whether it were fully distinct
from the elasticity of the parts, or by what causes it was
put in action. They had neither instituted observations nor
experiments which established its relation to other assumed
forces of the body. There was still wanting a determination
of the peculiar seat of this power, and experiments to trace
its gradual differences in different parts of the body. In
addition to other causes, the necessity of the assumption of
such a power was felt the more, in consequence of the
prevalence of Leibnitz's doctrine of the activity of matter;
but it was an occult quality, and remained so till Haller,
by numerous experiments and solid observations, placed in a
clear light the peculiarities of the powers of the animal body.'

5. Perhaps, however, Haller did more in the way of
determining experimentally the limits and details of the
application of this idea of Irritability as a peculiar
attribute, than in developing the Idea itself. In that way
his merits were great. As early as the year 1739, he
published his opinion upon Irritability as the cause of
muscular motion, which he promulgated again in 1743. But
from the year 1747 he was more attentive to the
peculiarities of Irritability, and its difference from the
effect of the nerves. In the first edition of his
_Physiology_, which appeared in 1747, he distinguished three
kinds of Force in muscles,--the Dead Force, the Innate
Force, and the Nervous Power. The first is identical with
the elastic force of dead matter, and remains even after
death. The _innate force_ continues only a short time after
death, and discloses itself especially by alternate
oscillations; the motions which arise from this are much
more lively than those which arise from mere elasticity:
they are not excited by tension, nor by pressure, nor by any
mechanical alteration, but only by _irritation_. The
_nervous force_ of the muscle is imparted to it from without
by the nerves; it preserves the _irritability_, which cannot
long subsist without the influence of the nervous force, but
is not identical with it. {226}

In the year 1752, Haller laid before the Society of
Göttingen the result of one hundred and ninety experiments;
from which it appears to what parts of the animal system
Irritability and Nervous Power belong. These I need not
enumerate. He also investigated with care its gradations in
those parts which do possess it. Thus the heart possesses it
in the highest degree, and other organs follow in their
order.

6. Haller's doctrine was, that there resides in the muscles
a peculiar vital power by which they contract, and that this
power is distinct from the attributes of the nerves. And
this doctrine has been accepted by the best physiologists of
modern times. But this distinction of the _irritability_ of
the muscles from the _sensibility_ of the nerves became
somewhat clearer by giving to the former attribute the name
of _Contractility_. This accordingly was done; it is, for
example, the phraseology used by Bichat. By speaking of
_animal sensibility_ and _animal contractility_, the passive
and the active element of the processes of animal life are
clearly separated and opposed to each other. The sensations
which we feel, and the muscular action which we exert, may
be closely and inseparably connected, yet still they are
clearly distinguishable. We can easily in our apprehension
separate the titillation felt in the nose on taking snuff,
from the action of the muscles in sneezing; or the
perception of an object falling towards the eye, from the
exertion which shuts the eye-lid; although in these cases
the passive and active part of the process are almost or
quite inseparable in fact. And this clear separation of the
active from the passive power is something, it would seem,
peculiar to the Animal Vital Powers; it is a character by
which they differ, not only from mechanical, chemical, and
all other merely physical forces, but even from Organic
Vital Powers.

7. But this difference between the Animal and the Organic
Vital Powers requires to be further insisted upon, for it
appears to have been overlooked or denied by very eminent
physiologists. For instance, Bichat classifies the Vital
Powers as Animal Sensibility, {227} Animal Contractility,
Organic Sensibility, Organic Contractility.

Now the view which suggests itself to us, in agreement with
what has been said, is this:--that though Animal Sensibility
and Animal Contractility are clearly and certainly distinct,
Organic Sensibility and Organic Contractility are neither
separable in fact nor in our conception, but together make
up a single Vital Power. That they are not separable in fact
is, indeed, acknowledged by Bichat himself. 'The organic
contractility,' he says[90\9], 'can never be separated from
the sensibility of the same kind; the reaction of the
excreting tubes is immediately connected with the action
which the secreted fluids exercise upon them: the
contraction of the heart must necessarily succeed the influx
of the blood into it.' It is not wonderful, therefore, that
it should have happened, as he complains, that 'authors have
by no means separated these two things, either in their
consideration or in language.' We cannot avoid asking, Are
Organic Sensibility and Organic Contractility really
anything more than two different aspects of the same thing,
like action and reaction in mechanics, which are only two
ways of considering the action which takes place at a point;
or like the positive and negative electricities, which, as
we have seen, always co-exist and correspond to each other?

[Note 90\9: _Life and Death_, p. 94.]

8. But we may observe, moreover, that Bichat, by his use of
the term Contractility, includes in it powers to which it
cannot with any propriety be applied. Why should we suppose
that the vital powers of absorption, secretion,
assimilation, are of such a nature that the name
_contractility_ may be employed to describe them? We have
seen, in the last chapter, that the most careful study of
these powers leads us to conceive them in a manner
altogether removed from any notion of contraction. Is it not
then an abuse of language which cannot possibly lead to
anything but {228} confusion, to write thus[91\9]: 'The
insensible organic contractility is that, by virtue of which
the excreting tubes react upon their respective fluids, the
secreting organs upon the blood which flows into them, the
parts where nutrition is performed upon the nutritive
juices, and the lymphatics upon the substances which excite
their open extremities'? In the same manner he
ascribes[92\9] to the peculiar sensibility of each organ the
peculiarity of its products and operations. An increased
absorption is produced by an increased susceptibility of the
'absorbent orifices.' And thus, in this view, each organic
power may be contemplated either as sensibility or as
contractility, and may be supposed to be rendered more
intense by magnifying either of these its aspects; although,
in fact, neither can be conceived to be increased without an
exactly commensurate increase of the other.

[Note 91\9:  _Life and Death_, p. 95.]

[Note 92\9:  _Ib._ p. 90.]

9. This opinion, unfounded as it thus appears to be, that
all the different organic vital powers are merely different
kinds of Contractility or Excitability, was connected with
the doctrines of Brown and his followers, which were so
celebrated in the last century, that all diseases arise from
increase or from diminution of the Vital Force. The
considerations which have already offered themselves would
lead us to assent to the judgment which Cuvier has
pronounced upon this system. 'The theory of excitation,' he
says, 'so celebrated in these later times by its influence
upon pathology and therapeutick, is at bottom only a
modification of that, in which, including under a common
name Sensibility and Irritability,' and we may add, applying
this name to all the Vital Powers, 'the speculator takes
refuge in an abstraction so wide, that if, by it, he
simplifies medicine, he by it annihilates all positive
physiology[93\9].'

[Note 93\9: _Hist. des Sc. Nat. depuis_ 1789, i. 219.]

10. The separation of the nervous influence and the muscular
irritability, although it has led to many highly instructive
speculations, is not without its {229} difficulties, when
viewed with reference to the Idea of Vital Power. If the
irritability of each muscle reside in the muscle itself, how
does it differ from a mere mechanical force, as elasticity?
But, in point of fact, it is certain that the muscular
irritability of the animal body is not an attribute of the
muscle itself independent of its connexion with the system.
No muscle, or other part, removed from the body, _long_
preserves its irritability. This power cannot subsist
permanently, except in connexion with an organic whole. This
condition peculiarly constitutes irritability a _living_
force: and this condition would be satisfied by considering
the force as derived from the nervous system; but it appears
that though the nervous system has the most important
influence upon all vital actions, the muscular irritability
must needs be considered as something distinct. And thus the
Irritability or Contractility of the muscle is a peculiar
endowment of the texture, but it is at the same time an
endowment which can only co-exist with life; it is, in
short, a peculiar Vital Power.

11. This necessity of the union of the muscle with the whole
nervous system, in order that it may possess irritability,
was the meaning of the true part of Stahl's psychical
doctrine; and the reason why he and his adherents persisted
in asserting the power of the soul even over involuntary
motions. This doctrine was the source of much controversy in
later times.

'But,' says Cuvier[94\9], 'this opposition of opinion may be
reconciled by the intimate union of the nervous substance
with the fibre and the other contractile organic elements,
and by their reciprocal action;--doctrines which had been
presented with so much probability by physiologists of the
Scotch school, but which were elevated above the rank of
hypotheses only by the observations of more recent times.

[Note 94\9: _Hist. des Sc. Nat. depuis_ 1789, i. 213.]

'The fibre does not contract by itself, but by the influence
of the nervous filaments, which are always united with it.
The change which produces the {230} contraction cannot take
place without the concurrence of both these substances; and
it is further necessary that it should be occasioned each
time by an exterior cause, by a stimulant.

'The Will is one of these stimulants; but it only excites
the Irritability, it does not constitute it; for in the case
of persons paralytic from apoplexy, the Irritability
remains, though the power of the Will over it is gone. Thus
_irritability_ depends in part on the _nerve_, but not on
the _sensibility_: this last is another property, still more
admirable and occult than the irritability; but it is only
one among several functions of the nervous system. It would
be an abuse of words to extend this denomination to
functions unaccompanied by perception.'

12. Supposing, then, that Contractility is established as a
peculiar Vital Power residing in the muscles, we may ask
whether we can trace with any further exactness the seat and
nature of this power. It would be unsuitable to the nature
of the present work to dwell upon the anatomical discussions
bearing upon this point. I will only remark that some
anatomists maintain[95\9] that muscles are contracted by
those fibres assuming a zigzag form, which at first were
straight. Others (Professor Owen and Dr. A. Thompson) doubt
the accuracy of this observation; and conceive that the
muscular fibre becomes shorter and thicker, but does not
deviate from a right line. We may remark that the latter
kind of action appears to be more elementary in its nature.
We can, as a matter of geometry, conceive a straight line
thrown into a zigzag shape by muscular contractions taking
place between remote parts of it; but it is difficult to
conceive by what _elementary_ mode of action a straight
fibre could bend itself at certain points, and at certain
points only; since the elementary force must act at every
point of the fibre, and not at certain selected points.

[Note 95\9: Müller, _Elem. Phys._ p. 887.]

13. A circumstance which remarkably marks the difference
between the vital force of Contractility, {231} inherent in
muscles, and any merely dead or mechanical force, is this;
that in assuming their contractile state, muscles exert a
tension which they could not themselves support or convey if
not strengthened by their vital irritability. They are
capable of raising weights by their exertion, which will
tear them asunder when the power of contraction is lost by
death. This has induced Cuvier and other physiologists[96\9]
to believe 'that in the moment of action, the particles that
compose a fibre, not only approach towards each other
longitudinally, but that their cohesive attraction becomes
instantaneously much greater than it was before: for without
such an increase of cohesive force, the tendency to shorten
could not, as it would appear, prevent the fibre from being
torn.' We see here the difficulty, or rather the
impossibility, of conceiving muscular contractility as a
mere mechanical force; and perhaps there is little hope of
any advantage by calling in the aid of chemical hypothesis
to solve the mechanical difficulty. Cuvier conjectures that
a sudden change in the chemical composition may thus so
quickly and powerfully augment the cohesion. But we may ask,
are not a chemical synthesis and analysis, suddenly
performed by a mere act of the will, as difficult to
conceive as a sudden increase and decrease of mechanical
power directly produced by the same cause?

[Note 96\9: Prichard, _Vital Prin._ p. 126.]

14. _Sensibility._ The nerves are the organs and channels of
Sensibility. By means of them we receive our sensations,
whether of mere pleasure and pain, or of qualities which we
ascribe to external objects, as a bitter taste, a sweet
odour, a shrill sound, a red colour, a hard or a hot feeling
of touch. Some of these sensations are but obscurely the
objects of our consciousness; as for example the feeling
which our feet have of the ground, or the sight which our
eyes have of neighbouring objects, when we walk in a
reverie. In these cases the sensations, though obscure,
exist; for they {232} serve to balance and guide us as we
walk. In other cases, our sensations are distinctly and
directly the objects of our attention.

But our Sensations, as we have already said, we ascribe as
Qualities to external objects. By our senses we perceive
objects, and thus our _sensations_ become _perceptions_. We
have not only the sensation of _round_, _purple_, and
_green_, repeated and varied, but the perception of a _bunch
of grapes_ partly ripe and partly unripe. We have not only
sensations of noise and of variously-coloured specks rapidly
changing their places, but we have perceptions, by sound and
sight, of a stone rolling down the hill and crushing the
shrubs in its path. We scarcely ever dwell upon our
Sensations; our thoughts are employed upon Objects. We
regard the impressions upon our nerves, not for what they
_are_, but for what they _tell_ us.

But in what Language do the impressions upon the nerves thus
speak to us of an external world,--of the forms and
qualities and actions of objects? How is it that by the aid
of our nervous system we become acquainted not only with
impressions but with _things_; that we learn not only the
relation of objects to us, but to one another?

15. It has been shown at some length in the previous Books,
that the mode in which Sensations are connected in our minds
so as to convey to us the knowledge of Objects and their
Relations, is by being contemplated with reference to
_Ideas_. Our Sensations, connected by the Idea of Space,
become Figures; connected by the Idea of Time, they become
Causes and Effects; connected by the Idea of Resemblance,
they become Individuals and Kinds; connected by the Idea of
Organization, they become Living Things. It has been shown
that without these Ideas there can be no connexion among our
sensations, and therefore no perception of Figure, Action,
Kind, or in short, of bodies under any aspect whatever.
Sensations are the rude _Matter_ of our perceptions; and are
nothing, except so far as they have _Form_ given them by
Ideas. {233} But thus moulded by our Ideas, Sensation
becomes the source of an endless store of important
Knowledge of every possible kind.

16. But one of the most obvious uses of our perceptions and
our knowledge is to direct our Actions. It is suitable to
the condition of our being that when we perceive a bunch of
grapes, we should be able to pluck and eat the ripe ones;
that when we perceive a stone rushing down the side of a
hill, we should be able to move so as to avoid it. And this
must be done by moving our limbs; in short, by the use of
our muscles. And thus Sensation leads, not directly, but
through the medium of Ideas, to muscular Contraction. I say
that sensation and Muscular action are in such cases
connected through the medium of Ideas. For when we proceed
to pluck the grape which we see, the _sensation_ does not
determine the motion of the hand by any necessary
geometrical or mechanical conditions, as an impression made
upon a machine determines its motions; but the _perception_
leads us to stretch forth the hand to that part of space,
wherever it is, where we _know_ that the grape is; and this,
not in any determinate path, but, it may be, avoiding or
removing intervening obstacles, which we also _perceive_.
There is in every such case a connexion between the
sensation and the resulting action, not of a material but of
a mental kind. The cause and the effect are bound together,
not by physical but by intellectual ties.

17. And thus in such cases, between the two _vital_
operations, Sensation and Muscular Action, there intervenes,
as an intermediate step, Perception or Knowledge, which is
not merely vital but _ideal_. But this is not all; there is
still another mental part of the process which may be
readily distinguished from that which we have described. An
act of the _Will_, a Volition, is that, in the Mind, which
immediately determines the action of the Muscles of the
Body. And thus Will intervenes between Knowledge and Action;
and the cycle of operations which take place when animals
act with reference to external objects is {234}
this:--Sensation, Perception, Volition, Muscular
Contraction.

18. To attempt further to analyse the mental part of this
cycle does not belong to the present part of our work. But
we may remark here, as we have already remarked in the
History[97\9], how irresistibly we are led by physiological
researches into the domain of thought and mind. We pass from
the body to the soul, from physics to metaphysics; from
biology to psychology; from things to persons; from nouns to
pronouns. I have there noticed the manner in which Cuvier
expresses this transition by the introduction of the
pronoun: 'The impression of external objects upon the ME,
the production of a sensation, of an image, is a mystery
impenetrable to our thoughts.'

[Note 97\9: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii. c. v. s. 2.]

19. But to return to the merely biological part of our
speculations. We have arrived, it will be perceived, at this
result: that in animal actions there intervenes between the
two terms of Sensation and Muscular Contraction, an
intermediate process; which may be described as a
communication to and from a Center. The Center is the seat
of the sentient and volent faculties, and is of a
_hyperphysical_ nature. But the existence of such a Center
as a necessary element in the functions of the _animal_ life
is a truth which is important in biology. This indeed may be
taken as the peculiar character of animal, as distinguished
from merely _organic_ powers. Accordingly, it is so stated
by Bichat. For although he superfluously, as I have tried to
show, introduces into his list of vital powers an organic
sensibility, he still draws the distinction of which I have
spoken; 'in the animal life, Sensibility is the faculty of
receiving an Impression _plus_ that of referring it to a
common Center[98\9].'

[Note 98\9: _Life and Death_, p. 84.]

20. But since Sensibility and Contractility are thus
connected by reference to a common Center, we may ask,
before quitting the subject, what are the different forms
which this reference assumes? Is the connexion {235} always
attended by the distinct steps of Knowledge and Will,--by a
clear act of consciousness, as in the case which we have
taken, of plucking a grape; or may these steps become
obscure, or vanish altogether?

We need not further illustrate the _conscious_ connexion.
Such actions as we have described are called _voluntary_
actions. In extreme cases, the mental part of the process is
obvious enough. But we may gradually pass from these to
cases in which the mental operation is more and more obscure.

In walking, in speaking, in eating, in breathing, our
muscular exertions are directed by our sensations and
perceptions: yet in such processes, how dimly are we
conscious of perceptive and directive power! How the mind
should be able to exercise such a power, and yet should be
scarcely or not at all conscious of its exercise, is a very
curious problem. But in all or in most of the instances just
mentioned, the solution of this problem appears to depend
upon psychological rather than biological principles, and
therefore does not belong to this place.

21. But in cases at the other extreme (unconscious actions)
the mental part of the operation vanishes altogether. In
many animals, even after decapitation, the limbs shrink when
irritated. The motions of the iris are determined by the
influence of light on our eyes, without our being aware of
the motions. Here Sensations produce Motions, but with no
trace of intervening Perception or Will. The Sensation
appears to be _reflected_ back from the central element of
animal life, in the form of a Muscular Contraction; but in
this case the Sensation is not modified or regulated by any
_Idea_. These reflected motions have no reference to
relations of space or force among surrounding objects. They
are blind and involuntary, like the movements of convulsion,
depending for direction and amount only on the position and
circumstances of the limb itself with its muscles. Here the
Centre from which the reflection takes place is merely
_animal_, not intellectual.

In this case some physiologists have doubted whether the
reflection of the sensation in the form of a muscular {236}
contraction does really take place from the Center; and have
conceived that sensorial impressions might affect motor
nerves without any communication with the nervous Center.
But on this subject we may, I conceive, with safety adopt
the decision of Professor Müller, deliberately given after a
careful examination of the subject: 'When impressions made
by the action of external stimuli on sensitive nerves give
rise to motions in other parts, these motions are never the
result of the _direct_ reaction of the sensitive and motor
fibres of the nerves on each other; the irritation is
conveyed by the sensitive fibres to the brain and spinal
cord, and is by these communicated to the motor fibres.'

22. Thus we have two extreme cases of the connexion of
sensation with muscular action; in one of which the
connexion clearly _is_, and in the other it as clearly _is
not_, determined by relations of Ideas, in its transit
through the nervous Center. There is another highly curious
case standing intermediate between these two, and extremely
difficult to refer to either. I speak of the case of _Instinct_.

Instinct leads to actions which are _such as if they were
determined by Ideas_. The lamb follows its mother by
instinct; but the motions by which it does this, the special
muscular exertions, depend entirely upon the geometrical and
mechanical relations of external bodies, as the form of the
ground, and the force of the wind. The contractions of the
muscles which are requisite in order that the creature may
obey its instinct, vary with every variation of these
external conditions;--are not determined by any rule or
necessity, but by properties of Space and Force. Thus the
action is not governed by Sensations directly, but by
sensations moulded by Ideas. And the same is the case with
other cases of instinct. The dog hunts by instinct; but he
hunts certain kinds of animals merely, thus showing that his
instinct acts according to Resemblances and Differences; he
crosses the field repeatedly to find the track of his prey
by scent; thus recognizing the relations of Space with
reference to the track; he leaps, adjusting his Force to
{237} the distance and height of the leap with mechanical
precision; and thus he practically recognizes the Ideas of
Resemblance, Space, and Force.

But have animals such Ideas? In any proper sense in which we
can speak of possessing Ideas, it appears plain that they
have not. Animals cannot, at any time, be said properly to
possess ideas, for ideas imply the possibility of
_speculative_ knowledge.

23. But even if we allow to animals only the _practical_
possession of Ideas, we have still a great difficulty
remaining. In the case of man, his ideas are unfolded
gradually by his intercourse with the external world. The
child learns to distinguish forms and positions by a
repeated and incessant use of his hands and eyes; he learns
to walk, to run, to leap, by slow and laborious degrees; he
distinguishes one man from another, and one animal from
another, only after repeated mistakes. Nor can we conceive
this to be otherwise. How should the child know at once what
muscles he is to exert in order to touch with his hand a
certain visible object? How should he know what muscles to
exert that he may stand and not fall, till he has tried
often? How should he learn to direct his attention to the
differences of different faces and persons, till he is
roused by some memory, or hope which implies memory? It
seems to us as if the sensations could not, without
considerable practice, be rightly referred to Ideas of
Space, Force, Resemblance, and the like.

Yet that which thus appears impossible, is in fact done by
animals. The lamb almost immediately after its birth follows
its mother, accommodating the actions of its muscles to the
form of the ground. The chick, just escaped from the shell,
picks up a minute insect, directing its beak with the
greatest accuracy. Even the human infant seeks the breast
and exerts its muscles in sucking, almost as soon as it is
born. Hence, then, we see that Instinct produces at once
actions regulated by Ideas, or, at least, which take place
_as if_ they were regulated by Ideas; although the Ideas
cannot have been developed by exercise, and only appear to
exist so far as such actions are concerned. {238}

24. The term _Instinct_ may properly be opposed to
_Insight_. The former implies an inward principle of action,
implanted within a creature and practically impelling it,
but not capable of being developed into a subject of
contemplation. While the instinctive actions of animals are
directed by such a principle, the deliberate actions of man
are governed by insight: he can contemplate the ideal
relations on which the result of his action depends. He can
in his mind map the path he will follow, and estimate the
force he will exert, and class the objects he has to deal
with, and determine his actions by the relations which he
thus has present to his mind. He thus possesses Ideas not
only practically, but speculatively. And knowing that the
Ideas by which he commonly directs his actions, Space,
Cause, Resemblance, and the like, have been developed to
that degree of clearness in which he possesses them by the
assiduous exercise of the senses and the mind from the
earliest stage of infancy, and that these Ideas are capable
of being still further unfolded into long trains of
speculative truth, he is unable to conceive the manner in
which animals possess such Ideas as their instinctive
actions disclose:--Ideas which neither require to be
unfolded nor admit of unfolding; which are adequate for
practical purposes without any previous exercise, and
inadequate for speculative purposes with whatever labour
cultivated.

I have ventured to make these few remarks on Instinct since
it may, perhaps, justly be considered as the last province
of Biology, where we reach the boundary line of Psychology.
I have now, before quitting this subject, only one other
principle to speak of.



{{239}}
