CHAPTER III.

OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE.


1. _Axiom of the Indestructibility of Substance._--WE now
come to an Idea of which the history is very different from
those of which we have lately been speaking. Instead of
being gradually and recently brought into a clear light, as
has been the case with the Ideas of Polarity and Affinity,
the Idea of Substance has been entertained in a distinct
form from the first periods of European speculation. That
this is so, is proved by our finding a principle depending
upon this Idea current as an axiom among the early
philosophers of Greece:--namely, that _nothing can be
produced out of nothing_. Such an axiom, more fully stated,
amounts to this: that the substance of which a body consists
is incapable of being diminished (and consequently incapable
of being augmented) in quantity, whatever apparent changes
it may undergo. Its forms, its distribution, its qualities,
may vary, but the substance itself is identically the same
under all these variations.

The axiom just spoken of was the great principle of the
physical philosophy of the Epicurean school, as it must be
of every merely material philosophy. The reader of Lucretius
will recollect the emphasis with which it is repeatedly
asserted in his poem:
    E nilo nil gigni, in nilum nil posse reverti;
  Nought comes of nought, nor ought returns to nought.

Those who engaged in these early attempts at physical
speculation were naturally much pleased with the clearness
which was given to their notions of change, composition, and
decomposition, by keeping steadily hold of the Idea of
Substance, as marked by this {30} fundamental axiom. Nor has
its authority ever ceased to be acknowledged. A philosopher
was asked[27\6], What is the weight of smoke? He answered,
'Subtract the weight of the ashes from the weight of the
wood which is burnt, and you have the weight of the smoke.'
This reply would be assented to by all; and it assumes as
incontestable that even under the action of fire, the
material, the substance, does not perish, but only changes
its form.

[Note 27\6: Kant, _Kritik der R. V._ p. 167.]

This principle of the indestructibility of substance might
easily be traced in many reasonings and researches, ancient
and modern. For instance, when the chemist works with the
_retort_, he places the body on which he operates in one
part of an inclosed cavity, which, by its bendings and
communications, separates at the same time that it confines,
the products which result from the action of fire: and he
assumes that this process is an analysis of the body into
its ingredients, not a creation of anything which did not
exist before, or a destruction of anything which previously
existed. And he assumes further, that the total quantity of
the substance thus analysed is the sum of the quantities of
its ingredients. This principle is the very basis of
chemical speculation, as we shall hereafter explain more fully.

2. _The Idea of Substance._--The axiom above spoken of
depends upon the Idea of Substance, which is involved in all
our views of external objects. We unavoidably assume that
the qualities and properties which we observe are properties
of _things_;--that the adjective implies a
substantive;--that there is, besides the external characters
of things, something _of which_ they are the characters. An
apple which is red, and round, and hard, is not merely
redness, and roundness, and hardness: these circumstances
may all alter while the apple remains the same apple. Behind
or under the appearances which we see, we conceive something
of which we think; or, to use the metaphor which obtained
currency among the ancient philosophers, the {31} attributes
and qualities which we observe are supported by and inherent
in something: and this something is hence called a
_substratum_ or _substance_,--that which stands _beneath_
the apparent qualities and supports them.

That we have such an _Idea_, using the term 'Idea' in the
sense in which I have employed it throughout these
disquisitions, is evident from what has been already said.
The Axiom of the Indestructibility of Substance proves the
existence of the Idea of Substance, just as the Axioms of
Geometry and Arithmetic prove the existence of the Ideas of
Space and Number. In the case of Substance, as of space or
number, the ideas cannot be said to be borrowed from
experience, for the axioms have an authority of a far more
comprehensive and demonstrative character than any which
experience can bestow. The axiom that nothing can be
produced from nothing and nothing destroyed, is so far from
being a result of experience, that it is apparently
contradicted by the most obvious observation. It has, at
first, the air of a paradox; and by those who refer to it,
it is familiarly employed to show how fallacious common
observation is. The assertion is usually made in this
form;--that nothing is created and nothing annihilated,
_notwithstanding_ that the common course of our experience
appears to show the contrary. The principle is not an
empirical, but a necessary and universal truth;--is
collected, not from the evidence of our senses, but from the
operation of our ideas. And thus the universal and
undisputed authority of the axiom proves the existence of
the Idea of Substance.

3. _Locke's Denial of the Idea of Substance._--I shall not
attempt to review the various opinions which have been
promulgated respecting this Idea: but it may be worth our
while to notice briefly the part which it played in the
great controversy concerning the origin of our ideas which
Locke's _Essay_ occasioned. Locke's object was to disprove
the existence of all ideas not derived from Sensation or
Reflection: and since the idea of substance as distinct from
external qualities, is {32} manifestly not derived directly
from sensation, nor by any very obvious or distinct process
from reflection, Locke was disposed to exclude the idea as
much as possible. Accordingly, in his argumentation against
Innate Ideas[28\6], he says plainly, 'the idea of substance,
which we neither have nor can have by sensation or
reflection.' And the inference which he draws is, 'that we
have no such clear idea at all.' What then, it may be asked,
do we mean by the word _substance_? This also he answers,
though somewhat strangely, 'We signify nothing by the word
_substance_, but only an uncertain supposition of we know
not what, _i. e._ of something whereof we have no particular
distinct positive idea, which we take to be the substratum,
or support, of those ideas we know.' That while he indulged
in this tautological assertion of our ignorance and
uncertainty, he should still have been compelled to
acknowledge that the word substance had some meaning, and
should have been driven to explain it by the identical
metaphors of 'substratum' and 'support,' is a curious proof
how impossible it is entirely to reject this idea.

[Note 28\6: _Essay_, b. i. c. iv. s. 18.]

But as we have already seen, the supposition of the
existence of substance is so far from being uncertain, that
it carries with it irresistible conviction, and substance is
necessarily conceived as something which cannot be produced
or destroyed. It may be easily supposed, therefore, that
when the controversy between Locke and his assailants came
to this point, he would be in some difficulty. And, indeed,
though with his accustomed skill in controversy, he managed
to retain a triumphant tone, he was driven from his main
points. Thus he repels the charge that he took the being of
substance to be doubtful[29\6]. He says, 'Having everywhere
affirmed and built upon it that man is a substance, I cannot
be supposed to question or doubt of the being of substance,
till I can question or doubt of my own being.' He attempts
to make a stand by saying that _being_ of things does not
depend upon our {33} _ideas_; but if he had been asked how,
without having an _idea_ of substance, he _knew_ substance
to _be_, it is difficult to conceive what answer he could
have made. Again, he had said that our idea of substance
arises from our 'accustoming ourselves to suppose' a
substratum of qualities. Upon this his adversary, Bishop
Stillingfleet, very properly asks, Is this custom grounded
upon true reason or no? To which Locke replies, that it is
grounded upon this: That we cannot conceive how simple ideas
of sensible qualities should subsist alone; and therefore we
suppose them to exist in, and to be supported by some common
subject, which support we denote by the name substance. Thus
he allows, not only that we necessarily assume the reality
of substance, but that we cannot conceive qualities without
substance; which are concessions so ample as almost to
include all that any advocate for the Idea of Substance need
desire.

[Note 29\6: _Essay_, b. ii. c. ii. and _First Letter to the
Bishop of Worcester_.]

Perhaps Locke, and the adherents of Locke, in denying that
we have an idea of substance in general, were latently
influenced by finding that they could not, by any effort of
mind, call up any _image_ which could be considered as an
image of substance in general. That in this sense we have no
idea of substance, is plain enough; but in the same sense we
have no idea of space in general, or of time, or number, or
cause, or resemblance. Yet we certainly have such a power of
representing to our minds space, time, number, cause,
resemblance, as to arrive at numerous truths by means of
such representations. These general representations I have
all along called Ideas, nor can I discover any more
appropriate word; and in this sense, we have also, as has
now been shown, an Idea of Substance.

4. _Is all Material Substance heavy?_--The principle that
the quantity of the substance of any body remains unchanged
by our operations upon it, is, as we have said, of universal
validity. But then the question occurs, how are we to
ascertain the quantity of substance, and thus, to apply the
principle in particular cases. In the case above mentioned,
where {34} smoke was to be weighed, it was manifestly
assumed that the quantity of the substance might be known by
its weight; and that the total quantity being unchanged, the
total weight also would remain the same. Now on what grounds
do we make this assumption? Is all material substance heavy?
and if we can assert this to be so, on what grounds does the
truth of the assertion rest? These are not idle questions of
barren curiosity; for in the history of that science
(Chemistry) to which the Idea of Substance is principally
applicable, nothing less than the fate of a comprehensive
and long established theory (the Phlogiston theory) depended
upon the decision of this question. When it was urged that
the reduction of a metal from a calcined to a metallic form
could not consist in the _addition_ of phlogiston, because
the metal was lighter than the calx had been; it was replied
by some, that this was not conclusive, for that phlogiston
was a principle of levity, diminishing the weight of the
body to which it was added. This reply was, however,
rejected by all the sounder philosophers, and the force of
the argument finally acknowledged. But why was this
suggestion of a substance having no weight, or having
absolute levity, repudiated by the most reflective
reasoners? It is assumed, it appears, that all matter must
be heavy; what is the ground of this assumption?

The ground of such an assumption appears to be the
following. Our idea of substance includes in it this:--that
substance is a quantity capable of addition; and thus
capable of making up, by composition, a sum equal to all its
parts. But substance, and the quantity of substance, can be
known to us only by its attributes and qualities. And the
qualities which are capable constantly and indefinitely of
increase and diminution by increase and diminution of the
parts, must be conceived inseparable from the substance. For
the qualities, if removable from the substance at all, must
be removable by some operation performed upon the substance;
and by the idea of substance, all such operations are only
equivalent to separation, junction, and union of parts.
Hence those characters {35} which thus universally increase
and diminish by addition and subtraction of the things
themselves, belong to the substance of the things. They are
measures of its quantity, and are not merely its separable
qualities.

The weight of bodies is such a character. However we
compound or divide bodies, we compound and divide their
weight in the same manner. We may dismember a body into the
minutest parts; but the sum of the weights of the parts is
always equal to the whole weight of the body. The weight of
a body can be in no way increased or diminished, except by
adding something to it or taking something from it. If we
bake a brick, we do not conceive that the change of colour
or of hardness, implies that anything has been created or
destroyed. It may easily be that the parts have only assumed
a new arrangement; but if the brick have lost weight, we
suppose that something (moisture for instance) has been
removed elsewhere.

Thus weight is apprehended as essential to matter. In
considering the dismemberment or analysis of bodies, we
assume that there must be some criterion of the quantity of
substance; and this criterion can possess no other
properties than their weight possesses. If we assume an
element which has no weight, or the weight of which is
negative, as some of the defenders of phlogiston attempted
to do, we put an end to all speculation on such subjects.
For if weight is not the criterion of the quantity of one
element, phlogiston for instance, why is weight the
criterion of the quantity of any other element? We may, by
the same right, assume any other real or imaginary element
to have levity instead of gravity; or to have a peculiar
intensity of gravity which makes its weight no index of its
quantity. In short, if we do this, we deprive of all
possibility of application our notions of element, analysis,
and composition; and violate the postulates on which the
questions are propounded which we thus attempt to decide.

We must, then, take a constant and quantitative property of
matter, such as weight is, to be an index {36} of the
quantity of matter or of substance to which it belongs. I do
not here speak of the question which has sometimes been
proposed, whether the _weight_ or the _inertia_ of bodies be
the more proper measure of the quantity of matter. For the
measure of inertia is regulated by the same assumption as
that of substance:--that the quantity of the whole must be
equal to the quantity of all the parts: and inertia is
measured by weight, for the same reason that substance is so.

Having thus established the certainty, and ascertained the
interpretation of the fundamental principle which the Idea
of Substance involves, we are prepared to consider its
application in the science upon which it has a peculiar
bearing.



{{37}}
NOTE TO CHAPTER III.


[3rd Ed.]--[THE doctrine here propounded, that All Matter is
Heavy, has been opposed by Sir William Hamilton of
Edinburgh. (_Works of Reid_, note, p. 853.) This writer is a
man of unquestionable acuteness and of very extensive
reading; but his acuteness shows itself in barren
ontological distinctions, which appear to me to be of the
same character as the speculations of the eminent Schoolmen
of the most sterile periods of the dark ages. That he should
have no conception of progressive or inductive science is
not wonderful, when we recollect that he holds, as an
important part of his philosophy, that the study of
mathematics perverts and obscures the mind. But it may be of
some interest to consider his objections to the doctrine
here maintained.

He says, 1st, that our reasoning assumes that we must
necessarily have it in our power to ascertain the Quantity
of Matter; whereas this may be a problem out of the reach of
human determination.

To this I reply, that my reasoning _does_ assume that there
is a science, or sciences, which make assertions concerning
the Quantity of Matter: Mechanics and Chemistry are such
sciences. My assertion is, that to make such sciences
possible, Quantity of Matter must be proportional to Weight.
If my opponent deny that Mechanics and Chemistry can exist
as sciences, he may invalidate my proof; but not otherwise.

2. He says that there are two conceivable ways of estimating
the Quantity of Matter: by the Space occupied, and by the
Weight or Inertia; and that I assume the second measure
gratuitously.

To which I reply, that the most elementary steps in
Mechanics and in Chemistry contradict the notion that {38}
the Quantity of Matter is proportionate to the Space. They
proceed necessarily on a distinction between Space and
Matter:--between mere Extension and material Substance.

3. He allows that we cannot make the Extension of a body the
measure of the Quantity of Matter, because, he says, we do
not know if 'the compressing force' is such as to produce
'the closest compression.' That is, he assumes a compressing
force, assumes a closest compression, assumes a peculiar
(and very improbable) atomic hypothesis; and all this to
supply a reason why we are not to believe the first simple
principle of Mechanics and Chemistry.

4. He speaks of 'a series of apparent fluids (as Light or
its vehicle, the Calorific, the Electro-galvanic, and
Magnetic agents) which we can neither denude of their
character of substance, nor clothe with the attribute of
weight.'

To which my reply is, that precisely because I cannot
'clothe' these agents with the attribute of Weight, I _do_
'denude them of the character of Substance.' They are not
substances, but agencies. These Imponderable Agents are not
properly called 'Imponderable Fluids.' This I conceive that
I have proved; and the proof is not shaken by denying the
conclusion without showing any defect in the reasoning.

5. Finally, my critic speaks about 'a logical canon,' and
about 'a criterion of truth, subjectively necessary and
objectively certain;' which matters I shall not waste the
reader's time by discussing.]



{{39}}
