CHAPTER X.

OF THE GENERAL DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS.


1. WE have seen how the progress of knowledge upon the
subject of motion and force has produced, in the course of
the world's history, a great change in the minds of acute
and speculative men; so that such persons can now reason
with perfect steadiness and precision upon subjects on
which, at first, their thoughts were vague and confused; and
can apprehend, as truths of complete certainty and evidence,
laws which it required great labour and time to discover.
This _complete_ development and clear manifestation of
mechanical ideas has taken place only among mathematicians
and philosophers. But yet a progress of thought upon such
subjects,--an advance from the obscure to the clear, and
from errour to truth,--may be traced in the world at large,
and among those who have not directly cultivated the exact
sciences. This diffused and collateral influence of science
manifests itself, although in a wavering and fluctuating
manner, by various indications, at various periods of
literary history. The opinions and reasonings which are put
forth upon mechanical subjects, and above all, the adoption,
into common language, of terms and phrases belonging to the
prevalent mechanical systems, exhibit to us the most
profound discoveries and speculations of philosophers in
their effect upon more common and familiar trains of
thought. This effect is by no means unimportant, and we
shall point out some examples of such indications as we have
mentioned.

2. The discoveries of the ancients in speculative mechanics
were, as we have seen, very scanty; and {280} hardly
extended their influence to the unmathematical world. Yet
the familiar use of the term 'center of gravity' preserved
and suggested the most important part of what the Greeks had
to teach. The other phrases which they employed, as
_momentum_, _energy_, _virtue_, _force_, and the like, never
had any exact meaning, even among mathematicians; and
therefore never, in the ancient world, became the means of
suggesting just habits of thought. I have pointed out, in
the History of Science, several circumstances which appear
to denote the general confusion of ideas which prevailed
upon mechanical subjects during the times of the Roman
empire. I have there taken as one of the examples of this
confusion, the fable narrated by Pliny and others concerning
the echineïs, a small fish, which was said to stop a ship
merely by sticking to it[45\3]. This story was adduced as
betraying the absence of any steady apprehension of the
equality of action and reaction; since the fish, except it
had some immoveable obstacle to hold by, must be pulled
forward by the ship, as much as it pulled the ship backward.
If the writers who speak of this wonder had shown any
perception of the necessity of a reaction, either produced
by the rapid motion of the fish's fins in the water, or in
any other way, they would not be chargeable with this
confusion of thought; but from their expressions it is, I
think, evident that they saw no such necessity[46\3]. Their
idea of mechanical action was not sufficiently distinct to
enable them to see the absurdity of {281} supposing an
intense pressure with no obstacle for it to exert itself
against.

[Note 45\3: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iv. c. i. sect. 2.]

[Note 46\3: See Prof. Powell, _On the Nature and Evidence of
the Laws of Motion_. _Reports of the Ashmolean Society_.
Oxford. 1837. Professor Powell has made an objection to my
use of this instance of confusion of thought; the remark in
the text seems to me to justify what I said in the History.
As an evidence that the fish was not supposed to produce its
effect by its muscular power acting on the water, we may
take what Pliny says, _Nat. Hist._ xxxii. 1, 'Domat mundi
rabiem, nullo suo labore; non retinendo, aut alio modo quam
adhærendo:' and also what he states in another place (ix.
41), that when it is preserved in pickle, it may be used in
recovering gold which has fallen into a deep well. All this
implies adhesion alone, with no conception of reaction.]

3. We may trace, in more modern times also, indications of a
general ignorance of mechanical truths. Thus the phrase of
shooting at an object 'point-blank,' implies the belief that
a cannon-ball describes a path of which the first portion is
a straight line. This errour was corrected by the true
mechanical principles which Galileo and his followers
brought to light; but these principles made their way to
popular notice, principally in consequence of their
application to the motions of the solar system, and to the
controversies which took place respecting those motions.
Thus by far the most powerful argument against the reception
of the Copernican system of the universe, was that of those
who asked, Why a stone dropt from a tower was not left
behind by the motion of the earth? The answer to this
question, now universally familiar, involves a reference to
the true doctrine of the composition of motions. Again;
Kepler's persevering and strenuous attempts[47\3] to frame a
physical theory of the universe were frustrated by his
ignorance of the first law of motion, which informs us that
a body will retain its velocity without any maintaining
force. He proceeded upon the supposition that the sun's
force was requisite to _keep up_ the motion of the planets,
as well as to deflect and modify it; and he was thus led to
a system which represented the sun as carrying round the
planets in their orbits by means of a _vortex_, produced by
his revolution. The same neglect of the laws of motion
presided in the formation of Descartes' system of vortices.
Although Descartes had enunciated in words the laws of
motion, he and his followers showed that they had not the
practical habit of referring to these mechanical principles;
and dared not trust the planets to move in free space
without some surrounding machinery to support them[48\3].

[Note 47\3: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. v. c. iv. and b. vii. c. i.]

[Note 48\3: I have, in the History, applied to Descartes the
character which Bacon gives to Aristotle, 'Audax simul et
pavidus:' though he was bold enough to enunciate the laws of
motion without knowing them aright, he had not the courage
to leave the planets to describe their orbits by the agency
of those laws, without the machinery of contact.]

{282} 4. When at last mathematicians, following Newton, had
ventured to consider the motion of each planet as a
mechanical problem not different in its nature from the
motion of a stone cast from the hand; and when the solution
of this problem and its immense consequences had become
matters of general notoriety and interest; the new views
introduced, as is usual, new terms, which soon became
extensively current. We meet with such phrases as 'flying
off in the tangent,' and 'deflexion from the tangent;' with
antitheses between 'centripetal' and 'centrifugal force,' or
between 'projectile' and 'central force.' 'Centers of
force,' 'disturbing forces,' 'perturbations,' and
'perturbations of higher orders,' are not unfrequently
spoken of: and the expression 'to gravitate,' and the term
'universal gravitation,' acquired a permanent place in the
language.

Yet for a long time, and even up to the present day, we find
many indications that false and confused apprehensions on
such subjects are by no means extirpated. Arguments are
urged against the mechanical system of the universe,
implying in the opponents an absence of all clear mechanical
notions. Many of this class of writers retrograde to
Kepler's point of view. This is, for example, the case with
Lord Monboddo, who, arguing on the assumption that force is
requisite to maintain, as well as to deflect motion,
produced a series of attacks upon the Newtonian philosophy;
which he inserted in his _Ancient Metaphysics_, published in
1779 and the succeeding years. This writer (like Kepler),
measures force by the velocity which the body _has_[49\3],
not by that which it _gains_. Such a use of language would
prevent our obtaining any laws of motion at all.
Accordingly, the author, in the very next page to that which
I have just quoted, abandons this measure of force, and, in
curvilinear motion, measures {283} force by 'the fall from
the extremity of the arc.' Again; in his objections to the
received theory, he denies that curvilinear motion is
compounded, although his own mode of considering such motion
assumes this composition in the only way in which it was
ever intended by mathematicians. Many more instances might
be adduced to show that a want of cultivation of the
mechanical ideas rendered this philosopher incapable of
judging of a mechanical system.

[Note 49\3: _Anc. Met._ vol. ii. b. v. c. vi. p. 413.]

The following extract from the _Ancient Metaphysics_, may be
sufficient to show the value of the author's criticism on
the subjects of which we are now speaking. His object is to
prove that there do not exist a centripetal and a
centrifugal force in the case of elliptical motion. 'Let any
man move in a circular or elliptical line described to him;
and he will find no tendency in himself either to the center
or from it, much less both. If indeed he attempt to make the
motion with great velocity, or if he do it carelessly and
inattentively, he may go out of the line, either towards the
center or from it: but this is to be ascribed, not to the
nature of the motion, but to our infirmity; or perhaps to
the animal form, which is more fitted for progressive motion
in a right line than for any kind of curvilinear motion. But
this is not the case with a sphere or spheroid, which is
equally adapted to motion in all directions[50\3].' We need
hardly remind the reader that the manner in which a man
running round a small circle, finds it necessary to lean
inwards, in order that there may be a centripetal
inclination to counteract the centrifugal force, is a
standard example of our mechanical doctrines; and this fact
(quite familiar in practice as well as theory) is in direct
contradiction of Lord Monboddo's assertion.

[Note 50\3: _Anc. Met._ vol. i. b. ii. c. 19, p. 264.]

5. A similar absence of distinct mechanical thought appears
in some of the most celebrated metaphysicians of Germany. I
have elsewhere noted[51\3] the opinion expressed by Hegel,
that the glory which belongs to {284} Kepler has been
unjustly transferred to Newton; and I have suggested, as the
explanation of this mode of thinking, that Hegel himself, in
the knowledge of mechanical truth, had not advanced beyond
Kepler's point of view. Persons who possess conceptions of
space and number, but who have not learnt to deal with ideas
of force and causation, may see more value in the
discoveries of Kepler than in those of Newton. Another
exemplification of this state of mind may be found in
Professor Schelling's speculations; for instance, in his
_Lectures on the Method of Academical Study_. In the twelfth
Lecture, on the study of Physics and Chemistry, he says, (p.
266,) 'What the mathematical natural philosophy has done for
the knowledge of the laws of the universe since the time
that they were discovered by his (Kepler's) godlike genius,
is, as is well known, this: it has attempted a construction
of those laws which, according to its foundations, is
altogether empirical. We may assume it as a general rule,
that in any proposed construction, that which is not a pure
general form cannot have any scientific import or truth. The
foundation from which the centrifugal motion of the bodies
of the world is derived, is no necessary form, it is an
empirical fact. The Newtonian attractive force, even if it
be a necessary assumption for a merely reflective view of
the subject, is still of no significance for the Reason,
which recognizes only absolute relations. The grounds of the
Keplerian laws can be derived, without any empirical
appendage, purely from the doctrine of Ideas, and of the two
Unities, which are in themselves one Unity, and in virtue of
which each being, while it is absolute in itself, is at the
same time in the absolute, and reciprocally.'

[Note 51\3: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vii. c. ii. sect. 5.]

It will be observed, that in this passage our mechanical
laws are objected to because they are not necessary results
of our ideas; which, however, as we have seen, according to
the opinion of some eminent mechanical philosophers, they
are. But to assume this evident necessity as a condition of
every advance in science, is to mistake the last, perhaps
unattainable step, for the first, which lies before our
feet. And, {285} without inquiring further about 'the
Doctrine of the two Unities,' or the manner in which from
that doctrine we may deduce the Keplerian laws, we may be
well convinced that such a doctrine cannot supply any
sufficient reason to induce us to quit the inductive path by
which all scientific truth up to the present time has been
acquired.

6. But without going to schools of philosophy opposed to the
Inductive School, we may find many loose and vague habits of
thinking on mechanical subjects among the common classes of
readers and reasoners. And there are some familiar modes of
employing the phraseology of mechanical science, which are,
in a certain degree, chargeable with inaccuracy, and may
produce or perpetuate confusion. Among such cases we may
mention the way in which the centripetal and centrifugal
forces, and also the projectile and central forces of the
planets, are often compared or opposed. Such antitheses
sometimes proceed upon the false notion that the two members
of these pairs of forces are of the same kind: whereas on
the contrary the _projectile_ force is a hypothetical
impulsive force which may, at some former period, have
caused the motion to begin; while the _central_ force is an
actual force, which must act continuously and during the
whole time of the motion, in order that the motion may go on
in the curve. In the same manner the _centrifugal_ force is
not a distinct force in a strict sense, but only a certain
result of the first law of motion, measured by the portion
of _centripetal_ force which counteracts it. Comparisons of
quantities so heterogeneous imply confusion of thought, and
often suggest baseless speculations and imagined reforms of
the received opinions.

7. I might point out other terms and maxims, in addition to
those already mentioned, which, though formerly employed in
a loose and vague manner, are now accurately understood and
employed by all just thinkers; and thus secure and diffuse a
right understanding of mechanical truths. Such are
_momentum_, _inertia_, _quantity of matter_, _quantity of
motion_; that _force is proportional to its effects_; that
_action and_ {286} _reaction are equal_; that _what is
gained in force by machinery is lost in time_; that _the
quantity of motion in the world cannot be either increased
or diminished_. When the expression of the truth thus
becomes easy and simple, clear and convincing, the meanings
given to words and phrases by discoverers glide into the
habitual texture of men's reasonings, and the effect of the
establishment of true mechanical principles is felt far from
the school of the mechanician. If these terms and maxims are
understood with tolerable clearness, they carry the
influence of truth to those who have no direct access to its
sources. Many an extravagant project in practical machinery,
and many a wild hypothesis in speculative physics, has been
repressed by the general currency of such maxims as we have
just quoted.

8. Indeed so familiar and evident are the elementary truths
of mechanics when expressed in this simple form, that they
are received as truisms; and men are disposed to look back
with surprise and scorn at the speculations which were
carried on in neglect of them. The most superficial reasoner
of modern times thinks himself entitled to speak with
contempt and ridicule of Kepler's hypothesis concerning the
physical causes of the celestial motions: and gives himself
credit for intellectual superiority, because he sees, as
self-evident, what such a man could not discover at all. It
is well for such a person to recollect, that the real cause
of his superior insight is not the pre-eminence of his
faculties, but the successful labours of those who have
preceded him. The language which he has learnt to use
unconsciously, has been adapted to, and moulded on,
ascertained truths. When he talks familiarly of
"accelerating forces" and "deflexions from the tangent," he
is assuming that which Kepler did not know, and which it
cost Galileo and his disciples so much labour and thought to
establish. Language is often called an instrument of
thought; but it is also the nutriment of thought; or rather,
it is the atmosphere in which thought lives: a medium
essential to the activity of our speculative power, although
invisible {287} and imperceptible in its operation; and an
element modifying, by its qualities and changes, the growth
and complexion of the faculties which it feeds. In this way
the influence of preceding discoveries upon subsequent ones,
of the past upon the present, is most penetrating and
universal, though most subtle and difficult to trace. The
most familiar words and phrases are connected by
imperceptible ties with the reasonings and discoveries of
former men and distant times. Their knowledge is an
inseparable part of ours; the present generation inherits
and uses the scientific wealth of all the past. And this is
the fortune, not only of the great and rich in the
intellectual world: of those who have the key to the ancient
storehouses, and who have accumulated treasures of their
own;--but the humblest inquirer, while he puts his
reasonings into words, benefits by the labours of the
greatest discoverers. When he counts his little wealth, he
finds that he has in his hands coins which bear the image
and superscription of ancient and modern intellectual
dynasties; and that in virtue of this possession,
acquisitions are in his power, solid knowledge within his
reach, which none could ever have attained to, if it were
not that the gold of truth, once dug out of the mine,
circulates more and more widely among mankind.

9. Having so fully examined, in the preceding instances, the
nature of the progress of thought which science implies,
both among the peculiar cultivators of science, and in that
wider world of general culture which receives only an
indirect influence from scientific discoveries, we shall not
find it necessary to go into the same extent of detail with
regard to the other provinces of human knowledge. In the
case of the Mechanical Sciences, we have endeavoured to
show, not only that Ideas are requisite in order to form
into a science the Facts which nature offers to us, but that
we can advance, almost or quite, to a complete
identification of the Facts with the Ideas. In the sciences
to which we now proceed, we shall not seek to fill up the
chasm by which Facts and Ideas are separated; but we shall
endeavour to detect the Ideas which our {288} knowledge
involves, to show how essential these are; and in some
respects to trace the mode in which they have been gradually
developed among men.

10. The motions of the heavenly bodies, their laws, their
causes, are among the subjects of the first division of the
Mechanical Sciences; and of these sciences we formerly
sketched the history, and have now endeavoured to exhibit
the philosophy. If we were to take any other class of
motions, _their_ laws and causes might give rise to sciences
which would be mechanical sciences in exactly the same sense
in which Physical Astronomy is so. The phenomena of magnets,
of electrical bodies, of galvanical apparatus, seem to form
obvious materials for such sciences; and if they were so
treated, the philosophy of such branches of knowledge would
naturally come under our consideration at this point of our
progress.

But on looking more attentively at the sciences of
Electricity, Magnetism, and Galvanism, we discover cogent
reasons for transferring them to another part of our
arrangement; we find it advisable to associate them with
Chemistry, and to discuss their principles when we can
connect them with the principles of chemical science. For
though the first steps and narrower generalizations of these
sciences depend upon mechanical ideas, the highest laws and
widest generalizations which we can reach respecting them,
involve chemical relations. The progress of these portions
of knowledge is in some respects opposite to the progress of
Physical Astronomy. In this, we begin with phenomena which
appear to indicate peculiar and various qualities in the
bodies which we consider, (namely, the heavenly bodies,) and
we find in the end that all these qualities resolve
themselves into one common mechanical property, which exists
alike in all bodies and parts of bodies. On the contrary, in
studying magnetical and electrical laws, we appear at first
to have a single extensive phenomenon, attraction and
repulsion: but in our attempts to generalize this
phenomenon, we find that it is governed by conditions
depending upon something quite separate from the bodies
themselves, upon {289} the presence and distribution of
peculiar and transitory agencies; and, so far as we can
discover, the general laws of these agencies are of a
_chemical_ nature, and are brought into action by peculiar
properties of special substances. In cosmical phenomena,
everything, in proportion as it is referred to mechanical
principles, tends to simplicity,--to permanent uniform
forces,--to one common, positive, property. In magnetical
and electrical appearances, on the contrary, the application
of mechanical principles leads only to a new complexity,
which requires a new explanation; and this explanation
involves changeable and various forces,--gradations and
oppositions of qualities. The doctrine of the universal
gravitation of matter is a simple and ultimate truth, in
which the mind can acquiesce and repose. We rank gravity
among the mechanical attributes of matter, and we see no
necessity to derive it from any ulterior properties. Gravity
belongs to matter, independent of any conditions. But the
_conditions_ of magnetic or electrical activity require
investigation as much as the _laws_ of their action. Of
these conditions no mere mechanical explanation can be
given; we are compelled to take along with us chemical
properties and relations also: and thus magnetism,
electricity, galvanism, are _mechanico-chemical sciences_.

11. Before considering these, therefore, I shall treat of
what I shall call _Secondary Mechanical Sciences_; by which
expression I mean the sciences depending upon certain
qualities which our senses discover to us in
bodies;--_Optics_, which has visible phenomena for its
subject; _Acoustics_, the science of hearing; the doctrine
of _Heat_, a quality which our touch recognizes: to this
last science I shall take the liberty of sometimes giving
the name _Thermotics_, analogous to the names of the other
two. If our knowledge of the phenomena of Smell and Taste
had been successfully cultivated and systematized, the
present part of our work would be the place for the
philosophical discussion of those sensations as the subjects
of science.

The branches of knowledge thus grouped in one class involve
common Fundamental Ideas, from which {290} their principles
are derived in a mode analogous, at least in a certain
degree, to the mode in which the principles of the
mechanical sciences are derived from the fundamental ideas
of causation and reaction. We proceed now to consider these
Fundamental Ideas, their nature, development, and
consequences.




{{291}}
