CHAPTER VII.

OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS.


1. IN the History of Mechanics, I have traced the steps by
which the three Laws of Motion and the other principles of
mechanics were discovered, established, and extended to the
widest generality of form and application. We have, in these
laws, examples of principles which were, historically
speaking, obtained by reference to experience. Bearing in
mind the object and the result of the preceding discussions,
we cannot but turn with much interest to examine these
portions of science; to inquire whether there be any real
difference in the grounds and nature between the knowledge
thus obtained, and those truths which we have already
contemplated; and which, as we have seen, contain their own
evidence, and do not require proof from experiment.

2. _The First Law of Motion._--The first law of motion is,
that _When a body moves not acted upon by any force, it will
go on perpetually in a straight line, and with a uniform
velocity._ Now what is the real ground of our assent to this
proposition? That it is not at first sight a self-evident
truth, appears to be clear; since from the time of Aristotle
to that of Galileo the opposite assertion was held to be
true; and it was believed that all bodies in motion had, by
their own nature, a constant tendency to move more and more
slowly, so as to stop at last. This belief, indeed, is
probably even now entertained by most persons, till their
attention is fixed upon the arguments by which the first law
of motion is established. It is, however, not difficult to
lead any person of a speculative habit {236} of thought to
see that the retardation which constantly takes place in the
motion of all bodies when left to themselves, is, in
reality, the effect of extraneous forces which destroy the
velocity. A top ceases to spin because the friction against
the ground and the resistance of the air gradually diminish
its motion, and not because its motion has any internal
principle of decay or fatigue. This may be shown, and was,
in fact, shown by Hooke before the Royal Society, at the
time when the laws of motion were still under discussion, by
means of experiments in which the weight of the top is
increased, and the resistance to motion offered by its
support, is diminished; for by such contrivances its motion
is made to continue much longer than it would otherwise do.
And by experiments of this nature, although we can never
remove the whole of the external impediments to continued
motion, and although, consequently, there will always be
some retardation; and an end of the motion of a body left to
itself, however long it may be delayed, must at last come;
yet we can establish a conviction that if all resistance
could be removed, there would be no diminution of velocity,
and thus the motion would go on for ever.

If we call to mind the axioms which we formerly stated, as
containing the most important conditions involved in the
idea of Cause, it will be seen that our conviction in this
case depends upon the first axiom of Causation, that nothing
can happen without a cause. Every change in the velocity of
the moving body must have a cause; and if the change can, in
any manner, be referred to the presence of other bodies,
these are said to exert _force_ upon the moving body: and
the conception of force is thus evolved from the general
idea of cause. _Force is any cause which has motion, or
change of motion, for its effect_; and thus, all the change
of velocity of a body which can be referred to extraneous
bodies,--as the air which surrounds it, or the support on
which it rests,--is considered as the effect of forces; and
this consideration is looked upon as explaining the
difference between the motion which really takes places in
the experiment, and that motion {237} which, as the law
asserts, would take place if the body were not acted on by
any forces.

Thus the truth of the first law of motion depends upon the
axiom that no change can take place without a cause; and
follows from the definition of force, if we suppose that
there can be none but an _external_ cause of change. But in
order to establish the law, it was necessary further to be
assured that there is no _internal_ cause of change of
velocity belonging to all matter whatever, and operating in
such a manner that the mere progress of time is sufficient
to produce a diminution of velocity in all moving bodies. It
appears from the history of mechanical science, that this
latter step required a reference to observation and
experiment; and that the first law of motion is so far,
historically at least, dependent upon our experience.

But notwithstanding this historical evidence of the need
which we have of a reference to observed facts, in order to
place this first law of motion out of doubt, it has been
maintained by very eminent mathematicians and philosophers,
that the law is, in truth, evident of itself, and does not
really rest upon experimental proof. Such, for example, is
the opinion of d'Alembert[20\3], who offers what is called
an _à priori_ proof of this law; that is, a demonstration
derived from our ideas alone. When a body is put in motion,
either, he says, the cause which puts it in motion at first,
suffices to make it move one foot, or the continued action
of the cause during this foot is requisite for the motion.
In the first case, the same reason which made the body
proceed to the end of the first foot will hold for its going
on through a second, a third, a fourth foot, and so on for
any number. In the second case, the same reason which made
the force continue to act during the first foot, will hold
for its acting, and therefore for the body moving during
each succeeding foot. And thus the body, once beginning to
move, must go on moving for ever.

[Note 20\3: _Dynamique._]

{238} It is obvious that we might reply to this argument,
that the reasons for the body proceeding during each
succeeding foot may not necessarily be all the same; for
among these reasons may be the time which has elapsed; and
thus the velocity may undergo a change as the time proceeds:
and we require observation to inform us that it does not do so.

Professor Playfair has presented nearly the same argument,
although in a different and more mathematical form[21\3]. If
the velocity change, says he, it must change according to
some expression of calculation depending upon the time, or,
in mathematical language, must be a _function_ of the time.
If the velocity diminish as the time increases, this may be
expressed by stating the velocity in each case as a certain
number, from which another quantity, or _term_, increasing
as the time increases, is subtracted. But, Playfair adds,
there is no condition involved in the nature of the case, by
which the _coefficients_, or numbers which are to be
employed, along with the number representing the time, in
calculating this second term, can be determined to be of one
magnitude rather than of any other. Therefore he infers
there can be no such coefficients, and that the velocity is
in each case equal to some constant number, independent of
the time; and is therefore the same for all times.

[Note 21\3: _Outlines of Natural Philosophy_, p. 26.]

In reply to this we may observe, that the circumstance of
_our not seeing_ in the nature of the case anything which
determines for us the coefficients above spoken of, cannot
prove that they have not some certain value _in nature_. We
do not see in the nature of the case anything which should
determine a body to fall sixteen feet in a second of time,
rather than one foot or one hundred feet: yet in fact the
space thus run through by falling bodies is determined to a
certain magnitude. It would be easy to assign a mathematical
expression for the velocity of a body, implying that
one-hundredth of the velocity, or any other {239} fraction,
is lost in each second[22\3]: and where is the absurdity of
supposing such an expression really to represent the
velocity?

[Note 22\3:  This would be the case, if, _t_ being the
number of seconds elapsed, and _C_ some constant quantity,
the velocity were expressed by this mathematical formula,
_C_(99/100)^_t_.]

Most modern writers on mechanics have embraced the opposite
opinion, and have ascribed our knowledge of this first law
of motion to experience. Thus M. Poisson, one of the most
eminent of the mathematicians who have written on this
subject, says[23\3], "We cannot affirm _à priori_ that the
velocity communicated to a body will not become slower and
slower of itself, and end by being entirely extinguished. It
is only by experience and induction that this question can
be decided."

[Note 23\3: Poisson, _Dynamique_, ed. 2, art. 113.]

Yet it cannot be denied that there is much force in those
arguments by which it is attempted to show that the First
Law of Motion, such as we find it, is more consonant to our
conceptions than any other would be. The Law, as it exists,
is the most simple that we can conceive. Instead of having
to determine by experiments what is the law of the natural
change of velocity, we find the Law to be that it does not
change at all. To a certain extent, the Law depends upon the
evident axiom, that no change can take place without a
cause. But the question further occurs, whether the mere
lapse of time may not be a cause of change of velocity. In
order to ensure this, we have recourse to experiment; and
the result is that time alone does not produce any such
change. In addition to the conditions of change which we
collect from our own Ideas, we ask of Experience what other
conditions and circumstances she has to offer; and the
answer is, that she can point out none; When we have removed
the alterations which external causes, in our very
conception of them, occasion, there are no longer any
alterations. Instead of having to guide ourselves {240} by
experience, we learn that on this subject she has nothing to
tell us. Instead of having to take into account a number of
circumstances, we find that we have only to reject all
circumstances. The velocity of a body remains unaltered by
time alone, of whatever kind the body itself be.

But the doctrine that time alone is not a cause of change of
velocity in any body is further recommended to us by this
consideration;--that time is conceived by us not as a cause,
but only as a condition of other causes producing their
effects. Causes operate in time; but it is only when the
cause exists, that the lapse of time can give rise to
alterations. When therefore all external causes of change of
velocity are supposed to be removed, the velocity must
continue identical with itself, whatever the time which
elapses. An eternity of negation can produce no positive
result.

Thus, though the discovery of the First Law of Motion was
made, historically speaking, by means of experiment, we have
now attained a point of view in which we see that it might
have been certainly known to be true independently of
experience. This law in its ultimate form, when completely
simplified and steadily contemplated, assumes the character
of a self-evident truth. We shall find the same process to
take place in other instances. And this feature in the
progress of science will hereafter be found to suggest very
important views with regard both to the nature and prospects
of our knowledge.

3. _Gravity is a Uniform Force._--We shall find observations
of the same kind offering themselves in a manner more or
less obvious, with regard to the other principles of
Dynamics. The determination of the laws according to which
bodies fall downwards by the common action of gravity, has
already been noticed in the History of Mechanics[24\3], as
one of the earliest positive advances in the doctrine of
motion. These laws were first rightly stated by Galileo, and
{241} established by reasoning and by experiment, not
without dissent and controversy. The amount of these
doctrines is this: That gravity is a uniform accelerating
force; such a _uniform force_ having this for its character,
that it _makes the velocity increase in exact proportion to
the time of motion_. The relation which the spaces described
by the body bear to the times in which they are described,
is obtained by mathematical deduction from this definition
of the force.

[Note 24\3: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. ii. sect. 2.]

The clear Definition of a uniform accelerating force, and
the Proposition that gravity is such a force, were
co-ordinate and contemporary steps in this discovery. In
defining accelerating force, reference, tacit or express,
was necessarily made to the second of the general axioms
respecting causation,--That causes are measured by their
effects. Force, in the cases now under our notice, is
conceived to be, as we have already stated, (p. 236,) any
cause which, acting from without, changes the motion of a
body. It must, therefore, in this acceptation, be measured
by the magnitude of the changes which are produced. But in
what manner the changes of motion are to be employed as the
measures of force, is learnt from observation of the facts
which we see taking place in the world. Experience
_interprets_ the axiom of causation, from which otherwise we
could not deduce any real knowledge. We may assume, in
virtue of our general conceptions of force, that under the
same circumstances, a greater change of motion implies a
greater force producing it; but what are we to expect when
the circumstances change? The weight of a body makes it fall
from rest at first, and causes it to move more quickly as it
descends lower. We may express this by saying, that gravity,
the universal force which makes all terrestrial bodies fall
when not supported, by its continuous action first _gives_
velocity to the body when it has none, and afterwards _adds_
velocity to that which the body already has. But how is the
velocity added proportioned to the velocity which already
exists? Force acting on a body at rest, and on a body in
motion, appears under very different {242} conditions;--how
are the effects related? Let the force be conceived to be in
both cases the same, since force is conceived to depend upon
the extraneous bodies, and not upon the condition of the
moving mass itself. But the force being the same, the
effects may still be different. It is at first sight
conceivable that the body, acted upon by the same gravity,
may receive a less addition of velocity when it is already
moving in the direction in which this gravity impels it; for
if we ourselves push a body forwards, we can produce little
additional effect upon it when it is already moving rapidly
away from us. May it not be true, in like manner, that
although gravity be always the same force, its effect
depends upon the velocity which the body under its influence
already possesses?

Observation and reasoning combined, as we have said, enabled
Galileo to answer these questions. He asserted and proved
that we may consistently and properly measure a force by the
velocity which is by it generated in a body, in some certain
time, as one second; and further, that if we adopt this
measure, gravity will be a force of the same value under all
circumstances of the body which it affects; since it
appeared that, in fact, a falling body does receive equal
increments of velocity in equal times from first to last.

If it be asked whether we could have known, anterior to, or
independent of, experiment, that gravity is a uniform force
in the sense thus imposed upon the term; it appears clear
that we must reply, that we could not have attained to such
knowledge, since other laws of the motion of bodies
downwards are easily conceivable, and nothing but
observation could inform us that one of these laws does not
prevail in fact. Indeed, we may add, that the assertion that
the force of gravity is uniform, is so far from being
self-evident, that it is not even true; for gravity varies
according to the distance from the center of the earth; and
although this variation is so small as to be, in the case of
falling bodies, imperceptible, it negatives the rigorous
uniformity of the force as completely, though {243} not to
the same extent, as if the weight of a body diminished in a
marked degree, when it was carried from the lower to the
upper room of a house. It cannot, then, be a truth
independent of experience, that gravity is uniform.

Yet, in fact, the assertion that gravity is uniform was
assented to, not only before it was proved, but even before
it was clearly understood. It was readily granted by all,
that bodies which fall freely are _uniformly_ accelerated;
but while some held the opinion just stated, that uniformly
accelerated motion is that in which the velocity increases
in proportion to the _time_, others maintained, that _that_
is uniformly accelerated motion, in which the velocity
increases in proportion to the _space_; so that, for
example, a body in falling vertically through twenty feet
should acquire twice as great a velocity as one which falls
through ten feet.

These two opinions are both put forward by the interlocutors
of Galileo's Dialogue on this subject[25\3]. And the latter
supposition is rejected, the author showing, not that it is
inconsistent with experience, but that it is impossible in
itself: inasmuch as it would inevitably lead to the
conclusion, that the fall through a large and a small
vertical space would occupy exactly the same time.

[Note 25\3: _Dialogo_, iii. p. 95.]

Indeed, Galileo assumes his definition of uniformly
accelerated motion as one which is sufficiently recommended
by its own simplicity. 'If we attend carefully,' he says,
'we shall find that no mode of increase of velocity is more
simple than that which adds equal increments in equal times.
Which we may easily understand if we consider the close
affinity of time and motion: for as the uniformity of motion
is defined by the equality of spaces described in equal
times, so we may conceive the uniformity of acceleration to
exist when equal velocities are added in equal times.'

Galileo's mode of supporting his opinion, that bodies
falling by the action of gravity are thus uniformly {244}
accelerated, consists, in the first place, in adducing the
maxim that nature always employs the most simple
means[26\3]. But he is far from considering this a decisive
argument. 'I,' says one of his speakers, 'as it would be
very unreasonable in me to gainsay this or any other
definition which any author may please to make, since they
are all arbitrary, may still, without offence, doubt whether
such a definition, conceived and admitted in the abstract,
fits, agrees, and is verified in that kind of accelerated
motion which bodies have when they descend naturally.'

[Note 26\3: _Dialogo_, iii. p. 91.]

The experimental proof that bodies, when they fall
downwards, are uniformly accelerated, is (by Galileo)
derived from the inclined plane; and therefore assumes the
proposition, that if such uniform acceleration prevail in
vertical motion, it will also hold when a body is compelled
to describe an oblique rectilinear path. This proposition
may be shown to be true, if (assuming by anticipation the
Third Law of Motion, of which we shall shortly have to
speak,) we introduce the conception of a uniform statical
force as the cause of uniform acceleration. For the force on
the inclined plane bears a constant proportion to the
vertical force, and this proportion is known from statical
considerations. But in the work of which we are speaking,
Galileo does not introduce this abstract conception of force
as the foundation of his doctrines. Instead of this, he
proposes, as a postulate sufficiently evident to be made the
basis of his reasonings, That bodies which descend down
inclined planes of different inclinations, but of the same
vertical height, all acquire the same velocity[27\3]. But
when this postulate has been propounded by one of the
persons of the dialogue, another interlocutor says, 'You
discourse very probably; but besides this likelihood, I wish
to augment the probability so far, that it shall be almost
as complete as a necessary demonstration.' He then proceeds
to describe a very ingenious and simple experiment, which
shows that when a body is made to swing upwards at the end
of {245} a string, it attains to the same height, whatever
is the path it follows, so long as it starts from the lowest
point with the same velocity. And thus Galileo's postulate
is experimentally confirmed, so far as the force of gravity
can be taken as an example of the forces which the postulate
contemplates: and conversely, gravity is proved to be a
uniform force, so far as it can be considered clear that the
postulate is true of uniform forces.

[Note 276\3: _Dialogo_, iii. p. 36.]

When we have introduced the conception and definition of
accelerating force, Galileo's postulate, that bodies
descending down inclined planes of the same vertical height,
acquire the same velocity, may, by a few steps of reasoning,
be demonstrated to be true of uniform forces: and thus the
proof that gravity, either in vertical or oblique motion, is
a uniform force, is confirmed by the experiment above
mentioned; as it also is, on like grounds, by many other
experiments, made upon inclined planes and pendulums.

Thus the propriety of Galileo's conception of a uniform
force, and the doctrine that gravity is a uniform force,
were confirmed by the same reasonings and experiments. We
may make here two remarks; _First_, that the conception,
when established and rightly stated, appears so simple as
hardly to require experimental proof; a remark which we have
already made with regard to the First Law of Motion: and
_Second_, that the discovery of the real law of nature was
made by assuming propositions which, without further proof,
we should consider as very precarious, and as far less
obvious, as well as less evident, than the law of nature in
its simple form.

4. _The Second Law of Motion._--When a body, instead of
falling downwards from rest, is thrown in any direction, it
describes a curve line, till its motion is stopped. In this,
and in all other cases in which a body describes a curved
path in free space, its motion is determined by the Second
Law of Motion. The law, in its general form, is as
follows:--When a body is thus cast forth and acted upon by a
force in a direction {246} transverse to its motion, the
result is, That _there is combined with the motion with
which the body is thrown, another motion, exactly the same
as that which the same force would have communicated to a
body at rest_.

It will readily be understood that the basis of this law is
the axiom already stated, that effects are measured by their
causes. In virtue of this axiom, the effect of gravity
acting upon a body in a direction transverse to its motion,
must measure the accelerative or deflective force of gravity
under those circumstances. If this effect vary with the
varying velocity and direction of the body thus acted upon,
the deflective force of gravity also will vary with those
circumstances. The more simple supposition is, that the
deflective force of gravity is the same, whatever be the
velocity and direction of the body which is subjected to its
influence: and this is the supposition which we find to be
verified by facts. For example, a ball let fall from the top
of a ship's upright mast, when she is sailing steadily
forward, will fall at the foot of the mast, just as if it
were let fall while the ship were at rest; thus showing that
the motion which gravity gives to the ball is compounded
with the horizontal motion which the ball shares with the
ship from the first. This general and simple conception of
motions as _compounded_ with one another, represents, it is
proved, the manner in which the motion produced by gravity
modifies any other motion which the body may previously have had.

The discussions which terminated in the general reception of
this Second Law of Motion among mechanical writers, were
much mixed up with the arguments for and against the
Copernican system, which system represented the earth as
revolving upon its axis. For the obvious argument against
this system was, that if each point of the earth's surface
were thus in motion from west to east, a stone dropt from
the top of a tower would be left behind, the tower moving
away from it: and the answer was, that by this law of
motion, the stone would have the earth's motion impressed
upon it, as well as that motion which would {247} arise from
its gravity to the earth; and that the motion of the stone
relative to the tower would thus be the same as if both
earth and tower were at rest. Galileo further urged, as a
presumption in favour of the opinion that the two
motions,--the circular motion arising from the rotation of
the earth, and the downward motion arising from the gravity
of the stone, would be compounded in the way we have
described, (neither of them disturbing or diminishing the
other,)--that the first motion was in its own nature not
liable to any change or diminution[28\3], as we learn from
the First Law of Motion. Nor was the subject lightly
dismissed. The experiment of the stone let fall from the top
of the mast was made in various forms by Gassendi; and in
his Epistle, _De Motu impresso a Motore translato_, the rule
now in question is supported by reference to these
experiments. In this manner, the general truth, the Second
Law of Motion, was established completely and beyond
dispute.

[Note 28\3: _Dialogo_, ii. p. 114.]

But when this law had been proved to be true in a general
sense, with such accuracy as rude experiments, like those of
Galileo and Gassendi, would admit, it still remained to be
ascertained (supposing our knowledge of the law to be the
result of experience alone,) whether it were true with that
precise and rigorous exactness which more refined modes of
experimenting could test. We so willingly believe in the
simplicity of laws of nature, that the rigorous accuracy of
such a law, known to be at least approximately true, was
taken for granted, till some ground for suspecting the
contrary should appear. Yet calculations have not been
wanting which might confirm the law as true to the last
degree of accuracy. Laplace relates (_Syst. du Monde_, livre
iv. chap. 16,) that at one time he had conceived it possible
that the effect of gravity upon the moon might be slightly
modified by the moon's direction and velocity; and that in
this way an explanation might be found for the moon's
_acceleration_ (a deviation of her observed from her
calculated place, which long {248} perplexed
mathematicians). But it was after some time discovered that
this feature in the moon's motion arose from another cause;
and the second law of motion was confirmed as true in the
most rigorous sense.

Thus we see that although there were arguments which might
be urged in favour of this law, founded upon the necessary
relations of ideas, men became convinced of its truth only
when it was verified and confirmed by actual experiment. But
yet in this case again, as in the former ones, when the law
had been established beyond doubt or question, men were very
ready to believe that it was not a mere result of
observation,--that the truth which it contained was not
derived from experience,--that it might have been assumed as
true in virtue of reasonings anterior to experience,--and
that experiments served only to make the law more plain and
intelligible, as visible diagrams in geometry serve to
illustrate geometrical truths; our knowledge not being (they
deemed) in mechanics, any more than in geometry, borrowed
from the senses. It was thought by many to be self-evident,
that the effect of a force in any direction cannot be
increased or diminished by any motion transverse to the
direction of the force which the body may have at the same
time: or, to express it otherwise, that if the motion of the
body be compounded of a horizontal and vertical motion, the
vertical motion alone will be affected by the vertical
force. This principle, indeed, not only has appeared evident
to many persons, but even at the present day is assumed as
an axiom by many of the most eminent mathematicians. It is,
for example, so employed in the _Mécanique Céleste_ of
Laplace, which may be looked upon as the standard of
mathematical mechanics in our time; and in the _Mécanique
Analytique_ of Lagrange, the most consummate example which
has appeared of subtilty of thought on such subjects, as
well as of power of mathematical generalization[29\3]. And
{249} thus we have here another example of that circumstance
which we have already noticed in speaking of the First Law
of Motion, (Art. 2 of this chapter,) and of the Law that
Gravity is a uniform Force, (Art. 3); namely, that the law,
though historically established by experiments, appears,
when once discovered and reduced to its most simple and
general form, to be self-evident. I am the more desirous of
drawing attention to this feature in various portions of the
history of science, inasmuch as it will be found to lead to
some very extensive and important views, hereafter to be
considered.

[Note 29\3: I may observe that the rule that we may
_compound_ motions, as the Law supposes, is involved in the
step of _resolving_ them; which is done in the passage to
which I refer. (_Méc. Analyt._ ptie. i. sect. i. art. 3. p.
225.) 'Si on conçoit que le mouvement d'un corps et les
forces qui le sollicitent soient _decomposées_ suivant trois
lignes droites perpendiculaires entre elles, on pourra
considérer séparément les mouvemens et les forces relatives
à chacun de ces trois directions. Car à cause de la
perpendicularité des directions il est visible que chacun de
ces mouvemens partiels peut être regardé comme indépendant
des deux autres, et qu'il ne peut recevoir d'altération que
de la part de la force qui agit dans la direction de ce
mouvement; l'on peut conclure que ces trois mouvemens
doivent suivre, chacun en particulier, les lois des
mouvemens rectilignes accélérés ou retardés par les forces
données.' Laplace makes the same assumption in effect,
(_Méc. Cél._ p. i. liv. i. art. 7), by resolving the forces
which act upon a point in three rectangular directions, and
reasoning separately concerning each direction. But in his
mode of treating the subject is involved a principle which
belongs to the Third Law of Motion, namely, the doctrine
that the velocity is as the force, of which we shall have to
speak elsewhere.]

5. _The Third Law of Motion._--We have, in the definition of
Accelerating Force, a measure of Forces, so far as they are
concerned in producing motion. We had before, in speaking of
the principles of statics, defined the measure of Forces or
Pressures, so far as they are employed in producing
equilibrium. But these two aspects of Force are closely
connected; and we require a law which shall lay down the
rule of their connexion. By the same kind of muscular
exertion by which we can support a heavy stone, we can also
put it in motion. The question then occurs, how is the rate
and manner of its motion determined? The answer to this
question is contained in the Third Law {250} of Motion, and
it is to this effect: that the _Momentum_ which any pressure
produces in the mass in a given time is proportional to the
pressure. By _Momentum_ is meant the product of the numbers
which express the velocity and the mass of the body: and
hence, if the mass of the body be the same in the instances
which we compare, the rule is,--That _the velocity is as the
force which produces it_; and this is one of the simplest
ways of expressing the Third Law of Motion.

In agreement with our general plan, we have to ask, What is
the ground of this rule? What is the simplest and most
satisfactory form to which we can reduce the proof of it?
Or, to take an instance; if a double pressure be exerted
against a given mass, so disposed as to be capable of
motion, why must it produce twice the velocity in the same time?

To answer this question, suppose the double pressure to be
resolved into two single pressures: one of these will
produce a certain velocity; and the question is, why an
equal pressure, acting upon the same mass, will produce an
equal velocity _in addition_ to the former? Or, stating the
matter otherwise, the question is, why each of the two
forces will produce its separate effect, unaltered by the
simultaneous action of the other force?

This statement of the case makes it seem to approach very
near to such cases as are included in the Second Law of
Motion, and therefore it might appear that this Third Law
has no grounds distinct from the Second. But it must be
recollected that the word _force_ has a different meaning in
this case and in that; in this place it signifies
_pressure_; in the statement of the Second Law its import
was _accelerative_ or _deflective force_, measured by the
velocity or deflexion generated. And thus the Third Law of
Motion, so far as our reasonings yet go, appears to rest on
a foundation different from the Second.

Accordingly, that part of the Third Law of Motion which we
are now considering, that the velocity generated is as the
force, was obtained, in fact, by a separate train of
research. The first exemplification of this {251} law which
was studied by mathematicians, was the motion of bodies upon
inclined planes: for the force which urges a body down an
inclined plane is known by statics, and hence the velocity
of its descent was to be determined. Galileo
originally[30\3] in his attempts to solve this problem of
the descent of a body down an inclined plane, did not
proceed from the principle which we have stated, (the
determination of the force which acts down the inclined
plane from statical considerations,) obvious as it may seem;
but assumed, as we have already seen, a proposition
apparently far more precarious;--namely, that a body sliding
down a smooth inclined plane acquires always the same
velocity, so long as the _vertical_ height fallen through is
the same. And this conjecture (for at first it was nothing
more than a conjecture) he confirmed by an ingenious
experiment; in which bodies acquired or lost the same
velocity by descending or ascending through the same height,
although their paths were different in other respects.

[Note 30\3: _Dial. della Sc. Nuov._ iii. p. 96. See _Hist.
Ind. Sci._ b. vi. c. ii. sect. 5.]

This was the form in which the doctrine of the motion of
bodies down inclined planes was at first presented in
Galileo's _Dialogues_ on the Science of Motion. But his
disciple Viviani was dissatisfied with the assumption thus
introduced; and in succeeding editions of the _Dialogues_,
the apparent chasm in the reasoning was much narrowed, by
making the proof depend upon a principle nearly identical
with the third law of motion as we have just stated it. In
the proof thus added, 'We are agreed,' says the
interlocutor[31\3], 'that in a moving body the impetus,
energy, momentum, or propension to motion, is as great as is
the force or least resistance which suffices to sustain it;'
and the impetus or momentum, in the course of the proof,
being taken to be as the velocity produced in a given time,
it is manifest that the principle so stated amounts to this;
that the velocity produced is as the statical force. And
thus this law of motion appears, {252} in the school of
Galileo, to have been suggested and established at first by
experiment, but afterwards confirmed and demonstrated by _à
priori_ considerations.

[Note 31\3: _Dialogo_, p. 104.]

We see, in the above reasoning, a number of abstract terms
introduced which are not, at first at least, very distinctly
defined, as _impetus_, _momentum_, &c. Of these, _momentum_
has been selected, to express that quantity which, in a
moving body, measures the statical force impressed upon the
body. This quantity is, as we have just seen, proportional
to the velocity in a given body. It is also, in different
bodies, proportional to the mass of the body. This part of
the third law of motion follows from our conception of
matter in general as consisting of parts capable of
addition. A double pressure must be required to produce the
same velocity in a double mass; for if the mass be halved,
each half will require an equal pressure; and the addition,
both of the pressures and of the masses, will take place
without disturbing the effects.

The measure of the quantity of matter of a body considered
as affecting the velocity which pressure produces in the
body, is termed its _inertia_, as we have already stated (c.
v.). Inertia is the property by which a large mass of matter
requires a greater force than a small mass, to give it an
equal velocity. It belongs to each portion of matter; and
portions of inertia are added whenever portions of matter
are added. Hence _inertia is as the quantity of matter_;
which is only another way of expressing this third law of
motion, so far as quantity of matter is concerned.

But how do we know the quantity of matter of a body? We may
reply, that we take the weight as the measure of the
quantity of matter: but we may then be again asked, how it
appears that the weight is proportional to the inertia;
which it must be, in order that the quantity of matter may
be proportional to both one and the other. We answer, that
this appears to be true experimentally, because all bodies
fall with equal velocities by gravity, when the known causes
of difference are removed. The observations of falling {253}
bodies, indeed, are not susceptible of much exactness: but
experiments leading to the same result, and capable of great
precision, were made upon pendulums by Newton; as he relates
in his _Principia_, Book III. prop. 6. They all agreed, he
says, with perfect accuracy: and thus the weight and the
inertia are proportional in all cases, and therefore each
proportional to the quantity of matter as measured by the other.

The conception of inertia, as we have already seen in
chapter V., involves the notion of action and reaction; and
thus the laws which involve inertia depend upon the idea of
mutual causation. The rule, that the velocity is as the
force, depends upon the principle of causation, that the
effect is proportional to the cause; the effect being here
so estimated as to be consistent both with the other laws of
motion and with experiment.

But here, as in other cases, the question occurs again; Is
experiment really requisite for the proof of this law? If we
look to authorities, we shall be not a little embarrassed to
decide. D'Alembert is against the necessity of experimental
proof. 'Why,' says he[32\3], 'should we have recourse to
this principle employed, at the present day, by everybody,
that the force is proportional to the velocity? ... a
principle resting solely upon this vague and obscure axiom,
that the effect is proportional to the cause. We shall not
examine here,' he adds, 'if this principle is necessarily
true; we shall only avow that the proofs which have hitherto
been adduced do not appear to us unexceptionable: nor shall
we, with some geometers, adopt it as a purely contingent
truth; which would be to ruin the certainty of mechanics,
and to reduce it to be nothing more than an experimental
science. We shall content ourselves with observing,' he
proceeds, 'that certain or doubtful, clear or obscure, it is
useless in mechanics, and consequently ought to be banished
from the science.' Though D'Alembert rejects the third law
of motion in this form, he accepts one of {254} equivalent
import, which appears to him to possess axiomatic certainty;
and this procedure is in consistence with the course which
he takes, of claiming for the science of mechanics more than
mere experimental truth. On the contrary, Laplace considers
this third law as established by experiment. 'Is the force,'
he says'[33\3], 'proportioned to the velocity? This,' he
replies, 'we cannot know _à priori_, seeing that we are in
ignorance of the nature of moving force: we must therefore,
for this purpose, recur to experience; for all which is not
a necessary consequence of the few data we have respecting
the nature of things, is, for us, only a result of
observation.' And again he says[34\3], 'Here, then, we have
two laws of motion,--the law of inertia [the first law of
motion], and the law of the force proportional to the
velocity,--which are given by observation. They are the most
natural and the most simple laws which we can imagine, and
without doubt they flow from the very nature of matter; but
this nature being unknown, they are, for us, only observed
facts: the only ones, however, which Mechanics borrows from
experience.'

[Note 32\3: _Dynamique_, Pref. p. x.]

[Note 33\3: _Méc. Cél._ p. 15.]

[Note 34\3: p. 18.]

It will appear, I think, from the views given in this and
several other parts of the present work, that we cannot with
justice say that we have very 'few data respecting the
nature of things,' in speculating concerning the laws of the
universe; since all the consequences which flow from the
relations of our fundamental ideas, necessarily regulate our
knowledge of things, so far as we have any such knowledge.
Nor can we say that the nature of matter is unknown to us,
in any sense in which we can conceive knowledge as possible.
The nature of matter is no more unknown than the nature of
space or of number. In our conception of matter, as of space
and of number, are involved certain relations, which are the
necessary groundwork of our knowledge; and anything which is
independent of these relations, is not unknown, but
inconceivable. {255}

It must be already clear to the reader, from the phraseology
employed by these two eminent mathematicians, that the
question respecting the formation of the third law of motion
can only be solved by a careful consideration of what we
mean by observation and experience, nature and matter. But
it will probably be generally allowed, that, taking into
account the explanations already offered of the necessary
conditions of experience and of the conception of inertia,
this law of motion, that the inertia is as the quantity of
matter, is almost or altogether self-evident.

6. _Action and Reaction are Equal in Moving Bodies._--When
we have to consider bodies as acting upon one another, and
influencing each other's motions, the third law of motion is
still applied; but along with this, we also employ the
general principle that action and reaction are equal and
opposite. Action and reaction are here to be understood as
momentum produced and destroyed, according to the measure of
action established by the Third Law of Motion: and the cases
in which this principle is thus employed form so large a
portion of those in which the third law of motion is used,
that some writers (Newton at the head of them) have
stated the equality of action and reaction as the third law
of motion.

The third law of motion being once established, the equality
of action and reaction, in the sense of momentum gained and
lost, necessarily follows. Thus, if a weight hanging by a
string over the edge of a smooth level table draw another
weight along the table, the hanging weight moves more slowly
than it would do if not so connected, and thus loses
velocity by the connexion; while the other weight gains by
the connexion all the velocity which it has, for if left to
itself it would rest. And the pressures which restrain the
descent of the first body and accelerate the motion of the
second, are equal at all instants of time, for each of these
pressures is the tension of the string: and hence, by the
third law of motion, the momentum gained by the one body,
and the momentum lost by the other in virtue of the action
of this string, are equal. And similar {256} reasoning may
be employed in any other case where bodies are connected.

The case where one body does not push or draw, but _strikes_
another, appeared at first to mechanical reasoners to be of
a different nature from the others; but a little
consideration was sufficient to show that a blow is, in
fact, only a short and violent pressure; and that,
therefore, the general rule of the equality of momentum lost
and gained applies to this as well as to the other cases.

Thus, in order to determine the case of the direct action of
bodies upon one another, we require no new law of motion.
The equality of action and reaction, which enters
necessarily into every conception of mechanical operation,
combined with the measure of action as given by the third
law of motion, enables us to trace the consequences of every
case, whether of pressure or of impact.

7. _D'Alembert's Principle._--But what will be the result
when bodies do not act directly upon each other, but are
_indirectly_ connected in any way by levers, strings,
pulleys, or in any other manner, so that one part of the
system has a mechanical advantage over another? The result
must still be determined by the principle that action and
reaction balance each other. The action and reaction, being
pressures in one sense, must balance each other by the laws
of statics, for these laws determine the equilibrium of
pressure. Now action and reaction, according to their
measures in the Third Law of Motion, are momentum gained and
lost, when the action is direct; and except the indirect
action introduce some modification of the law, they must
have the same measure still. But, in fact, we cannot well
conceive any modification of the law to take place in this
case; for direct action is only one (the ultimate) case of
indirect action. Thus if two heavy bodies act at different
points of a lever, the action of each on the other is
indirect; but if the two points come together, the action
becomes direct. Hence the rule must be that which we have
already stated; for if the rule were false for indirect
action, it would {257} also be false for direct action, for
which case we have shown it to be true. And thus we obtain
the general principle, that in any system of bodies which
act on each other, action and reaction, estimated by
momentum gained and lost, balance each other according to
the laws of equilibrium. This principle, which is so general
as to supply a key to the solution of all possible
mechanical problems, is commonly called _D'Alembert's
Principle_. The experimental proofs which convinced men of
the truth of the Third Law of Motion were, many or most of
them, proofs of the law in this extended sense. And thus the
proof of D'Alembert's Principle, both from the idea of
mechanical action and from experience, is included in the
proof of the law already stated.

8. _Connexion of Dynamical and Statical Principles._--The
principle of equilibrium of D'Alembert just stated, is the
law which he would substitute for the Third Law of Motion;
and he would thus remove the necessity for an independent
proof of that law. In like manner, the Second Law of Motion
is by some writers derived from the principle of the
composition of statical forces; and they would thus
supersede the necessity of a reference to experiment in that
case. Laplace takes this course, and thus, as we have seen,
rests only the First and Third Law of Motion upon
experience. Newton, on the other hand, recognizes the same
connexion of propositions, but for a different purpose; for
he derives the composition of statical forces from the
Second Law of Motion.

The close connexion of these three principles, the
composition of (statical) forces, the composition of
(accelerating) forces with velocities, and the measure of
(moving) forces by velocities, cannot be denied; yet it
appears to be by no means easy to supersede the necessity of
independent proofs of the last two of these principles. Both
may be proved or illustrated by experiment: and the
experiments which prove the one are different from those
which establish the other. For example, it appears by easy
calculations, that when we apply our principles to the
oscillations of a pendulum, {258} the Second Law is proved
by the fact, that the oscillations take place at the same
rate in an east and west, and in a north and south
direction: under the same circumstances, the Third Law is
proved by our finding that the time of a small oscillation
is proportional to the square root of the length of a
pendulum; and similar differences might be pointed out in
other experiments, as to their bearing upon the one law or
the other.

9. _Mechanical Principles become gradually more simple and
more evident._--I will again point out in general two
circumstances which I have already noticed in particular
cases of the laws of motion.--Truths are often at first
assumed in a form which is far from being the most obvious
or simple;--and truths once discovered are gradually
simplified, so as to assume the appearance of self-evident
truths.

The former circumstance is exemplified in several of the
instances which we have had to consider. The assumption,
that a perpetual motion is impossible, preceded the
knowledge of the first law of motion. The assumed equality
of the velocities acquired down two inclined planes of the
same height, was afterwards reduced to the third law of
motion by Galileo himself. In the History[35\3], we have
noted Huyghens's assumption of the equality of the actual
descent and potential ascent of the center of gravity: this
was afterwards reduced by Herman and the Bernoullis, to the
statical equivalence of the solicitations of gravity and the
vicarious solicitations of the effective forces which act on
each point; and finally to the principle of D'Alembert,
which asserts that the motions gained and lost balance each
other.

[Note 35\3: B. vi. c. v. sect. 2.]

This early assertion of principles which now appear neither
obvious nor self-evident, is not to be considered as a
groundless assumption on the part of the discoverers by whom
it was made. On the contrary, it is evidence of the deep
sagacity and clear thought which were {259} requisite in
order to make such discoveries. For these results are really
rigorous consequences of the laws of motion in their
simplest form: and the evidence of them was probably
present, though undeveloped, in the minds of the
discoverers. We are told of geometrical students, who, by a
peculiar aptitude of mind, perceived the evidence of some of
the more advanced propositions of geometry without going
through the introductory steps. We must suppose a similar
aptitude for mechanical reasonings, which, existing in the
minds of Stevinus, Galileo, Newton, and Huyghens, led them
to make those assumptions which finally resolved themselves
into the laws of motion.

We may observe further, that the simplicity and evidence
which the laws of mechanics have at length assumed, are much
favoured by the usage of words among the best writers on
such subjects. Terms which originally, and before the laws
of motion were fully known, were used in a very vague and
fluctuating sense, were afterwards limited and rendered
precise, so that assertions which at first appear identical
propositions become distinct and important principles. Thus
_force_, _motion_, _momentum_, are terms which were
employed, though in a loose manner, from the very outset of
mechanical speculation. And so long as these words retained
the vagueness of common language, it would have been a
useless and barren truism to say that 'the momentum is
proportional to the force,' or that 'a body loses as much
motion as it communicates to another.' But when 'momentum'
and 'quantity of motion' are defined to mean the product of
mass and velocity, these two propositions immediately become
distinct statements of the third law of motion and its
consequences. In like manner, the assertion that 'gravity is
a uniform force' was assented to, before it was settled what
a uniform force was; but this assertion only became
significant and useful when that point had been properly
determined. The statement that 'when different motions are
communicated to the same body their effects are {260}
compounded,' becomes the second law of motion, when we
define what composition of motions is. And the same process
may be observed in other cases.

And thus we see how well the form which science ultimately
assumes is adapted to simplify knowledge. The definitions
which are adopted, and the terms which become current in
precise senses, produce a complete harmony between the
matter and the form of our knowledge; so that truths which
were at first unexpected and recondite, became familiar
phrases, and after a few generations sound, even to common
ears, like identical propositions.

10. _Controversy of the Measure of Force._--In the History
of Mechanics[36\3], we have given an account of the
controversy which, for some time, occupied the
mathematicians of Europe, whether the forces of bodies in
motion should be reckoned proportional to the velocity, or
to the square of the velocity. We need not here recall the
events of this dispute; but we may remark, that its history,
as a metaphysical controversy, is remarkable in this
respect, that it has been finally and completely settled;
for it is now agreed among mathematicians that both sides
were right, and that the results of mechanical action may be
expressed with equal correctness by means of _momentum_ and
of _vis viva_. It is, in one sense, as D'Alembert has
said[37\3], a dispute about words; but we are not to infer
that, on that account, it was frivolous or useless; for such
disputes are one principal means of reducing the principles
of our {261} knowledge to their utmost simplicity and
clearness. The terms which are employed in the science of
mechanics are now liberated for ever, in the minds of
mathematicians, from that ambiguity which was the
battleground in the war of the _vis viva_.

[Note 36\3: B. vi. c. v. sect. 2.]

[Note 37\3: D'Alembert has also remarked (_Dynamique_, Pref.
xxi.) that this controversy 'shows how little justice and
precision there is in the pretended axiom that causes are
proportional to their effects.' But this reflection is by no
means well founded. For since both measures are true, it
appears that causes may be _justly_ measured by their
effects, even when very different kinds of effects are
taken. That the axiom does not point out one _precise_
measure, till illustrated by experience or by other
considerations, we grant: but the same thing occurs in the
application of other axioms also.]

But we may observe that the real reason of this controversy
was exactly that tendency which we have been noticing;--the
disposition of man to assume in his speculations certain
general propositions as true, and to fix the sense of terms
so that they shall fall in with this truth. It was agreed,
on all hands, that in the mutual action of bodies the same
quantity of force is always preserved; and the question was,
by which of the two measures this rule could best be
verified. We see, therefore, that the dispute was not
concerning a definition merely, but concerning a definition
combined with a general proposition. Such a question may be
readily conceived to have been by no means unimportant; and
we may remark, in passing, that such controversies, although
they are commonly afterwards stigmatized as quarrels about
words and definitions, are, in reality, events of
considerable consequence in the history of science; since
they dissipate all ambiguity and vagueness in the use of
terms, and bring into view the conditions under which the
fundamental principles of our knowledge can be most clearly
and simply presented.

It is worth our while to pause for a moment on the prospect
that we have thus obtained, of the advance of knowledge, as
exemplified in the history of Mechanics. The general
transformation of our views from vague to definite, from
complex to simple, from unexpected discoveries to
self-evident truths, from seeming contradictions to
identical propositions, is very remarkable, but it is by no
means peculiar to our subject. The same circumstances, more
or less prominent, more or less developed, appear in the
history of other sciences, according to the point of advance
which each has reached. They bear upon very important
doctrines respecting the prospects, the {262} limits, and
the very nature of our knowledge. And though these doctrines
require to be considered with reference to the whole body of
science, yet the peculiar manner in which they are
illustrated by the survey of the history of Mechanics, on
which we have just been engaged, appears to make this a
convenient place for introducing them to the reader.



{{263}}
