BOOK VII.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF
MORPHOLOGY,
INCLUDING
CRYSTALLOGRAPHY.




CRYSTALLIZATION exhibits to us the effects of the natural
arrangement of the ultimate particles of various compound
bodies; but we are scarcely yet sufficiently acquainted with
chemical synthesis and analysis to understand the rationale
of this process. The rhomboidal form may arise from the
proper position of 4, 6, 8 or 9 globular particles, the
cubic form from 8 particles, the triangular form from 3, 6
or 10 particles, the hexahedral prism from 7 particles, &c.
Perhaps, in due time we may be enabled to ascertain the
number and order of elementary particles, constituting any
given compound element, and from that determine the figure
which it will prefer on crystallization, and _vice versâ_.

JOHN DALTON, _Chemical Philosophy_ (1808), p. 210.



{{67}}
BOOK VII.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MORPHOLOGY, INCLUDING CRYSTALLOGRAPHY.


CHAPTER I.

EXPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY.


1. WE have seen in the History of the Sciences, that the
principle which I have there termed[1\7] the Principle of
Developed and Metamorphosed Symmetry, has been extensively
applied in botany and physiology, and has given rise to a
province of science termed Morphology. In order to
understand clearly this principle, it is necessary to obtain
a clear idea of the Symmetry of which we thus speak. But
this Idea of Symmetry is applicable in the inorganic, as
well as in the organic kingdoms of nature; it is presented
to our eyes in the forms of minerals, as well as of flowers
and animals; we must, therefore, take it under our
consideration here, in order that we may complete our view
of Mineralogy, which, as I have repeatedly said, is an
essential part of Chemical science. I shall accordingly
endeavour to unfold the Idea of Symmetry with which we here
have to do.

[Note 1\7: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii. c. vi.]

It will of course be understood that by the term _Symmetry_
I here intend, not that more indefinite attribute of form
which belongs to the domain of the fine arts, as when we
speak of the 'symmetry' of an edifice {68} or of a
sculptured figure, but a certain definite relation or
property, no less rigorous and precise than other relations
of number and position, which is thus one of the sure guides
of the scientific faculty, and one of the bases of our exact
science.

2. In order to explain what Symmetry is in this sense, let
the reader recollect that the bodies of animals consist of
_two_ equal and similar sets of members, the right and the
left side;--that some flowers consist of three or of five
equal sets of organs, similarly and regularly disposed, as
the iris has _three_ straight petals, and three reflexed
ones, alternately disposed, the rose has _five_ equal and
similar sepals of the calyx, and alternate with these, as
many petals of the corolla. This orderly and exactly similar
distribution of two, or three, or five, or any other number
of parts, is Symmetry; and according to its various
modifications, the forms thus determined are said to be
_symmetrical_ with various numbers of members. The
classification of these different kinds of symmetry has been
most attended to in Crystallography, in which science it is
the highest and most general principle by which the classes
of forms are governed. Without entering far into the
technicalities of the subject, we may point out some of the
features of such classes.

[Illustration] The first of the figures (1) in the margin
may represent the summit of a crystal as it appears to an
eye looking directly down upon it; the center of the figure
represents the summit of a pyramid, and the spaces of
various forms which diverge from this point represent
sloping sides of the pyramid. Now it will be observed that
the figure consists of three portions exactly similar to one
another, and that each part or member is repeated in each of
these portions. The faces, or pairs of faces, are repeated
in _threes_, with exactly similar forms and angles. This
figure is said to be _three-membered_, or to have
_triangular_ symmetry. The same kind of {69} symmetry may
exist in a flower, as presented in the accompanying figure,
and does, in fact, occur in a large class of flowers, as for
example, all the lily tribe. The next pair of figures (2)
have four equal and similar portions, and have their members
or pairs of members four times repeated. Such figures are
termed _four-membered_, and are said to have _square_ or
_tetragonal_ symmetry. The _pentagonal_ symmetry, formed by
_five_ similar _members_, is represented in the next figures
(3). It occurs abundantly in the vegetable world, but never
among crystals; for the pentagonal figures which crystals
sometimes assume, are never exactly regular. But there is
still another kind of symmetry (4) in which the opposite
ends are exactly similar to each other and also the opposite
sides; this is _oblong_, or _two-and-two-membered_ symmetry.
And finally, we have the case of _simple_ symmetry (5) in
which the two sides of the object are exactly alike (in
opposite positions) without any further repetition.
[Illustration]

3. These different kinds of symmetry occur in various ways
in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdom. Vertebrate
animals have a right and a {70} left side exactly alike, and
thus possess _simple_ symmetry. The same kind of symmetry
(simple symmetry) occurs very largely in the forms of
vegetables, as in most leaves, in _papilionaceous_,
_personate_, and _labiate_ flowers. Among minerals, crystals
which possess this symmetry are called _oblique-prismatic_,
and are of very frequent occurrence. The _oblong_, or
_two-and-two-membered_ symmetry belongs to _right-prismatic_
crystals; and may be seen in _cruciferous_ flowers, for
though these are cross-shaped, the cross has two longer and
two shorter arms, or pairs of arms. The _square_ or
_tetragonal_ symmetry occurs in crystals abundantly; to the
vegetable world it appears to be less congenial; for though
there are flowers with four exactly similar and
regularly-disposed petals, as the herb Paris (_Paris
quadrifolia_), these flowers appear, from various
circumstances, to be deviations from the usual type of
vegetable forms. The _trigonal_, or _three-membered_
symmetry is found abundantly both in plants and in crystals,
while the _pentagonal_ symmetry, on the other hand, though
by far the most common among flowers, nowhere occurs in
minerals, and does not appear to be a possible form of
crystals. This pentagonal form further occurs in the animal
kingdom, which the oblong, triangular, and square forms do
not. Many of Cuvier's _radiate_ animals appear in this
pentagonal form, as _echini_ and _pentacrinites_, which
latter have hence their name.

4. The regular, or as they may be called, the _normal_ types
of the vegetable world appear to be the forms which possess
triangular and pentagonal symmetry; from these the others
may be conceived to be derived, by transformations resulting
from the expansion of one or more parts. Thus it is manifest
that if in a three-membered or five-membered flower, one of
the petals be expanded more than the other, it is
immediately reduced from pentagonal or trigonal, to simple
symmetry. And the oblong or two-and-two-membered symmetry of
the flowers of cruciferous plants, (in which the stamens are
four large and two small ones, arranged in regular
opposition,) is held by botanists to result {71} from a
normal form with ten stamens; Meinecke explaining this by
adhesion, and Sprengel by the metamorphosis of the stamens
into petals[2\7].

[Note 2\7: Sprengel, _Gesch. d. Bot._ ii. 304.]

It is easy to see that these various kinds of symmetry
include relations both of form and of number, but more
especially of the latter kind; and as this symmetry is often
an important character in various classes of natural
objects, such classes have often curious numerical
properties. One of the most remarkable and extensive of
these is the distinction which prevails between
monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants; the number
_three_ being the ground of the symmetry of the former, and
the number _five_, of the latter. Thus liliaceous and
bulbous plants, and the like, have flowers of three or six
petals, and the other organs follow the same numbers: while
the vast majority of plants are pentandrous, and with their
five stamens have also their other parts in fives. This
great numerical distinction corresponding to a leading
difference of physiological structure cannot but be
considered as a highly curious fact in phytology. Such
properties of numbers, thus connected in an incomprehensible
manner with fundamental and extensive laws of nature, give
to numbers an appearance of mysterious importance and
efficacy. We learn from history how strongly the study of
such properties, as they are exhibited by the phenomena of
the heavens, took possession of the mind of Kepler; perhaps
it was this which, at an earlier period, contributed in no
small degree to the numerical mysticism of the Pythagoreans
in antiquity, and of the Arabians and others in the middle
ages. In crystallography, numbers are the primary characters
in which the properties of substances are expressed;--they
appear, first, in that classification of forms which depends
on the degree of symmetry, that is, upon the number of
correspondencies; and next, in the laws of derivation,
which, for the most part, appear to be common in their
occurrence in proportion to the numerical simplicity of
their expression. But the manifestation {72} of a governing
numerical relation in the organic world strikes us as more
unexpected; and the selection of the number _five_ as the
index of the symmetry of dicotyledonous plants and radiated
animals, (a number which is nowhere symmetrically produced
in inorganic bodies,) makes this a new and remarkable
illustration of the constancy of numerical relations. We may
observe, however, that the moment one of these radiate
animals has one of its five members expanded, or in any way
peculiarly modified, (as happens among the echini), it is
reduced to the common type of animals simply symmetrical,
with a right and left side.

5. It is not necessary to attempt to enumerate all the kinds
of Symmetry, since our object is only to explain what
Symmetry is, and for this purpose enough has probably been
said already. It will be seen, as soon as the notion of
Symmetry in general is well apprehended, that it is or
includes a peculiar Fundamental Idea, not capable of being
resolved into any of the ideas hitherto examined. It may be
said, perhaps, that the Idea of Symmetry is a modification
or derivative of our ideas of space and number;--that a
symmetrical shape is one which consists of parts exactly
similar, repeated a certain number of times, and placed so
as to correspond with each other. But on further reflection
it will be seen that this repetition and correspondence of
parts in symmetrical figures are something peculiar; for it
is not _any_ repetition or any correspondence of parts to
which we should give the name of symmetry, in the manner in
which we are now using the term. Symmetrical arrangements
may, no doubt, be concerned with space and position, time
and number; but there appears to be implied in them a
Fundamental Idea of regularity, of completeness, of complex
simplicity, which is not a mere modification of other ideas.

6. It is, however, not necessary, in this and in similar
cases, to determine whether the idea which we have before us
be a peculiar and independent Fundamental Idea or a
modification of other ideas, provided we clearly perceive
the evidence of those Axioms by {73} means of which the Idea
is applied in scientific reasonings. Now in the application
of the Idea of Symmetry to crystallography, phytology and
zoology, we must have this idea embodied in some principle
which asserts more than a mere geometrical or numerical
accordance of members. We must have it involved in some
vital or productive action, in order that it may connect and
explain the facts of the organic world. Nor is it difficult
to enunciate such a principle. We may state it in this
manner. _All the symmetrical members of a natural product
are, under like circumstances, alike affected by the natural
formative power._ The parts which we have termed
_symmetrical_, resemble each other, not only in their form
and position, but also in the manner in which they are
produced and modified by natural causes. And this principle
we assume to be necessarily true, however unknown and
inconceivable may be the causes which determine the
phenomena. Thus it has not yet been found possible to
discover or represent to ourselves, in any intelligible
manner, the forces by which the various faces of a crystal
are consequent upon its primary form: for the hypothesis of
their being built up of integrant molecules, as Haüy held,
cannot be made satisfactory. But though the mechanism of
crystals is still obscure, there is no doubt as to the
principle which regulates their modifications. The whole of
crystallography rests upon this principle, that if one of
the primary planes or axes be modified in any manner, all
the symmetrical planes and axes must be modified in the same
manner. And though accidental mechanical or other causes may
interfere with the actual exhibition of such faces, we do
not the less assume their crystallographical reality, as
inevitably implied in the law of symmetry of the
crystal[3\7]. And we apply similar considerations to
organized beings. We assume that in a regular flower, each
of the similar {74} members has the same organization and
similar powers of developement; and hence if among these
similar parts some are much less developed than others, we
consider them as _abortive_; and if we wish to remove doubts
as to what are symmetrical members in such a case, we make
the inquiry by tracing the anatomy of these members, or by
following them in their earlier states of developement, or
in cases where their capabilities are magnified by
monstrosity or otherwise. The power of developement may be
modified by external causes, and thus we may pass from one
kind of symmetry to another; as we have already remarked.
Thus a regular flower with pentagonal symmetry, growing on a
lateral branch, has one petal nearest to the axis of the
plant: if this petal be more or less expanded than the
others, the pentagonal symmetry is interfered with, and the
flower may change to a symmetry of another kind. But it is
easy to see that all such conceptions of expansion,
abortion, and any other kind of metamorphosis, go upon the
supposition of identical faculties and tendencies in each
similar member, in so far as such tendencies have any
relation to the symmetry. And thus the principle we have
stated above is the basis of that which, in the History, we
termed the Principle of Developed and Metamorphosed
Symmetry.

[Note 3\7: Some crystalline forms, instead of being
_holohedral_ (provided with their whole number of faces),
are _hemihedral_ (provided with only half their number of
faces). But in these hemihedral forms the half of the faces
are still _symmetrically_ suppressed.]

We shall not at present pursue the other applications of
this Idea of Symmetry, but we shall consider some of the
results of its introduction into Crystallography.



{{75}}
