BOOK X.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF
PALÆTIOLOGY.




τὴν μὲν οὖν τοιαύτην _Αἰτιολογίαν_ ἧττον ἄν τις ἀποδέξαιτο·
μᾶλλον _δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῶν φανερωτέρων_ καὶ τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμέραν τρόπον
τινὰ ὁρωμένων ἀναπτέον τὸν λόγον. Καὶ γὰρ κατακλυσμοὶ, καὶ
σεισμοὶ, καὶ ἀναφυσήματα, καὶ ἀνοιδήσεις τῆς ὑφάλου γῆς,
μετεωρίζουσι καὶ τὴν θάλατταν· αἱ δὲ συνιζήσεις ταπεινοῦσιν
αὐτήν.

STRABO, _Geogr._ 1. p. 54.


IT is therefore, not so much what these forms of the earth
actually are, as what they are continually becoming, that we
have to observe; nor is it possible thus to observe them
without an instinctive reference to the first state out of
which they have been brought.... Yet to such questions
continually suggesting themselves, it is never possible to
give a complete answer. For a certain distance, the past
work of existing forces can be traced; but then gradually
the mist gathers, and the footsteps of more gigantic
agencies are traceable in the darkness; and still as we
endeavour to penetrate further and further into departed
time, the thunder of the Almighty power sounds louder and
louder, and the clouds gather broader and more fearfully,
until at last the Sinai of the world is seen altogether upon
a smoke, and the fence of its foot is reached, where none
can break through.

RUSKIN, _Modern Painters_, Vol. IV. p. 143.



{{257}}
BOOK X.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF PALÆTIOLOGY.


CHAPTER I.

OF PALÆTIOLOGICAL SCIENCES IN GENERAL.


1. I HAVE already stated in the _History of the
Sciences_[1\10], that the class of Sciences which I
designate as _Palætiological_ are those in which the object
is to ascend from the present state of things to a more
ancient condition, from which the present is derived by
intelligible causes. As conspicuous examples of this class
we may take Geology, Glossology or Comparative Philology,
and Comparative Archæology. These provinces of knowledge
might perhaps be intelligibly described as _Histories_; the
History of the Earth,--the History of Languages,--the
History of Arts. But these phrases would not fully describe
the sciences we have in view; for the object to which we now
suppose their investigations to be directed is, not merely
to ascertain what the series of events has been, as in the
common forms of History, but also how it has been brought
about. These sciences are to treat of causes as well as of
effects. Such researches might be termed _Philosophical
History_; or, in order to mark more distinctly that the
_causes_ of events are the leading object of attention,
_Ætiological History_. But since {258} it will be more
convenient to describe this class of sciences by a single
appellation, I have taken the liberty of proposing to call
them[2\10] the _Palætiological_ Sciences.

[Note 1\10: B. xviii. Introd.]

[Note 2\10: A philological writer, in a very interesting
work (Mr. Donaldson, in his _New Cratylus_, p. 12),
expresses his dislike of this word, and suggests that I must
mean _palæ-ætiological_. I think the word is more likely to
obtain currency in the more compact and euphonious form in
which I have used it. It has been adopted by Mr. Winning, in
his _Manual of Comparative Philology_, and more recently, by
other writers.]

While Palæontology describes the beings which have lived in
former ages without investigating their causes, and
_Ætiology_ treats of causes without distinguishing
historical from mechanical causation; _Palætiology_ is a
combination of the two sciences; exploring, by means of the
second, the phenomena presented by the first. The portions
of knowledge which I include in this term are
palæontological ætiological sciences.

2. All these sciences are connected by this bond;--that they
all endeavour to ascend to a past state, by considering what
is the present state of things, and what are the causes of
change. Geology examines the existing appearance of the
materials which form the earth, infers from them previous
conditions, and speculates concerning the forces by which
one condition has been made to succeed another. Another
science, cultivated with great zeal and success in modern
times, compares the languages of different countries and
nations, and by an examination of their materials and
structure, endeavours to determine their descent from one
another: this science has been termed _Comparative
Philology_, or _Ethnography_; and by the French,
_Linguistique_, a word which we might imitate in order to
have a single name for the science, but the Greek derivative
_Glossology_ appears to be more convenient in its form. The
progress of the Arts (Architecture and the like);--how one
stage of the culture produced another; and how far we can
trace their maturest and most complete condition to their
earliest form in various nations;--are problems of great
interest belonging to another subject, which we may for the
present term {259} _Comparative Archæology_. I have already
noticed, in the History[3\10] how the researches into the
origin of natural objects, and those relating to works of
art, pass by slight gradations into each other; how the
examination of the changes which have affected an ancient
temple or fortress, harbour or river, may concern alike the
geologist and the antiquary. Cuvier's assertion that the
geologist is an antiquary of a new order, is perfectly
correct, for both are palætiologists.

[Note 3\10: B. xviii. Introd.]

3. We are very far from having exhausted, by this
enumeration, the class of sciences which are thus connected.
We may easily point out many other subjects of speculation
of the same kind. As we may look back towards the first
condition of our planet, we may in like manner turn our
thoughts towards the first condition of the solar system,
and try whether we can discern any traces of an order of
things antecedent to that which is now established; and if
we find, as some great mathematicians have conceived,
indications of an earlier state in which the planets were
not yet gathered into their present forms, we have, in the
pursuit of this train of research, a palætiological portion
of Astronomy. Again, as we may inquire how languages, and
how man, have been diffused over the earth's surface from
place to place, we may make the like inquiry with regard to
the races of plants and animals, founding our inferences
upon the existing geographical distribution of the animal
and vegetable kingdoms: and thus the Geography of Plants and
of Animals also becomes a portion of Palætiology. Again, as
we can in some measure trace the progress of Arts from
nation to nation and from age to age, we can also pursue a
similar investigation with respect to the progress of
Mythology, of Poetry, of Government, of Law. Thus the
philosophical history of the human race, viewed with
reference to these subjects, if it can give rise to
knowledge so exact as to be properly called Science, will
supply Sciences belonging to the class I am now to consider. {260}

4. It is not an arbitrary and useless proceeding to
construct such a Class of Sciences. For wide and various as
their subjects are, it will be found that they have all
certain principles, maxims, and rules of procedure in
common; and thus may reflect light upon each other by being
treated of together. Indeed it will, I trust, appear, that
we may by such a juxtaposition of different speculations,
obtain most salutary lessons. And questions, which, when
viewed as they first present themselves under the aspect of
a special science, disturb and alarm men's minds, may
perhaps be contemplated more calmly, as well as more
clearly, when they are considered as general problems of
palætiology.

5. It will at once occur to the reader that, if we include
in the circuit of our classification such subjects as have
been mentioned,--politics and law, mythology and poetry,--we
are travelling very far beyond the material sciences within
whose limits we at the outset proposed to confine our
discussion of principles. But we shall remain faithful to
our original plan; and for that purpose shall confine
ourselves, in this work, to those palætiological sciences
which deal with material things. It is true, that the
general principles and maxims which regulate these sciences
apply also to investigations of a parallel kind respecting
the products which result from man's imaginative and social
endowments. But although there may be a similarity in the
general form of such portions of knowledge, their materials
are so different from those with which we have been hitherto
dealing, that we cannot hope to take them into our present
account with any profit. Language, Government, Law, Poetry,
Art, embrace a number of peculiar Fundamental Ideas,
hitherto not touched upon in the disquisitions in which we
have been engaged; and most of them involved in far greater
perplexity and ambiguity, the subject of controversies far
more vehement, than the Ideas we have hitherto been
examining. We must therefore avoid resting any part of our
philosophy upon sciences, or supposed sciences, which treat
of such subjects. To attend to this caution, {261} is the
only way in which we can secure the advantage we proposed to
ourselves at the outset, of taking, as the basis of our
speculations, none but systems of undisputed truths, clearly
understood and expressed[4\10]. We have already said that we
must, knowingly and voluntarily, resign that livelier and
warmer interest which doctrines on subjects of Polity or Art
possess, and content ourselves with the cold truths of the
material sciences, in order that we may avoid having the
very foundations of our philosophy involved in controversy,
doubt, and obscurity.

[Note 4\10: See Introd. p. 9.]

6. We may remark, however, that the necessity of rejecting
from our survey a large portion of the researches which the
general notion of Palætiology includes, suggests one
consideration which adds to the interest of our task. We
began our inquiry with the trust that any sound views which
we should be able to obtain respecting the nature of Truth
in the physical sciences, and the mode of discovering it,
must also tend to throw light upon the nature and prospects
of knowledge of all other kinds;--must be useful to us in
moral, political, and philological researches. We stated
this as a confident anticipation; and the evidence of the
justice of our belief already begins to appear. We have
seen, in the last Book, that biology leads us to psychology,
if we choose to follow the path; and thus the passage from
the material to the immaterial has already unfolded itself
at one point; and we now perceive that there are several
large provinces of speculation which concern subjects
belonging to man's immaterial nature, and which are governed
by the same laws as sciences altogether physical. It is not
our business here to dwell on the prospects which our
philosophy thus opens to our contemplation; but we may allow
ourselves, in this last stage of our pilgrimage among the
foundations of the physical sciences, to be cheered and
animated by the ray {262} that thus beams upon us, however
dimly, from a higher and brighter region.

But in our reasonings and examples we shall mainly confine
ourselves to the physical sciences; and for the most part to
Geology, which in the _History_ I have put forwards as the
best representative of the Palætiological Sciences.



{{263}}
