CHAPTER IV.

OF THE MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES.


SECT. I.--_Scales of Qualities in general._

THE ultimate object of our investigation in each of the
Secondary Mechanical Sciences, is the nature of the
processes by which the special impressions of sound, light,
and heat, are conveyed, and the modifications of which these
processes are susceptible. And of this investigation, as we
have seen, the necessary basis is the principle, that these
impressions are transmitted by means of a medium. But before
we arrive at this ultimate object, we may find it necessary
to occupy ourselves with several intermediate objects:
before we discover the _cause_, it may be necessary to
determine the _laws_ of the phenomena. Even if we cannot
immediately ascertain the mechanism of light or heat, it may
still be interesting and important to arrange and measure
the effects which we observe.

The idea of a Medium affects our proceeding in this research
also. We cannot measure Secondary qualities in the same
manner in which we measure Primary qualities, by a mere
addition of parts. There is this leading and remarkable
difference, that while both classes of qualities are
susceptible of changes of magnitude, primary qualities
increase by addition of _extension_, secondary, by
augmentation of _intensity_. A space is doubled when another
equal space is placed by its side; one weight joined to
another makes up the sum of the two. But when one degree of
warmth is combined with another, or one shade of red colour
with another, we cannot in like manner talk of the _sum_.
The component parts do not evidently retain their {334}
separate existence; we cannot separate a strong green colour
into two weaker ones, as we can separate a large force into
two smaller. The increase is absorbed into the previous
amount, and is no longer in evidence as a part of the whole.
And this is the difference which has given birth to the two
words _extended_, and _intense_. That is extended which has
'partes extra partes,' parts outside of parts: that is
intense which becomes stronger by some indirect and
unapparent increase of agency, like the stretching of the
internal springs of a machine, as the term _intense_
implies. Extended magnitudes can at will be resolved into
the parts of which they were originally composed, or any
other which the nature of their extension admits; their
proportion is apparent; they are directly and at once
subject to the relations of number. Intensive magnitudes
cannot be resolved into smaller magnitudes; we can see that
they differ, but we cannot tell in what proportion; we have
no direct measure of their quantity. How many times hotter
than blood is boiling water? The answer cannot be given by
the aid of our feelings of heat alone.

The difference, as we have said, is connected with the
fundamental principle that we do not perceive Secondary
qualities directly, but through a Medium. We have no natural
apprehension of light, or sound, or heat, as they exist in
the bodies from which they proceed, but only as they affect
our organs. We can only measure them, therefore, by some
_Scale_ supplied by their effects. And thus while extended
magnitudes, as space, time, are measurable directly and of
themselves; intensive magnitudes, as brightness, loudness,
heat, are measurable only by artificial means and
conventional scales. Space, time, measure themselves: the
repetition of a smaller space, or time, while it composes a
larger one, measures it. But for light and heat we must have
Photometers and Thermometers, which measure something which
is assumed to be an indication of the quality in question.
In the one case, the mode of applying the measure, and the
meaning of the number resulting, are seen by intuition; in
the {335} other, they are consequences of assumption and
reasoning. In the one case, they are _Units_, of which the
extension is made up; in the other, they are _Degrees_ by
which the intensity ascends.

2. When we discover any property in a sensible quality,
which at once refers us to number or space, we readily take
this property as a measure; and thus we make a transition
from quality to quantity. Thus Ptolemy in the third chapter
of the First Book of his _Harmonics_ begins thus: 'As to the
differences which exist in sounds both in _quality_ and in
_quantity_, if we consider that difference which refers to
the acuteness and graveness, we cannot at once tell to which
of the above two classes it belongs, till we have considered
the causes of such symptoms.' But at the end of the chapter,
having satisfied himself that grave sounds result from the
magnitude of the string or pipe, other things being equal,
he infers, 'Thus the difference of acute and grave appears
to be a difference of _quantity_.'

In the same manner, in order to form Secondary Mechanical
Sciences respecting any of the other properties of bodies,
we must reduce these properties to a dependence upon
quantity, and thus make them subject to measurement. We
cannot obtain any sciential truths respecting the comparison
of sensible qualities, till we have discovered measures and
scales of the qualities which we have to consider; and
accordingly, some of the most important steps in such
sciences have been the establishment of such measures and
scales, and the invention of the requisite instruments.

The formation of the mathematical sciences which rest upon
the measures of the intensity of sensible qualities took
place mainly in the course of the last century. Perhaps we
may consider Lambert, a mathematician who resided in
Switzerland, and published about 1750, as the person who
first clearly felt the importance of establishing such
sciences. His Photometry, Pyrometry, and Hygrometry, are
examples of the systematic reduction of sensible qualities
(light, heat, moisture) to modes of numerical measurement.
{336}

We now proceed to speak of such modes of measurement with
regard to the most obvious properties of bodies.


SECT. II.--_The Musical Scale._

3. THE establishment of the _Harmonic Canon_, that is, of a
Scale and Measure of the musical place of notes, in the
relation of _high_ and _low_, was the first step in the
science of Harmonics. The perception of the differences and
relations of musical sounds is the office of the sense of
hearing; but these relations are fixed, and rendered
accurately recognizable by artificial means. 'Indeed, in all
the senses,' as Ptolemy truly says in the opening of his
Harmonics, 'the sense discovers what is approximately true,
and receives accuracy from another quarter: the reason
receives the approximately-true from another quarter, and
discovers the accurate truth.' We can have no measures of
sensible qualities which do not ultimately refer to the
sense;--whether they do this immediately, as when we refer
Colours to an assumed Standard; or mediately, as when we
measure Heat by Expansion, having previously found by an
appeal to sense that the expansion increases with the heat.
Such relations of sensible qualities cannot be described in
words, and can only be apprehended by their appropriate
faculty. The faculty by which the relations of sounds are
apprehended is a _musical ear_ in the largest acceptation of
the term. In this signification the faculty is nearly
universal among men; for all persons have musical ears
sufficiently delicate to understand and to imitate the
modulations corresponding to various emotions in speaking;
which modulations depend upon the succession of acuter and
graver tones. These are the relations now spoken of, and
these are plainly perceived by persons who have very
imperfect musical ears, according to the common use of the
phrase. But the relations of tones which occur in speaking
are somewhat indefinite; and in forming that musical scale
which is the basis of our science upon the subject, we {337}
take the most definite and marked of such relations of
notes; such as occur, not in speaking but in singing. Those
musical relations of two sounds which we call the _octave_,
the _fifth_, the _fourth_, the _third_, are recognized after
a short familiarity with them. These _chords_ or _intervals_
are perceived to have each a peculiar character, which
separates them from the relations of two sounds taken at
random, and makes it easy to know them when sung or played
on an instrument; and for most persons, not difficult to
sing the sounds in succession exactly, or nearly correct.
These musical relations, or _concords_, then, are the
groundwork of our musical series of sounds. But how are we
to name these indescribable sensible characters? how to
refer, with unerring accuracy, to a type which exists only
in our own perceptions? We must have for this purpose a
_Scale_ and a _Standard_.

The Musical Scale is a series of eight notes, ascending by
certain steps from the first or key-note to the octave above
it, each of the notes being fixed by such distinguishable
musical relations as we have spoken of above. We may call
these notes C, D, E, F, G, A, B, _c_; and we may then say
that G is determined by its being a fifth above C; D by its
being a fourth below G; E by its being a third above C; and
similarly of the rest. It will be recollected that the terms
a _fifth_, a _fourth_, a _third_, have hitherto been
introduced as expressing certain simple and indescribable
musical relations among sounds, which might have been
indicated by any other names. Thus we might call the fifth
the _dominant_, and the fourth the _subdominant_, as is done
in one part of musical science. But the names we have used,
which are the common ones, are in fact derived from the
number of notes which these intervals include in the scale
obtained in the above manner. The notes, C, D, E, F, G,
being five, the interval from C to G is a fifth, and so of
the rest. The fixation of this scale gave the means of
describing exactly any note which occurs in the scale, and
the method is easily applicable to notes above and below
this range; for in a series of sounds higher or lower by an
octave than {338} this standard series, the ear discovers a
recurrence of the same relations so exact, that a person may
sometimes imagine he is producing the same notes as another
when he is singing the same air an octave higher. Hence the
next eight notes may be conveniently denoted by a repetition
of the same letters, as the first; thus, C, D, E, F, G, A,
B, _c_, _d_, _e_, _f_, _g_, _a_, _b_; and it is easy to
devise a continuation of such cycles. And other admissible
notes are designated by a further modification of the
standard ones, as by making each note _flat_ or _sharp_;
which modification it is not necessary here to consider,
since our object is only to show how a standard is
attainable, and how it serves the ends of science.

We may observe, however, that the above is not an exact
account of the first, or early Greek scale; for that scale
was founded on a primary division of the interval of two
octaves (the extreme range which it admitted) into five
_tetrachords_, each tetrachord including the interval of a
fourth. All the notes of this series had different names
borrowed from this division[26\4]; thus _mese_ was the
middle or key-note; the note below it was _lichanos mesôn_,
the next below was _parypate mesôn_, the next lower, _hypate
mesôn_. The fifth above _mese_ was _nete diazeugmenôn_, the
octave was _nete hyperbolæôn_.

[Note 26\4: Burney's _History of Music_, vol. i. p. 28.]

4. But supposing a complete system of such denominations
established, how could it be with certainty and rigour
applied? The human ear is fallible, the organs of voice
imperfectly obedient; if this were not so, there would be no
such thing as a _good_ ear or a _good_ voice. What means can
be devised of finding at will a _perfect_ concord, a fifth
or a fourth? Or supposing such concords fixed by an
acknowledged authority, how can they be referred to, and the
authority adduced? How can we enact a Standard of sounds?

A Standard was discovered in the _Monochord_. A musical
string properly stretched, may be made to produce different
notes, in proportion as we intercept a longer or shorter
portion, and make this portion {339} vibrate. The relation
of the length of the strings which thus sound the two notes
G and C is fixed and constant, and the same is true of all
other notes. Hence the musical interval of any notes of
which we know the places in the musical scale, may be
reproduced by measuring the lengths of string which are
known to give them. If C be of the length 180, D is 160, E
is 144, F is 135, G is 120; and thus the musical relations
are reduced to numerical relations, and the monochord is a
complete and perfect _Tonometer_.

We have here taken the length of the string as the measure
of the tone: but we may observe that there is in us a
necessary tendency to assume that the ground of this measure
is to be sought in some ulterior cause; and when we consider
the matter further, we find this cause in the frequency of
these vibrations of the string. The truth that the same note
must result from the same frequency of vibration is readily
assented to on a slight suggestion of experience. Thus
Mersenne[27\4], when he undertakes to determine the
frequency of vibrations of a given sound, says 'Supponendum
est quoscunque nervos et quaslibet chordas unisonum
facientes eundem efficere numerum recursuum eodem vel equali
tempore, quod perpetuâ constat experientiâ.' And he proceeds
to apply it to cases where experience could not verify this
assertion, or at least had not verified it, as to that of pipes.

[Note 27\4: _Harmonia_, lib. ii. prop. 19.]

The pursuit of these numerical relations of tones forms the
science of Harmonics; of which here we do not pretend to
give an account, but only to show, how the invention of a
Scale and Nomenclature, a Standard and Measure of the tone
of sounds, is its necessary basis. We will therefore now
proceed to speak of another subject; _colour_.


SECT. III.--_Scales of Colour._

5. _The Prismatic Scale of Colour._--A SCALE of Colour must
depend originally upon differences {340} discernible by the
eye, as a scale of notes depends on differences perceived by
the ear. In one respect the difficulty is greater in the
case of the visible qualities, for there are no relations of
colour which the eye peculiarly singles out and
distinguishes, as the ear selects and distinguishes an
octave or a fifth. Hence we are compelled to take an
arbitrary scale; and we have to find one which is fixed, and
which includes a proper collection of colours. The
_prismatic spectrum_, or coloured image produced when a
small beam of light passes obliquely through any transparent
surface (as the surface of a prism of glass,) offers an
obvious Standard as far as it is applicable. Accordingly
colours have, for various purposes, been designated by their
place in the spectrum, ever since the time of Newton; and we
have thus a means of referring to such colours as are
included in the series _red_, _orange_, _yellow_, _green_,
_blue_, _violet_, _indigo_, and the intermediate tints.

But this scale is not capable of numerical precision. If the
spectrum could be exactly defined as to its extremities, and
if these colours occupied always the same proportional part
of it, we might describe any colour in the above series by
the measure of its position. But the fact is otherwise. The
spectrum is too indefinite in its boundaries to afford any
distinct point from which we may commence our measures; and
moreover the spectra produced by different transparent
bodies differ from each other. Newton had supposed that the
spectrum and its parts were the same, so long as the
refraction was the same; but his successors discovered that,
with the same amount of refraction in different kinds of
glass, there are different magnitudes of the spectrum; and
what is still worse with reference to our present purpose,
that the spectra from different glasses have the colours
distributed in different proportions. In order, therefore,
to make the spectrum the scale of colour, we must assume
some fixed substance; for instance, we may take water, and
thus a series approaching to the colours of the _rainbow_
will be our standard. But we should still have an extreme
difficulty in applying such a rule. The distinctions of
{341} colour which the terms of common language express, are
not used with perfect unanimity or with rigorous precision.
What one person calls _bluish green_ another calls _greenish
blue_. Nobody can say what is the precise boundary between
red and orange. Thus the prismatic scale of colour was
incapable of mathematical exactness, and this inconvenience
was felt up to our own times.

But this difficulty was removed by a curious discovery of
Wollaston and Fraunhofer; who found that there are, in the
solar spectrum, certain fine black Lines which occupy a
definite place in the series of colours, and can be observed
with perfect precision. We have now no uncertainty as to
what coloured light we are speaking of, when we describe it
as that part of the spectrum in which Fraunhofer's Line C or
D occurs. And thus, by this discovery, the prismatic
spectrum of sunlight became, for certain purposes, an exact
_Chromatometer_.

6. _Newton's Scale of Colours._--Still, such a standard,
though definite, is arbitrary and seemingly anomalous. The
lines A, B, C, D, &c., of Fraunhofer's spectrum are
distributed without any apparent order or law; and we do
not, in this way, obtain numerical measures, which is what,
in all cases, we desire to have. Another discovery of
Newton, however, gives us a spectrum containing the same
colours as the prismatic spectrum, but produced in another
way, so that the colours have a numerical relation. I speak
of the laws of the _Colours of Thin Plates_. The little
rainbows which we sometimes see in the cracks of broken
glass are governed by fixed and simple laws. The kind of
colour produced at any point depends on the thickness of the
thin plate of air included in the fissure. If the thickness
be eight-millionths of an inch, the colour is orange, if
fifteen-millionths of an inch, we have green, and so on; and
thus these numbers, which succeed each other in a regular
order from red to indigo, give a numerical measure of each
colour; which measure, when we pursue the subject, we find
is one of the bases of all optical theory. The series of
colours obtained from plates of air of gradually increasing
thickness is called {342} _Newton's Scale of Colours_; but
we may observe that this is not precisely what we are here
speaking of, a scale of _simple_ colours; it is a series
produced by certain combinations, resulting from the
repetition of the first spectrum, and is mainly useful as a
standard for similar phenomena, and not for colour in
general. The real scale of colour is to be found, as we have
said, in the numbers which express the thickness of the
producing film;--in the length of a _fit_ in Newton's
phraseology, or the length of an _undulation_ in the modern
theory.

7. _Scales of Impure Colours._--The standards just spoken of
include (mainly at least) only pure and simple colours; and
however complete these standards may be for certain objects
of the science of optics, they are insufficient for other
purposes. They do not enable us to put in their place mixed
and impure colours. And there is, in the case of colour, a
difficulty already noticed, which does not occur in the case
of sound; two notes, when sounded together, are not
necessarily heard as one; they are recognized as still two,
and as forming a concord or a discord. But two colours form
a single colour; and the eye cannot, in any way, distinguish
between a green compound of blue and yellow, and the simple,
undecomposable green of the spectrum. By composition of
three or more colours, innumerable new colours may be
generated which form no part of the prismatic series; and by
such compositions is woven the infinitely varied web of
colour which forms the clothing of nature. How are we to
classify and arrange all the possible colours of objects, so
that each shall have a place and name? How shall we find a
_chromatometer_ for impure as well as for pure colour?

Though no optical investigations have depended on a scale of
impure colours, such a scale has been wanted and invented
for other purposes; for instance, in order to identify and
describe objects of natural history. Not to speak of earlier
essays, we may notice Werner's Nomenclature of Colours,
devised for the purpose of describing minerals. This scale
of colour was far superior to any which had previously been
promulgated. {343} It was, indeed, arbitrary in the
selection of its degrees, and in a great measure in their
arrangement; and the colours were described by the usual
terms, though generally with some added distinction; as
_blackish green_, _bluish green_, _apple-green_,
_emerald-green_. But the great merit of the scale was its
giving a _fixed_ conventional meaning to these terms, so
that they lost much of their usual vagueness. Thus
_apple-green_ did not mean the colour of any green apple
casually taken; but a certain definite colour which the
student was to bear in mind, whether or not he had ever seen
an apple of that exact hue. The words were not a
description, but a _record_ of the colour: the memory was to
retain a _sensation_, not a name.

The imperfection of the system (arising from its arbitrary
form) was its incompleteness: however well it served for the
reference of the colours which it did contain, it was
applicable to no others; and thus though Werner's
enumeration extended to more than a hundred colours, there
occur in nature a still greater number which cannot be
exactly described by means of it.

In such cases the unclassed colour is, by the Wernerians,
defined by stating it as intermediate between two others:
thus we have an object described as _between emerald-green
and grass-green_. The eye is capable of perceiving a
gradation from one colour to another; such as may be
produced by a gradual mixture in various ways. And if we
image to ourselves such a mixture, we can compare with it a
given colour. But in employing this method we have nothing
to tell us in what part of the scale we must seek for an
approximation to our unclassed colour. We have no rule for
discovering where we are to look for the boundaries of the
definition of a colour which the Wernerian series does not
supply. For it is not always between contiguous members of
the series that the undescribed colour is found. If we place
emerald-green between apple-green and grass-green, we may
yet have a colour intermediate between emerald-green and
leek-green; and, in fact, the Wernerian series of colours is
destitute {344} of a principle of self-arrangement and
gradation; and is thus necessarily and incurably imperfect.

8. We should have a complete Scale of Colours, if we could
form a series including all colours, and arranged so that
each colour was intermediate in its tint between the
adjacent terms of the series; for then, whether we took many
or few of the steps of the series for our standard terms,
the rest could be supplied by the law of continuity; and any
given colour would either correspond to one of the steps of
our scale or fall between two intermediate ones. The
invention of a Chromatometer for Impure Colours, therefore,
requires that we should be able to form all possible colours
by such intermediation in a systematic manner; that is, by
the mixture or combination of certain elementary colours
according to a simple rule: and we are led to ask whether
such a process has been shown to be possible.

The colours of the prismatic spectrum obviously do form a
continuous series; green is intermediate between its
neighbours yellow and blue, orange between red and yellow;
and if we suppose the two ends of the spectrum bent round to
meet each other, so that the arrangement of the colours may
be circular, the violet and indigo will find their
appropriate place between the blue and red. And all the
interjacent tints of the spectrum, as well as the ones just
named, will result from such an arrangement. Thus all the
_pure_ colours are produced by combinations two and two of
three primary colours, Red, Yellow, and Blue: and the
question suggests itself whether these three are not really
the only Primary Colours, and whether all the impure colours
do not arise from mixtures of the three in various
proportions. There are various modes in which this
suggestion may be applied to the construction of a scale of
colours; but the simplest, and the one which appears really
to verify the conjecture that all possible colours may be so
exhibited, is the following. A certain combination of red,
yellow, and blue, will produce black, or pure grey, and when
diluted, will give all the shades of grey which intervene
between {345} black and white. By adding various shades of
grey, then, to pure colours, we may obtain all the possible
ternary combinations of red, yellow, and blue; and in this
way it is found that we exhaust the range of colours. Thus
the circle of pure colours of which we have spoken may be
accompanied by several other circles, in which these colours
are tinged with a less or greater shade of grey; and in this
manner it is found that we have a perfect chromatometer;
every possible colour being exhibited either exactly or by
means of approximate and contiguous limits. The arrangement
of colours has been brought into this final and complete
form by M. Merimée, whose Chromatic Scale is published by M.
Mirbel in his _Elements of Botany_. We may observe that such
a standard affords us a numerical exponent for every colour
by means of the proportions of the three primary colours
which compose it; or, expressing the same result otherwise,
by means of the pure colour which is involved, and the
proportion of grey by which it is rendered impure. In such a
scale the fundamental elements would be the precise tints of
red, yellow, and blue which are found or assumed to be
primary; the numerical exponents of each colour would depend
upon the arbitrary number of degrees which we interpose
between each two primary colours; and between each pure
colour and absolute blackness. No such numerical scale has,
however, as yet, obtained general acceptation[28\4].

[Note 28\4: The reference to _Fraunhofer's Lines_, as a
means of determining the place of a colour in the prismatic
series, has been objected to, because, as is asserted, the
colours which are in the neighbourhood of each line vary
with the position of the sun, state of the atmosphere and
the like. It is very evident that coloured light refracted
by the prism will not give the same spectrum as white light.
The spectrum given by white light is of course the one here
meant. It is an usual practice of optical experimenters to
refer to the colours of such a spectrum, defining them by
Fraunhofer's Lines.

I do not know whether it needs explanation that the 'first
spectrum' in Newton's rings is a ring of the prismatic
colours.

I have not had an opportunity of consulting Lambert's
_Photometria, sive de mensura et gradibus luminis, colorum,
et umbræ_, published in 1760, nor Mayer's _Commentatio de
Affinitate Colorum_, (1758), in which, I believe, he
describes a chromatometer. The present work is not intended
to be complete as a history; and I hope I have given
sufficient historical detail  to answer its philosophical
purpose.]


{346} SECT. IV.--_Scales of Light._

9. _Photometer._--ANOTHER instrument much needed in optical
researches is a _Photometer_, a measure of the intensity of
light. In this case, also, the organ of sense, the eye, is
the ultimate judge; nor has any effect of light, as light,
yet been discovered which we can substitute for such a
judgment. All instruments, such as that of Leslie, which
employ the heating effect of light, or at least all that
have hitherto been proposed, are inadmissible as
photometers. But though the eye can judge of two surfaces
illuminated by light of the same colour, and can determine
when they are equally bright, or which is the brighter, the
eye can by no means decide at sight the proportion of
illumination. How much in such judgments we are affected by
contrast, is easily seen when we consider how different is
the apparent brightness of the moon at mid-day and at
midnight, though the light which we receive from her is, in
fact, the same at both periods. In order to apply a scale in
this case, we must take advantage of the known numerical
relations of light. We are certain that if all other
illumination be excluded, two equal luminaries, under the
same circumstances, will produce an illumination twice as
great as one does; and we can easily prove, from
mathematical considerations, that if light be not enfeebled
by the medium through which it passes, the illumination on a
given surface will diminish as the square of the distance of
the luminary increases. If, therefore, we can by taking a
fraction thus known of the illuminating effect of one
luminary, make it equal to the total effect of another, of
which equality the eye is a competent judge, we compare the
effects of the two luminaries. In order to make this
comparison we may, with Rumford, look at the shadows of the
same object made by the two lights, {347} or with Ritchie,
we may view the brightness produced on two contiguous
surfaces, framing an apparatus so that the equality may be
brought about by proper adjustment; and thus a measure will
become practicable. Or we may employ other methods as was
done by Wollaston[29\4], who reduced the light of the sun by
observing it as reflected from a bright globule, and thus
found the light of the sun to be 10,000,000,000 times that
of Sirius, the brightest fixed star. All these methods are
inaccurate, even as methods of comparison; and do not offer
any fixed or convenient numerical standard; but none better
have yet been devised[30\4].

[Note 29\4: _Phil. Trans._ 1820, p. 19.]

[Note 30\4: Improved Photometers have been devised by
Professor Wheatstone, Professor Potter, and Professor
Steinheil; but they depend upon principles similar to those
mentioned in the text.]

10. _Cyanometer._--As we thus measure the brightness of a
colourless light, we may measure the intensity of any
particular colour in the same way; that is, by applying a
standard exhibiting the gradations of the colour in question
till we find a shade which is seen to agree with the
proposed object. Such an instrument we have in the
_Cyanometer_, which was invented by Saussure for the purpose
of measuring the intensity of the blue colour of the sky. We
may introduce into such an instrument a numerical scale, but
the numbers in such a scale will be altogether arbitrary.


SECT. V.--_Scales of Heat._

11. _Thermometers._--WHEN we proceed to the sensation of
heat, and seek a measure of that quality, we find, at first
sight, new difficulties. Our sensations of this kind are
more fluctuating than those of vision; for we know that the
same object may feel warm to one hand and cold to another at
the same instant, if the hands have been previously cooled
and warmed respectively. Nor can we obtain here, as in the
case of light, self-evident numerical relations of the heat
communicated in given circumstances; for we know that the
{348} effect so produced will depend on the warmth of the
body to be heated, as well as on that of the source of heat;
the summer sun, which warms our bodies, will not augment the
heat of a red-hot iron. The cause of the difference of these
cases is, that bodies do not receive the whole of their
heat, as they receive the whole of their light, from the
immediate influence of obvious external agents. There is no
readily-discovered absolute cold, corresponding to the
absolute darkness which we can easily produce or imagine.
Hence we should be greatly at a loss to devise a
_Thermometer_, if we did not find an indirect effect of heat
sufficiently constant and measurable to answer this purpose.
We discover, however, such an effect in the _expansion_ of
bodies by the effect of heat.

12. Many obvious phenomena show that air, under given
circumstances, expands by the effect of heat; the same is
seen to be true of liquids, as of water, and spirit of wine;
and the property is found to belong also to the metallic
fluid, quicksilver. A more careful examination showed that
the increase of bulk in some of these bodies by increase of
Heat was a fact of a nature sufficiently constant and
regular to afford a means of measuring that previously
intangible quality; and the Thermometer was invented. There
were, however, many difficulties to overcome, and many
points to settle, before this instrument was fit for the
purposes of science.

An explanation of the way in which this was done necessarily
includes an important chapter of the history of Thermotics.
We must now, therefore, briefly notice historically the
progress of the Thermometer. The leading steps of this
progress, after the first invention of the instrument,
were--The establishment of _fixed points_ in the
thermometric scale--The _comparison of the scales_ of
different substances--And the reconcilement of these
differences by some method of interpreting them as
indications of the absolute _quantity of heat_.

13. It would occupy too much space to give in detail the
history of the successive attempts by which {349} these
steps were effected. A thermometer is described by Bacon
under the title _Vitrum Calendare_; this was an air
thermometer. Newton used a thermometer of linseed oil, and
he perceived that the first step requisite to give value to
such an instrument was to fix its scale; accordingly he
proposed his _Scala Graduum Caloris_[31\4]. But when
thermometers of different liquids were compared, it
appeared, from their discrepancies, that this fixation of
the scale of heat was more difficult than had been supposed.
It was, however, effected. Newton had taken freezing water,
or rather thawing snow, as the zero of his scale, which is
really a fixed point; Halley and Amontons discovered (in
1693 and 1702) that the heat of boiling water is another
fixed point; and Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit, of Dantzig, by
carefully applying these two standard points, produced,
about 1714, thermometers, which were constantly consistent
with each other. This result was much admired at the time,
and was, in fact, the solution of the problem just stated,
the _fixation of the scale of heat_.

[Note 31\4: _Phil. Trans._ 1701.]

14. But the scale thus obtained is a conventional not a
natural scale. It depends upon the fluid employed for the
thermometer. The progress of expansion from the heat of
freezing to that of boiling water is different for mercury,
oil, water, spirit of wine, air. A degree of heat which is
half-way between these two standard points according to a
mercurial thermometer, will be below the half-way point in a
spirit thermometer, and above it in an air thermometer. Each
liquid has its own _march_ in the course of its expansion.
Deluc and others compared the marches of various liquids,
and thus made what we may call a _concordance_ of
thermometers of various kinds.

15. Here the question further occurs: Is there not some
_natural measure_ of the degrees of heat? It appears certain
that there must be such a measure, and that by means of it
all the scales of different liquids must be reconciled. Yet
this does not seem to have occurred at once to men's minds.
Deluc, in speaking {350} of the researches which we have
just mentioned, says[32\4], 'When I undertook these
experiments, it never once came into my thoughts that they
could conduct me with any probability to a table of real
degrees of heat. But hope grows with success, and desire
with hope.' Accordingly he pursued this inquiry for a long
course of years.

[Note 32\4: _Modif. de l'Atmosph._ 1782, p. 303.]

What are the principles by which we are to be guided to the
true measure of heat? Here, as in all the sciences of this
class, we have the general principle, that the secondary
quality, Heat, must be supposed to be perceived in some way
by a material Medium or Fluid. If we take that which is,
perhaps, the simplest form of this hypothesis, that the heat
depends upon the _quantity_ of this fluid, or _Caloric_,
which is present, we shall find that we are led to
propositions which may serve as a foundation for a natural
measure of heat. The _Method of Mixtures_ is one example of
such a result. If we mix together two pints of water, one
hot and one cold, is it not manifest that the temperature of
the mixture must be midway between the two? Each of the two
portions brings with it its own heat. The whole heat, or
caloric, of the mixture is the sum of the two; and the heat
of each half must be the half of this sum, and therefore its
temperature must be intermediate between the temperatures of
the equal portions which were mixed. Deluc made experiments
founded upon this principle, and was led by them to conclude
that 'the dilatations of mercury follow an accelerated march
for successive equal augmentations of heat.'

But there are various circumstances which prevent this
method of mixtures from being so satisfactory as at first
sight it seems to promise to be. The different capacities
for heat of different substances, and even of the same
substance at different temperatures, introduce much
difficulty into the experiments; and this path of inquiry
has not yet led to a satisfactory result. {351}

16. Another mode of inquiring into the natural measure of
heat is to seek it by researches on the _law of cooling_ of
hot bodies. If we assume that the process of cooling of hot
bodies consists in a certain material heat flying off, we
may, by means of certain probable hypotheses, determine
mathematically the law according to which the temperature
decreases as time goes on; and we may assume _that_ to be
the true measure of temperature which gives to the
experimental law of cooling the most simple and probable
form.

It appears evident from the most obvious conceptions which
we can form of the manner in which a body parts with its
superabundant heat, that the hotter a body is, the faster it
cools; though it is not clear without experiment, by what
law the rate of cooling will depend upon the heat of the
body. Newton took for granted the most simple and seemingly
natural law of this dependence: he supposed the rate of
cooling to be _proportional_ to the temperature, and from
this supposition he could deduce the temperature of a hot
iron, calculating from the original temperature and the time
during which it had been cooling. By calculation founded on
such a basis, he graduated his thermometer.

17. But a little further consideration showed that the rate
of cooling of a hot body depended upon the temperature of
the surrounding bodies, as well as upon its own temperature.
Prevost's _Theory of Exchanges_[33\4] was propounded with a
view of explaining this dependence, and was generally
accepted. According to this theory, all bodies radiate heat
to one another, and are thus constantly giving and receiving
heat; and a body which is hotter than surrounding bodies,
cools itself, and warms the surrounding, bodies, by an
exchange of heat for heat, in which they are the gainers.
Hence if _θ_ be the temperature of the bodies, or of the
space, by which the hot body is surrounded, and _θ_ + _t_ the
temperature of the hot body, the rate of cooling will depend
{352} upon the excess of the radiation for a temperature _θ_ +
_t_, above the radiation for a temperature _θ_.

[Note 33\4: _Recherches sur la Chaleur_, 1791. _Hist. Ind.
Sc._ b. x. c. i. sect. 2.]

Accordingly, in the admirable researches of MM. Dulong and
Petit upon the cooling of bodies, it was assumed that the
rate of cooling of the hot body was represented by the
excess of F(_θ_ + _t_) above F(_θ_); where F represented some
mathematical _function_, that is, some expression obtained
by arithmetical operations from the temperatures _θ_ + _t_ and
_θ_; although what these operations are to be, was left
undecided, and was in fact determined by the experiments.
And the result of their investigations was, that the
function is of this kind: when the temperature increases by
equal intervals, the function increases in a continued
geometric proportion[34\4]. This was, in fact, the same law
which had been assumed by Newton and others, with this
difference, that _they_ had neglected the term which depends
upon the temperature of the surrounding space.

[Note 34\4: The formula for the rate of cooling is _ma^(θ +
t) - ma^θ_, where the quantity _m_ depends upon the nature
of the body, the state of its surface, and  other
circumstances.--_Ann. Chim._ vii. 150.]

18. This law falls in so well with the best conceptions we
can form of the mechanism of cooling upon the supposition of
a radiant fluid caloric, that it gives great probability to
the scale of temperature on which the simplicity of the
result depends. Now the temperatures in the formulæ just
referred to were expressed by means of the _air
thermometer_. Hence MM. Dulong and Petit justly state, that
while all different substances employed as thermometers give
different laws of thermotical phenomena, their own success
in obtaining simple and general laws by means of the air
thermometer, is a strong recommendation of that as the
_natural scale of heat_. They add[35\4], 'The well-known
uniformity of the principal physical properties of all
gases, and especially the perfect identity of their laws of
dilatation by heat, [a very important discovery of {353}
Dalton and Gay Lussac[36\4],] make it very probable that in
this class of bodies the disturbing causes have not the same
influence as in solids and liquids; and consequently that
the changes of bulk produced by the action of heat are here
in a more immediate dependence on the force which produces them.'

[Note 35\4: _Annales de Chimie_, vii. 153.]

[Note 36\4: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. x. c. ii. sect. 1.]

19. Still we cannot consider this point as settled till we
obtain a more complete theoretical insight into the nature
of heat itself. If it be true that heat consists in the
vibrations of a fluid, then, although, as Ampère has
shown[37\4], the laws of radiation will, on mathematical
grounds, be the same as they are on the hypothesis of
emission, we cannot consider the natural scale of heat as
determined, till we have discovered some means of measuring
the caloriferous vibrations as we measure luminiferous
vibrations. We shall only know what the quantity of heat is
when we know what heat itself is;--when we have obtained a
theory which satisfactorily explains the manner in which the
substance or medium of heat produces its effects. When we
see how radiation and conduction, dilatation and
liquefaction, are all produced by mechanical changes of the
same fluid, we shall then see what the nature of that change
is which dilatation really measures, and what relation it
bears to any more proper standard of heat.

[Note 37\4: _Ib._ c. iv.]

We may add, that while our thermotical theory is still so
imperfect as it is, all attempts to divine the true nature
of the relation between light and heat are premature, and
must be in the highest degree insecure and visionary.
Speculations in which, from the general assumption of a
caloriferous and luminiferous medium, and from a few facts
arbitrarily selected and loosely analysed, a general theory
of light and heat is asserted, are entirely foreign to the
course of inductive science, and cannot lead to any stable
and substantial truth.

20. _Other Instruments for measuring Heat._--It does not
belong to our present purpose to speak of {354} instruments
of which the object is to measure, not sensible qualities,
but some effect or modification of the cause by which such
qualities are produced: such, for instance, are the
_Calorimeter_, employed by Lavoisier and Laplace, in order
to compare the _Specific Heat_ of different substances; and
the _Actinometer_, invented by Sir John Herschel, in order
to determine the _effect of the Sun's Rays_ by means of the
heat which they communicate in a given time; which effect
is, as may readily be supposed, very different under
different circumstances of atmosphere and position. The laws
of such effects may be valuable contributions to our
knowledge of heat, but the interpretation of them must
depend on a previous knowledge of the relations which
temperature bears to heat, according to the views just
explained.


SECT. VI.--_Scales of other Qualities._

21. BEFORE quitting the subject of the measures of sensible
qualities, we may observe that there are several other such
qualities for which it would be necessary to have scales and
means of measuring, in order to make any approach to science
on such subjects. This is true, for instance, of Tastes and
Smells. Indeed some attempts have been made towards a
classification of the Tastes of sapid substances, but these
have not yet assumed any satisfactory or systematic
character; and I am not aware that any instrument has been
suggested for _measuring_ either the Flavour or the Odour of
bodies which possess such qualities.

22. _Quality of Sounds._--The same is true of that kind of
difference in sounds which is peculiarly termed their
_Quality_; that character by which, for instance, the sound
of a flute differs from that of a hautbois, when the note is
the same; or a woman's voice from a boy's.

23. _Articulate Sounds._--There is also in sounds another
difference, of which the nature is still obscure, but in
reducing which to rule, and consequently to measure, some
progress has nevertheless been made. {355} I speak of the
differences of sound considered as _articulate_.
Classifications of the sounds of the usual alphabets have
been frequently proposed; for instance, that which arranges
the _Consonants_ in the following groups,:

Sharp. Flat.    Sharp Aspirate.  Flat Aspirate.  Nasal.
  p    b          ph (_f_)          bh (_v_)       m
  k    g (hard)   kh                gh             ng
  t    d          th (sharp)        th (flat)      n
  s    z          sh                zh

It is easily perceived that the relations of the sounds in
each of these horizontal lines are analogous; and
accordingly the rules of derivation and modification of
words in several languages proceed upon such analogies. In
the same manner the _Vowels_ may be arranged in an order
depending on their sound. But to make such arrangements
fixed and indisputable, we ought to know the mechanism by
which such modifications are caused. Instruments have been
invented by which some of these sounds can be imitated; and
if such instruments could be made to produce the above
series of articulate sounds, by connected and regular
processes, we should find, in the process, a _measure_ of
the sound produced. This has been in a great degree effected
for the Vowels by Professor Willis's artificial mode of
imitating them. For he finds that if a musical reed be made
to sound through a cylindrical pipe, we obtain by gradually
lengthening the cylindrical pipe, the series of vowels I, E,
A, O, U, with intermediate sounds[38\4]. In this instrument,
then, the length of the pipe would determine the vowel, and
might be used numerically to express it. Such an instrument
so employed would be a measure of vowel quality, and might
be called a _Phthongometer_.

[Note 38\4: _Camb. Trans._ vol. iii. p. 239.]

Our business at present, however, is not with instruments
which might be devised for measuring sensible qualities, but
with those which have been so used, and have thus been the
basis of the sciences in which {356} such qualities are
treated of; and this we have now done sufficiently for our
present purpose.

24. There is another Idea which, though hitherto very
vaguely entertained, has had considerable influence in the
formation, both of the sciences spoken of in the present
Book, and on others which will hereafter come under our
notice: namely, the Idea of Polarity. This Idea will be the
subject of the ensuing Book. And although this Idea forms a
part of the basis of various other extensive portions of
science, as Optics and Chemistry, it occupies so peculiarly
conspicuous a place in speculations belonging to what I have
termed the Mechanico-Chemical Sciences, (Magnetism and
Electricity,) that I shall designate the discussion of the
Idea of Polarity as the Philosophy of those Sciences.




{{357}}
