CHAPTER VI.

OF THE IDEA OF FINAL CAUSES.


1. BY an examination of those notions which enter into all
our reasonings and judgments on living things, it appeared
that we conceive animal life as a vortex or cycle of moving
matter in which the form of the vortex determines the
motions, and these motions again support the form of the
vortex: the stationary parts circulate the fluids, and the
fluids nourish the permanent parts. Each portion ministers
to the others, each depends upon the other. The parts make
up the whole, but the existence of the whole is essential to
the preservation of the parts. But parts existing under such
conditions are _organs_, and the whole is _organized_. This
is the fundamental conception of organization. 'Organized
beings,' says the physiologist[99\9], 'are composed of a
number of essential and mutually dependent parts.' 'An
organized product of nature,' says the great
metaphysician[100\9], 'is that in which all the parts are
mutually ends and means.'

[Note 99\9: Müller, _Elem._ p. 18.]

[Note 100\9: Kant, _Urtheilskraft_, p. 296.]

2. It will be observed that we do not content ourselves with
saying that in such a whole, all the parts are _mutually
dependent_. This might be true even of a mechanical
structure; it would be easy to imagine a framework in which
each part should be necessary to the support of each of the
others; for example, an arch of several stones. But in such
a structure, the parts have no properties which they derive
from the whole. They are beams or stones when separate; they
are no more when joined. But the same is not the case in an
organized whole. The limb of an animal separated {240} from
the body, loses the properties of a limb, and soon ceases to
retain even its form.

3. Nor do we content ourselves with saying that the parts
are _mutually causes and effects_. This is the case in
machinery. In a clock, the pendulum by means of the
escapement causes the descent of the weight, the weight by
the same escapement keeps up the motion of the pendulum. But
things of this kind may happen by accident. Stones slide
from a rock down the side of a hill and cause it to be
smooth; the smoothness of the slope causes stones still to
slide. Yet no one would call such a slide an organized
system. The system is organized, when the effects which take
place among the parts are _essential to our conception of
the whole_; when the whole would not _be_ a whole, nor the
parts, parts, except these effects were produced; when the
effects not only happen in fact, but are included in the
idea of the object; when they are not only seen, but
foreseen; not only expected, but intended: in short when,
instead of being causes and effects, they are _ends_ and
_means_, as they are termed in the above definition.

Thus we necessarily include, in our Idea of Organization,
the notion of an End, a Purpose, a Design; or, to use
another phrase which has been peculiarly appropriated in
this case, a _Final Cause_. This idea of a Final Cause is an
essential condition in order to the pursuing our researches
respecting organized bodies.

4. This Idea of Final Cause is not _deduced_ from the
phenomena by reasoning, but is _assumed_ as the only
condition under which we can reason on such subjects at all.
We do not deduce the Idea of Space, or Time, or efficient
Cause from the phenomena about us, but necessarily look at
phenomena as subordinate to these Ideas from the beginning
of our reasoning. It is true, our ideas of relations of
Space, and Time, and Force, may become much more clear by
our familiarizing ourselves with particular phenomena: but
still, the Fundamental Ideas are not generated, but
unfolded; not extracted from the external world, but evolved
from the world within. In like manner, in the contemplation
of organic structures, we consider {241} each part as
subservient to some use, and we cannot study the structure
as organic without such a conception. This notion of
adaptation,--this Idea of an End,--may become much more
clear and impressive by seeing it exemplified in particular
cases. But still, though suggested and evoked by special
cases, it is not furnished by them. If it be not supplied by
the mind itself, it can never be logically deduced from the
phenomena. It is not a portion of the facts which we study,
but it is a principle which connects, includes, and renders
them intelligible; as our other Fundamental Ideas do the
classes of facts to which they respectively apply.

5. This has already been confirmed by reference to fact; in
the History of Physiology, I have shown that those who
studied the structure of animals were irresistibly led to
the conviction that the parts of this structure have each
its end or purpose;--that each member and organ not merely
produces a certain effect or answers a certain use, but is
so framed as to impress us with the persuasion that it was
constructed _for_ that use:--that it was _intended_ to
produce the effect. It was there seen that this persuasion
was repeatedly expressed in the most emphatic manner by
Galen;--that it directed the researches and led to the
discoveries of Harvey;--that it has always been dwelt upon
as a favourite contemplation, and followed as a certain
guide, by the best anatomists;--and that it is inculcated by
the physiologists of the profoundest views and most
extensive knowledge of our own time. All these persons have
deemed it a most certain and important principle of
physiology, that in every organized structure, plant or
animal, each intelligible part has its allotted
office:--each organ is designed for its appropriate
function:--that nature, in these cases, produces nothing in
vain: that, in short, each portion of the whole arrangement
has its _final cause_; an End to which it is adapted, and in
this End, the reason that it is where and what it is.

6. This Notion of Design in organized bodies must, I say, be
supplied by the student of organization out of his own mind:
a truth which will become clearer if {242} we attend to the
most conspicuous and acknowledged instances of _design_. The
structure of the Eye, in which the parts are curiously
adjusted so as to produce a distinct image on the retina, as
in an optical instrument;--the Trochlear Muscle of the eye,
in which the tendon passes round a support and turns back,
like a rope round a pulley;--the prospective contrivances
for the preservation of animals, provided long before they
are wanted, as the Milk of the mother, the Teeth of the
child, the Eyes and Lungs of the fœtus:--these arrangements,
and innumerable others, call up in us a persuasion that
Design has entered into the plan of animal form and
progress. And if we bring in our minds this conception of
Design, nothing can more fully square with and fit it, than
such instances as these. But if we did not already possess
the Idea of Design;--if we had not had our notion of
mechanical contrivance awakened by inspection of optical
instruments, or pulleys, or in some other way:--if we had
never been conscious ourselves of providing for the
future;--if this were the case, we could not recognize
contrivance and prospectiveness in such instances as we have
referred to. The facts are, indeed, admirably in accordance
with these conceptions, when the two are brought together:
but the facts and the conceptions come together from
different quarters--from without and from within.

7. We may further illustrate this point by referring to the
relations of travellers who tell us that when consummate
examples of human mechanical contrivance have been set
before savages, they have appeared incapable of apprehending
them as proofs of design. This shows that in such cases the
Idea of Design had not been developed in the minds of the
people who were thus unintelligent: but it no more proves
that such an idea does not naturally and necessarily arise,
in the progress of men's minds, than the confused manner in
which the same savages apprehend the relations of space, or
number, or cause, proves that these ideas do not naturally
belong to their intellects. All men have these ideas; and it
is because they {243} cannot help referring their sensations
to such ideas, that they apprehend the world as existing in
time and space, and as a series of causes and effects. It
would be very erroneous to say that the belief of such
truths is obtained by logical reasoning from facts. And in
like manner we cannot logically deduce design from the
contemplation of organic structures; although it is
impossible for us, when the facts are clearly before us, not
to find a reference to design operating in our minds.

8. Again; the evidence of the doctrine of Final Causes as a
fundamental principle of Biology may be obscured and
weakened in some minds by the constant habit of viewing this
doctrine with suspicion as unphilosophical and at variance
with Morphology. By cherishing such views, it is probable
that many persons, physiologists and others, have gradually
brought themselves to suppose that many or most of the
arrangements which are familiarly adduced as instances of
design may be accounted for, or explained away;--that there
is a certain degree of prejudice and narrowness of
comprehension in that lively admiration of the adaptation of
means to ends which common minds derive from the spectacle
of organic arrangements. And yet, even in persons accustomed
to these views, the strong and natural influence of the Idea
of a Final Cause, the spontaneous recognition of the
relation of Means to an End as the assumption which makes
organic arrangements intelligible, breaks forth when we
bring before them a new case, with regard to which their
genuine convictions have not yet been modified by their
intellectual habits. I will offer, as an example which may
serve to illustrate this, the discoveries recently made with
regard to the process of Suckling in the Kangaroo. In the
case of this, as of other pouched animals, the young animal
is removed, while very small and imperfectly formed, from
the womb to the pouch, in which the teats are, and is there
placed with its lips against one of the nipples. But the
young animal taken altogether is not so large as the nipple,
and is therefore incapable of sucking after the manner of
common mammals. Here is a difficulty: {244} how is it
overcome?--By an appropriate _contrivance_: the nipple,
which in common mammals is not furnished with any muscle, is
in the kangaroo provided with a powerful extrusory muscle by
which the mother can inject the milk into the mouth of her
offspring. And again; in order to give attachment to this
muscle there is a bone which is not found in animals of
other kinds. But this mode of solving the problem of
suckling so small a creature introduces another difficulty.
If the milk is injected into the mouth of the young one,
without any action of its own muscles, what is to prevent
the fluid entering the windpipe and producing suffocation?
How is this danger avoided?--By another appropriate
_contrivance_: there is a funnel in the back of the throat
by which the air passage is completely separated from the
passage for nutriment, and the injected milk passes in a
divided stream on each side of the larynx to the
œsophagus[101\9]. And as if to show that this apparatus is
really formed with a view to the wants of the young one, the
structure alters in the course of the animal's growth; and
the funnel, no longer needed, is modified and disappears.

[Note 101\9: Mr. Owen, in _Phil. Trans._ 1834, p. 348.]

With regard to this and similar examples, the remark which I
would urge is this:--that no one, however prejudiced or
unphilosophical he may in general deem the reference to
Final Causes, can, at the first impression, help regarding
this curious system of arrangement as the Means to an End.
So contemplated, it becomes significant, intelligible,
admirable: without such a principle, it is an unmeaning
complexity, a collection of contradictions, producing an
almost impossible result by a portentous conflict of
chances. The parts of this apparatus cannot have produced
one another: one part is in the mother; another part in the
young one: without their harmony they could not be
effective; but nothing except design can operate to make
them harmonious. They are _intended_ to work together; and
we cannot resist the conviction of this intention when the
facts first come before us. Perhaps {245} there may
hereafter be physiologists who, tracing the gradual
development of the parts of which we have spoken, and the
analogies which connect them with the structures of other
animals, may think that this development, these analogies,
account for the conformation we have described; and may
hence think lightly of the explanation derived from the
reference to Final Causes. Yet surely it is clear, on a calm
consideration of the subject, that the latter explanation is
not disturbed by the former; and that the observer's first
impression, that this is 'an irrefragable evidence of
creative foresight[102\9],' can never be obliterated;
however much it may be obscured in the minds of those who
confuse this view by mixing it with others which are utterly
heterogeneous to it, and therefore cannot be contradictory.

[Note 102\9: Mr. Owen, in _Phil. Trans._ 1834, p. 349.]

9. I have elsewhere[103\9] remarked how physiologists, who
thus look with suspicion and dislike upon the introduction
of Final Causes into physiology, have still been unable to
exclude from their speculations causes of this kind. Thus
Cabanis says[104\9], 'I regard with the great Bacon, the
philosophy of Final Causes as sterile; but I have elsewhere
acknowledged that it was very difficult for the most
cautious man never to have recourse to them in his
explanations.' Accordingly, he says, 'The partisans of Final
Causes nowhere find arguments so strong in favour of their
way of looking at nature as in the laws which preside and
the circumstances of all kinds which concur in the
reproduction of living races. In no case do the means
employed appear so clearly relative to the end.' And it
would be easy to find similar acknowledgments, express or
virtual, in other writers of the same kind. Thus Bichat,
after noting the difference between the organic sensibility
by which the organs are made to perform their offices, and
the animal sensibility of which the {246} nervous center is
the seat, says[105\9], 'No doubt it will be asked,
_why_'--that is, as we shall see, for what _end_--'the
organs of internal life have received from nature an
inferior degree of sensibility only, and why they do not
transmit to the brain the impressions which they receive,
while all the acts of the animal life imply this
transmission? The reason is simply this, that all the
phenomena which establish our connexions with surrounding
objects _ought to be_, and are in fact, under the influence
of the Will; while all those which serve for the purpose of
assimilation only, escape, and _ought_ indeed to escape,
such influence.' The _reason_ here assigned is the Final
Cause; which, as Bichat justly says, we cannot help asking
for.

[Note 103\9: _Bridgewater Treatise_, p. 352.]

[Note 104\9: _Rapports du Physique et du Moral_, i. 299.]

[Note 105\9: _Life and Death_, (trans.) p. 32.]

10. Again; I may quote from the writer last mentioned
another remark, which shows that in the organical sciences,
and in them alone, the Idea of forces as Means acting to an
End, is inevitably assumed and acknowledged as of supreme
authority. In Biology alone, observes Bichat[106\9], have we
to contemplate the state of _Disease_. 'Physiology is to the
movements of living bodies, what astronomy, dynamics,
hydraulics, &e., are to those of inert matter: but these
latter sciences have no branches which correspond to them as
Pathology corresponds to Physiology. For the same reason all
notion of a Medicament is repugnant to the physical
sciences. A Medicament has for its object to bring the
properties of the system back to their Natural Type; but the
physical properties never depart from this Type, and have no
need to be brought back to it: and thus there is nothing in
the physical sciences which holds the place of Therapeutick
in Physiology.' Or, as we might express it otherwise, of
inert forces we have no conception of what they _ought to
do_, except what they _do_. The forces of gravity,
elasticity, affinity, never act in a _diseased_ manner; we
never conceive them as failing in their purpose; for we do
not conceive them as having any purpose which is answered by
one mode of their action rather than {247} another. But with
_organical_ forces the case is different; they are
necessarily conceived as acting for the preservation and
development of the system in which they reside. If they do
not do this, they fail, they are deranged, diseased. They
have for their object to conform the living being to a
certain type; and if they cause or allow it to deviate from
this type, their action is distorted, morbid, contrary to
the ends of nature. And thus this conception of organized
beings as susceptible of disease, implies the recognition of
a state of health, and of the organs and the vital forces as
means for preserving this normal condition. The state of
health, and of perpetual development, is necessarily
contemplated as the Final Cause of the processes and powers
with which the different parts of plants and animals are
endowed.

[Note 106\9: _Anatomie Générale_, i. liii.]

11. This Idea of a Final Cause is applicable as a
fundamental and regulative idea to our speculations
concerning organized creatures only. That there is a purpose
in many other parts of the creation, we find abundant reason
to believe, from the arrangements and laws which prevail
around us. But this persuasion is not to be allowed to
regulate and direct our reasonings with regard to inorganic
matter, of which conception the relation of means and end
forms no essential part. In mere Physics, Final Causes, as
Bacon has observed, are not to be admitted as a principle of
reasoning. But in the organical sciences, the assumption of
design and purpose in every part of every whole, that is,
the pervading idea of Final Cause, is the basis of sound
reasoning and the source of true doctrine.

12. The Idea of Final Cause, of end, purpose, design,
intention, is altogether different from the Idea of Cause,
as Efficient Cause, which we formerly had to consider; and
on this account the use of the word Cause in this phrase has
been objected to. If the idea be clearly entertained and
steadily applied, the word is a question of subordinate
importance. The term Final Cause has been long familiarly
used, and appears not likely to lead to confusion. {248}

13. The consideration of Final Causes, both in physiology
and in other subjects, has at all times attracted much
attention, in consequence of its bearing upon the belief of
an Intelligent Author of the Universe. I do not intend, in
this place, to pursue the subject far in this view: but
there is one antithesis of opinion, already noticed in the
History of Physiology, on which I will again make a few
remarks[107\9].

[Note 107\9: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii. c. viii. On the
Doctrine of Final Causes in Physiology.]

It has appeared to some persons that the mere aspect of
order and symmetry in the works of nature--the contemplation
of comprehensive and consistent law--is sufficient to lead
us to the conception of a design and intelligence producing
the order and carrying into effect the law. Without here
attempting to decide whether this is true, we may discern,
after what has been said, that the conception of Design,
arrived at in this manner, is altogether different from that
Idea of Design which is suggested to us by organized bodies,
and which we describe as the doctrine of Final Causes. The
regular form of a crystal, whatever beautiful symmetry it
may exhibit, whatever general laws it may exemplify, does
not prove design in the same manner in which design is
proved by the provisions for the preservation and growth of
the seeds of plants, and of the young of animals. The law of
universal gravitation, however wide and simple, does not
impress us with the belief of a purpose, as does that
propensity by which the two sexes of each animal are brought
together. If it could be shown that the symmetrical
structure of a flower results from laws of the same kind as
those which determine the regular forms of crystals, or the
motions of the planets, the discovery might be very striking
and important, but it would not at all come under our idea
of Final Cause.

14. Accordingly, there have been, in modern times, two
different schools of physiologists, the one proceeding upon
the idea of Final Causes, the other school {249} seeking in
the realm of organized bodies wide laws and analogies from
which that idea is excluded. All the great biologists of
preceding times, and some of the greatest of modern times,
have belonged to the former school; and especially Cuvier,
who may be considered as the head of it. It was solely by
the assiduous application of this principle of Final Cause,
as he himself constantly declared, that he was enabled to
make the discoveries which have rendered his name so
illustrious, and which contain a far larger portion of
important anatomical and biological truth than it ever
before fell to the lot of one man to contribute to the science.

The opinions which have been put in opposition to the
principle of Final Causes have, for the most part, been
stated vaguely and ambiguously. Among the most definite of
such principles, is that which, in the History of the
subject, I have termed the Principle of Metamorphosed and
Developed Symmetry, upon which has been founded the science
of Morphology.

The reality and importance of this principle are not to be
denied by us: we have shown how they are proved by its
application in various sciences, and especially in botany.
But those advocates of this principle who have placed it in
antithesis to the doctrine of Final Causes, have, by this
means, done far more injustice to their own favourite
doctrine than damage to the one which they opposed. The
adaptation of the bones of the skeleton to the muscles, the
provision of fulcrums, projecting processes, channels, so
that the motions and forces shall be such as the needs of
life require, cannot possibly become less striking and
convincing, from any discovery of general analogies of one
animal frame with another, or of laws connecting the
development of different parts. Whenever such laws are
discovered, we can only consider them as the means of
producing that adaptation which we so much admire. Our
conviction that the Artist works intelligently, is not
destroyed, though it may be modified and transferred, when
we obtain a sight of his tools. Our discovery of laws cannot
contradict our persuasion of ends; our Morphology cannot
prejudice our Teleology. {250}

15. The irresistible and constant apprehension of a purpose
in the forms and functions of animals has introduced into
the writings of speculators on these subjects various forms
of expression, more or less precise, more or less
figurative; as, that 'animals are framed with a view to the
part which they have to play;'--that 'nature does nothing in
vain;' that 'she employs the best means for her ends;' and
the like. However metaphorical or inexact any of these
phrases may be in particular, yet taken altogether, they
convey, clearly and definitely enough to preclude any
serious errour, a principle of the most profound reality and
of the highest importance in the organical sciences. But
some adherents of the morphological school of which 1 have
spoken reject, and even ridicule, all such modes of
expression. 'I know nothing,' says M. Geoffroy Saint
Hilaire, 'of animals which have to play a part in nature. I
cannot make of nature an intelligent being who does nothing
in vain; who acts by the shortest mode; who does all for the
best.' The philosophers of this school, therefore, do not,
it would seem, feel any of the admiration which is
irresistibly excited in all the rest of mankind at the
contemplation of the various and wonderful adaptations for
the preservation, the enjoyment, the continuation of the
creatures which people the globe;--at the survey of the
mechanical contrivances, the chemical agencies, the
prospective arrangements, the compensations, the minute
adaptations, the comprehensive interdependencies, which
zoology and physiology have brought into view, more and
more, the further their researches have been carried. Yet
the clear and deep-seated conviction of the reality of these
provisions, which the study of anatomy produces in its most
profound and accurate cultivators, cannot be shaken by any
objections to the metaphors or terms in which this
conviction is clothed. In regard to the Idea of a Purpose in
organization, as in regard to any other idea, we cannot
fully express our meaning by phrases borrowed from any
extraneous source; but that impossibility arises precisely
from the circumstance of its being a Fundamental Idea which
is inevitably assumed in our {251} representation of each
special fact. The same objection has been made to the idea
of mechanical _force_, on account of its being often
expressed in metaphorical language; for writers have spoken
of an _energy_, _effort_, or _solicitation_ to motion; and
bodies have been said to be _animated_ by a force. Such
language, it has been urged, implies volition, and the act
of animated beings. But the idea of Force as distinct from
mere motion,--as the Cause of motion, or of tendency to
motion,--is not on that account less real. We endeavour in
vain to conduct our mechanical reasonings without the aid of
this idea, and must express it as we can. Just as little can
we reason concerning organized beings without assuming that
each part has its function, each function its purpose; and
so far as our phrases imply this, they will not mislead us,
however inexact, or however figurative they be.

16. The doctrine of a purpose in Organization has been
sometimes called the doctrine of _the Conditions of
Existence_; and has been stated as teaching that each animal
must be so framed as to contain in its structure the
Conditions which its existence requires. When expressed in
this manner, it has given rise to the objection, that it
merely offers an identical proposition; since no animal can
exist without such conditions. But in reality, such
expressions as those just quoted give an inadequate
statement of the Principle of a Final Cause. For we discover
in innumerable cases, arrangements in an animal, of which we
see, indeed, that they are subservient to its well being;
but the nature of which we never should have been able at
all to conjecture, from considering what was necessary to
its existence, and which strike us, no less by their
unexpectedness than by their adaptation: so far are they
from being presented by any perceptible necessity. Who would
venture to say that the trochlear muscle, or the power of
articulate speech, must occur in man, because they are the
necessary conditions of his existence? When, indeed, the
general scheme and mode of being of an animal are known, the
expert and profound anatomist can reason concerning the
proportions and {252} form of its various parts and organs,
and prove in some measure what their relations must be. We
can assert, with Cuvier, that certain forms of the viscera
require certain forms of the teeth, certain forms of the
limbs, certain powers of the senses. But in all this, the
functions of self-nutrition and digestion are supposed
already existing as ends: and it being taken for granted, as
the only conceivable basis of reasoning, that the organs are
means to these ends, we may discover what modifications of
these organs are necessarily related to and connected with
each other. Instead of terming this rule of speculation
merely 'the Principle of the Conditions of Existence,' we
might term it 'the Principle of the conditions of organs as
_Means_ adapted to animal existence as their _End_.' And how
far this principle is from being a mere barren truism, the
extraordinary discoveries made by the great assertor of the
principle, and universally assented to by naturalists,
abundantly prove. The vast extinct creation which is
recalled to life in Cuvier's great work, the _Ossemens
Fossiles_, cannot be the consequence of a mere identical
proposition.

17. It has been objected, also, that the doctrine of Final
Causes supposes us to be acquainted with the intentions of
the Creator; which, it is insinuated, is a most presumptuous
and irrational basis for our reasonings. But there can be
nothing presumptuous or irrational in reasoning on that
basis, which if we reject, we cannot reason at all. If men
really can discern, and cannot help discerning, a design in
certain portions of the works of creation, this perception
is the soundest and most satisfactory ground for the
convictions to which it leads. The Ideas which we
necessarily employ in the contemplation of the world around
us, afford us the only natural means of forming any
conception of the Creator and Governor of the Universe; and
if we are by such means enabled to elevate our thoughts,
however inadequately, towards Him, where is the presumption
of doing so? or rather, where is the wisdom of refusing to
open our minds to contemplations so animating and elevating,
and yet {253} so entirely convincing? We possess the ideas
of Time and Space, under which all the objects of the
universe present themselves to us; and in virtue of these
ideas thus possessed, we believe the Creator to be eternal
and omnipotent. When we find that we, in like manner,
possess the idea of a Design in Creation, and that with
regard to ourselves, and creatures more or less resembling
ourselves, we cannot but contemplate their constitution
under this idea, we cannot abstain from ascribing to the
Creator the infinite profundity and extent of design to
which all these special instances belong as parts of a whole.

18. I have here considered Design as manifest in
organization only: for in that field of speculation it is
forced upon us as contained in all the phenomena, and as the
only mode of our understanding them. The existence of Final
Causes has often been pointed out in other portions of the
creation;--for instance, in the apparent adaptations of the
various parts of the earth and of the solar system to each
other and to organized beings. In these provinces of
speculation, however, the principle of Final Causes is no
longer the basis and guide, but the sequel and result of our
physical reasonings. If in looking at the universe, we
follow the widest analogies of which we obtain a view, we
see, however dimly, reason to believe that all its laws are
adapted to each other, and intended to work together for the
benefit of its organic population, and for the general
welfare of its rational tenants. On this subject, however,
not immediately included in the principle of Final Causes as
here stated, I shall not dwell. I will only make this
remark; that the assertion appears to be quite unfounded,
that as science advances from point to point, Final Causes
recede before it, and disappear one after the other. The
principle of design changes its mode of application indeed,
but it loses none of its force. We no longer consider
particular facts as produced by special interpositions, but
we consider design as exhibited in the establishment and
adjustment of the laws by which particular facts are
produced. We do not look upon each particular {254} cloud as
brought near us that it may drop fatness on our fields; but
the general adaptation of the laws of heat, and air, and
moisture, to the promotion of vegetation, does not become
doubtful. We do not consider the sun as less intended to
warm and vivify the tribes of plants and animals, because we
find that, instead of revolving round the earth as an
attendant, the earth along with other planets revolves round
him. We are rather, by the discovery of the general laws of
nature, led into a scene of wider design, of deeper
contrivance, of more comprehensive adjustments. Final
causes, if they appear driven further from us by such an
extension of our views, embrace us only with a vaster and
more majestic circuit: instead of a few threads' connecting
some detached objects, they become a stupendous net-work,
which is wound round and round the universal frame of things.

19. I now quit the subject of Biology, and with it the
circle of sciences depending upon separate original Ideas
and permanent relations. If from the general relations which
permanently prevail and constantly recur among the objects
around us, we turn to the inquiry of what has actually
happened,--if from Science we turn to History,--we find
ourselves in a new field. In this region of speculation we
can rarely obtain a complete and scientific view of the
connexion between objects and events. The past History of
Man, of the Arts, of Languages, of the Earth, of the Solar
System, offers a vast series of problems, of which perhaps
not one has been rigorously solved. Still, man, as his
speculative powers unfold themselves, cannot but feel
prompted and invited to employ his thoughts even on these
problems. He cannot but wish and endeavour to understand the
connexion between the successive links of such chains of
events. He attempts to form a Science which shall be
applicable to each of these Histories; and thus he begins to
construct the class of sciences to which I now, in the last
place, proceed.




{{255}}
