CHAPTER II.

ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEA OF CHEMICAL
AFFINITY.


1. THE earlier chemists did not commonly involve themselves
in the confusion into which the mechanical philosophers ran,
of comparing chemical to mechanical forces. Their attention
was engaged, and their ideas were moulded, by their own
pursuits. They saw that the connexion of elements and
compounds with which they had to deal, was a peculiar
relation which must be studied directly; and which must be
understood, if understood at all, in itself, and not by
comparison with a different class of relations. At different
periods of the progress of chemistry, the conception of this
relation, still vague and obscure, was expressed in various
manners; and at last this conception was clothed in
tolerably consistent phraseology, and the principles which
it involved were, by the united force of thought and
experiment, brought into view.

2. The power by which the elements of bodies combine
chemically, being, as we have seen, a peculiar agency,
different from mere mechanical connexion or attraction, it
is desirable to have it designated by a distinct and
peculiar name; and the term _Affinity_ has been employed for
that purpose by most modern chemists. The word 'affinity' in
common language means, sometimes resemblance, and sometimes
relationship and ties of family. It is from the latter sense
that the metaphor is borrowed when we speak of 'chemical
affinity.' By the employment of this term we do not indicate
a resemblance, but a disposition to unite. Using the word in
a common unscientific manner, we might say that chlorine,
bromine, and iodine, have a great {16} _natural affinity_
with each other, for there are considerable resemblances and
analogies among them; but these bodies have very little
_chemical_ Affinity for each other. The use of the word in
the _former_ sense, of resemblance, can be traced in earlier
chemists; but the word does not appear to have acquired its
peculiar chemical meaning till after Boerhaave's time.
Boerhaave, however, is the writer in whom we first find a
due apprehension of the peculiarity and importance of the
Idea which it now expresses. When we make a chemical
solution[13\6], he says, not only are the particles of the
dissolved body separated from each other, but they are
closely united to the particles of the solvent. When _aqua
regia_ dissolves gold, do you not see, he says to his
hearers, that there must be between each particle of the
solvent and of the metal, a mutual virtue by which each
loves, unites with, and holds the other (_amat_, _unit_,
_retinet_)? The opinion previously prevalent had been that
the solvent merely separates the parts of the body
dissolved: and most philosophers had conceived this
separation as performed by mechanical operations of the
particles, resembling, for instance, the operation of wedges
breaking up a block of timber. But Boerhaave forcibly and
earnestly points out the insufficiency of the conception.
This, he says, does not account for what we see. We have not
only a separation, but a new combination. There is a force
by which the particles of the solvent associate to
themselves the parts dissolved, not a force by which they
repel and dissever them. We are here to imagine not
mechanical action, not violent impulse, not antipathy, but
love, at least if love be the desire of uniting. (Non igitur
hic etiam actiones mechanicæ, non propulsiones violentæ, non
inimicitiæ cogitandæ, sed amicitiæ, si amor dicendus copulæ
cupido.) The novelty of this view is evidenced by the mode
in which he apologizes for introducing it. 'Fateor, paradoxa
hæc assertio.' To Boerhaave, therefore, (especially
considering his great influence as a teacher of chemistry,)
we may {17} assign the merit of first diffusing a proper
view of Chemical Affinity as a peculiar force, the origin of
almost all chemical changes and operations.

[Note 13\6: _Elementa Chemiæ_, Lugd. Bat. 1732, p. 677.]

3. To Boerhaave is usually assigned also the credit of
introducing the _word_ 'Affinity' among chemists; but I do
not find that the word is often used by him in this sense;
perhaps not at all[14\6]. But however this may be, the term
is, on many accounts, well worthy to be preserved, as I
shall endeavour to show. Other terms were used in the same
sense during the early part of the eighteenth century. Thus
when Geoffroy, in 1718, laid before the Academy of Paris his
Tables of Affinities, which perhaps did more than any other
event to fix the Idea of Affinity, he termed them 'Tables of
the Relations of Bodies;' '_Tables des Rapports_:' speaking
however, also, of their 'disposition to unite,' and using
other phrases of the same import.

[Note 14\6: See Dumas, _Leçons de Phil. Chim._ p. 364. Rees'
_Cyclopædia_, Art. Chemistry. In the passage of Boerhaave to
which I refer above, _affinitas_ is rather opposed to, than
identified with, chemical combination. When, he says, the
parts of the body to be dissolved are dissevered by the
solvent, why do they remain united to the particles of the
solvent, and why do not rather both the particles of the
solvent and of the dissolved body collect into homogeneous
bodies by their _affinity_? 'denuo se affinitate suæ naturæ
colligant in corpora homogenea?' And the answer is, because
they possess another force which counteracts this affinity
of homogeneous particles, and makes compounds of different
elements. Affinity, in chemistry, now means the tendency of
_different_ kinds of matter to unite: but it appears, as I
have said, to have acquired this sense since Boerhaave's time.]

The term _attraction_, having been recommended by Newton as
a fit word to designate the force which produces chemical
combination, continued in great favour in England, where the
Newtonian philosophy was looked upon as applicable to every
branch of science. In France, on the contrary, where
Descartes still reigned triumphant, 'attraction,' the
watch-word of the enemy, was a sound never uttered but with
dislike and suspicion. In 1718 (in the notice of Geoffroy's
Table,) the Secretary of the Academy, after pointing out
some of the peculiar circumstances of chemical {18}
combinations, says, 'Sympathies and attractions would suit
well here, if there were such things,' 'Les sympathies, les
attractions conviendroient bien ici, si elles étaient
quelque chose.' And at a later period, in 1731, having to
write the _éloge_ of Geoffroy after his death, he says, 'He
gave, in 1718, a singular system, and a Table of
_Affinities_, or Relations of the different substances in
chemistry. These affinities gave an easiness to some
persons, who feared that they were _attractions in
disguise_, and all the more dangerous in consequence of the
seductive forms which clever people have contrived to give
them. It was found in the sequel that this scruple might be
got over.'

This is the earliest published instance, so far as I am
aware, in which the word 'Affinity' is distinctly used for
the cause of chemical composition; and taking into account
the circumstances, the word appears to have been adopted in
France in order to avoid the word _attraction_, which had
the taint of Newtonianism. Accordingly we find the word
_affinité_ employed in the works of French chemists from
this time. Thus, in the _Transactions of the French Academy_
for 1746, in a paper of Macquer's upon Arsenic, he
says[15\6], 'On peut facilement rendre raison de ces
phenomènes par le moyen des affinités que les différens
substances qui entrent dans ces combinaisons, ont les uns
avec les autres:' and he proceeds to explain the facts by
reference to Geoffroy's Table. And in Macquer's _Elements of
Chemistry_, which appeared a few years later, the 'Affinity
of Composition' is treated of as a leading part of the
subject, much in the same way as has been practised in such
books up to the present time. From this period, the word
appears to have become familiar to all European chemists in
the sense of which we are now speaking. Thus, in the year
1758, the Academy of Sciences at Rouen offered a prize for
the best dissertation on Affinity. The prize was shared
between M. Limbourg of Theux, near Liege, and M. Le Sage
{19} of Geneva[16\6]. About the same time other persons
(Manherr[17\6], Nicolai[18\6], and others) wrote on the same
subject, employing the same name.

[Note 15\6: _A. P._ 1746, p. 201.]

[Note 16\6: Thomson's _Chemistry_, iii. 10. Limbourg's
Dissertation was published at Liege, in 1761; and Le Sage's
at Geneva.]

[Note 17\6: _Dissertatio de Affinitate Corporum_. Vindob. 1762.]

[Note 18\6: _Progr._ I. II. _de Affinitate Corporum Chimica_.
Jen. 1775, 1776.]

Nevertheless, in 1775, the Swedish chemist Bergman, pursuing
still further this subject of Chemical Affinities, and the
expression of them by means of Tables, returned again to the
old Newtonian term; and designated the disposition of a body
to combine with one rather than another of two others as
_Elective Attraction_. And as his work on _Elective
Attractions_ had great circulation and great influence, this
phrase has obtained a footing by the side of _Affinity_, and
both one and the other are now in common use among chemists.

4. I have said above that the term _Affinity_ is worthy of
being retained as a technical term. If we use the word
_attraction_ in this case, we identify or compare chemical
with mechanical attraction; from which identification and
comparison, as I have already remarked, no one has yet been
able to extract the means of expressing any single
scientific truth. If such an identification or comparison be
not intended, the use of the same word in two different
senses can only lead to confusion; and the proper course,
recommended by all the best analogies of scientific history,
is to adopt a peculiar term for that peculiar relation on
which chemical composition depends. The word _Affinity_,
even if it were not rigorously proper according to its
common meaning, still, being simple, familiar, and well
established in this very usage, is much to be preferred
before any other.

But further, there are some analogies drawn from the common
meaning of this word, which appear to recommend it as
suitable for the office which it has to discharge. For
common mechanical attractions and {20} repulsions, the
forces by which one body considered as a _whole_ acts upon
another external to it, are, as we have said, to be
distinguished from those more intimate ties by which the
_parts_ of each body are held together. Now this difference
is implied, if we compare the former relations, the
attractions and repulsions, to alliances and wars between
States, and the latter, the internal union of particles, to
those bonds of affinity which connect the citizens of the
same state with one another, and especially to the ties of
Family. We have seen that Boerhaave compares the union of
two elements of a compound to their marriage; 'we must
allow,' says an eminent chemist of our own time[19\6], 'that
there is some truth in this poetical comparison.' It
contains this truth,--that the two become one to most
intents and purposes, and that the Unit thus formed (the
Family) is not a mere juxtaposition of the component parts.
And thus the Idea of Affinity as the peculiar principle of
chemical composition, is established among chemists, and
designated by a familiar and appropriate name.

[Note 19\6: Dumas, _Leçons de Phil. Chim._ p. 363.]

5. _Analysis is possible._--We must, however, endeavour to
obtain a further insight into this Idea, thus fixed and
named. We must endeavour to extricate, if not from the Idea
itself, from the processes by which it has obtained
acceptation and currency among chemists, some principles
which may define its application, some additional
specialities in the relations which it implies. This we
shall proceed to do.

The Idea of Affinity, as already explained, implies a
disposition to combine. But this combination is to be
understood as admitting also of a possibility of separation.
Synthesis implies Analysis as conceivable: or to recur to
the image which we have already used, Divorce is possible
when the Marriage has taken place.

That there is this possibility, is a conviction implied in
all the researches of chemists, ever since the true notion
of composition began to predominate in their investigations.
One of the first persons who clearly {21} expressed this
conviction was Mayow, an English physician, who published
his _Medico-Physical Tracts_ in 1674. The first of them _De
Sale-Nitro et Spiritu Nitro-Aerio_, contains a clear
enunciation of this principle. After showing how, in the
combinations of opposite elements, as acid and alkali, their
properties entirely disappear, and a new substance is formed
not at all resembling either of the ingredients, he
adds[20\6], 'Although these salts thus mixed appear to be
destroyed it is still possible for them to be separated from
each other, with their powers still entire.' He proceeds to
exemplify this, and illustrates it by the same image which I
have already alluded to: 'Salia acida a salibus
volatilibus discedunt, ut cum sale fixo tartari, tanquam
_sponso_ magis idoneo, _conjugium_ strictius ineunt.' This
idea of a synthesis which left a complete analysis still
possible, was opposed to a notion previously current, that
when two heterogeneous bodies united together and formed a
third body, the two constituents were entirely destroyed,
and the result formed out of their ruins[21\6]. And this
conception of Synthesis and Analysis, as processes which are
possible successively and alternately, and each of which
supposes the possibility of the other, has been the
fundamental and regulative principle of the operations and
speculations of analytical chemistry from the time of Mayow
to the present day.

[Note 20\6: Cap. xiv. p. 233.]

[Note 21\6: Thomson's _Chemistry_, iii. 8.]

6. _Affinity is Elective._--When the idea of chemical
affinity, or disposition to unite, was brought into view by
the experiments and reasonings of chemists, they found it
necessary to consider this disposition as _elective_;--each
element _chose_ one rather than another of the elements
which were presented to it, and quitted its union with one
to unite with another which it preferred. This has already
appeared in the passage just quoted from Mayow. He adds in
the same strain, 'I have no doubt that fixed salts choose
one acid rather than another, in order that they may
coalesce with it {22} in a more intimate union.'--'Nullus
dubito salia fixa acidum unum præ aliis _eligere_, ut cum
eodem arctiore unione coalescant.' The same thought is
expressed and exemplified by other chemists: they notice
innumerable cases in which, when an ingredient is combined
with a liquid, if a new substance be immersed which has a
greater affinity for the liquid, the liquid combines with
the new substance by election, and the former **ingredient
is _precipitated_. Thus Stahl says[22\6], 'In spirit of
nitre dissolve silver; put in copper and the silver is
thrown down; put in iron and the copper goes down; put in
zinc, the iron precipitates; put in volatile alkali, the
zinc is separated; put in fixed alkali, the volatile quits
its hold.'--As may be seen in this example, we have in such
cases, not only a preference, but a long gradation of
preferences. The spirit of nitre will combine with silver,
but it prefers copper; prefers iron more; zinc still more;
volatile alkali yet more; fixed alkali the most.

[Note 22\6: _Zymotechnia_, 1697, p. 117.]

The same thing was proved to obtain with regard to each
element; and when this was ascertained, it became the object
of chemists to express these degrees of preference, by lists
in which substances were arranged according to their
disposition to unite with another substance. In this manner
was formed Geoffroy's Table of Affinities (1718), which we
have already mentioned. This Table was further improved by
other writers, as Gellert (1751) and Limbourg (1761).
Finally Bergman improved these Tables still further, taking
into account not only the order of affinities of each
element for others, but the _sum_ of the tendencies to unite
of each two elements, which sum, he held, determined the
resulting combination when several elements were in contact
with each other.

7. As we have stated in the History[23\6], when the doctrine
of elective affinities had assumed this very definite and
systematic form, it was assailed by Berthollet, who
maintained, in his _Essai de Statique_ {23} _Chimique_,
(1803,) that chemical affinities are _not_ elective:--that,
when various elements are brought together, their
combinations do not depend upon the kind of elements alone,
but upon the quantity of each which is present, that which
is most abundant always entering most largely into the
resulting compounds. It may seem strange that it should be
possible, at so late a period of the science, to throw doubt
upon a doctrine which had presided over and directed its
progress so long. Proust answered Berthollet, and again
maintained that chemical affinity is elective. I have, in
the History, given the judgment of Berzelius upon this
controversy. 'Berthollet,' he says, 'defended himself with
an acuteness which makes the reader hesitate in his
judgment; but the great mass of facts finally decided the
point in favour of Proust.' I may here add the opinion
pronounced upon this subject by Dr. Turner[24\6]: 'Bergman
erred in supposing the result of the chemical action to be
in every case owing to elective affinity [for this power is
modified in its effects by various circumstances]: but
Berthollet ran into the opposite extreme in declaring that
the effects formerly ascribed to that power are never
produced by it. That chemical attraction is exerted between
different bodies with different degrees of energy, is, I
apprehend, indisputable.' And he then proceeds to give many
instances of differences in affinity which cannot be
accounted for by the operation of any modifying causes.
Still more recently, M. Dumas has taken a review of this
controversy; and, speaking with enthusiasm of the work of
Berthollet, as one which had been of inestimable service to
himself in his early study of chemistry, he appears at first
disposed to award to him the victory in this dispute. But
his final verdict leaves undamaged the general principle now
under our consideration, that chemical affinity is elective.
'For my own part,' he says[25\6], 'I willingly admit the
notions of Berthollet when we have to do with acids or {24}
with bases, of which the energy is nearly equal: but when
bodies endued with very energetic affinities are in presence
of other bodies of which the affinities are very feeble, I
propose to adopt the following rule: In a solution,
everything remaining dissolved, the strong affinities
satisfy themselves, leaving the weak affinities to arrange
matters with one another. The strong acids take the strong
bases, and the weak acids can only unite with the weak
bases. The known facts are perfectly in accordance with this
practical rule.' It is obvious that this recognition of a
distinction between strong and weak affinities, which
operates to such an extent as to determine entirely the
result, is a complete acknowledgement of the Elective nature
of Affinity, as far as any person acquainted with chemical
operations could contend for it. For it must be allowed by
all, that solubility, and other collateral circumstances,
influence the course of chemical combinations, since they
determine whether or not there shall take place that contact
of elements without which affinity cannot possibly operate.

[Note 23\6: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xiv. c. iii.]

[Note 24\6: _Chemistry_, p. 199. 6th edition.]

[Note 25\6:  _Leçons de Philosophie Chimique_, p. 386.]

8. _Affinity is Definite as to quantity._--In proportion as
chemists obtained a clearer view of the products of the
laboratory as results of the composition of elements, they
saw more and more clearly that these results were definite;
that one element not only preferred to combine with another
of a certain kind, but also would combine with it to a
certain extent and no further, thus giving to the result not
an accidental and variable, but a fixed and constant
character. Thus salts being considered as the result of the
combination of two opposite principles, acid and alkali, and
being termed _neutral_ when these principles exactly
balanced each other, Rouelle (who was Royal Professor at
Paris in 1742) admits of neutral salts with excess of acid,
neutral salts with excess of base, and perfect neutral
salts. Beaume maintained[26\6] against him that there were
no salts except those perfectly neutral, the other classes
being the results of mixture and imperfect {25} combination.
But this question was not adequately treated till chemists
made every experiment with the balance in their hands. When
this was done, they soon discovered that, in each neutral
salt, the proportional weights of the ingredients which
composed it were always the same. This was ascertained by
Wenzel, whose _Doctrine of the Affinities of Bodies_
appeared in 1777. He not only ascertained that the
proportions of elements in neutral chemical compounds are
definite, but also that they are reciprocal; that is, (to
express his results in a manner now employed by chemists),
that if A, a certain weight of a certain acid, neutralize
_m_, a certain weight of a certain base, and B, a certain
weight of a certain other acid, neutralize _n_, a certain
weight of a certain other base; the compound of A and _n_
will also be neutral; as also that of B and _m_. The same
views were again presented by Richter in 1792, in his
_Principles of the Measure of Chemical Elements_. And along
with these facts, that of the combination of elements in
multiple proportions being also taken into account, the
foundations of the Atomic Theory were laid; and that Theory
was propounded in 1803 by Mr. Dalton. That theory, however,
rests upon the Idea of Substance, as well as upon that Idea
of Chemical Affinity which we are here considering; and the
discussion of its evidence and truth must be for the present
deferred.

[Note 26\6: Dumas, _Phil. Chim._ p. 198.]

9. The two principles just explained,--that Affinity is
Definite as to the Kind, and as to the Quantity of the
elements which it unites,--have here been stated as results
of experimental investigation. That they could never have
been clearly understood, and therefore never firmly
established, without laborious and exact experiments, is
certain; but yet we may venture to say that being once fully
known, they may seem to thoughtful men to possess an
evidence beyond that of mere experiment. For how, in fact,
can we conceive combinations, otherwise than as definite in
kind and quantity? If we were to suppose each element
ready to combine with any other indifferently, and
indifferently in any quantity, we should have a world in
{26} which all would be confusion and indefiniteness. There
would be no fixed kinds of bodies. Salts, and stones, and
ores, would approach to and graduate into each other by
insensible degrees. Instead of this, we know that the world
consists of bodies distinguishable from each other by
definite differences, capable of being classified and named,
and of having general propositions asserted concerning them.
And as we cannot conceive a world in which this should not
be the case, it would appear that we cannot conceive a state
of things in which the laws of the combination of elements
should not be of that definite and measured kind which we
have above asserted.

This will, perhaps, appear more clearly by stating our
fundamental convictions respecting chemical composition in
another form, which I shall, therefore, proceed to do.

10. _Chemical Composition determines Physical
Properties._--However obscure and incomplete may be our
conception of the internal powers by which the ultimate
particles of bodies are held together, it involves, at
least, this conviction:--that these powers are what
determine bodies to be bodies, and therefore contain the
reason of all the properties which, as bodies, they possess.
The forces by which the particles of a body are held
together, also cause it to be hard or soft, heavy or light,
opake or transparent, black or red; for if these forces are
not the cause of these peculiarities, what can be the cause?
By the very supposition which we make respecting these
forces, they include all the relations by which the parts
are combined into a whole, and therefore they, and they
only, must determine all the attributes of the whole. The
foundation of all our speculations respecting the intimate
constitution of bodies must be this principle, that their
composition determines their properties.

Accordingly we find our chemists reasoning from this
principle with great confidence, even in doubtful cases.
Thus Davy, in his researches concerning the diamond, says:
'That some chemical difference must exist between the
hardest and most beautiful of the {27} gems and charcoal,
between a non-conductor and a conductor of electricity, it
is scarcely possible to doubt: and it seems reasonable to
expect that a very refined or perfect chemistry will confirm
_the analogies of nature_; and show that bodies cannot be
the same in their composition or chemical nature, and yet
totally different in their chemical properties.' It is
obvious that the principle here assumed is so far from being
a mere result of experience, that it is here appealed to to
prove that all previous results of experience on this
subject must be incomplete and inaccurate; and that there
must be some chemical difference between charcoal and
diamond, though none had hitherto been detected.

11. In what manner, according to what rule, the chemical
composition shall determine the kind of the substance, we
cannot reasonably expect to determine by mere conjecture or
assumption, without a studious examination of natural bodies
and artificial compounds. Yet even in the most recent times,
and among men of science, we find that an assumption of the
most arbitrary character has in one case been mixed up with
this indisputable principle, that the elementary composition
determines the kind of the substance. In the classification
of minerals, one school of mineralogists have rightly taken
it as their fundamental principle that the chemical
composition shall decide the position of the mineral in the
system. But they have appended to this principle,
arbitrarily and unjustifiably, the maxim that the element
which is _largest in quantity_ shall fix the class of the
substance. To make such an assumption is to renounce, at
once, all hope of framing a system which shall be governed
by the resemblances of the things classified; for how can we
possibly know beforehand that fifty-five per cent, of iron
shall give a substance its predominant properties, and that
forty-five per cent, shall not? Accordingly, the systems of
mineralogical arrangement which have been attempted in this
way, (those of Haüy, Phillips, and others,) have been found
inconsistent with themselves, ambiguous, and incapable of
leading to any general truths. {28}

12. _Chemical Composition and Crystalline Form
correspond._--Thus the physical properties of bodies depend
upon their chemical composition, but in a manner which a
general examination of bodies with reference to their
properties and their composition can alone determine. We
may, however, venture to assert further, that the more
definite the properties are, the more distinct may we expect
to find this dependence. Now the most definite of the
properties of bodies are those constant properties which
involve relations of space; that is, their figure. We speak
not, however, of that external figure, derived from external
circumstances, which, so far from being constant and
definite, is altogether casual and arbitrary; but of that
figure which arises from their internal texture, and which
shows itself not only in the regular forms which they
spontaneously assume, but in the disposition of the parts to
separate in definite directions, and no others. In short,
the most definite of the properties of perfect chemical
compounds is their _crystalline structure_; and therefore it
is evident that the crystalline structure of each body, and
the forms which it affects, must be in a most intimate
dependence upon its chemical composition.

Here again we are led to the brink of another theory;--that
of crystalline structure, which has excited great interest
among philosophers ever since the time of Haüy. But this
theory involves, besides that idea of chemical composition
with which we are here concerned, other conceptions, which
enter into the relations of figure. These conceptions,
governed principally by the Idea of Symmetry, must be
unfolded and examined before we can venture to discuss any
theory of crystallization: and we shall proceed to do this
as soon as we have first duly considered the Idea of
Substance and its consequences.



{{29}}
