CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS OBTAINED FROM
EXPERIENCE.


1. IT was formerly stated[38\3] that experience cannot
establish any universal or necessary truths. The number of
trials which we can make of any proposition is necessarily
limited, and observation alone cannot give us any ground of
extending the inference to untried cases. Observed facts
have no visible bond of necessary connexion, and no exercise
of our senses can enable us to discover such connexion. We
can never acquire from a mere observation of facts, the
right to assert that a proposition is true in all cases, and
that it could not be otherwise than we find it to be.

[Note 38\3: B. i. c. iv. Of Experience]

Yet, as we have just seen in the history of the laws of
motion, we may go on collecting our knowledge from
observation, and enlarging and simplifying it, till it
approaches or attains to complete universality and seeming
necessity. Whether the laws of motion, as we now know them,
can be rigorously traced to an absolute necessity in the
nature of things, we have not ventured absolutely to
pronounce. But we have seen that some of the most acute and
profound mathematicians have believed that, for these laws
of motion, or some of them, there was such a demonstrable
necessity compelling them to be such as they are, and no
other. Most of those who have carefully studied the
principles of Mechanics will allow that some at least of the
primary laws of motion approach very near to this character
of necessary truth; and will confess that it would be
difficult to imagine any other consistent {264} scheme of
fundamental principles. And almost all mathematicians will
allow to these laws an absolute universality; so that we may
apply them without scruple or misgiving, in cases the most
remote from those to which our experience has extended. What
astronomer would fear to refer to the known laws of motion,
in reasoning concerning the double stars; although these
objects are at an immeasurably remote distance from that
solar system which has been the only field of our
observation of mechanical facts? What philosopher, in
speculating respecting a magnetic fluid, or a luminiferous
ether, would hesitate to apply to it the mechanical
principles which are applicable to fluids of known
mechanical properties? When we assert that the quantity of
motion in the world cannot be increased or diminished by the
mutual actions of bodies, does not every mathematician feel
convinced that it would be an unphilosophical restriction to
limit this proposition to such modes of action as we have tried?

Yet no one can doubt that, in historical fact, these laws
were collected from experience. That such is the case, is no
matter of conjecture. We know the time, the persons, the
circumstances, belonging to each step of each discovery. I
have, in the History, given an account of these discoveries;
and in the previous chapters of the present work, I have
further examined the nature and the import of the principles
which were thus brought to light.

Here, then, is an apparent contradiction. Experience, it
would seem, has done that which we had proved that she
cannot do. She has led men to propositions, universal at
least, and to principles which appear to some persons
necessary. What is the explanation of this contradiction,
the solution of this paradox? Is it true that Experience can
reveal to us universal and necessary truths? Does she
possess some secret virtue, some unsuspected power, by which
she can detect connexions and consequences which we have
declared to be out of her sphere? Can she see more than mere
appearances, and observe more than mere facts? Can {265} she
penetrate, in some way, to the nature of things?--descend
below the surface of phenomena to their causes and origins,
so as to be able to say what can and what can not be;--what
occurrences are partial, and what universal? If this be so,
we have indeed mistaken her character and powers; and the
whole course of our reasoning becomes precarious and
obscure. But, then, when we return upon our path we cannot
find the point at which we deviated, we cannot detect the
false step in our deduction. It still seems that by
experience, strictly so called, we cannot discover necessary
and universal truths. Our senses can give us no evidence of
a necessary connexion in phenomena. Our observation must be
limited, and cannot testify concerning anything which is
beyond its limits. A general view of our faculties appears
to prove it to be impossible that men should do what the
history of the science of mechanics shows that they have done.

2. But in order to try to solve this Paradox, let us again
refer to the History of Mechanics. In the cases belonging to
that science, in which propositions of the most
unquestionable universality, and most approaching to the
character of necessary truths, (as, for instance, the laws
of motion,) have been arrived at, what is the source of the
axiomatic character which the propositions thus assume? The
answer to this question will, we may hope, throw some light
on the perplexity in which we appear to be involved.

Now the answer to this inquiry is, that the laws of motion
borrow their axiomatic character from their being merely
_interpretations_ of the Axioms of Causation. Those axioms,
being exhibitions of the Idea of Cause under various
aspects, are of the most rigorous universality and
necessity. And so far as the laws of motion are
exemplifications of those axioms, these laws must be no less
universal and necessary. How these axioms are to be
understood;--in what sense _cause_ and _effect_, _action_
and _reaction_, are to be taken, experience and observation
did, in fact, teach inquirers on this subject; and without
this teaching, the laws of motion could never have been
distinctly known. If two forces {266} act together, each
must produce its effect, by the axiom of causation; and,
therefore, the effects of the separate forces must be
_compounded_. But a long course of discussion and experiment
must instruct men of what kind this _composition_ of forces
is. Again; action and reaction must be equal; but much
thought and some trial were needed to show what _action_ and
_reaction_ are. Those metaphysicians who enunciated Laws of
motion without reference to experience, propounded only such
laws as were vague and inapplicable. But yet these persons
manifested the indestructible conviction, belonging to man's
speculative nature, that there exist Laws of motion, that
is, universal formulæ, connecting the causes and effects
when motion takes place. Those mechanicians, again, who,
observed facts involving equilibrium and motion, and stated
some narrow rules, without attempting to ascend to any
universal and simple principle, obtained laws no less barren
and useless than the metaphysicians; for they could not tell
in what new cases, or whether in any, their laws would be
verified;--they needed a more general rule, to show them the
limits of the rule they had discovered. They went wrong in
each attempt to solve a new problem, because their
interpretation of the terms of the axioms, though true,
perhaps, in certain cases, was not right in general.

Thus Pappus erred in attempting to interpret as a case of
the lever, the problem of supporting a weight upon an
inclined plane; thus Aristotle erred in interpreting the
doctrine that the weight of bodies is the cause of their
fall; thus Kepler erred in interpreting the rule that the
velocity of bodies depends upon the force; thus
Bernoulli[39\3] erred in interpreting the equality of action
and reaction upon a lever in motion. In each of these
instances, true doctrines, already established, (whether by
experiment or otherwise,) were erroneously applied. And the
error was corrected by further reflection, which pointed out
that another mode of interpretation was requisite, in order
that the axiom {267} which, was appealed to in each case
might retain its force in the most general sense. And in the
reasonings which avoided or corrected such errors, and which
led to substantial general truths, the object of the
speculator always was to give to the acknowledged maxims
which the Idea of Cause suggested, such a signification as
should be consistent with their universal validity. The rule
was not accepted as particular at the outset, and afterwards
generalized more and more widely; but from the very first,
the universality of the rule was assumed, and the question
was, how it should be understood so as to be universally
true. At every stage of speculation, the law was regarded as
a general law. This was not an aspect which it gradually
acquired, by the accumulating contributions of experience,
but a feature of its original and native character. _What_
should happen universally, experience might be needed to
show: but that what happened should happen _universally_,
was implied in the nature of knowledge. The universality of
the laws of motion was not gathered from experience, however
much the laws themselves might be so.

[Note 39\3: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. v. sect. 2.]

3. Thus we obtain the solution of our Paradox, so far as the
case before us is concerned. The laws of motion borrow their
_form_ from the Idea of Causation, though their _matter_ may
be given by experience: and hence they possess a
universality which experience cannot give. They are
certainly and universally valid; and the only question for
observation to decide is, how they are to be understood.
They are like general mathematical formulæ, which are known
to be true, even while we are ignorant what are the unknown
quantities which they involve. It must be allowed, on the
other hand, that so long as these formulæ are not
interpreted by a real study of nature, they are not only
useless but prejudicial; filling men's minds with vague
general terms, empty maxims, and unintelligible
abstractions, which they mistake for knowledge. Of such
perversion of the speculative propensities of man's nature,
the world has seen too much in all ages. Yet we must not, on
that account, despise these forms of {268} truth, since
without them, no general knowledge is possible. Without
general terms, and maxims, and abstractions, we can have no
science, no speculation; hardly, indeed, consistent thought
or the exercise of reason. The course of real knowledge is,
to obtain from thought and experience the right
interpretation of our general terms, the real import of our
maxims, the true generalizations which our abstractions
involve.

4. If it be asked, How Experience is able to teach us to
interpret aright the general terms which the Axioms of
Causation involve;--whence she derives the light which she
is to throw on these general notions; the answer is
obvious;--namely, that the relations of causation are the
_conditions_ of Experience;--that the general notions are
_exemplified_ in the particular cases of which she takes
cognizance. The events which take place about us, and which
are the objects of our observation, we cannot conceive
otherwise than as subject to the laws of cause and effect.
Every event must have a cause;--Every effect must be
determined by its cause;--these maxims are true of the
phenomena which form the materials of our experience. It is
precisely to them, that these truths apply. It is in the
world which we have before our eyes, that these propositions
are universally verified; and it is therefore by the
observation of what we see, that we must learn how these
propositions are to be understood. Every fact, every
experiment, is an example of these statements; and it is
therefore by attention to and familiarity with facts and
experiments, that we learn the signification of the
expressions in which the statements are made; just as in any
other case we learn the import of language by observing the
manner in which it is applied in known cases. Experience is
the interpreter of nature; it being understood that she is
to make her interpretation in that comprehensive phraseology
which is the genuine language of science.

5. We may return for an instant to the objection, that
experience cannot give us general truths, since, after any
number of trials confirming a rule, we may for aught we can
foresee, have one which violates the {269} rule. When we
have seen a thousand stones fall to the ground, we may see
one which does not fall under the same apparent
circumstances. How then, it is asked, can experience teach
us that _all_ stones, rigorously speaking, will fall if
unsupported? And to this we reply, that it is not true that
we can conceive one stone to be suspended in the air, while
a thousand others fall, without believing some peculiar
cause to support it; and that, therefore, such a supposition
forms no exception to the law, that gravity is a force by
which _all_ bodies are urged downwards. Undoubtedly we can
conceive a body, when dropt or thrown, to move in a line
quite different from other bodies: thus a certain
missile[40\3] used by the natives of Australia, and lately
brought to this country, when thrown from the hand in a
proper manner, describes a curve, and returns to the place
from whence it was thrown. But did any one, therefore, even
for an instant suppose that the laws of motion are different
for this and for other bodies? On the contrary, was not
every person of a speculative turn immediately led to
inquire how it was that the known causes which modify
motion, the resistance of the air and the other causes,
produced in this instance so peculiar an effect? And if the
motion had been still more unaccountable, it would not have
occasioned any uncertainty whether it were consistent with
the agency of gravity and the laws of motion. If a body
suddenly alter its direction, or move in any other
unexpected manner, we never doubt that there is a cause of
the change. We may continue quite ignorant of the nature of
this cause, but this ignorance never occasions a moment's
doubt that the cause exists and is exactly suited to the
effect. And thus experience can prove or discover to us
general rules, but she can never prove that general rules do
not exist. Anomalies, exceptions, unexplained phenomena, may
remind us that we have much still to learn, but they can
never make us suppose that truths are not universal. We may
observe facts that show us we have not fully {270}
understood the meaning of our general laws, but we can never
find facts which show our laws to have no meaning. Our
experience is bound in by the limits of cause and effect,
and can give us no information concerning any region where
that relation does not prevail. The whole series of external
occurrences and objects, through all time and space, exists
only, and is conceived only, as subject to this relation;
and therefore we endeavour in vain to imagine to ourselves
when and where and how exceptions to this relation may
occur. The assumption of the connexion of cause and effect
is essential to our experience, as the recognition of the
maxims which express this connexion is essential to our
knowledge.

[Note 40\3: Called the Bo-me-rang.]

6. I have thus endeavoured to explain in some measure how,
at least in the field of our mechanical knowledge,
experience can discover universal truths, though she cannot
give them their universality; and how such truths, though
borrowing their form from our ideas, cannot be understood
except by the actual study of external nature. And thus with
regard to the laws of motion, and other fundamental
principles of Mechanics, the analysis of our ideas and the
history of the progress of the science well illustrate each
other.

If the paradox of the discovery of universal truths by
experience be thus solved in one instance, a much wider
question offers itself to us;--How far the difficulty, and
how far the solution, are applicable to other subjects. It
is easy to see that this question involves most grave and
extensive doctrines with regard to the whole compass of
human knowledge: and the views to which we have been led in
the present Book of this work are, we trust, fitted to throw
much light upon the general aspect of the subject. But after
discussions so abstract, and perhaps obscure, as those in
which we have been engaged for some chapters, I willingly
postpone to a future occasion an investigation which may
perhaps appear to most readers more recondite and difficult
still. And we have, in fact, many other special fields of
knowledge to survey, before we are led by the order of our
subject, to {271} those general questions and doctrines,
those antitheses brought into view and again resolved, which
a view of the whole territory of human knowledge suggests,
and by which the nature and conditions of knowledge are
exhibited.

Before we quit the subject of mechanical science we shall
make a few remarks on another doctrine which forms part of
the established truths of the science, namely, the doctrine
of universal gravitation.



{{272}}
