CHAPTER II.

APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SYMMETRY TO CRYSTALS.


1. MINERALS and other bodies of definite chemical
composition often exhibit that marked regularity of form and
structure which we designate by terming them _Crystals_; and
in such crystals, when we duly study them, we perceive the
various kinds of symmetry of which we have spoken in the
previous chapter. And the different kinds of symmetry which
we have there described are now usually distinguished from
each other, by writers on crystallography. Indeed it is
mainly to such writers that we are indebted for a sound and
consistent classification of the kinds and degrees of
symmetry of which forms are capable. But this classification
was by no means invented as soon as mineralogists applied
themselves to the study of crystals. These first attempts to
arrange crystalline forms were very imperfect; those, for
example, of Linnæus, Werner, Romé de Lisle, and Haüy. The
essays of these writers implied a classification at once
defective and superfluous. They reduced all crystals to one
or other of certain _fundamental forms_; and this procedure
might have been a perfectly good method of dividing
crystalline forms into classes, if the fundamental forms had
been selected so as to exemplify the different kinds of
symmetry. But this was not the case. Haüy's fundamental or
'primitive' forms, were, for instance, the following: the
_parallelepiped_, the _octahedron_, the _tetrahedron_, the
_regular hexagonal prism_, the _rhombic dodecahedron_, and
the _double hexagonal pyramid_. Of these, the _octahedron_,
the _tetrahedron_, the _rhombic dodecahedron_, all belong to
the {76} same kind of symmetry (the TESSULAR systems); also
the _hexagonal prism_ and the _hexagonal pyramid_ both
belong to the RHOMBIC system; while the _parallelepiped_ is
so employed as to include all kinds of symmetry.

It is, however, to be recollected that Haüy, in his
selection of primitive forms, not only had an eye to the
external form of the crystal and to its degree and kind of
regularity, but also made his classification with an
especial reference to the _cleavage_ of the mineral, which
he considered as a primary element in crystalline analysis.
There can be no doubt that the cleavage of a crystal is one
of its most important characters: it is a relation of form
belonging to the interior, which is to be attended to no
less than the form of the exterior. But still, the cleavage
is to be regarded only as determining the degree of
geometrical symmetry of the body, and not as defining a
special geometrical figure to which the body _must_ be
referred. To have looked upon it in the latter light, was a
mistake of the earlier crystallographic speculators, on
which we shall shortly have to remark.

2. I have said that the reference of crystals to Primitive
Forms might have been well employed as a mode of expressing
a just classification of them. This follows as a consequence
from the application of the Principle stated in the last
chapter, that _all symmetrical members are alike affected_.
Thus we may take an upright triangular prism as the
representative of the rhombic system, and if we then suppose
one of the upper edges to be cut off, or truncated, we must,
by the Principle of Symmetry, suppose the other two upper
edges to be truncated in precisely the same manner. By this
truncation we may obtain the upper part of a rhombohedron;
and by truncations of the same kind, symmetrically affecting
all the analogous parts of the figure, we may obtain any
other form possessing three-membered symmetry. And the same
is true of any of the other kinds of symmetry, provided we
make a proper selection of a fundamental form. And this was
really the method employed by Demeste, Werner, and Romé de
Lisle. They {77} assumed a Primitive Form, and then
conceived other forms, such as they found in nature, to be
derived from the Primitive Form by truncation of the edges,
acumination of the corners, and the like processes. This
mode of conception was a perfectly just and legitimate
expression of the general Idea of Symmetry.

3. The true view of the degrees of symmetry was, as I have
already said, impeded by the attempts which Haüy and others
made to arrive at primitive forms by the light which
cleavage was supposed to throw upon the structure of
minerals. At last, however, in Germany, as I have narrated
in the History of Mineralogy[4\7], Weiss and Mohs introduced
a classification of forms implying a more philosophical
principle, dividing the forms into Systems; which, employing
the terms of the latter writer, we shall call the
_tessular_, the _pyramidal_ or _square pyramidal_, the
_prismatic_ or _oblong_, and the _rhombohedral_ systems.

[Note 4\7: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xv. c. iv.]

Of these forms, the three latter may be at once referred to
those kinds of symmetry of which we have spoken in the last
chapter. The _rhombohedral_ system has _triangular_
symmetry, or is three-membered: the _pyramidal_ has _square_
symmetry, or is four-membered: the _prismatic_ has _oblong_
symmetry, and is two-and-two-membered. But the kinds of
symmetry which were spoken of in the former chapter, do not
exhaust the idea when applied to minerals. For the symmetry
which was there explained was such only as can be exhibited
on a surface, whereas the forms of crystals are solid. Not
only have the right and left parts of the upper surface of a
crystal relations to each other; but the upper surface and
the lateral faces of the crystal have also their relations;
they may be different, or they may be alike. If we take a
cube, and hold it so that four of its faces are vertical,
not only are all these four sides exactly similar, so as to
give square symmetry; but also we may turn the cube, so that
any one of these four sides shall become the top, and still
the four sides which are thus made vertical, though {78} not
the same which were vertical before, are still perfectly
symmetrical. Thus this cubical figure possesses more than
square symmetry. It possesses square symmetry in a vertical
as well as in a horizontal sense. It possesses a symmetry
which has the same relation to a _cube_ which four-membered
symmetry has to a _square_. And this kind of symmetry is
termed the _cubical_ or _tessular_ symmetry. All the other
kinds of symmetry have reference to an axis, about which the
corresponding parts are disposed; but in tessular symmetry
the horizontal and vertical axes are also symmetrical, or
interchangeable; and thus the figure may be said to have no
axis at all.

4. It has already been repeatedly stated that, by the very
idea of symmetry, all the incidents of form must affect
alike all the corresponding parts. Now in crystals we have,
among these incidents, not only external figure, but
_cleavage_, which may be considered as internal figure.
Cleavage, then, must conform to the degree of symmetry of
the figure. Accordingly cleavage, no less than form, is to
be attended to in determining to what system a mineral
belongs. If a crystal were to occur as a square prism or
pyramid, it would not on that account necessarily belong to
the square pyramidal system. If it were found that it was
cleavable parallel to one side of the prism, but not in the
transverse direction, it has only oblong symmetry; and the
equality of the sides which makes it square is only
accidental.

Thus no cleavage is admissible in any system of
crystallization which does not agree with the degree of
symmetry of the system. On the other hand, _any_ cleavage
which _is_ consistent with the symmetry of the system, is
(hypothetically at least) allowable. Thus in the oblong
prismatic system we may have a cleavage parallel to one side
only of the prism; or parallel to both, but of different
distinctness; or parallel to the two diagonals of the prism
but of the same distinctness; or we may have both these
cleavages together. In the rhombohedral system, the cleavage
may be parallel to the sides of the rhombohedron, as in Calc
{79} Spar: or, in the same system, the cleavage, instead of
being thus oblique to the axis, may be along the axis in
those directions which make equal angles with each other:
this cleavage easily gives either a triangular or a
hexagonal prism. Again, in the tessular system, the cleavage
may be parallel to the surface of the cube, which is thus
readily separable into other cubes, as in Galena; or the
cleavage may be such as to cut off the solid angle of the
cube, and since there are eight of these, such cleavage
gives us an octahedron, which, however, may be reduced to a
tetrahedron, by rejecting all parallel faces, as being mere
repetitions of the same cleavage; this is the case with
Fluor Spar: or the cube of the tessular system may be
cleavable in planes which truncate all the edges of the
cube; and as these are twelve, we thus obtain the
dodecahedron with rhombic faces: this occurs in Zinc Blende.
And thus we see the origin of Haüy's various primitive
forms, the tetrahedron, octahedron, and rhombic
dodecahedron, all belonging to the tessular system:--they
are, in fact, different cleavage forms of that system.

5. I do not dwell upon other incidents of crystals which
have reference to form, nor upon the lustre, smoothness, and
striation of the surfaces. To all such incidents the general
principle applies, that similar parts are similarly
affected; and hence, if any parts are found to be constantly
and definitely different from other parts of the same sort,
they are not similar parts; and the symmetry is to be
interpreted with reference to this difference.

We have now to consider the inferences which have been drawn
from these incidents of crystallization, with regard to the
intimate structure of bodies.



{{80}}
