CHAPTER II.

OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES.


1. IT has appeared in the preceding chapter that in cases in
which the phenomena suggest to us the idea of Polarity, we
are also led to assume some material machinery as the mode
in which the polar forces are exerted. We assume, for
instance, globular particles which possess poles, or the
vibrations of a fluid, or two fluids attracting each other;
in every case, in short, some hypothesis by which the
existence and operation of the Polarity is embodied in
geometrical and mechanical properties of a medium; nor is it
possible for us to avoid proceeding upon the conviction that
some such hypothesis must be true; although the nature of
the connexion between the mechanism and the phenomena must
still be indefinite and arbitrary.

But since each class of Polar Phenomena is thus referred to
an ulterior cause, of which we know no more than that it has
a polar character, it follows that _different_ Polarities
may result from the _same_ cause manifesting its polar
character under different aspects. Taking, for example, the
hypothesis of globular particles, if electricity result from
an action dependent upon the _poles_ of each globule,
magnetism may depend upon an action in the _equator_ of each
globule; or taking the supposition of transverse vibrations,
if polarized light result directly from such _vibrations_,
crystallization may have reference to the _axes_ of the
elasticity of the _medium_ by which the vibrations are
rendered transverse,--so far as the polar character only of
the phenomena is to be accounted for. I say this _may_ be
so, _in so far_ only as the polar character of the phenomena
is concerned; for whether the relation of {372} electricity
to magnetism, or of crystalline forces to light, can really
be explained by such hypotheses, remains to be determined by
the facts themselves. But since the first necessary feature
of the hypothesis is, that it shall give polarity, and since
an hypothesis which does this, may, by its mathematical
relations, give polarities of different kinds and in
different directions, any two co-existent kinds of polarity
may result from the same cause, manifesting itself in
various manners.

The conclusion to which we are led by these general
considerations is, that two co-existing classes of polar
phenomena _may_ be effects of the same cause. But those who
have studied such phenomena more deeply and attentively
have, in most or in all cases, arrived at the conviction
that the various kinds of Polarity in such cases _must_ be
connected and fundamentally identical. As this conviction
has exercised a great influence, both upon the discoveries
of new facts and upon the theoretical speculations of modern
philosophers, and has been put forward by some writers as a
universal principle of science, I will consider some of the
cases in which it has been thus applied.

2. _Connexion of Magnetic and Electric Polarity._--The polar
phenomena of electricity and magnetism are clearly analogous
in their laws: and obvious facts showed at an early period
that there was some connexion between the two agencies.
Attempts were made to establish an evident and definite
relation between the two kinds of force, which attempts
proceeded upon the principle now under
consideration;--namely, that in such cases, the two kinds of
Polarity must be connected. Professor Œrsted, of Copenhagen,
was one of those who made many trials founded upon this
conviction: yet all these were long unsuccessful. At length,
in 1820, he discovered that a galvanic current, passing at
right angles near to a magnetic needle, exercises upon it a
powerful deflecting force. The connexion once detected
between magnetism and galvanism was soon recognized as
constant and universal. It was represented in different
hypothetical modes by different persons; some considering
the galvanic {373} current as the primitive axis, and the
magnet as constituted of galvanic currents passing round it
at right angles to the magnetic axis; while others conceived
the magnetic axis as the primitive one, and the electric
current as implying a magnetic current round the wire. So
far as many of the general relations of these two kinds of
force were concerned, either mode of representation served
to express them; and thus the assumption that the two
Polarities, the magnetic and the electric, were
fundamentally identical, was verified, so far as the
phenomena of magnetic attraction, and the like, were
concerned.

I need not here mention how this was further confirmed by
the experiments in which, by means of the forces thus
brought into view, a galvanic wire was made to revolve round
a magnet, and a magnet round a galvanic wire;--in which
artificial magnets were constructed of coils of galvanic
wire;--and finally, in which the galvanic spark was obtained
from the magnet. The identity which sagacious speculators
had divined even before it was discovered, and which they
had seen to be universal as soon as it was brought to light,
was completely manifested in every imaginable form.

The relation of the electric and magnetic Polarities was
found to be, that they were _transverse_ to each other, and
this relation exhibited under various conditions of form and
position of the apparatus, gave rise to very curious and
unexpected perplexities. The degree of complication which
this relation may occasion, may be judged of from the number
of constructions and modes of conception offered by Œrsted,
Wollaston, Faraday, and others, for the purpose of framing a
technical memory of the results. The magnetic polarity gives
us the north and south poles of the needle; the electric
polarity makes the current positive and negative; and these
pairs of opposites are connected by relations of situation,
as above and below, right and left; and give rise to the
resulting motion of the needle one way or the other. {374}

3. Ampère, by framing his hypotheses of the action of
voltaic currents and the constitution of magnets, reduced
all these technical rules to rigorous deductions from one
general principle. And thus the vague and obscure persuasion
that there _must_ be _some_ connexion between Electricity
and Magnetism, so long an idle and barren conjecture, was
unfolded into a complete theory, according to which magnetic
and electromotive actions are only two different
manifestations of the same forces; and all the
above-mentioned complex relations of polarities are reduced
to one single polarity, that of the electro-dynamic current.

4. As the Idea of Polarity was thus firmly established and
clearly developed, it became an instrument of reasoning.
Thus it led Ampère to maintain that the original or
elementary forces in electro-dynamic action could not be as
M. Biot thought they were, a statical _couple_, but must be
directly opposite to each other. The same idea enabled Mr.
Faraday to carry on with confidence such reasonings as the
following[8\5]: 'No other known power has like direction
with that exerted between an electric current and a magnetic
pole; it is tangential, while all other forces acting at a
distance are direct. Hence if a magnetic pole on one side of
a revolving plate follow its course by reason of its
obedience to the tangential force exerted upon it by the
very current of electricity which it has itself caused; a
similar pole on the other side of the plate should
immediately set it free from this force; for the currents
which have to be formed by the two poles are in contrary
directions.' And in Article 1114 of his _Researches_, the
same eminent philosopher infers that if electricity and
magnetism are considered as the results of a peculiar agent
or condition, exerted in determinate directions
perpendicular to each other, one must be by some means
convertible into the other; and this he was afterwards able
to prove to be the case in fact.

[Note 8\5: _Researches_, 244.]

{375} Thus the principle that the Co-existent Polarities of
magnetism and electricity are connected and fundamentally
identical, is not only true, but is far from being either
vague or barren. It has been a fertile source both of
theories which have, at present, a very great probability,
and of the discovery of new and striking facts. We proceed
to consider other similar cases.

5. _Connexion of Electrical and Chemical Polarities._--The
doctrine that the chemical forces by which the elements of
bodies are held together or separated, are identical with
the polar forces of electricity, is a great discovery of
modern times; so great and so recent, indeed, that probably
men of science in general have hardly yet obtained a clear
view and firm hold of this truth. This doctrine is now,
however, entirely established in the minds of the most
profound and philosophical chemists of our time. The
complete development and confirmation of this as of other
great truths, was preceded by more vague and confused
opinions gradually tending to this point; and the progress
of thought and of research was impelled and guided, in this
as in similar cases, by the persuasion that these
co-existent polarities could not fail to be closely
connected with each other. While the ultimate and exact
theory to which previous incomplete and transitory theories
tended is still so new and so unfamiliar, it must needs be a
matter of difficulty and responsibility for a common reader
to describe the steps by which truth has advanced from point
to point. I shall, therefore, in doing this, guide myself
mainly by the historical sketches of the progress of this
great theory, which, fortunately for us, have been given us
by the two philosophers who have played by far the most
important parts in the discovery, Davy and Faraday.

It will be observed that we are concerned here with the
progress of theory, and not of experiment, except so far as
it is confirmatory of theory. In Davy's Memoir[9\5] of 1826,
on the Relations of Electrical and {376} Chemical Changes,
he gives the historical details to which I have alluded.
Already in 1802 he had conjectured that all chemical
decompositions might be polar. In 1806 he attempted to
confirm this conjecture, and succeeded, to his own
satisfaction, in establishing[10\5] that the combinations
and decompositions by electricity were referable to the law
of electrical attractions and repulsions; and advanced the
hypothesis (as he calls it), that chemical and electrical
attractions were produced by the same cause, acting in one
case on particles, in the other on masses. This hypothesis
was most strikingly confirmed by the author's being able to
use electrical agency as a more powerful means of chemical
decomposition than any which had yet been applied.
'Believing,' he adds, 'that our philosophical systems are
exceedingly imperfect, I never attached much importance to
this hypothesis; but having formed it after a copious
induction of facts, and having gained by the application of
it a number of practical results, and considering myself as
much the author of it as I was of the decomposition of the
alkalies, and having developed it in an elementary work as
far as the present state of chemistry seemed to allow, I
have never,' he says, 'criticised or examined the manner in
which different authors have adopted or explained it,
contented, if in the hands of others, it assisted the
arrangements of chemistry or mineralogy, or became an
instrument of discovery.' When the doctrine had found an
extensive acceptance among chemists, attempts were made to
show that it had been asserted by earlier writers: and
though Davy justly denies all value to these pretended
anticipations, they serve to show, however dimly, the
working of that conviction of the Connexion of Co-existent
Properties which all along presided in men's minds during
this course of investigation. 'Ritter and Winterl have been
quoted,' Davy says[11\5], 'among other persons, as having
imagined or anticipated the relation between electrical
powers and chemical affinities before the discovery of the
pile {377} of Volta. But whoever will read with attention
Ritter's "Evidence that Galvanic action exists in organised
nature," and **Winterl's _Prolusiones ad Chemiam sæculi decimi
noni_, will find nothing to justify this opinion.' He then
refers to the Queries of Newton at the end of his Optics.
'These,' he says, 'contain more grand and speculative views
that might be brought to bear upon this question than any
found in the works of modern electricians; but it is very
unjust to the experimentalists who by the laborious
application of new instruments, have discovered novel facts
and analogies, to refer them to any such suppositions as
that all attractions, chemical, electrical, magnetical, and
gravitative, may depend upon the same cause.' It is
perfectly true, that such vague opinions, though arising
from that tendency to generalize which is the essence of
science, are of no value except so far as they are both
rendered intelligible, and confirmed by experimental
research.

[Note 9\5: _Phil. Trans._ 1826, p. 383.]

[Note 10\5: _Phil. Trans._ 1826, p. 389.]

[Note 11\5: _Ibid._ p. 384.]

The phenomena of chemical decomposition by means of the
voltaic pile, however, led other persons to views very
similar to those of Davy. Thus Grotthus in 1805[12\5]
published an hypothesis of the same kind. 'The pile of
Volta,' he says, 'is an electrical magnet, of which each
element, that is, each pair of plates, has a positive and a
negative pole. The consideration of this polarity suggested
to me the idea that a similar polarity may come into play
between the elementary particles of water when acted upon by
the same electrical agent; and I avow that this thought was
for me a flash of light.'

[Note 12\5: _Ann. Chim._ lxviii. 54.]

6. The thought, however, though thus brought into being, was
very far from being as yet freed from vagueness,
superfluities, and errours. I have elsewhere noticed[13\5]
Faraday's remark on Davy's celebrated Memoir of 1806; that
'the mode of action by which the effects take place is
stated very generally, so generally, indeed, that probably a
dozen precise schemes of electro-chemical action might be
drawn up, differing {378} essentially from each other, yet
all agreeing with the statement there given.' When Davy and
others proceeded to give a little more definiteness and
precision to the statement of their views, they soon
introduced into the theory features which it was afterwards
found necessary to abandon. Thus[14\5] both Davy, Grotthus,
Riffault, and Chompré, ascribed electrical decomposition to
the action of the _poles_, and some of them even pretended
to assign the proportion in which the force of the pole
diminishes as the distance from it increases. Faraday, as I
have already stated, showed that the polarity must be
considered as residing not only in what had till then been
called the _poles_, but at every point of the circuit. He
ascribed[15\5] electro-chemical decomposition to internal
forces, residing in the _particles_ of the matter under
decomposition, not to external forces, exerted by the poles.
Hence he shortly afterwards[16\5] proposed to reject the
word _poles_ altogether, and to employ instead, the term
_electrode_, meaning the doors or passages (of whatever
surface formed) by which the decomposed elements pass out.
What have been called the _positive_ and _negative_ poles he
further termed the _Anode_ and _Cathode_; and he introduced
some other changes in nomenclature connected with these. He
then, as I have related in the History[17\5], invented the
Volta-electrometer, which enabled him to measure the
quantity of voltaic action, and this he found to be
identical with the quantity of chemical affinity; and he was
thus led to the clearest view of the truth towards which he
and his predecessors had so long been travelling, that
electrical and chemical forces are identical[18\5].

[Note 13\5: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xiv. c. ix. sect. 1.]

[Note 14\5: See Faraday's Historical Sketch, _Researches_,
481-492.]

[Note 15\5: Art. 524.]

[Note 16\5: In 1834. Eleventh Series of Researches. Art. 662.]

[Note 17\5: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xiv. c. ix. sect. 2.]

[Note 18\5: Arts. 915, 916, 917.]

7. It will, perhaps, be said that this beautiful train of
discovery was entirely due to experiment, and not to any _à
priori_ conviction that co-existent polarities {379} must be
connected. I trust I have sufficiently stated that such an
_à priori_ principle could not be proved, nor even
understood, without a most laborious and enlightened use of
experiment; but yet I think that the doctrine, when once
fully unfolded, exhibited clearly, and established as true,
takes possession of the mind with a more entire conviction
of its certainty and universality, in virtue of the
principle we are now considering. When the theory has
assumed so simple a form, it appears to derive immense
probability (to say the least) from its simplicity. Like the
laws of motion, when stated in its most general form, it
appears to carry with it its own evidence. And thus this
great theory borrows something of its character from the
Ideas which it involves, as well as from the Experiments by
which it was established.

8. We may find in many of Mr. Faraday's subsequent
reasonings, clear evidence that this idea of the Connexion
of Polarities, as now developed, is not limited in its
application to facts already known experimentally, but, like
other ideas, determines the philosopher's researches into
the unknown, and gives us the _form_ of knowledge even
before we possess the _matter_. Thus, he says, in his
Thirteenth Series[19\5], 'I have long sought, and still
seek, for an effect or condition which shall be to statical
electricity what magnetic force is to current electricity;
for as the lines of discharge are associated with a certain
transverse effect, so it appeared to me impossible but that
the lines of tension or of inductive action, which of
necessity precede the discharge, should also have their
correspondent transverse condition or effect.' Other similar
passages might be found.

[Note 19\5: Art. 1658.]

I will now consider another case to which we may apply the
Principle of Connected Polarities.

9. _Connexion of Chemical and Crystalline Polarities._--The
close connexion between the Chemical Affinity and the
Crystalline Attraction of elements cannot be overlooked.
Bodies never crystallize but when their elements combine
chemically; and solid bodies which {380} combine, when they
do it most completely and exactly, also crystallize. The
forces which _hold together_ the elements of a crystal of
alum are the same forces which make it a _crystal_. There is
no distinguishing between the two sets of forces.

Both _chemical_ and _crystalline_ forces are _polar_, as we
stated in the last chapter; but the polarity in the two
cases is of a different kind. The polarity of chemical
forces is then put in the most distinct form, when it is
identified with electrical polarity; the polarity of the
particles of crystals has reference to their geometrical
form. And it is clear that these two kinds of polarity must
be connected. Accordingly, Berzelius expressly asserts[20\5]
the necessary identity of these two polarities. 'The regular
forms of bodies suppose a polarity which _can be_ no other
than an electric or magnetic polarity.' This being so
seemingly inevitable, we might expect to find the electric
forces manifesting some relation to the definite directions
of crystalline forms. Mr. Faraday tried, but in vain, to
detect some such relation. He attempted to ascertain[21\5]
whether a cube of rock crystal transmitted the electrical
force of tension with different intensity along and across
the axis of the crystal. In the first specimen there seemed
to be some difference; but in other experiments, made both
with rock crystal and with calc spar, this difference
disappeared. Although therefore we may venture to assert
that there must be some very close connexion between
electrical and crystalline forces, we are, as yet, quite
ignorant what the nature of the connexion is, and in what
kind of phenomena it will manifest itself.

[Note 20\5: _Essay on Chemical Prop._ 113.]

[Note 21\5: _Researches_. Art. 1689.]

10. _Connexion of Crystalline and Optical
Polarities._--Crystals present to us _optical_ phenomena
which have a manifestly polar character. The double
refraction, both of uniaxal and of biaxal crystals, is
always accompanied with opposite polarization of the two
rays; and in this and in other ways light is polarized in
directions dependent upon the axes of the crystalline form,
that is, on the directions of the polarities of the {381}
crystalline particles. The identity of these two kinds of
polarity (crystalline and optical) is too obvious to need
insisting on; and it is not necessary for us here to decide
by what hypothesis this identity may most properly be
represented. We may hereafter perhaps find ourselves
justified in considering the crystalline forces as
determining the _elasticity_ of the luminiferous ether to be
different in _different directions_ within the crystal, and
thus as determining the refraction and polarization of the
light which the crystal transmits. But at present we merely
note this case as an additional example of the manifest
connexion and fundamental identity of two co-existent
polarities.

11. _Connexion of Polarities in general._--Thus we find that
the Connexion of different kinds of Polarities, magnetic,
electric, chemical, crystalline, and optical, is certain as
a truth of experimental science. We have attempted to show
further that in the minds of several of the most eminent
discoverers and philosophers, such a conviction is something
more than a mere empirical result: it is a principle which
has regulated their researches while it was still but
obscurely seen and imperfectly unfolded, and has given to
their theories a character of generality and self-evidence
which experience alone cannot bestow.

It will, perhaps, be said that these doctrines,--that
scientific researches may usefully be directed by principles
in themselves vague and obscure;--that theories may have an
evidence superior to and anterior to experience;--are
doctrines in the highest degree dangerous, and utterly at
variance with the soundest maxims of modern times respecting
the cultivation of science.

In the justice and wisdom of this caution I entirely agree:
and although I have shown that this principle of the
_Connexion of Polarities_, rightly interpreted and
established in each case by experiment, involves profound
and comprehensive truths; I think it no less important to
remark that, at least in the present stage of our knowledge,
we can make no use of this principle without taking care, at
every step, to determine by {382} clear and decisive
experiments, its proper meaning and application. All
endeavours to proceed otherwise have led, and must lead, to
ignorance and confusion. Attempts to deduce from our bare
Idea of Polarity, and our fundamental convictions respecting
the connexion of polarities, theories concerning the forces
which really exist in nature, can hardly have any other
result than to bewilder men's minds, and to misdirect their
efforts.

So far, indeed, as this persuasion of a connexion among
apparently different kinds of agencies, impels men, engaged
in the pursuit of knowledge, to collect observations, to
multiply, repeat, and vary experiments, and to contemplate
the result of these in all aspects and relations, it may be
an occasion of the most important discoveries. Accordingly
we find that the great laws of phenomena which govern the
motions of the planets about the sun, were first discovered
by Kepler, in consequence of his scrutinizing the recorded
observations with an intense conviction of the existence of
geometrical and arithmetical harmonies in the solar system.
Perhaps we may consider the discovery of the connexion of
magnetism and electricity by Professor Œrsted in 1820, as an
example somewhat of the same kind; for he also was a
believer in certain comprehensive but undefined relations
among the properties of bodies; and in consequence of such
views entertained great admiration for the _Prologue to the
Chemistry of the Nineteenth Century_, of Winterl, already
mentioned. M. Œrsted, in 1803, published a summary of this
work; and in so doing, praised the views of Winterl as far
more profound and comprehensive than those of Lavoisier.
Soon afterwards a Review of this publication appeared in
France[22\5], in which it was spoken of as a work only fit
for the dark ages, and as the indication of a sect which had
for some time 'ravaged Germany,' and inundated that country
with extravagant and unintelligible mysticism. It was,
therefore, a kind of triumph to M. Œrsted to be, after {383}
some years' labour, the author of one of the most remarkable
and fertile physical discoveries of his time.

[Note 22\5: _Ann. Chim._, Tom. 1. (1804), p. 191.]

12. It was not indeed without some reason that certain of
the German philosophers were accused of dealing in doctrines
vast and profound in their aspect, but, in reality,
indefinite, ambiguous, and inapplicable. And the most
prominent of such doctrines had reference to the principle
now under our consideration; they represented the properties
of bodies as consisting in certain polarities, and professed
to deduce, from the very nature of things, with little or no
reference to experiment, the existence and connexion of
these polarities. Thus Schelling, in his _Ideas towards a
Philosophy of Nature_, published in 1803, says[23\5],
'Magnetism is the universal act of investing Multiplicity
with Unity; but the universal form of the reduction of
Multiplicity to Unity is the Line, pure Longitudinal
Extension: hence Magnetism is determination of pure
Longitudinal Extension; and as this manifests itself by
absolute Cohesion, Magnetism is the determination of
absolute Cohesion.' And as Magnetism was, by such reasoning,
conceived to be proved as a universal property of matter,
Schelling asserted it to be a confirmation of his views when
it was discovered that other bodies besides iron are
magnetic. In like manner he used such expressions as the
following[24\5]: 'The threefold character of the Universal,
the Particular, and the Indifference of the two,--as
expressed in their Identity, is Magnetism, as expressed in
their Difference, is Electricity, and as expressed in the
Totality, is Chemical Process. Thus these forms are only one
form; and the Chemical Process is a mere transfer of the
three Points of Magnetism into the Triangle of Chemistry.'

[Note 23\5: P. 223.]

[Note 24\5: P. 486.]

It was very natural that the chemists should refuse to
acknowledge, in this fanciful and vague language,
(delivered, however, it is to be recollected, in 1803,) an
anticipation of Davy's doctrine of the identity of
electrical and chemical forces, or of Œrsted's {384}
electro-magnetic agency. Yet it was perhaps no less natural
that the author of such assertions should look upon every
great step in the electro-chemical theory as an illustration
of his own doctrines. Accordingly we find Schelling
welcoming, with a due sense of their importance, the
discoveries of Faraday. When he heard of the experiment in
which electricity was produced from common magnetism, he
fastened with enthusiasm upon the discovery, even before he
knew any of its details, and proclaimed it at a public
meeting of a scientific body[25\5] as one of the most
important advances of modern science. We have (he thus
reasoned) three effects of polar forces;--Electro-chemical
Decomposition, Electrical Action, Magnetism. Volta and Davy
had confirmed experimentally the identity of the two former
agencies: Œrsted showed that a closed voltaic circuit
acquired magnetic properties: but in order to exhibit the
identity of electric and magnetic action it was requisite
that electric forces should be extricated from magnetic.
This great step Faraday, he remarked, had made, in producing
the electric spark by means of magnets.

[Note 25\5: Ueber Faraday's _Neueste Entdeckung_. München. 1832.]

13. Although conjectures and assertions of the kind thus put
forth by Schelling involve a persuasion of the pervading
influence and connexion of polarities, which persuasion has
already been confirmed in many instances, they involve this
principle in a manner so vague and ambiguous that it can
rarely, in such a form, be of any use or value. Such views
of polarity can never teach us in what cases we are and in
what we are not expected to find polar relations; and indeed
tend rather to diffuse error and confusion, than to promote
knowledge. Accordingly we cannot be surprized to find such
doctrines put forward by their authors as an evidence of the
small value and small necessity of experimental science.
This is done by the celebrated metaphysician Hegel, in his
_Encyclopædia_[26\5]. 'Since,' {385} says he, 'the plane of
incidence and of reflection in simple reflection is the same
plane, when a second reflector is introduced which further
distributes the illumination reflected from the first, the
position of the first plane with respect to the second
plane, containing the direction of the first reflection and
of the second, has its influence upon the position,
illumination or darkening of the object as it appears by the
second reflection. This influence must be the strongest when
the two planes are what we must call _negatively_ related to
each other:--that is, when they are at right angles.' 'But,'
he adds, 'when men infer (as Malus has done) from the
modification which is produced by this situation, in the
illumination of the reflection, that the molecules of light
in themselves, that is, on their different sides, possess
different physical energies; and when on this foundation,
along with the phenomena of entoptical colours therewith
connected, a wide labyrinth of the most complex theory is
erected; we have then one of the most remarkable examples of
the _inferences_ of physics from experiment.' If Hegel's
reasoning prove anything, it must prove that polarization
always accompanies reflection under such circumstances as he
describes: yet all physical philosophers know that in the
case of metals, in which the reflection is most complete,
light is not completely polarized at any angle; and that in
other substances the polarization depends upon various
circumstances which show how idle and inapplicable is the
account which he thus gives of the property. His
self-complacent remark about the inferences of physics from
experiment, is intended to recommend by comparison his own
method of considering the nature of 'things in themselves;'
a mode of obtaining physical truth which had been more than
exhausted by Aristotle, and out of which no new attempts
have extracted anything of value since his time.

[Note 26\5: Sec. 278.]

14. Thus the general conclusion to which we are led on this
subject, is, that the persuasion of the existence and
Connexion or Identity of various Polarities in nature,
although very naturally admitted, and in many {386} cases
interpreted and confirmed by observed facts, is of itself,
so far as we at present possess it, a very insecure guide to
scientific doctrines. When it is allowed to dictate our
theories, instead of animating and extending our
experimental researches, it leads only to errour, confusion,
obscurity, and mysticism.

This Fifth Book, on the subject of Polarities, is a short
one compared with most of the others. This arises in a great
measure from the circumstance that the Idea of Polarity has
only recently been apprehended and applied, with any great
degree of clearness, among physical philosophers; and is
even yet probably entertained in an obscure and ambiguous
manner by most experimental inquirers. I have been desirous
of not attempting to bring forward any doctrines upon the
subject, except such as have been fully illustrated and
exemplified by the acknowledged progress of the physical
sciences. If I had been willing to discuss the various
speculations which have been published respecting the
universal prevalence of Polarities in the universe, and
their results in every province of nature, I might easily
have presented this subject in a more extended form; but
this would not have been consistent with my plan of tracing
the influence of scientific Ideas only so far as they have
really aided in disclosing and developing scientific truths.
And as the influence of this Idea is clearly distinguishable
both from those which precede and those which follow, in the
character of the sciences to which it gives rise, and as it
appears likely to be hereafter of great extent and
consequence, it seemed better to treat of it in a separate
Book, although of a brevity disproportioned to the rest.




END OF VOL. I.



Cambridge: Printed at the University Press.




HISTORY
OF
SCIENTIFIC IDEAS.



VOLUME II.




Cambridge;
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.



HISTORY
OF
SCIENTIFIC IDEAS.

BY WILLIAM WHEWELL, D.D.,
MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND
CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE.



BEING THE FIRST PART OF THE PHILOSOPHY
OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.



_THE THIRD EDITION._

IN TWO VOLUMES.


ΛΑΜΠΑΔIΑ ΕΧΟΝΤΕΣ ΔIΑΔΩΣΟΥΣIΝ ΑΛΛΗΛΟIΣ


VOLUME II.



LONDON:
JOHN W. PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND.
1858.


CONTENTS
OF
THE SECOND VOLUME.


