The Project Gutenberg eBook of History of scientific ideas, by
William Whewell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: History of scientific ideas

Author: William Whewell

Release Date: October 4, 2022 [eBook #69093]

Language: English

Produced by: Ed Brandon from materials generously provided by the
             Internet Archive

IDEAS ***


HISTORY
OF
SCIENTIFIC IDEAS.



VOLUME I.




Cambridge;
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.



HISTORY
OF
SCIENTIFIC IDEAS.

BY WILLIAM WHEWELL, D.D.,
MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND
CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE.



BEING THE FIRST PART OF THE PHILOSOPHY
OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.



_THE THIRD EDITION._

IN TWO VOLUMES.


ΛΑΜΠΑΔIΑ ΕΧΟΝΤΕΣ ΔIΑΔΩΣΟΥΣIΝ ΑΛΛΗΛΟIΣ


VOLUME I.



LONDON:
JOHN W. PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND.
1858.



{{v}}
PREFACE TO THIS EDITION.



THE Chapters now offered to the Reader were formerly
published as a portion of _The Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences, founded upon their History_: but the nature and
subject of these Chapters are more exactly described by the
present title, _The History of Scientific Ideas_. For this
part of the work is mainly historical, and was, in fact,
collected from the body of scientific literature, at the
same time that the _History of the Inductive Sciences_ was
so collected. The present work contains the history of
Science so far as it depends on _Ideas_; the former work
contains the same history so far as it is derived from
_Observation_. The leading features in _that_ were Theories
inferred from Facts; the leading features of _this_ are
Discussions of Theories tending to make them consistent with
the conditions of human thought.

The Ideas of which the History is here given are mainly the
following:
_Space_, _Time_, _Number_, _Motion_, _Cause_, _Force_,
_Matter_, _Medium_, _Intensity_, _Scale_, _Polarity_,
_Element_, _Affinity_, _Substance_, _Atom_, _Symmetry_,
_Likeness_, _Natural Classes_, _Species_, _Life_,
_Function_, _Vital Forces_, _Final_ {vi} _Causes_,
_Historical Causation_, _Catastrophe and Uniformity_, _First
Cause_.

The controversies to which the exact fixation of these Ideas
and their properties have given occasion form a large and
essential part of the History of Science: but they also form
an important part of the Philosophy of Science, for no
Philosophy of Science can be complete which does not solve
the difficulties, antitheses, and paradoxes on which such
controversies have turned. I have given a survey of such
controversies, generally carried from their earliest origin
to their latest aspect; and have stated what appeared to me
the best solution of each problem. This has necessarily
involved me in much thorny metaphysics; but such metaphysics
is a necessary part of the progress of Science. The human
mind deriving its knowledge of Truth from the observation of
nature, cannot evade the task of determining at every step
how Truth is consistent with itself. This is the Metaphysics
of Progressive Knowledge, and this is the matter of this
present History.

Of the remaining part of what was formerly published as the
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, an additional part,
described in the Introduction to the present work, will
shortly be published.

TRINITY LODGE,
_May_ 24, 1858.


ERRATUM, p. 157, l. 11 from top, _for_ sciences
_read_ science.




CONTENTS
OF
THE FIRST VOLUME.


                                                                PAGE
PREFACE                                                            v

PART I.
OF IDEAS.


INTRODUCTION                                                       3

BOOK I.

OF IDEAS IN GENERAL.

CHAP. I. OF THE FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY              23

_Sect._    1. _Thoughts and Things_                               --
           2. _Necessary and Experiential Truths_                 25
           3. _Deduction and Induction_                           27
           4. _Theories and Facts_                                29
           5. _Ideas and Sensations_                              30
           6. _Reflexion and Sensation_                           33
           7. _Subjective and Objective_                          35
           8. _Matter and Form_                                   38
           9. _Man the Interpreter of Nature_                     41
          10. _The Fundamental Antithesis is inseparable_         43
          11. _Successive Generalization_                         49
{viii}

CHAP. II. OF TECHNICAL TERMS                                      54

  _Art._   1. Examples.
           2. Use of Terms.

CHAP. III. OF NECESSARY TRUTHS                                    57

  _Art._   1. The two Elements of Knowledge,
           2. Shown by necessary Truths.
           3. Examples of necessary Truths in numbers.
           4. The opposite cannot be distinctly conceived.
           5. Other Examples.
           6. Universal Truths.

CHAP. IV. OF EXPERIENCE                                           65

  _Art._   1. Experience cannot prove necessary Truths,
           2. Except when aided by Ideas.

CHAP. V. OF THE GROUNDS OF NECESSARY TRUTHS                       69

  _Art._   1. These Grounds are Fundamental Ideas.
           2. These are to be reviewed.
           3. Definitions and Axioms.
           4. Syllogism,
           5. Produces no new Truths.
           6. Axioms needed.
           7. Axioms depend on Ideas:
           8. So do Definitions.
           9. Idea not completely expressed.

CHAP. VI. THE FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS ARE NOT DERIVED FROM EXPERIENCE   76

  _Art._   1. No connexion observed.
           2. Faculties implied in observation.
           3. We are to examine our Faculties.

CHAP. VII. OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCIENCES                      81

           Sciences arranged according to Ideas.
{ix}

BOOK II.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES.

CHAP. I. OF THE PURE SCIENCES                                     88

  _Art._   1. Geometry, Arithmetic, Algebra,
           2. Are not Inductive Sciences:
           3. Are Mathematical Sciences.
           4. Mixed Mathematics.
           5. Space, Time, Number.

CHAP. II. OF THE IDEA OF SPACE                                    91

  _Art._   1. Space is an Idea,
           2. Not derived from Experience,
           3. As Geometrical Truth shows.
           4. Space is a Form of Experience.
           5. The phrase not essential.

CHAP. III. OF SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE IDEA OF SPACE             95

  _Art._   1. Space is not an Abstract Notion.
           2. Space is infinite.
           3. Space is real.
           4. Space is a Form of Intuition.
           5. Figure.
           6. Three Dimensions.

CHAP. IV. OF THE DEFINITIONS AND AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO SPACE     98

  _Art._   1. Geometry.
           2. Definitions.
           3. Axioms.
           4. Not Hypotheses.
           5. Axioms necessary.
           6. Straight Lines.
           7. Planes.
           8. Elementary Geometry.

CHAP. V. OF SOME OBJECTIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN MADE TO THE
         DOCTRINES STATED IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER                107

  _Art._   1. How is Geometry hypothetical?
           2. What was Stewart's view?
{x}
           3. 'Legitimate filiations' of Definitions.
           4. Is a Definition a complete explanation?
           5. Are some Axioms Definitions?
           6. Axiom concerning Circles.
           7. Can Axioms become truisms?
           8. Use of such.

CHAP. VI. OF THE PERCEPTION OF SPACE                             117

  _Art._   1. Which Senses apprehend Space?
           2. Perception of solid figure.
           3. Is an interpretation.
           4. May be analysed.
           5. Outline.
           6. Reversed convexity.
           7. Do we perceive Space by Touch?
           8. Brown's Opinion.
           9. The Muscular Sense.
          10. Bell's Opinion.
          11. Perception includes Activity.
          12. Perception of the Skyey Dome.
          13. Reid's Idomenians.
          14. Motion of the Eye.
          15. Searching Motion.
          16. Sensible Spot.
          17. Expressions implying Motion.

CHAP. VII. OF THE IDEA OF TIME                                   131

  _Art._   1. Time an Idea not derived from Experience.
           2. Time is a Form of Experience.
           3. Number.
           4. Is Time derived from Motion?

CHAP. VIII. OF SOME PECULIARITIES IN THE IDEA OF TIME            134

  _Art._   1. Time is not an Abstract Notion.
           2. Time is infinite.
           3. Time is a Form of Intuition.
           4. Time is of one Dimension,
           5. And no more.
           6. Rhythm.
           7. Alternation.
           8. Arithmetic.
{xi}

CHAP. IX. OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO NUMBER                   138

  _Art._   1. Grounds of Arithmetic.
           2. Intuition.
           3. Arithmetical Axioms,
           4. Are Conditions of Numerical Reasoning
           5. In all Arithmetical Operations.
           6. Higher Numbers.

CHAP. X. OF THE PERCEPTION OF TIME AND NUMBER                    141

  _Art._   1. Memory.
           2. Sense of Successiveness
           3. Implies Activity.
           4. Number also does so.
           5. And apprehension of Rhythm.
 Note to Chapter X.                                              145

CHAP. XI. OF MATHEMATICAL REASONING                              147

  _Art._   1. Discursive Reasoning.
           2. Technical Terms of Reasoning.
           3. Geometrical Analysis and Synthesis.

CHAP. XII. OF THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE HIGHER MATHEMATICS          151

  _Art._   1. The Idea of a Limit.
           2. The use of General Symbols.
           3. Connexion of Symbols and Analysis.

CHAP. XIII. THE DOCTRINE OF MOTION                                156

_Art._ 1. Pure Mechanism.
            2. Formal Astronomy.

CHAP. XIV. OF THE APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICS TO THE INDUCTIVE
           SCIENCES                                               159

  _Art._   1. The Ideas of Space and Number are clear from
              the first.
           2. Their application in Astronomy.
           3. Conic Sections, &c.
           4. Arabian Numerals.
           5. Newton's Lemmas.
           6. Tides.
           7. Mechanics.
           8. Optics.
           9. Conclusion.
{xii}

BOOK III.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES.

CHAP. I. OF THE MECHANICAL SCIENCES                              171

CHAP. II. OF THE IDEA OF CAUSE                                   173

  _Art._   1. Not derived from Observation,
           2. As appears by its use.
           3. Cause cannot be observed.
           4. Is Cause only constant succession?
           5. Other reasons.

CHAP. III. MODERN OPINIONS RESPECTING THE IDEA OF CAUSE          178

  _Art._   1. Hume's Doctrine.
           2. Stewart and Brown.
           3. Kant.
           4. Relation of Kant and Brown.
           5. Axioms flow from the Idea.
           6. The Idea implies activity in the Mind.

CHAP. IV. OF THE AXIOMS WHICH RELATE TO THE IDEA OF CAUSE        184

  _Art._   1. Causes are Abstract Conceptions.
           2. First Axiom.
           3. Second Axiom.
           4. Limitation of the Second Axiom.
           5. Third Axiom.
           6. Extent of the Third Axiom.

CHAP. V. OF THE ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF FORCE AND MATTER    205

  _Art._   1. Force.
           2. Matter.
           3. Solidity.
           4. Inertia.
           5. Application.
{xiii}

CHAP. VI. OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS      212

  _Art._   1. Object of the Chapter.
           2. Statics and Dynamics.
           3. Equilibrium.
           4. Measure of Statical Forces.
           5. The Center of Gravity.
           6. Oblique Forces.
           7. Force acts at any point of its Direction.
           8. The Parallelogram of Forces
           9. Is a necessary Truth.
          10. Center of Gravity descends.
          11. Stevinus's Proof.
          12. Principle of Virtual Velocities.
          13. Fluids press equally.
          14. Foundation of this Axiom.

CHAP. VII. OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS    235

  _Art._   1. History.
           2. The First Law of Motion.
           3. Gravity is a Uniform Force.
           4. The Second Law of Motion.
           5. The Third Law of Motion.
           6. Action and Reaction in Moving Bodies.
           7. D'Alembert's Principle.
           8. Connexion of Statics and Dynamics.
           9. Mechanical Principles grow more evident.
          10. Controversy of the Measure of Force.

CHAP. VIII. OF THE PARADOX OF UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS
            OBTAINED FROM EXPERIENCE                             263

  _Art._   1. Experience cannot establish necessary Truths;
           2. But can interpret Axioms.
           3. Gives us the Matter of Truths.
           4. Exemplifies Truths.
           5. Cannot shake Axioms.
           6. Is this applicable in other cases?

CHAP. IX. OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL
          GRAVITATION                                            272

  _Art._   1. General course of the History.
{xiv}
           2. Particulars as to the Law.
           3. As to the Gravity of Matter.
           4. Universality of the Law.
           5. Is Gravity an essential quality?
           6. Newton's Rule of Philosophizing.
           7. Hypotheses respecting Gravity.
           8. Do Bodies act at a distance?

CHAP. X. OF THE GENERAL DIFFUSION OF CLEAR MECHANICAL IDEAS      279

  _Art._   1. Nature of the Process
           2. Among the Ancients.
           3. Kepler, &c.
           4. Lord Monboddo, &c.
           5. Schelling, &c.
           6. Common usage.
           7. Effect of Phrases.
           8. Contempt of Predecessors.
           9. Less detail hereafter.
          10. Mechanico-Chemical Sciences.
          11. Secondary Mechanical Sciences.


BOOK IV.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SECONDARY MECHANICAL SCIENCES.

CHAP. I. OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM AS COMMONLY EMPLOYED            293

  _Art._   1. Of Primary and Secondary Qualities.
           2. The Idea of Externality.
           3. Sensation by a Medium.
           4. Process of Perception of Secondary Qualities.

CHAP. II. ON PECULIARITIES IN THE PERCEPTIONS OF THE
          DIFFERENT SENSES                                       302

  _Art._   1. Difference of Senses.

_Sect._ I. _Prerogatives of Sight._
  _Art._   2. Position.
           3. Distance.
{xv}
_Sect._ II. _Prerogatives of Hearing._
  _Art._   4. Musical Intervals.
           5. Chords.
           6. Rhythm.

_Sect._ III. _The Paradoxes of Vision._
  _Art._   7. First Paradox.
           8. Second Paradox.
           9. The same for near Objects.
          10. Objections answered.

_Sect._ IV. _The Perception of Visible Figures._
  _Art._  11. Brown's Opinion.

CHAP. III. SUCCESSIVE ATTEMPTS AT THE SCIENTIFIC
           APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF A MEDIUM                   322

  _Art._   1. Introduction.
           2. Sound.
           3. Light.
           4. Heat.

CHAP. IV. OF THE MEASURE OF SECONDARY QUALITIES                  333

_Sect._ I. _Scales of Qualities in General._
  _Art._   1. Intensity.
           2. Quantity and Quality.

_Sect._ II. _The Musical Scale._
  _Art._   3. Musical Relations.
           4. Musical Standard.

_Sect._ III. _Scales of Colour._
  _Art._   5. The Prismatic Scale.
           6. Newton's Scale.
           7. Scales of Impure Colours.
           8. Chromatometer.

_Sect._ IV. _Scales of Light._
  _Art._   9. Photometer.
          10. Cyanometer.

_Sect._ V. _Scales of Heat._
  _Art._  11. Thermometers.
          12. Their progress.
          13. Fixed Points.
          14. Concordance of Thermometers.
          15. Natural Measure.
          16. Law of Cooling.
{xvi}
          17. Theory of Exchanges.
          18. Air Thermometer.
          19. Theory of Heat.
          20. Other Instruments.

_Sect._ VI. _Scales of other Quantities._
  _Art._  21. Tastes and Smells.
          22. Quality of Sounds.
          23. Articulate Sounds.
          24. Transition.


BOOK V.

OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MECHANICO-CHEMICAL SCIENCES.

CHAP. I. ATTEMPTS AT THE SCIENTIFIC APPLICATION OF THE IDEA
         OF POLARITY                                             359

  _Art._   1. Introduction of the Idea.
           2. Magnetism.
           3. Electricity.
           4. Voltaic Electricity.
           5. Light.
           6. Crystallization.
           7. Chemical Affinity.
           8. General Remarks.
           9. Like _repels_ like.

CHAP. II. OF THE CONNEXION OF POLARITIES                         371

  _Art._   1. Different Polar Phenomena from one Cause.
           2. Connexion of Magnetic and Electric Polarity.
           3. Ampère's Theory.
           4. Faraday's views.
           5. Connexion of Electrical and Chemical Polarity.
           6. Davy's and Faraday's views
           7. Depend upon Ideas as well as Experiments.
           8. Faraday's Anticipations.
           9. Connexion of Chemical and Crystalline Polarities.
          10. Connexion of Crystalline and Optical Polarities.
          11. Connexion of Polarities in general.
          12. Schelling's Speculations.
          13. Hegel's vague notions.
          14. Ideas must guide Experiment.




{{1}}
THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.



INTRODUCTION.

{{3}}
INTRODUCTION.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE, if the phrase were to be
understood in the comprehensive sense which most naturally
offers itself to our thoughts, would imply nothing less than
a complete insight into the essence and conditions of all
real knowledge, and an exposition of the best methods for
the discovery of new truths. We must narrow and lower this
conception, in order to mould it into a form in which we may
make it the immediate object of our labours with a good hope
of success; yet still it may be a rational and useful
undertaking, to endeavour to make some advance towards such
a Philosophy, even according to the most ample conception of
it which we can form. The present work has been written with
a view of contributing, in some measure, however small it
may be, towards such an undertaking.

But in this, as in every attempt to advance beyond the
position which we at present occupy, our hope of success
must depend mainly upon our being able to profit, to the
fullest extent, by the progress already made. We may best
hope to understand the nature and conditions of real
knowledge, by studying the nature and conditions of the most
certain and stable portions of knowledge which we already
possess: and we are most likely to learn the best methods of
discovering truth, by examining how truths, now universally
recognized, have really been discovered. Now there do exist
among us doctrines of solid and acknowledged certainty, and
truths of which the discovery has been received with
universal applause. These constitute what we commonly term
_Sciences_; and of these bodies of exact and enduring
knowledge, we have within our {4} reach so large and varied
a collection, that we may examine them, and the history of
their formation, with a good prospect of deriving from the
study such instruction as we seek. We may best hope to make
some progress towards the Philosophy of Science, by
employing ourselves upon THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCIENCES.

The _Sciences_ to which the name is most commonly and
unhesitatingly given, are those which are concerned about
the material world; whether they deal with the celestial
bodies, as the sun and stars, or the earth and its products,
or the elements; whether they consider the differences which
prevail among such objects, or their origin, or their mutual
operation. And in all these Sciences it is familiarly
understood and assumed, that their doctrines are obtained by
a common process of collecting general truths from
particular observed facts, which process is termed
_Induction_. It is further assumed that both in these and in
other provinces of knowledge, so long as this process is
duly and legitimately performed, the results will be real
substantial truth. And although this process, with the
conditions under which it is legitimate, and the general
laws of the formation of Sciences, will hereafter be
subjects of discussion in this work, I shall at present so
far adopt the assumption of which I speak, as to give to the
Sciences from which our lessons are to be collected the name
of _Inductive Sciences_. And thus it is that I am led to
designate my work as THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INDUCTIVE
SCIENCES.

The views respecting the nature and progress of knowledge,
towards which we shall be directed by such a course of
inquiry as I have pointed out, though derived from those
portions of human knowledge which are more peculiarly and
technically termed _Sciences_, will by no means be confined,
in their bearing, to the domain of such Sciences as deal
with the material world, nor even to the whole range of
Sciences now existing. On the contrary, we shall be led to
believe that the nature of truth is in all subjects the
same, and that its discovery involves, in all cases, the
like {5} conditions. On one subject of human speculation
after another, man's knowledge assumes that exact and
substantial character which leads us to term it _Science_;
and in all these cases, whether inert matter or living
bodies, whether permanent relations or successive
occurrences, be the subject of our attention, we can point
out certain universal characters which belong to truth,
certain general laws which have regulated its progress among
men. And we naturally expect that, even when we extend our
range of speculation wider still, when we contemplate the
world within us as well as the world without us, when we
consider the thoughts and actions of men as well as the
motions and operations of unintelligent bodies, we shall
still find some general analogies which belong to the
essence of truth, and run through the whole intellectual
universe. Hence we have reason to trust that a just
Philosophy of the Sciences may throw light upon the nature
and extent of our knowledge in every department of human
speculation. By considering what is the real import of our
acquisitions, where they are certain and definite, we may
learn something respecting the difference between true
knowledge and its precarious or illusory semblances; by
examining the steps by which such acquisitions have been
made, we may discover the conditions under which truth is to
be obtained; by tracing the boundary-line between our
knowledge and our ignorance, we may ascertain in some
measure the extent of the powers of man's understanding.

But it may be said, in such a design there is nothing new;
these are objects at which inquiring men have often before
aimed. To determine the difference between real and
imaginary knowledge, the conditions under which we arrive at
truth, the range of the powers of the human mind, has been a
favourite employment of speculative men from the earliest to
the most recent times. To inquire into the original,
certainty, and compass of man's knowledge, the limits of his
capacity, the strength and weakness of his reason, has been
the professed purpose of many of the most conspicuous and
valued labours of the philosophers of {6} all periods up to
our own day. It may appear, therefore, that there is little
necessity to add one more to these numerous essays; and
little hope that any new attempt will make any very
important addition to the stores of thought upon such
questions, which have been accumulated by the profoundest
and acutest thinkers of all ages.

To this I reply, that without at all disparaging the value
or importance of the labours of those who have previously
written respecting the foundations and conditions of human
knowledge, it may still be possible to add something to what
they have done. The writings of all great philosophers, up
to our own time, form a series which is not yet terminated.
The books and systems of philosophy which have, each in its
own time, won the admiration of men, and exercised a
powerful influence upon their thoughts, have had each its
own part and functions in the intellectual history of the
world; and other labours which shall succeed these may also
have their proper office and useful effect. We may not be
able to do much, and yet still it may be in our power to
effect something. Perhaps the very advances made by former
inquirers may have made it possible for us, at present, to
advance still further. In the discovery of truth, in the
development of man's mental powers and privileges, each
generation has its assigned part; and it is for us to
endeavour to perform our portion of this perpetual task of
our species. Although the terms which describe our
undertaking may be the same which have often been employed
by previous writers to express their purpose, yet our
position is different from theirs, and thus the result may
be different too. We have, as they had, to run our
appropriate course of speculation with the exertion of our
best powers; but our course lies in a more advanced part of
the great line along which Philosophy travels from age to
age. However familiar and old, therefore, be the design of
such a work as this, the execution may have, and if it be
performed in a manner suitable to the time, will have,
something that is new and not unimportant. {7}

Indeed, it appears to be absolutely necessary, in order to
check the prevalence of grave and pernicious errour, that
the doctrines which are taught concerning the foundations of
human knowledge and the powers of the human mind, should be
from time to time revised and corrected or extended.
Erroneous and partial views are promulgated and accepted;
one portion of the truth is insisted upon to the undue
exclusion of another; or principles true in themselves are
exaggerated till they produce on men's minds the effect of
falsehood. When evils of this kind have grown to a serious
height, a _Reform_ is requisite. The faults of the existing
systems must be remedied by correcting what is wrong, and
supplying what is wanting. In such cases, all the merits and
excellencies of the labours of the preceding times do not
supersede the necessity of putting forth new views suited to
the emergency which has arrived. The new form which errour
has assumed makes it proper to endeavour to give a new and
corresponding form to truth. Thus the mere progress of time,
and the natural growth of opinion from one stage to another,
leads to the production of new systems and forms of
philosophy. It will be found, I think, that some of the
doctrines now most widely prevalent respecting the
foundations and nature of truth are of such a kind that a
Reform is needed. The present age seems, by many
indications, to be called upon to seek a sounder Philosophy
of Knowledge than is now current among us. To contribute
towards such a Philosophy is the object of the present work.
The work is, therefore, like all works which take into
account the most recent forms of speculative doctrine,
invested with a certain degree of novelty in its aspect and
import, by the mere time and circumstances of its
appearance.

But, moreover, we can point out a very important peculiarity
by which this work is, in its design, distinguished from
preceding essays on like subjects; and this difference
appears to be of such a kind as may well entitle us to
expect some substantial addition to our knowledge as the
result of our labours. The peculiarity {8} of which I speak
has already been announced;--it is this: that we purpose to
collect our doctrines concerning the nature of knowledge,
and the best mode of acquiring it, from a contemplation of
the Structure and History of those Sciences (the Material
Sciences), which are universally recognized as the clearest
and surest examples of knowledge and of discovery. It is by
surveying and studying the whole mass of such Sciences, and
the various steps of their progress, that we now hope to
approach to the true Philosophy of Science.

Now this, I venture to say, is a new method of pursuing the
philosophy of human knowledge. Those who have hitherto
endeavoured to explain the nature of knowledge, and the
process of discovery, have, it is true, often illustrated
their views by adducing special examples of truths which
they conceived to be established, and by referring to the
mode of their establishment. But these examples have, for
the most part, been taken at random, not selected according
to any principle or system. Often they have involved
doctrines so precarious or so vague that they confused
rather than elucidated the subject; and instead of a single
difficulty,--What is the nature of Knowledge? these attempts
at illustration introduced two,--What was the true analysis
of the Doctrines thus adduced? and,--Whether they might
safely be taken as types of real Knowledge?

This has usually been the case when there have been adduced,
as standard examples of the formation of human knowledge,
doctrines belonging to supposed sciences other than the
material sciences; doctrines, for example, of Political
Economy, or Philology, or Morals, or the Philosophy of the
Fine Arts. I am very far from thinking that, in regard to
such subjects, there are no important truths hitherto
established: but it would seem that those truths which have
been obtained in these provinces of knowledge, have not yet
been fixed by means of distinct and permanent phraseology,
and sanctioned by universal reception, and formed into a
connected system, and traced through the steps of their
gradual discovery and establishment, so as to make {9} them
instructive examples of the nature and progress of truth in
general. Hereafter we trust to be able to show that the
progress of moral, and political, and philological, and
other knowledge, is governed by the same laws as that of
physical science. But since, at present, the former class of
subjects are full of controversy, doubt, and obscurity,
while the latter consist of undisputed truths clearly
understood and expressed, it may be considered a wise
procedure to make the latter class of doctrines the basis of
our speculations. And on the having taken this course, is,
in a great measure, my hope founded, of obtaining valuable
truths which have escaped preceding inquirers.

But it may be said that many preceding writers on the nature
and progress of knowledge have taken their examples
abundantly from the Physical Sciences. It would be easy to
point out admirable works, which have appeared during the
present and former generations, in which instances of
discovery, borrowed from the Physical Sciences, are
introduced in a manner most happily instructive. And to the
works in which this has been done, I gladly give my most
cordial admiration. But at the same time I may venture to
remark that there still remains a difference between my
design and theirs: and that I use the Physical Sciences as
exemplifications of the general progress of knowledge in a
manner very materially different from the course which is
followed in works such as are now referred to. For the
conclusions stated in the present work, respecting knowledge
and discovery, are drawn from _a connected and systematic
survey of the whole range of Physical Science and its
History_; whereas, hitherto, philosophers have contented
themselves with adducing detached examples of scientific
doctrines, drawn from one or two departments of science. So
long as we select our examples in this arbitrary and limited
manner, we lose the best part of that philosophical
instruction, which the sciences are fitted to afford when we
consider them as all members of one series, and as governed
by rules which are the same for all. Mathematical and
chemical truths, physical and physiological doctrines, the
sciences of {10} classification and of causation, must alike
be taken into our account, in order that we may learn what
are the general characters of real knowledge. When our
conclusions assume so comprehensive a shape that they apply
to a range of subjects so vast and varied as these, we may
feel some confidence that they represent the genuine form of
universal and permanent truth. But if our exemplification is
of a narrower kind, it may easily cramp and disturb our
philosophy. We may, for instance, render our views of truth
and its evidence so rigid and confined as to be quite
worthless, by founding them too much on the contemplation of
mathematical truth. We may overlook some of the most
important steps in the general course of discovery, by
fixing our attention too exclusively upon some one
conspicuous group of discoveries, as, for instance, those of
Newton. We may misunderstand the nature of physiological
discoveries, by attempting to force an analogy between them
and discoveries of mechanical laws, and by not attending to
the intermediate sciences which fill up the vast interval
between these extreme terms in the series of material
sciences. In these and in many other ways, a partial and
arbitrary reference to the material sciences in our inquiry
into human knowledge may mislead us; or at least may fail to
give us those wider views, and that deeper insight, which
should result from a systematic study of the whole range of
sciences with this particular object.

The design of the following work, then, is to form a
Philosophy of Science, by analyzing the substance and
examining the progress of the existing body of the sciences.
As a preliminary to this undertaking, a survey of the
history of the sciences was necessary. This, accordingly, I
have already performed; and the result of the labour thus
undertaken has been laid before the public as a _History of
the Inductive Sciences_.

In that work I have endeavoured to trace the steps by which
men acquired each main portion of that knowledge on which
they now look with so much confidence and satisfaction. The
events which that History relates, the speculations and
controversies {11} which are there described, and
discussions of the same kind, far more extensive, which are
there omitted, must all be taken into our account at
present, as the prominent and standard examples of the
circumstances which attend the progress of knowledge. With
so much of real historical fact before us, we may hope to
avoid such views of the processes of the human mind as are
too partial and limited, or too vague and loose, or too
abstract and unsubstantial, to represent fitly the real
forms of discovery and of truth.

Of former attempts, made with the same view of tracing the
conditions of the progress of knowledge, that of Bacon is
perhaps the most conspicuous: and his labours on this
subject were opened by his book on the _Advancement of
Learning_, which contains, among other matter, a survey of
the then existing state of knowledge. But this review was
undertaken rather with the object of ascertaining in what
quarters future advances were to be hoped for, than of
learning by what means they were to be made. His examination
of the domain of human knowledge was conducted rather with
the view of discovering what remained undone, than of
finding out how so much had been done. Bacon's survey was
made for the purpose of tracing the boundaries, rather than
of detecting the principles of knowledge. 'I will now
attempt,' he says[1\I], 'to make a general and faithful
perambulation of learning, with an inquiry what parts
thereof lie fresh and waste, and not improved and converted
by the industry of man; to the end that such a plot made and
recorded to memory, may both minister light to any public
designation, and also serve to excite voluntary endeavours.'
Nor will it be foreign to our scheme also hereafter to
examine with a like purpose the frontier-line of man's
intellectual estate. But the object of our perambulation in
the first place, is not so much to determine the extent of
the field, as the sources of its fertility. We would learn
by what plan and rules {12} of culture, conspiring with the
native forces of the bounteous soil, those rich harvests
have been produced which fill our garners. Bacon's maxims,
on the other hand, respecting the mode in which he conceived
that knowledge was thenceforth to be cultivated, have little
reference to the failures, still less to the successes,
which are recorded in his Review of the learning of his
time. His precepts are connected with his historical views
in a slight and unessential manner. His Philosophy of the
Sciences is not collected from the Sciences which are
noticed in his survey. Nor, in truth, could this, at the
time when he wrote, have easily been otherwise. At that
period, scarce any branch of physics existed as a science,
except Astronomy. The rules which Bacon gives for the
conduct of scientific researches are obtained, as it were,
by divination, from the contemplation of subjects with
regard to which no sciences as yet were. His instances of
steps rightly or wrongly made in this path, are in a great
measure cases of his own devising. He could not have
exemplified his Aphorisms by references to treatises then
extant, on the laws of nature; for the constant burden of
his exhortation is, that men up to his time had almost
universally followed an erroneous course. And however we may
admire the sagacity with which he pointed the way along a
better path, we have this great advantage over him;--that we
can interrogate the many travellers who since his time have
journeyed on this road. At the present day, when we have
under our notice so many sciences, of such wide extent, so
well established; a Philosophy of the Sciences ought, it
must seem, to be founded, not upon conjecture, but upon an
examination of many instances;--should not consist of a few
vague and unconnected maxims, difficult and doubtful in
their application, but should form a system of which every
part has been repeatedly confirmed and verified.

[Note 1\I: _Advancement of Learning_, b. i. p. 74.]

This accordingly it is the purpose of the present work to
attempt. But I may further observe, that as my hope of
making any progress in this undertaking is {13} founded upon
the design of keeping constantly in view the whole result of
the past history and present condition of science, I have
also been led to draw my lessons from my examples in a
manner more systematic and regular, as appears to me, than
has been done by preceding writers. Bacon, as I have just
said, was led to his maxims for the promotion of knowledge
by the sagacity of his own mind, with little or no aid from
previous examples. Succeeding philosophers may often have
gathered useful instruction from the instances of scientific
truths and discoveries which they adduced, but their
conclusions were drawn from their instances casually and
arbitrarily. They took for their moral any which the story
might suggest. But such a proceeding as this cannot suffice
for us, whose aim is to obtain a consistent body of
philosophy from a contemplation of the whole of Science and
its History. For our purpose it is necessary to resolve
scientific truths into their conditions and ingredients, in
order that we may see in what manner each of these has been
and is to be provided, in the cases which we may have to
consider. This accordingly is necessarily the first part of
our task:--_to analyse Scientific Truth into its Elements_.
This attempt will occupy the earlier portion of the present
work; and will necessarily be somewhat long, and perhaps, in
many parts, abstruse and uninviting. The risk of such an
inconvenience is inevitable; for the inquiry brings before
us many of the most dark and entangled questions in which
men have at any time busied themselves. And even if these
can now be made clearer and plainer than of yore, still they
can be made so only by means of mental discipline and mental
effort. Moreover this analysis of scientific truth into its
elements contains much, both in its principles and in its
results, different from the doctrines most generally
prevalent among us in recent times: but on that very account
this analysis is an essential part of the doctrines which I
have now to lay before the reader: and I must therefore
crave his indulgence towards any portion of it which may
appear to him obscure or repulsive. {14}

There is another circumstance which may tend to make the
present work less pleasing than others on the same subject,
in the nature of the examples of human knowledge to which I
confine myself; all my instances being, as I have said,
taken from the material sciences. For the truths belonging
to these sciences are, for the most part, neither so
familiar nor so interesting to the bulk of readers as those
doctrines which belong to some other subjects. Every general
proposition concerning politics or morals at once stirs up
an interest in men's bosoms, which makes them listen with
curiosity to the attempts to trace it to its origin and
foundation. Every rule of art or language brings before the
mind of cultivated men subjects of familiar and agreeable
thought, and is dwelt upon with pleasure for its own sake,
as well as on account of the philosophical lessons which it
may convey. But the curiosity which regards the truths of
physics or chemistry, or even of physiology or astronomy, is
of a more limited and less animated kind. Hence, in the mode
of inquiry which I have prescribed to myself, the examples
which I have to adduce will not amuse and relieve the
reader's mind as much as they might do, if I could allow
myself to collect them from the whole field of human
knowledge. They will have in them nothing to engage his
fancy, or to warm his heart. I am compelled to detain the
listener in the chilly air of the external world, in order
that we may have the advantage of full daylight.

But although I cannot avoid this inconvenience, so far as it
is one, I hope it will be recollected how great are the
advantages which we obtain by this restriction. We are thus
enabled to draw all our conclusions from doctrines which are
universally allowed to be eminently certain, clear, and
definite. The portions of knowledge to which I refer are
well known, and well established among men. Their names are
familiar, their assertions uncontested. Astronomy and
Geology, Mechanics and Chemistry, Optics and Acoustics,
Botany and Physiology, are each recognized as large and
substantial collections of undoubted truths. Men are {15}
wont to dwell with pride and triumph on the acquisitions of
knowledge which have been made in each of these provinces;
and to speak with confidence of the certainty of their
results. And all can easily learn in what repositories these
treasures of human knowledge are to be found. When,
therefore, we begin our inquiry from such examples, we
proceed upon a solid foundation. With such a clear ground of
confidence, we shall not be met with general assertions of
the vagueness and uncertainty of human knowledge; with the
question, What truth is, and How we are to recognize it;
with complaints concerning the hopelessness and
unprofitableness of such researches. We have, at least, a
definite problem before us. We have to examine the structure
and scheme, not of a shapeless mass of incoherent materials,
of which we doubt whether it be a ruin or a natural
wilderness, but of a fair and lofty palace, still erect and
tenanted, where hundreds of different apartments belong to a
common plan, where every generation adds something to the
extent and magnificence of the pile. The certainty and the
constant progress of science are things so unquestioned,
that we are at least engaged in an intelligible inquiry,
when we are examining the grounds and nature of that
certainty, the causes and laws of that progress.

To this inquiry, then, we now proceed. And in entering upon
this task, however our plan or our principles may differ
from those of the eminent philosophers who have endeavoured,
in our own or in former times, to illustrate or enforce the
philosophy of science, we most willingly acknowledge them as
in many things our leaders and teachers. Each reform must
involve its own peculiar principles, and the result of our
attempts, so far as they lead to a result, must be, in some
respects, different from those of former works. But we may
still share with the great writers who have treated this
subject before us, their spirit of hope and trust, their
reverence for the dignity of the subject, their belief in
the vast powers and boundless destiny of man. And we may
once more venture to use the {16} words of hopeful
exhortation, with which the greatest of those who have
trodden this path encouraged himself and his followers when
he set out upon his way.

'Concerning ourselves we speak not; but as touching the
matter which we have in hand, this we ask;--that men deem it
not to be the setting up an Opinion, but the performing of a
Work: and that they receive this as a certainty; that we are
not laying the foundations of any sect or doctrine, but of
the profit and dignity of mankind. Furthermore, that being
well disposed to what shall advantage themselves, and
putting off factions and prejudices, they take common
counsel with us, to the end that being by these our aids and
appliances freed and defended from wanderings and
impediments, they may lend their hands also to the labours
which remain to be performed: and yet further, that they be
of good hope; neither imagine to themselves this our Reform
as something of infinite dimension, and beyond the grasp of
mortal man, when in truth it is the end and true limit of
infinite errour; and is by no means unmindful of the
condition of mortality and humanity, not confiding that such
a thing can be carried to its perfect close in the space of
one single age, but assigning it as a task to a succession
of generations.'

[The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, according to our
view, must be founded upon the History of such Sciences;
which history we have attempted in a former work. The events
of that history may be described generally as the rise of
Theories out of Facts. But besides this, which we may term
the _external_ history of Theories, there is an internal
history of Theories, namely, the series of steps by which
the human mind becomes capable of forming each Theory. Hence
to complete the History of the Sciences as derived from
Facts, we require a history of the Ideas by which such
derivation has been made possible: and thus, the _First
Part_ of our Philosophy must be a _History of Scientific
Ideas_;--a labour no less historical than our former work,
and concerned with the same events; but which has been
purposely kept separate during the {17} composition, in
order that it might be afterwards presented in a more
systematic form, which I have here attempted to do.

Scientific Ideas are the Conditions of the derivation of
Sciences from Facts: but can any method or methods be given
by which such a Derivation can be ensured, or at least,
aided? Many such methods have been proposed; of which the
most celebrated is the _Novum Organon_ of Bacon, of which
the title was intended to imply that its scope goes much
beyond the _Organon_ of Aristotle. With the experience of
the formation of Science which the world has had since
Bacon's time, it does not appear presumptuous to suppose
that we can now improve or correct his methods; nor to term
such an attempt _Novum Organon Renovatum_.

The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, then, contains
these two parts, _The History of Scientific Ideas_, and the
_Novum Organon Renovatum_.]




{{19}}
THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.


PART I.

HISTORY OF SCIENTIFIC IDEAS.


[We have just spoken of _Theories_ and _Facts_, of _Ideas_
and _Facts_, and of _Inductive_ Sciences, which imply the
opposition of _Induction_ and _Deduction_. The explanation
of these antitheses must be the starting point of our
Philosophy.]


[Knowledge grows, and] through the ages one increasing purpose runs,
And the thoughts of men are widen'd with the process of the Suns.




BOOK I.


OF IDEAS IN GENERAL.


Quæ adhuc inventa sunt in Scientiis, ea hujusmodi sunt ut
Notionibus Vulgaribus fere subjaceant: ut vero ad interiora
et remotiora Naturæ penetretur, necesse est ut tam NOTIONES
quam AXIOMATA magis certâ et munitâ viâ a particularibus
abstrahantur; atque omnino melior et certior intellectûs
adoperatio in usum veniat.

BACON, _Nov. Org._, Lib. 1. Aphor. xviii.


{{23}}
