CHAPTER III.

MODERN OPINIONS RESPECTING THE IDEA OF CAUSE.


1. TOWARDS the end of the seventeenth century there existed
in the minds of many of the most vigorous and active
speculators of the European literary world, a strong
tendency to ascribe the whole of our Knowledge to the
teaching of Experience. This tendency, with its
consequences, including among them the reaction which was
produced when the tenet had been pushed to a length
manifestly absurd, has exercised a very powerful influence
upon the progress of metaphysical doctrines up to the
present time. I proceed to notice some of the most prominent
of the opinions which have thus obtained prevalence among
philosophers, so far as the Idea of Cause is concerned.

Locke was one of the metaphysicians who produced the
greatest effect in diffusing this opinion, of the exclusive
dependence of our knowledge upon experience. Agreeably to
this general system, he taught[2\3] that our ideas of Cause
and Effect are got from observation of the things about us.
Yet notwithstanding this tenet of his, he endeavoured still
to employ these ideas in reasoning on subjects which are far
beyond all limits of experience: for he professed to prove,
from our idea of Causation, the existence of the Deity[3\3].

[Note 2\3: _Essay on the Human Understanding_, b. ii. c. xxvi.]

[Note 3\3:  B. iv. c. x.]

Hume noticed this obvious inconsistency; but declared
himself unable to discover any remedy for a defect so fatal
to the most important parts of our knowledge. He could see,
in our belief of the succession of cause and effect, nothing
but the habit of associating in our minds what had often
been {179} associated in our experience. He therefore
maintained that we could not, with logical propriety, extend
our belief of such a succession to cases entirely distinct
from all those of which our experience consisted. We see, he
said, an actual _conjunction_ of two events; but we can in
no way detect a necessary _connexion_; and therefore we have
no means of inferring cause from effect, or effect from
cause[4\3]. The only way in which we recognize Cause and
Effect in the field of our experience, is as an unfailing
Sequence: we look in vain for anything which can assure us
of an infallible Consequence. And since experience is the
only source of our knowledge, we cannot with any justice
assert that the world in which we live must necessarily have
had a cause.

[Note 4\3: Hume's _Phil. of the Human Mind_, vol. i. p.
94.]

2. This doctrine, taken in conjunction with the known
skepticism of its author on religious points, produced a
considerable fermentation in the speculative world. The
solution of the difficulty thus thrown before philosophers,
was by no means obvious. It was vain to endeavour to find in
experience any other property of a Cause, than a constant
sequence of the effect. Yet it was equally vain to try to
persuade men that they had no idea of Cause; or even to
shake their belief in the cogency of the familiar arguments
concerning the necessity of an original cause of all that is
and happens. Accordingly these hostile and apparently
irreconcilable doctrines,--the indispensable necessity of a
cause of every event, and the impossibility of our knowing
such a necessity,--were at last allowed to encamp side by
side. Reid, Beattie, and others, formed one party, who
showed how widely and constantly the idea of a cause
pervades all the processes of the human mind: while another
sect, including Brown, and apparently Stewart, maintained
that this idea is always capable of being resolved into a
constant sequence; and these latter reasoners tried to
obviate the dangerous and shocking inferences which some
persons might try to draw from their opinion, by declaring
the {180} maxim that "Every event must have a cause," to be
an instinctive law of belief, or a fundamental principle of
the human mind[5\3].

[Note 5\3: Stewart's _Active Powers_, vol. i. p. 347.
Browne's _Lectures_, vol. i. p. 115.]

3. While this series of discussions was going on in Britain,
a great metaphysical genius in Germany was unravelling the
perplexity in another way. Kant's speculations originated,
as he informs us, in the trains of thought to which Hume's
writings gave rise; and the _Kritik der Reinen Vernunft_, or
_Examination of the Pure Reason_, was published in 1787,
with the view of showing the true nature of our knowledge.

Kant's solution of the difficulties just mentioned differs
materially from that above stated. According to Brown[6\3],
succession observed and cause inferred,--the memory of past
conjunctions of events and the belief of similar future
conjunctions,--are facts, independent, so far as we can
discover, but inseparably combined by a law of our mental
nature. According to Kant, causality is an inseparable
condition of our experience: a connexion in events is
requisite to our apprehending them _as_ events. Future
occurrences must be connected by causation as the past have
been, because we cannot think of past, present, and future,
without such connexion. We cannot fix the mind upon
occurrences, without including these occurrences in a series
of causes and effects. The relation of Causation is a
condition under which we think of events, as the relations
of space are a condition under which we see objects.

[Note 6\3: _Lectures_, vol. i. p. 114.]

4. On a subject so abstruse, it is not easy to make our
distinctions very clear. Some of Brown's illustrations
appear to approach very near to the doctrine of Kant. Thus
he says[7\3], 'The _form_ of bodies is the relation of their
elements to each other in space,--the _power_ of bodies is
their relation to each other in time.' Yet notwithstanding
such approximations in expression, the Kantian doctrine
appears to be different from {181} the views of Stewart and
Brown, as commonly understood. According to the Scotch
philosophers, the cause and the effect are two things,
connected in our minds by a law of our nature. But this view
requires us to suppose that we can conceive the law to be
absent, and the course of events to be unconnected. If we
can understand what is the special force of this law, we
must be able to imagine what the case would be if the law
were non-existing. We must be able to conceive a mind which
does not connect effects with causes. The Kantian doctrine,
on the other hand, teaches that we cannot imagine events
liberated from the connexion of cause and effect: this
connexion is a condition of our conceiving any real
occurrences: we cannot think of a real sequence of things,
except as involving the operation of causes. In the Scotch
system, the past and the future are in their nature
independent, but bound together by a rule; in the German
system, they share in a common nature and mutual relation,
by the act of thought which makes them past and future. In
the former doctrine cause is a tie which binds; in the
latter it is a character which pervades and shapes events.
The Scotch metaphysicians only assert the _universality_ of
the relation; the German attempts further to explain its
_necessity_.

[Note 7\3: _Lectures_, vol. i. p. 127.]

This being the state of the case, such illustrations as that
of Dr. Brown quoted above, in which he represents _cause_ as
a relation of the same kind with _form_, do not appear
exactly to fit his opinions. Can the relations of figure be
properly said to be connected with each other by a law of
our nature, or a tendency of our mental constitution? Can we
ascribe it to a law of our thoughts, that we believe the
three angles of a triangle to be equal to two right angles?
If so, we must give the same reason for our belief that two
straight lines cannot inclose a space; or that three and two
are five. But will any one refer us to an ultimate law of
our constitution for the belief that three and two are five?
Do we not see that they are so, as plainly as we see that
they are three and two? Can we imagine laws of our
constitution abolished, so that three and two shall {182}
make something different from five;--so that an inclosed
space shall lie between two straight lines;--so that the
three angles of a plane triangle shall be greater than two
right angles? We cannot conceive this. If the numbers _are_
three and two; if the lines _are_ straight; if the triangle
_is_ a rectilinear triangle, the consequences are
inevitable. We cannot even imagine the contrary. We do not
want a law to direct that things should be what they are.
The relation, then, of cause and effect, being of the same
kind as the necessary relations of figure and number, is not
properly spoken of as established in our minds by a special
law of our constitution: for we reject that loose and
inappropriate phraseology which speaks of the relations of
figure and number as 'determined by laws of belief.'

5. In the present work, we accept and adopt, as the basis of
our inquiry concerning our knowledge, the existence of
necessary truths concerning causes, as there exist necessary
truths concerning figure and number. We find such truths
universally established and assented to among the
cultivators of science, and among speculative men in
general. All mechanicians agree that reaction is equal and
opposite to action, both when one body presses another, and
when one body communicates motion to another. All reasoners
join in the assertion, not only that every observed change
of motion has had a cause, but that every change of motion
must have a cause. Here we have certain portions of
substantial and undoubted knowledge. Now the essential point
in the view which we must take of the idea of cause is
this,--that our view must be such as to form a solid basis
for our knowledge. We have, in the Mechanical Sciences,
certain universal and necessary truths on the subject of
causes. Now any view which refers our belief in causation to
mere experience or habit, cannot explain the possibility of
such necessary truths, since experience and habit can never
lead to a perception of necessary connexion. But a view
which teaches us to acknowledge axioms concerning cause, as
we acknowledge axioms {183} concerning space, will lead us
to look upon the science of mechanics as equally certain and
universal with the science of geometry; and will thus
materially affect our judgment concerning the nature and
claims of our scientific knowledge.

Axioms concerning Cause, or concerning Force, which as we
shall see, is a modification of Cause, will flow from an
Idea of Cause, just as axioms concerning space and number
flow from the ideas of space and number or time. And thus
the propositions which constitute the science of Mechanics
prove that we possess an idea of cause, in the same sense in
which the propositions of geometry and arithmetic prove our
possession of the ideas of space and of time or number.

6. The idea of cause, like the ideas of space and time, is a
part of the _active_ powers of the mind. The relation of
cause and effect is a relation or condition under which
events are apprehended, which relation is not given by
observation, but supplied by the mind itself. According to
the views which explain our apprehension of cause by
reference to habit, or to a supposed law of our mental
nature, causal connexion is a consequence of agencies which
the mind passively obeys; but according to the view to which
we are led, this connexion is a result of faculties which
the mind actively exercises. And thus the relation of cause
and effect is a condition of our apprehending successive
events, a part of the mind's constant and universal
activity, a source of necessary truths; or, to sum all this
in one phrase, a Fundamental Idea.



{{184}}
