CHAPTER V.

THE ATOMIC THEORY.


1. _The Atomic Theory considered on Chemical Grounds._--WE
have already seen that the combinations which result from
chemical affinity are definite, a certain quantity of one
ingredient uniting, not with an uncertain, but with a
certain quantity of another ingredient. But it was found, in
addition to this principle, that one ingredient would often
unite with another in different proportions, and that, in
such cases, these proportions are multiples one of another.
In the three salts formed by potassa with oxalic acid, the
quantities of acid which combine with the same quantity of
alkali are exactly in the proportion of the numbers 1, 2, 4.
And the same rule of the existence of multiple proportions
is found to obtain in other cases.

It is obvious that such results will be accounted for, if we
suppose that the base and the acid consist each of numerous
definite equal particles, and that the formation of the
salts above mentioned consists in the combination of one
particle of the base with one particle of acid, with two
particles of acid, and with four particles of acid,
respectively. But further; as we have already stated,
chemical affinity is not only definite, but reciprocal. The
proportions of potassa and soda which form neutral salts
being 590 and 391 in one case, they are so in all cases.
These numbers represent _proportions_ of weight in which the
two bases, potassa and soda, enter into analogous
combinations; 590 of potassa is _equivalent_ to 391 of soda.
These facts with regard to combination are still expressed
by the above supposition of equal particles, assuming that
the weights of a {49} particle of potassa and of soda are in
the proportion of 590 to 391.

But we pursue our analysis further. We find that potassa is
a compound of a metallic base, potassium, and of oxygen, in
the proportion of 490 to 100; we suppose, then, that the
particle of potassa consists of a particle of potassium and
a particle of oxygen; and these latter particles, since we
see no present need to suppose them divided, potassium and
oxygen being simple bodies, we may call _atoms_, and assume to
be indivisible. And by supposing all simple bodies to
consist of such atoms, and compounds to be formed by the
union of two, or three, or more of such atoms, we explain
the occurrence of definite and multiple proportions, and we
construct the Atomic Theory.

2. _Hypothesis of Atoms._--So far as the assumption of such
atoms as we have spoken of serves to express those laws of
chemical composition which we have referred to, it is a
clear and useful generalization. But if the Atomic Theory be
put forwards (and its author, Dr. Dalton, appears to have
put it forwards with such an intention,) as asserting that
chemical elements are really composed of _atoms_, that is,
of such particles not further divisible, we cannot avoid
remarking, that for such a conclusion, chemical research has
not afforded, nor can afford, any satisfactory evidence
whatever. The smallest observable quantities of ingredients,
as well as the largest, combine according to the laws of
proportions and equivalence which have been cited above. How
are we to deduce from such facts any inference with regard
to the existence of certain smallest possible particles? The
Theory, when dogmatically taught as a physical truth,
asserts that all observable quantities of elements _are_
composed of proportional numbers of particles which can no
further be subdivided; but all which observation teaches us
is, that if there be such particles, they are smaller than
the smallest observable quantities. In chemical experiment,
at least, there is not the slightest positive evidence for
the existence of such atoms. The assumption of _indivisible_
particles, smaller than the smallest {50} observable, which
combine, particle with particle, will explain the phenomena;
but the assumption of particles bearing this proportion, but
_not_ possessing the property of indivisibility, will explain
the phenomena at least equally well. The decision of the
question, therefore, whether the Atomic Hypothesis be the
proper way of conceiving the chemical combinations of
substances, must depend, not upon chemical facts, but upon
our conception of Substance. In this sense the question is
an ancient and curious controversy, and we shall hereafter
have to make some remarks upon it.

3. _Chemical Difficulties of the Hypothesis._--But before
doing this, we may observe that there is no small difficulty
in reconciling this hypothesis with the facts of chemistry.
According to the theory, all salts, compounded of an acid
and a base, are analogous in their atomic constitution; and
the number of atoms in one such compound being known or
assumed, the number of atoms in other salts may be
determined. But when we proceed in this course of reasoning
to other bodies, as metals, we find ourselves involved in
difficulties. The protoxide of iron is a base which,
according to all analogy, must consist of one atom of iron
and one of oxygen: but the peroxide of iron is also a base,
and it appears by the analysis of this substance that it
must consist of _two-thirds_ of an atom of iron and one atom
of oxygen. Here, then, our indivisible atoms must be
divisible, even upon chemical grounds. And if we attempt to
evade this difficulty by making the peroxide of iron consist
of two atoms of iron and three of oxygen, we have to make a
corresponding alteration in the theoretical constitution of
all bodies analogous to the protoxide; and thus we overturn
the very foundation of the theory. Chemical facts,
therefore, not only do not prove the Atomic Theory as a
physical truth, but they are not, according to any
modification yet devised of the theory, reconcileable with
its scheme.

Nearly the same conclusions result from the attempts to
employ the Atomic Hypothesis in expressing another important
chemical law;--the law of the {51} combinations of gases
according to definite proportions of their volumes,
experimentally established by Gay Lussac[40\6]. In order to
account for this law, it has been very plausibly suggested
that all gases, under the same pressure, contain an equal
number of atoms in the same space; and that when they
combine, they unite atom to atom. Thus one volume of
chlorine unites with one volume of hydrogen, and forms
hydrochloric acid[41\6]. But then this hydrochloric acid
occupies the space of the two volumes; and therefore the
proper number of particles cannot be supplied, and the
uniform distribution of atoms in all gases maintained,
without dividing into two each of the compound particles,
constituted of an atom of chlorine and an atom of hydrogen.
And thus in this case, also, the Atomic Theory becomes
untenable if it be understood to imply the indivisibility of
the atoms.

[Note 40\6: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xiv. c. 8.]

[Note 41\6: Dumas, _Phil. Chim._ 263.]

In all these attempts to obtain distinct physical conception
of chemical union by the aid of the Atomic Hypothesis, the
atoms are conceived to be associated by certain forces of
the nature of mechanical attractions. But we have already
seen[42\6] that no such mode of conception can at all
explain or express the facts of chemical combination; and
therefore it is not wonderful that when the Atomic Theory
attempts to give an account of chemical relations by
contemplating them under such an aspect, the facts on which
it grounds itself should be found not to authorize its
positive doctrines; and that when these doctrines are tried
upon the general range of chemical observation, they should
prove incapable of even expressing, without
self-contradiction, the laws of phenomena.

[Note 42\6: See Chapter I. of this book.]

4. _Grounds of the Atomic Doctrine._--Yet the doctrine of
atoms, or of substance as composed of indivisible particles,
has in all ages had great hold upon the minds of physical
speculators; nor would this doctrine ever have suggested
itself so readily, or have been maintained so tenaciously,
as the true mode of {52} conceiving chemical combinations,
if it had not been already familiar to the minds of those
who endeavour to obtain a general view of the constitution
of nature. The grounds of the assumption of the atomic
structure of substance are to be found rather in the idea of
substance itself, than in the experimental laws of chemical
affinity. And the question of the existence of atoms, thus
depending upon an idea which has been the subject of
contemplation from the very infancy of philosophy, has been
discussed in all ages with interest and ingenuity. On this
very account it is unlikely that the question, so far as it
bears upon chemistry, should admit of any clear and final
solution. Still it will be instructive to look back at some
of the opinions which have been delivered respecting this
doctrine.

5. _Ancient Prevalence of the Atomic Doctrine._--The
doctrine that matter consists of minute, simple,
indivisible, indestructible particles as its ultimate
elements, has been current in all ages and countries,
whenever the tendency of man to wide and subtle speculations
has been active. I need not attempt to trace the history of
this opinion in the schools of Greece and Italy. It was the
leading feature in the physical tenets of the Epicureans,
and was adopted by their Roman disciples, as the poem of
Lucretius copiously shows us. The same tenet had been held
at still earlier periods, in forms more or less definite, by
other philosophers. It is ascribed to Democritus, and is
said to have been by him derived from Leucippus. But this
doctrine is found also, we are told[43\6], among the
speculations of another intellectual and acute race, the
Hindoos. According to some of their philosophical writers,
the ultimate elements of matter are atoms, of which it is
proved by certain reasonings, that they are each one-sixth
of one of the motes that float in the sunbeam.

[Note 43\6: By Mr. Colebrook. _Asiatic Res._ 1824.]

This early prevalence of controversies of the widest and
deepest kind, which even in our day remain undecided, has in
it nothing which need surprize us; or, at least, it has in
it nothing which is not in conformity {53} with the general
course of the history of philosophy. As soon as any ideas
are clearly possessed by the human mind, its activity and
acuteness in reasoning upon them are such, that the
fundamental antitheses and ultimate difficulties which
belong to them are soon brought into view. The Greek and
Indian philosophers had mastered completely the Idea of
Space, and possessed the Idea of Substance in tolerable
distinctness. They were, therefore, quite ready, with their
lively and subtle minds, to discuss the question of the
finite and infinite divisibility of matter, so far as it
involved only the ideas of space and of substance, and this
accordingly they did with great ingenuity and perseverance.

But the ideas of Space and of Substance are far from being
sufficient to enable men to form a complete general view of
the constitution of matter. We must add to these ideas, that
of mechanical Force with its antagonist Resistance, and that
of the Affinity of one kind of matter for another. Now the
former of these ideas the ancients possessed in a very
obscure and confused manner; and of the latter they had no
apprehension whatever. They made vague assumptions
respecting the impact and pressure of atoms on each other;
but of their mutual attraction and repulsion they never had
any conception, except of the most dim and wavering kind;
and of an affinity different from mere local union they did
not even dream. Their speculations concerning atoms,
therefore, can have no value for us, except as a part of the
history of science. If their doctrines appear to us to
approach near to the conclusions of our modern philosophy,
it must be because our modern philosophy is that philosophy
which has not fully profited by the additional light which
the experiments and meditations of later times have thrown
upon the constitution of matter.

6. _Bacon._--Still, when modern philosophers look upon the
Atomic Theory of the ancients in a general point of view
merely, without considering the special conditions which
such a theory must fulfil, in order to represent the
discoveries of modern times, they are {54} disposed to
regard it with admiration. Accordingly we find Francis Bacon
strongly expressing such a feeling. The Atomic Theory is
selected and dwelt upon by him as the chain which connects
the best parts of the physical philosophy of the ancient and
the modern world. Among his works is a remarkable
dissertation _On the Philosophy of Democritus, Parmenides,
and Telesius_: the last mentioned of whom was one of the
revivers of physical science in modern times. In this work
he speaks of the atomic doctrine of Democritus as a
favourable example of the exertions of the undisciplined
intellect. 'Hæc ipsa placita, quamvis paulo emendatiora,
talia sunt qualia esse possunt illa quæ ab intellectu sibi
permisso, nec continenter et gradatim sublevato, profecta
videntur.'--'These doctrines, thus [in an ancient fable]
presented in a better form, are such glimpses of truth as
can be obtained by the intellect left to its own natural
impulses, and not ascending by successive and connected
steps,' [as the Baconian philosophy directs]. 'Accordingly,'
he adds, 'the doctrine of Atoms, from its going a step
beyond the period in which it was advanced, was ridiculed by
the vulgar, and severely handled in the disputations of the
learned, notwithstanding the profound acquaintance with
physical science by which its author was allowed to be
distinguished, and from which he acquired the character of a
magician.'

'However,' he continues, 'neither the hostility of
Aristotle, with all his skill and vigour in disputation,
(though, like the Ottoman sultans, he laboured to destroy
all his brother philosophers that he might rest undisputed
master of the throne of science,) nor the majestic and lofty
authority of Plato, could effect the subversion of the
doctrine of Democritus. And while the opinions of Plato and
Aristotle were rehearsed with loud declamation and
professorial pomp in the schools, this of Democritus was
always held in high honour by those of a deeper wisdom, who
followed in silence a severer path of contemplation. In the
days of Roman speculation it kept its ground and its favour;
Cicero everywhere speaks of its author with the  {55}
greatest praise; and Juvenal, who, like poets in general,
probably expressed the prevailing judgment of his time,
proclaims his merit as a noble exception to the general
stupidity of his countrymen.
  . . . . Cujus prudentia monstrat
  Magnos posse viros et magna exempla daturos
  Vervecum in patriâ crassoque sub aere nasci.

'The destruction of this philosophy was not effected by
Aristotle and Plato, but by Genseric and Attila, and their
barbarians. For then, when human knowledge had suffered
shipwreck, those fragments of the Aristotelian and Platonic
philosophy floated on the surface like things of some
lighter and emptier sort, and so were preserved; while more
solid matters went to the bottom, and were almost lost in
oblivion.'

7. _Modern Prevalence of the Atomic Doctrine._--It is our
business here to consider the doctrine of Atoms only in its
bearing upon existing physical sciences, and I must
therefore abstain from tracing the various manifestations of
it in the schemes of hypothetical cosmologists;--its place
among the _vortices_ of Descartes, its exhibition in the
_monads_ of Leibnitz. I will, however, quote a passage from
Newton to show the hold it had upon his mind.

At the close of his _Opticks_ he says, 'All these things
being considered, it seems probable to me that God, in the
beginning, formed matter in solid, massy, hard,
impenetrable, moveable particles, of such sizes and figures,
and with such other properties, and in such proportions to
space, as most conduced to the end for which He formed them;
and that the primitive particles, being solids, are
incomparably harder than any porous bodies compounded of
them, even so very hard as never to wear or break in pieces;
no ordinary power being able to divide what God had made one
in the first creation. While the particles continue entire,
they may compose bodies of one and the same nature and
texture in all ages: but should they wear away or break in
pieces, the nature of things depending on them would be
changed. Water and earth composed {56} of old worn particles
and fragments of particles would not be of the same nature
and texture now with water and earth composed of entire
particles in the beginning. And therefore that nature may be
lasting, the changes of corporeal things are to be placed
only in the various separations and new associations and
motions of these permanent particles; compounded bodies
being apt to break, not in the midst of solid particles, but
where those particles are laid together and only touch in a
few points.'

We shall hereafter see how extensively the atomic doctrine
has prevailed among still more recent philosophers. Not only
have the chemists assumed it as the fittest form for
exhibiting the principles of multiple proportions; but the
physical mathematicians, as Laplace and Poisson, have made
it the basis of their theories of heat, electricity,
capillary action; and the crystallographers have been
supposed to have established both the existence and the
arrangement of such ultimate molecules.

In the way in which it has been employed by such writers,
the hypothesis of ultimate particles has been of great use,
and is undoubtedly permissible. But when we would assert
this theory, not as a convenient hypothesis for the
expression or calculation of the laws of nature, but as a
philosophical truth respecting the constitution of the
universe, we find ourselves checked by difficulties of
reasoning which we cannot overcome, as well as by
conflicting phenomena which we cannot reconcile. I will
attempt to state briefly the opposing arguments on this
question.

8. _Arguments for and against Atoms._--The leading arguments
on the two sides of the question, in their most general
form, may be stated as follows:

_For_ the Atomic Doctrine.--The appearances which nature
presents are compounded of many parts, but if we go on
resolving the larger parts into smaller, and so on
successively, we must at last come to something simple. For
that which is compound can be so no otherwise than by
composition of what is simple; and if we suppose all
composition to be removed, which {57} hypothetically we may
do, there can remain nothing but a number of simple
substances, capable of composition, but themselves not
compounded. That is, matter being dissolved, resolves itself
into atoms.

_Against_ the Atomic Doctrine.--Space is divisible without
limit, as may be proved by Geometry; and matter occupies
space, therefore matter is divisible without limit, and no
portion of matter is indivisible, or an _atom_.

And to the argument on the other side just stated, it is
replied that we cannot even hypothetically divest a body of
composition, if by composition we mean the relation of point
to point in space. However small be a particle, it is
compounded of parts having relation in space.

The Atomists urge again, that if matter be infinitely
divisible, a finite body consists of an infinite number of
parts, which is a contradiction. To this it is replied, that
the finite body consists of an infinite number of parts in
the same sense in which the parts are infinitely small,
which is no contradiction.

But the opponents of the Atomists not only rebut, but retort
this argument drawn from the notion of infinity. Your atoms,
they say, are indivisible by any finite force; therefore
they are infinitely hard; and thus your finite particles
possess infinite properties. To this the Atomists are wont
to reply, that they do not mean the hardness of their
particles to be infinite, but only so great as to resist all
usual natural forces. But here it is plain that their
position becomes untenable; for, in the first place, their
assumption of this precise degree of hardness in the
particles is altogether gratuitous; and in the next place,
if it were granted, such particles are not atoms, since in
the next moment the forces of nature may be augmented so as
to divide the particle, though hitherto undivided.

Such are the arguments for and against the Atomic Theory in
its original form. But when these atoms are conceived, as
they have been by Newton, and commonly by his followers, to
be solid, hard particles exerting attractive and repulsive
forces, a new set of {58} arguments come into play. Of
these, the principal one may be thus stated: According to
the Atomic Theory thus modified, the properties of bodies
depend upon the attractions and repulsions of the particles.
Therefore, among other properties of bodies, their hardness
depends upon such forces. But if the hardness _of the
bodies_ depends upon the forces, the repulsion, for
instance, of the particles, upon what does the hardness _of
the particles_ depend? what progress do we make in
explaining the properties of bodies, when we assume the same
properties in our explanation? and to what purpose do we
assume that the particles are hard?

9. _Transition to Boscovich's Theory._--To this difficulty
it does not appear easy to offer any reply. But if the
hardness and solidity of the particles be given up as an
incongruous and untenable appendage to the Newtonian view of
the Atomic Theory, we are led to the theory of Boscovich,
according to which matter consists not of solid particles,
but of mere mathematical centers of force. According to this
theory, each body is composed of a number of geometrical
points from which emanate forces, following certain
mathematical laws in virtue of which the forces become, at
certain small distances attractive, at certain other
distances repulsive, and at greater distances attractive
again. From these forces of the points arise the cohesion of
the parts of the same body, the resistance which it exerts
against the pressure of another body, and finally the
attraction of gravitation which it exerts upon bodies at a
distance.

This theory is at least a homogeneous and consistent theory,
and it is probable that it may be used as an instrument for
investigating and expressing true laws of nature; although,
as we have already said, the attempt to identify the forces
by which the particles of bodies are bound together with
mechanical attraction, appears to be a confusion of two
separate ideas[44\6].

[Note 44\6: 'Boscovich's Theory,' that all bodies may be
considered as consisting of a mere collection of centers of
forces, may be so conceived as possibly to involve an
explanation of all the powers which their parts exert, (such
powers, namely, as those which produce optical, thermotical
and chemical phenomena;) but this theory cannot supply an
explanation of the mechanical properties of a body as a
whole, especially of its _inertia_. A collection of mere
centers of force can have no inertia. If two bodies are
considered as two collections of centers of force, the one
attracting the other, there is in this view nothing to limit
or determine the velocity with which the one body will
approach the other. A world composed of such bodies is not a
_material_ world: for matter (as we have already seen in
book iii. chapter v.) implies not only force, but something
which resists the action of force.]

{59} 10. _Use of the Molecular Hypothesis._--In this form,
representing matter as a collection of molecules or centers
of force, the Atomic Theory has been abundantly employed in
modern times as an hypothesis on which calculations
respecting the elementary forces of bodies might be
conducted. When thus employed it is to be considered as
expressing the principle that the properties of bodies
depend upon forces emanating from immovable points of their
mass. This view of the way in which the properties of bodies
are to be treated by the mechanical philosopher was
introduced by Newton, and was a natural sequel to the
success which he had obtained by reasoning concerning
central forces on a large scale. I have already quoted his
Preface to the _Principia_, in which he says, 'Many things
induce me to believe that the rest of the phenomena of
nature, as well as those of astronomy, may depend upon
certain forces by which the particles of bodies, in virtue
of causes not yet known, are urged towards each other and
cohere in regular figures, or are mutually repelled and
recede; and philosophers, knowing nothing of these forces,
have hitherto failed in their examination of nature.' Since
the time of Newton, this line of speculation has been
followed with great assiduity, and by some mathematicians
with great success. In particular Laplace has shown that the
hypothesis may, in many instances, be made a much closer
representation of nature, if we suppose the forces exerted
by the particles to decrease so rapidly with the increasing
distance from them, that {60} the force is finite only at
distances imperceptible to our senses, and vanishes at all
remoter points. He has taught the method of expressing and
calculating such forces, and he and other mathematicians of
his school have applied this method to many of the most
important questions of physics; as capillary action, the
elasticity of solids, the conduction and radiation of heat.
The explanation of many apparently unconnected and curious
observed facts by these mathematical theories gives a strong
assurance that its essential principles are true. But it
must be observed that the actual constitution of bodies as
composed of distinct and separate particles is by no means
proved by these coincidences. The assumption, in the
reasoning, of certain centers of force acting at a distance,
is to be considered as nothing more than a method of
reducing to calculation that view of the constitution of
bodies which supposes that they exert force at _every_
point. It is a mathematical artifice of the same kind as the
hypothetical division of a body into infinitesimal parts, in
order to find its center of gravity; and no more implies a
physical reality than that hypothesis does.

11. _Poisson's Inference._--When, therefore, M. Poisson, in
his views of Capillary Action, treats this hypothetical
distribution of centers of force as if it were a physical
fact, and blames Laplace for not taking account of their
different distribution at the surface of the fluid and below
it[45\6], he appears to push the claims of the molecular
hypothesis too far. The only ground for the assumption of
separate centers, is that we can thus explain the action of
the whole mass. The intervals between the centers nowhere
enter into this explanation: and therefore we can have no
reason for assuming these intervals different in one part of
the fluid and in the other. M. Poisson asserts that the
density of the fluid diminishes when we approach very near
the surface; but he allows that this diminution is not
detected by experiment, and that the formulæ on {61} his
supposition, so far as the results go, are identical with
those of Laplace. It is clear, then, that his doctrine
consists merely in the assertion of the necessary truth of a
part of the hypothesis which cannot be put to the test of
experiment. It is true, that so long as we have before us
the hypothesis of separate centers, the particles very near
the surface are not in a condition symmetrical with that of
the others: but it is also true that this hypothesis is only
a step of calculation. There results, at one period of the
process of deduction, a stratum of smaller density at the
surface of the fluid; but at a succeeding point of the
reasoning the thickness of this stratum vanishes; it has no
physical existence.

[Note 45\6: Poisson, _Théorie de l'Action Capillaire_.]

Thus the _molecular_ hypothesis, as used in such cases, does
not differ from the doctrine of forces acting at _every
point_ of the mass; and this principle, which is common to
both the opposite views, is the true part of each.

12. _Wollaston's Argument._--An attempt has been made in
another case, but depending on nearly the same arguments, to
bring the doctrine of ultimate atoms to the test of
observation. In the case of the air, we know that there _is_
a diminution of density in approaching the upper surface of
the atmosphere, if it have a surface: but it is held by some
that except we allow the doctrine of ultimate molecules, it
will not be bounded by any surface, but will extend to an
infinite distance. This is the reasoning of Wollaston[46\6].
'If air consists of any ultimate particles no longer
divisible, then must the expansion of the medium composed of
them cease at that distance where the force of gravity
downwards is equal to the resistance arising from the
repulsive force of the medium.' But if there be no such
ultimate particles, every stratum will require a stratum
beyond it to prevent by its weight a further expansion, and
thus the atmosphere {62} must extend to an infinite
distance. And Wollaston conceived that he could learn from
observation whether the atmosphere was thus diffused through
all space; for if so, it must, he argued, be accumulated
about the larger bodies of the system, as Jupiter and the
Sun, by the law of universal gravitation; and the existence
of an atmosphere about these bodies, might, he remarked, be
detected by its effects in producing refraction. His result
is, that 'all the phenomena accord entirely with the
supposition that the earth's atmosphere is of finite extent,
limited by the weight of ultimate atoms of definite
magnitude, no longer divisible by repulsion of their parts.'

[Note 46\6: _Phil. Trans._ 1822, p. 89.]

A very little reflection will show us that such a line of
reasoning cannot lead to any result. For we know nothing of
the law which connects the density with the compressing
force, in air so extremely rare as we must suppose it to be
near the boundary of the atmosphere. Now there are possible
laws of dependence of the density upon the compressing force
such that the atmosphere would terminate in virtue of the
law without any assumption of atoms. This may be proved by
mathematical reasoning. If we suppose the density of air to
be as the square root of the compressing force, it will
follow that at the very limits of the atmosphere, the strata
of equal thickness may observe in their densities such a law
of proportion as is expressed by the numbers 7, 5, 3,
1[47\6].

[Note 47\6: For the compressing force on each being as the
whole weight beyond it, it will be for the four highest
strata, 16, 9, 4 and 1, of which the square roots are as 4,
3, 2, 1, or, as 8, 6, 4, 2; and though these numbers are not
exactly as the densities 7, 5, 3, 1, those who are a little
acquainted with mathematical reasoning, will see that the
difference arises from taking so small a number of strata.
If we were to make the strata indefinitely thin, as to avoid
error we ought to do, the coincidence would be exact; and
thus, according to this law, the series of strata terminates
as we ascend, without any consideration of atoms.]

If it be asked how, on this hypothesis, the density of the
highest stratum can be as 1, since there is {63} nothing to
compress it, we answer that the upper part of the highest
stratum compresses the lower, and that the density
diminishes continually to the surface, so that the need of
compression and the compressing weight vanish together.

The fallacy of concluding that because the height of the
atmosphere is finite, the weight of the highest stratum must
be finite, is just the same as the fallacy of those who
conclude that when we project a body vertically upwards,
because it occupies only a finite time in ascending to the
highest point, the velocity at the last instant of the
ascent must be finite. For it might be said, if the last
velocity of ascent be not finite, how can the body describe
the last particle of space in a finite time? and the answer
is, that there is no last finite particle of space, and
therefore no last finite velocity.

13. _Permanence of Properties of Bodies._--We have already
seen that, in explaining the properties of matter as we find
them in nature, the assumption of solid, hard,
indestructible particles is of no use or value. But we may
remark, before quitting the subject, that Newton appears to
have had another reason for assuming such particles, and one
well worthy of notice. He wished to express, by means of
this hypothesis, the doctrine that the laws of nature do not
alter with the course of time. This we have already seen in
the quotation from Newton. 'The ultimate particles of matter
are indestructible, unalterable, impenetrable; for if they
could break or wear, the structure of material bodies now
would be different from that which it was when the particles
were new.' No philosopher will deny the truth which is thus
conveyed by the assertion of atoms; but it is obviously
equally easy for a person who rejects the atomic view, to
state this truth by saying that the forces which matter
exerts do not vary with time, but however modified by the
new modifications of its form, are always unimpaired in
quantity, and capable of being restored to their former mode
of action. {64}

We now proceed to speculations in which the fundamental
conceptions may, perhaps, be expressed, at least in some
cases, by means of the arrangement of atoms; but in which
the philosophy of the subject appears to require a reference
to a new Fundamental Idea.




{{65}}
