CHAPTER V.

OF THE ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF FORCE AND MATTER.


1. _Force._--WHEN the faculties of observation and thought
are developed in man, the idea of causation is applied to
those changes which we see and feel in the state of rest and
motion of bodies around us. And when our abstract
conceptions are thus formed and named, we adopt the term
_Force_, and use it to denote that property which is the
cause of motion produced, changed, or prevented. This
conception is, it would seem, mainly and primarily suggested
by our consciousness of the exertions by which we put bodies
in motion. The Latin and Greek words for _Force_, Vis, Ϝὶς,
were probably, like all abstract terms, derived at first
from some sensible object. The original meaning of the Greek
word was a _muscle_ or _tendon_. Its first application as an
abstract term is accordingly to muscular force:

  Δεύτερος αὖτ' Αἴας πολὺ μείζονα λᾶαν ἀείρας
  ἦκ' ἐπιδινήσας, ἐπέρεισε δὲ ϜÎ͂Ν' ἀπέλεθρον.

  Then Ajax a far heavier stone upheaved,
  He whirled it, and impressing Force intense
  Upon the mass, dismist it.

The property by which bodies affect each other's motions,
was naturally likened to that energy which we exert upon
them with similar effect: and thus the labouring horse, the
rushing torrent, the descending weight, the elastic bow,
were said to exert force. {206} Homer[8\3] speaks of the
_force_ of the river, Ϝὶς ποταμοῖο; and Hesiod[9\3] of the
_force_ of the north wind, Ϝὶς ἀνέμου βορέαο.

[Note 8\3: _Il._ xxi.]

[Note 9\3: _Op. et D._]

Thus man's general notion of force was probably first
suggested by his muscular exertions, that is, by an act
depending upon that muscular sense, to which, as we have
already seen, the perception of space is mainly due. And
this being the case, it will be easily understood that the
_Direction_ of the force thus exerted is perceived by the
muscular sense, at the same time that the force itself is
perceived; and that the direction of any other force is
understood by comparison with force which man must exert to
produce the same effect, in the same manner as force itself
is so understood.

This abstract notion of Force long remained in a very vague
and obscure condition, as may be seen by referring to the
History for the failures of attempts at a science of force
and motion, made by the ancients and their commentators in
the middle ages. By degrees, in modern times, we see the
scientific faculty revive. The conception of Force becomes
so far distinct and precise that it can be reasoned upon in
a consistent manner, with demonstrated consequences; and a
genuine science of Mechanics comes into existence. The
foundations of this science are to be found in the Axioms
concerning causation which we have already stated; these
axioms being interpreted and fixed in their application by a
constant reference to observed facts, as we shall show. But
we must, in the first place, consider further those primary
processes of observation by which we acquire the first
materials of thought on such subjects.

2. _Matter._--The conception of Force, as we have said,
arises with our consciousness of our own muscular exertions.
But we cannot imagine such exertions without also imagining
some bodily substance against which they are exercised. If
we press, we press something: if we thrust or throw, there
must be something {207} to resist the thrust or to receive
the impulse. Without body, muscular force cannot be exerted,
and force in general is not conceivable.

Thus Force cannot exist without _Body_ on which it acts. The
two conceptions, Force and Matter, are co-existent and
correlative. Force implies resistance; and the force is
effective only when the resistance is called into play. If
we grasp a stone, we have no hold of it till the closing of
the hand is resisted by the solid texture of the stone. If
we push open a gate, we must surmount the opposition which
it exerts while turning on its hinges. However slight the
resistance be, there must be some resistance, or there would
be no force. If we imagine a state of things in which
objects do not resist our touch, they must also cease to be
influenced by our strength. Such a state of things we
sometimes imagine in our dreams; and such are the poetical
pictures of the regions inhabited by disembodied spirits. In
these, the figures which appear are conspicuous to the eye,
but impalpable like shadow or smoke; and as they do not
resist the corporeal impressions, so neither do they obey
them. The spectator tries in vain to strike or to grasp
them.

  Et ni docta comes tenues sine corpore vitas
  Admoneat volitare cavâ sub imagine formæ,
  Irruat ac frustra ferro diverberet umbras.

  The Sibyl warns him that there round him fly
  Bodiless things, but substance to the eye;
  Else had he pierced those shapes with life-like face,
  And smitten, fierce, the unresisting space.

      Neque illum
  Prensantem nequicquam umbras et multa volentem
  Dicere, preterea vidit.

  He grasps her form, and clutches but the shade.

Such may be the circumstances of the unreal world of dreams,
or of poetical fancies approaching to dreams: for in these
worlds our imaginary perceptions are bound by no rigid
conditions of force and reaction. In {208} such cases, the
mind casts off the empire of the idea of cause, as it casts
off even the still more familiar sway of the ideas of space
and time. But the character of the material world in which
we live when awake is, that we have at every instant and at
every place, force operating on matter and matter resisting
force.

3. _Solidity._--From our consciousness of muscular exertion,
we derive, as we have seen, the conception of force, and
with that also the conception of matter. We have already
shown, in a former chapter, that the same part of our frame,
the muscular system, is the organ by which we perceive
extension and the relations of space. Thus the same organ
gives us the perception of body as resisting force, and as
occupying space; and by combining these conditions we have
the conception of _solid_ extended bodies. In reality, this
resistance is inevitably presented to our notice in the very
facts from which we collect the notion of extension. For the
action of the hand and arm by which we follow the forms of
objects, implies that we apply our fingers to their surface;
and we are stopped there by the resistance which the body
offers. This resistance is precisely that which is requisite
in order to make us conscious of cur muscular effort[10\3].
Neither touch, nor any other mere passive sensation, could
produce the perception of extent, as we have already urged:
nor could the muscular sense lead to such a perception,
except the extension of the muscles were felt to be
resisted. And thus the perception of resistance enters the
mind along with the perception of extended bodies. All the
objects with which we have to do are not only extended but
solid.

[Note 10\3: Brown's _Lectures_, i. 466.]

This sense of the term _solidity_, (the general property of
all matter,) is different to that in which we oppose
_solidity_ to _fluidity_. We may avoid ambiguity by opposing
_rigid_ to _fluid_ bodies. By solid bodies, as we now speak
of them, we mean only such as resist the pressure which we
exert, so long as their parts continue in their places. By
fluid bodies, we mean those {209} whose parts are, by a
slight pressure, removed out of their places. A drop of
water ceases to prevent the contact of our two hands, not by
ceasing to have solidity in this sense, but by being thrust
out of the way. If it could remain in its place, it could
not cease to exercise its resistance to our pressure, except
by ceasing to be matter altogether.

The perception of solidity, like the perception of
extension, implies an act of the mind, as well as an
impression of the senses: as the perception of extension
implies the idea of space, so the perception of solidity
implies the idea of action and reaction. That an Idea is
involved in our knowledge on this subject, appears, as in
other instances, from this consideration, that the
convictions of persons, even of those who allow of no ground
of knowledge but experience, do in fact go far beyond the
possible limits of experience. Thus Locke says[11\3], that
'the bodies which we daily handle hinder by an
_insurmountable_ force the approach of the parts of our
hands that press them.' Now it is manifest that our
observation can never go to this length. By our senses we
can only perceive that bodies resist the greatest actual
forces that we exert upon them. But our conception of force
carries us further: and since, so long as the body is there
to receive the action of the force, it must suffer the whole
of that action, and must react as much as it suffers: it is
therefore true, that so long as the body remains there, the
force which is exerted upon it can never surmount the
resistance which the body exercises. And thus this doctrine,
that bodies resist the intrusion of other bodies by an
insurmountable force, is, in fact, a consequence of the
axiom that the reaction is always equal to the action.

[Note 11\3: _Essay_, b. ii. c. 4.]

4. _Inertia._--But this principle of the equality of action
and reaction appears also in another way. Not only when we
exert force upon bodies at rest, but when, by our exertions,
we put them in motion, they react. If we set a large stone
in motion, the stone {210} resists; for the operation
requires an effort. By increasing the effort, we can
increase the effect, that is, the motion produced; but the
resistance still remains. And the greater the stone moved,
the greater is the effort requisite to move it. There is, in
every case, a resistance to motion, which shows itself, not
in preventing the motion, but in a reciprocal force, exerted
backwards upon the agent by which the motion is produced.
And this resistance resides in each portion of matter, for
it is increased as we add one portion of matter to another.
We can push a light boat rapidly through the water; but we
may go on increasing its freight, till we are barely able to
stir it. This property of matter, then, by which it resists
the reception of motion, or rather by which it reacts and
requires an adequate force in order that any motion may
result, is called its inertness, or _inertia_. That matter
has such a property, is a conviction flowing from that idea
of a reaction equal and opposite to the action, which the
conception of all force involves. By what laws this inertia
depends on the magnitude, form, and material of the body,
must be the subject of our consideration hereafter. But that
matter has this inertia, in virtue of which, as the matter
is greater, the velocity which the same effort can
communicate to it is less, is a principle inseparable from
the notion of matter itself.

Hermann says that Kepler first introduced this 'most
significant' _inertia_. Whether it is to be found in earlier
writers I know not; Kepler certainly does use it familiarly
in those attempts to assign physical reasons for the motions
of the planets which were among the main occasions of the
discovery of the true laws of mechanics. He assumes the
slowness of the motions of the planets to increase, (other
causes remaining the same,) as the inertia increases; and
though, even in this assumption, there is an errour
involved, (if we adopt that interpretation of the term
_inertia_ to which subsequent researches led,) the
introduction of such a word was one step in determining and
expressing those laws of motion which depend on the
fundamental principle of the equality of action and
reaction. {211}

5. We have thus seen, I trust in a satisfactory manner, the
origin of our conceptions of Force, Matter, Solidity, and
Inertness. It has appeared that the organ by which we obtain
such conceptions is that very muscular frame, which is the
main instrument of our perceptions of space; but that,
besides bodily sensations, these ideal conceptions, like all
the others which we have hitherto considered, involve also
an habitual activity of the mind, giving to our sensations a
meaning which they could not otherwise possess. And among
the ideas thus brought into play, is an idea of action with
an equal and opposite reaction, which forms a foundation for
universal truths to be hereafter established respecting the
conceptions thus obtained.

We must now endeavour to trace in what manner these
fundamental principles and conceptions are unfolded by means
of observation and reasoning, till they become an extensive
yet indisputable science.



{{212}}
