CHAPTER VI.

OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF STATICS.


1. _Object of the Chapter._--IN the present and the
succeeding chapters we have to show how the general axioms
of Causation enable us to construct the science of
Mechanics. We have to consider these axioms as moulding
themselves, in the first place, into certain fundamental
mechanical principles, which are of evident and necessary
truth in virtue of their dependence upon the general axioms
of Causation; and thus as forming a foundation for the whole
structure of the science;--a system of truths no less
necessary than the fundamental principles, because derived
from these by rigorous demonstration.

This account of the construction of the science of
Mechanics, however generally treated, cannot be otherwise
than technical in its details, and will probably be
imperfectly understood by any one not acquainted with
Mechanics as a mathematical science.

I cannot omit this portion of my survey without rendering my
work incomplete; but I may remark that the main purpose of
it is to prove, in a more particular manner, what I have
already declared in general, that there are, in Mechanics no
less than in Geometry, fundamental principles of axiomatic
evidence and necessity;--that these principles derive their
axiomatic character from the Idea which they involve,
namely, the Idea of Cause;--and that through the combination
of principles of this kind, the whole science of Mechanics,
including its most complex and remote results, exists as a
body of solid and universal truths. {213}

2. _Statics and Dynamics._--We must first turn our attention
to a technical distinction of Mechanics into two portions,
according as the forces about which we reason produce rest,
or motion; the former portion is termed _Statics_, the
latter _Dynamics_. If a stone fall, or a weight put a
machine in motion, the problem belongs to Dynamics; but if
the stone rest upon the ground, or a weight be merely
supported by a machine, without being raised higher, the
question is one of Statics.

3. _Equilibrium._--In Statics, forces _balance_ each other,
or keep each other _in equilibrium_. And forces which
directly balance each other, or keep each other in
equilibrium, are necessarily and manifestly equal. If we see
two boys pull at two ends of a rope so that neither of them
in the smallest degree prevails over the other, we have a
case in which two forces are in equilibrium. The two forces
are evidently equal, and are a statical exemplification of
action and reaction, such as are spoken of in the third
axiom concerning causes. Now the same exemplification occurs
in every case of equilibrium. No point or body can be kept
at rest except in virtue of opposing forces acting upon it;
and these forces must always be equal in their opposite
effect. When a stone lies on the floor, the weight of the
stone downwards is opposed and balanced by an equal pressure
of the floor upwards. If the stone rests on a slope, its
tendency to slide is counteracted by some equal and opposite
force, arising, it may be, from the resistance which the
sloping ground opposes to any motion along its surface.
Every case of rest is a case of equilibrium: every case of
equilibrium is a case of equal and opposite forces.

The most complex frame-work on which weights are supported,
as the roof of a building, or the cordage of a machine, are
still examples of equilibrium. In such cases we may have
many forces all combining to balance each other; and the
equilibrium will depend on various conditions of direction
and magnitude among the forces. And in order to understand
what are these conditions, we must ask, in the first place,
what {214} we understand by the magnitude of such
forces;--what is the measure of statical forces.

4. _Measure of Statical Forces._--At first we might expect,
perhaps, that since statical forces come under the general
notion of Cause, the mode of measuring them would be derived
from the second axiom of Causation, that causes are measured
by their effects. But we find that the application of this
axiom is controlled by the limitation which we noticed,
after stating that axiom; namely, the condition that the
causes shall be capable of addition. Further, as we have
seen, a statical force produces no other effect than this,
that it balances some other statical force; and hence the
measure of statical forces is necessarily dependent upon
their balancing, that is, upon the equality of action and
reaction.

That _statical forces are capable of addition_ is involved
in our conception of such forces. When two men pull at a
rope in the same direction, the forces which they exert are
added together. When two heavy bodies are put into a basket
suspended by a string, their weights are added, and the sum
is supported by the string.

Combining these considerations, it will appear that the
measure of statical forces is necessarily given at once by
the fundamental principle of the equality of action and
reaction. Since two opposite forces which balance each other
are equal, each force is measured by that which it balances;
and since forces are capable of addition, a force of any
magnitude is measured by adding together a proper number of
such equal forces. Thus a heavy body which, appended to some
certain elastic branch of a tree, would bend it down through
one inch, may be taken as a unit of weight. Then if we
remove this first body, and find a second heavy body which
will also bend the branch through the same space, this is
also a unit of weight; and in like manner we might go on to
a third and a fourth equal body; and adding together the
two, or the three, or the four heavy bodies, we have a force
twice, or three times, or four times the unit of weight. And
with {215} such a collection of heavy bodies, or _weights_,
we can readily measure all other forces; for the same
principle of the equality of action and reaction leads at
once to this maxim, that any statical force is measured by
the weight which it would support.

As has been said, it might at first have been supposed that
we should have to apply, in this case, the axiom that causes
are measured by their effects in another manner; that thus,
if that body were a unit of weight which bent the bough of a
tree through one inch, _that_ body would be _two_ units
which bent it through _two_ inches, and so on. But, as we
have already stated, the measures of weight must be subject
to this condition, that they are susceptible of being added:
and therefore we cannot take the deflexion of the bough for
our measure, till we have ascertained, that which experience
alone can teach us, that under the burden of two equal
weights, the deflexion will be twice as great as it is with
one weight, which is not true, or at least is neither
obviously nor necessarily true. In this, as in all other
cases, although causes must be measured by their effects, we
learn from experience only how the effects are to be
interpreted, so as to give a true and consistent measure.

With regard, however, to the measure of statical force, and
of weight, no difficulty really occurred to philosophers
from the time when they first began to speculate on such
subjects; for it was easily seen that if we take any uniform
material, as wood, or stone, or iron, portions of this which
are geometrically equal, must also be equal in statical
effect; since this was implied in the very hypothesis of a
uniform material And a body ten times as large as another of
the same substance, will be of ten times the weight. But
before men could establish by reasoning the conditions under
which weights would be in equilibrium, some other principles
were needed in addition to the mere measure of forces. The
principles introduced for this purpose still resulted from
the conception of equal action and reaction; but it required
no small clearness of thought to select them rightly, and to
employ them {216} successfully. This, however, was done, to
a certain extent, by the Greeks; and the treatise of
Archimedes _On the Center of Gravity_, is founded on
principles which may still be considered as the genuine
basis of statical reasoning. I shall make a few remarks on
the most important principle among those which Archimedes
thus employs.

5. _The Center of Gravity._--The most important of the
principles which enter into the demonstration of Archimedes
is this: that "Every body has a center of gravity;" meaning
by the center of gravity, a point at which the whole matter
of the body may be supposed to be collected, to all intents
and purposes of statical reasoning. This principle has been
put in various forms by succeeding writers: for instance, it
has been thought sufficient to assume a case much simpler
than the general one; and to assert that two _equal_ bodies
have their center of gravity in the point midway between
them. It is to be observed, that this assertion not only
implies that the two bodies will _balance_ upon a support
placed at that midway point, but also, that they will
exercise, upon such a support, a _pressure equal to their
sum_; for this point being the center of gravity, the whole
matter of the two bodies may be conceived to be collected
there, and therefore the whole weight will press there. And
thus the principle in question amounts to this, that _when
two equal heavy bodies are supported on the middle point
between them, the pressure upon the support is equal to the
sum of the weights of the bodies_.

A clear understanding of the nature and grounds of this
principle is of great consequence: for in it we have the
foundation of a large portion of the science of Mechanics.
And if this principle can be shown to be necessarily true,
in virtue of our Fundamental Ideas, we can hardly doubt that
there exist many other truths of the same kind, and that no
sound view of the evidence and extent of human knowledge can
be obtained, so long as we mistake the nature of these, its
first principles. {217}

The above principle, that the pressure on the support is
equal to the sum of the bodies supported, is often stated as
an axiom in the outset of books on Mechanics. And this
appears to be the true place and character of this
principle, in accordance with the reasonings which we have
already urged. The axiom depends upon our conception of
action and reaction. That the two weights are supported,
implies that the supporting force must be equal to the force
or weight supported.

In order further to show the foundation of this principle,
we may ask the question:--If it be not an axiom, deriving
its truth from the fundamental conception of equal action
and reaction, which equilibrium always implies, what is the
origin of its certainty? The principle is never for an
instant denied or questioned: it is taken for granted, even
before it is stated. No one will doubt that it is not only
true, but true with the same rigour and universality as the
axioms of Geometry. Will it be said, that it is borrowed
from experience? Experience could never prove a principle to
be universally and rigorously true. Moreover, when from
experience we prove a proposition to possess great exactness
and generality, we approach by degrees to this proof: the
conviction becomes stronger, the truth more secure, as we
accumulate trials. But nothing of this kind is the case in
the instance before us. There is no gradation from less to
greater certainty;--no hesitation which precedes confidence.
From the first, we know that the axiom is exactly and
certainly true. In order to be convinced of it, we do not
require many trials, but merely a clear understanding of the
assertion itself.

But in fact, not only are trials not necessary to the proof,
but they do not strengthen it. Probably no one ever made a
trial for the purpose of showing that the pressure upon the
support is equal to the sum of the two weights. Certainly no
person with clear mechanical conceptions ever wanted such a
trial to convince him of the truth; or thought the truth
clearer after the trial had been made. If to such a person,
an {218} experiment were shown which seemed to contradict
the principle, his conclusion would be, not that the
principle was doubtful, but that the apparatus was out of
order. Nothing can be less like collecting truth from
experience than this.

We maintain, then, that this equality of mechanical action
and reaction, is one of the principles which do not flow
from, but regulate our experience. To this principle, the
facts which we observe must conform; and we cannot help
interpreting them in such a manner that they shall be
exemplifications of the principle. A mechanical pressure not
accompanied by an equal and opposite pressure, can no more
be given by experience, than two unequal right angles. With
the supposition of such inequalities, space ceases to be
space, force ceases to be force, matter ceases to be matter.
And this equality of action and reaction, considered in the
case in which two bodies are connected so as to act on a
single support, leads to the axiom which we have stated
above, and which is one of the main foundations of the
science of Mechanics.

[2d ed.] [To the doctrine that mechanical principles, such
as the one here under consideration (that the pressure on
the point of support is equal to the sum of the weights),
are derived from our Ideas, and do not flow from but
regulate our experience, objections are naturally made by
those who assert all our knowledge to be derived from
experience. How, they ask, can we know the properties of
pressures, levers and the like, except from experience? What
but experience can possibly inform us that a force applied
transversely to a lever will have any tendency to turn the
lever on its center? This cannot be, except we suppose in
the lever tenacity, rigidity and the like, which are
qualities known only by experience. And it is obvious that
this line of argument might be carried on through the whole
subject.

My answer to this objection is a remark of the same kind as
one which I have made respecting the Ideas of Space, Time,
and Number, in the last Book. The mind, in apprehending
events as causes {219} and effects, is governed by Laws of
its own Activity; and these Laws govern the results of the
mind's action; and make these results conform to the Axioms
of Causation. But this activity of the mind is awakened and
developed by being exercised; and in dealing with the
examples of cause and effect here spoken of, (namely,
pressure and resistance, force and motion,) the mind's
activity is necessarily governed also by the bodily powers
of perception and action. We are human beings only in so far
as we have existed in space and time; and of our human
faculties, developed by our existence in space and time,
space and time are necessary conditions. In like manner, we
are human beings only in so far as we have bodies, and
bodily organs; and our bodies necessarily imply material
objects external to us. And hence our human faculties,
developed by our bodily existence in a material world, have
the conditions of matter for their necessary Laws. I have
already said (chap. v.) that our conception of Force arises
with our consciousness of our own muscular exertions;--that
Force cannot be conceived without Resistance to exercise
itself upon;--and that this resistance is supplied by
Matter. And thus the conception of Matter, and of the most
general modes in which Matter receives, resists, and
transmits force, are parts of our constitution which, though
awakened and unfolded by our being in a material world, are
not distinguishable from the original structure of the mind.
I do not ascribe to the mind _innate_ Ideas--Ideas which it
would have, even if it had no intercourse with the world of
space, time, and matter; because we cannot imagine a mind in
such a state. But I attempt to point out and classify those
Conditions of all Experience, to which the intercourse of
all minds with the material world has necessarily given rise
in all. Truths _thus_ necessarily acquired in the course of
all experience, cannot be said to be learnt _from
experience_, in the same sense in which particular facts, at
definite times, are learnt from experience--learnt by some
persons and not by others--learnt with more or less of
certainty. These latter _special truths of_ {220}
_experience_ will be very important subjects of our
consideration; but our whole chance of discussing them with
any profit depends upon our keeping them distinct from the
_necessary and universal conditions of experience_. Here, as
everywhere, we must keep in view the fundamental antithesis
of Ideas and Facts.]

6. _Oblique Forces._--By the aid of the above axiom and a
few others, the Greeks made some progress in the science of
Statics. But after a short advance, they arrived at another
difficulty, that of Oblique Forces, which they never
overcame; and which no mathematician mastered till modern
times. The unpublished manuscripts of Leonardo da Vinci,
written in the fifteenth century, and the works of Stevinus
and Galileo, in the sixteenth, are the places in which we
find the first solid grounds of reasoning on the subject of
forces acting obliquely to each other. And from that period,
mathematicians, having thus become possessed of all the
mechanical principles which are requisite in problems
respecting equilibrium, soon framed a complete science of
Statics. Succeeding writers presented this science in forms
variously modified; for it was found, in Mechanics as in
Geometry, that various propositions might be taken as the
starting points; and that the collection of truths which it
was the mechanician's business to include in his course,
might thus be traversed by various routes, each path
offering a series of satisfactory demonstrations. The
fundamental conceptions of force and resistance, like those
of space and number, could be contemplated under different
aspects, each of which might be made the basis of axioms, or
of principles employed as axioms. Hence the grounds of the
truth of Statics may be stated in various ways; and it would
be a task of some length to examine all these completely,
and to trace them to their Fundamental Ideas. This I shall
not undertake here to do; but the philosophical importance
of the subject makes it proper to offer a few remarks on
some of the main principles involved in the different modes
of presenting Statics as a rigorously demonstrated science.
{221}

7. _A Force may be supposed to act at any Point of its
Direction._--It has been stated in the history of
Mechanics[12\3], that Leonardo da Vinci and Galileo obtained
the true measure of the effect of oblique forces, by
reasonings which were, in substance, the same. The principle
of these reasonings is that expressed at the head of this
paragraph; and when we have a little accustomed ourselves to
contemplate our conceptions of force, and its action on
matter, in an abstract manner, we shall have no difficulty
in assenting to the principle in this general form. But it
may, perhaps, be more obvious at first in a special case.

[Note 12\3: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. i. sect. 2.]

If we suppose a wheel, moveable about its axis, and carrying
with it in its motion a weight, (as, for example, one of the
wheels by means of which the large bells of a church are
rung,) this weight may be supported by means of a rope (not
passing along the circumference of the wheel, as is usual in
the case of bells,) but fastened to one of the spokes of the
wheel. Now the principle which is enunciated above asserts,
that if the rope pass in a straight line across several of
the spokes of the wheel, it makes no difference in the
mechanical effect of the force applied, for the purpose of
putting the bell in motion, to _which_ of these spokes the
rope is _fastened_. In each case, the fastening of the rope
to the wheel merely serves to enable the force to produce
motion about the center; and so long as the force acts in
the same line, the effect is the same, at whatever point of
the rope the line of action finishes.

This axiom very readily aids us in estimating the effect of
oblique forces. For when a force acts on one of the arms of
a lever at any oblique angle, we suppose another arm
projecting from the center of motion, like another spoke of
the same wheel, so situated that it is perpendicular to the
force. This arm we may, with Leonardo, call the _virtual
lever_; for, by the axiom, we may suppose the force to act
where the line of its direction meets this arm; and thus we
reduce the case {222} to that in which the force acts
perpendicularly on the arm.

The ground of this axiom is, that matter, in Statics, is
necessarily conceived as _transmitting_ force. That force
can be transmitted from one place to another, by means of
matter;--that we can push with a rod, pull with a rope,--are
suppositions implied in our conceptions of force and matter.
Matter is, as we have said, that which receives the
impression of force, and the modes just mentioned, are the
simplest ways in which that impression operates. And since,
in any of these cases, the force might be resisted by a
reaction equal to the force itself, the reaction in each
case would be equal, and, therefore, the action in each case
is necessarily equal; and thus the forces must be
transmitted, from one point to another, without increase or
diminution.

This property of matter, of transmitting the action of
force, is of various kinds. We have the coherence of a rope
which enables us to pull, and the rigidity of a staff, which
enables us to push with it in the direction of its length;
and again, the same staff has a rigidity of another kind, in
virtue of which we can use it as a lever; that is, a
rigidity to resist flexure, and to transmit the force which
turns a body round a fulcrum. There is, further, the
rigidity by which a solid body resists _twisting_. Of these
kinds of rigidity, the first is that to which our axiom
refers; but in order to complete the list of the elementary
principles of Statics, we ought also to lay down axioms
respecting the other kinds of rigidity[13\3]. These,
however, I shall not here state, as they do not involve any
new principle. Like the one just considered, they form part
of our fundamental conception of matter; they are not the
results of any experience, but are the hypotheses to which
we are irresistibly led, when we would liberate our
reasonings concerning force and matter from a dependence on
the special results of experience. We cannot even {223}
conceive (that is, if we have any clear mechanical
conceptions at all) the force exerted by the point of a
staff and resisting the force which we steadily impress on
the head of it, to be different from the impressed force.

[Note 13\3: Such axioms are given in a little work (_The
Mechanical Euclid_) which I published on the Elements of
Mechanics.]

8. _Forces may have equivalent Forces substituted for them.
The Parallelogram of Forces._--It has already been observed,
that in order to prove the doctrines of Statics, we may take
various principles as our starting points, and may still
find a course of demonstration by which the leading
propositions belonging to the subject may be established.
Thus, instead of beginning our reasonings, as in the last
section we supposed them to commence, with the case in which
forces act upon different points of the same body in the
same line of force, and counteract each other in virtue of
the intervening matter by which the effect of force is
transferred from one point to another; we may suppose
different forces to act at the same point, and may thus
commence our reasonings with a case in which we have to
contemplate force, without having to take into our account
the resistance or rigidity of matter. Two statical forces,
thus acting at a mathematical point, are equivalent, in all
respects, to some single force acting at the same point; and
would be kept in equilibrium by a force equal and opposite
to that single force. And the rule by which the single force
is derived from the two, is commonly termed _the
parallelogram of forces_; the proposition being this,--That
if the two forces be represented in magnitude and direction
by the two sides of a parallelogram, the resulting force
will be represented in the same manner by the diagonal of
the parallelogram. This proposition has very frequently been
made, by modern writers, the commencement of the science of
Mechanics: a position for which, by its simplicity, it is
well suited; although, in order to deduce from it the other
elementary propositions of the science, as, for instance,
those respecting the lever, we require the axiom stated in
the last section.

9. _The Parallelogram of Forces is a necessary Truth._--In
the series of discussions in which we are {224} here
engaged, our main business is to ascertain the nature and
grounds of the certainty of scientific truths. We have,
therefore, to ask whether this proposition, the
parallelogram of forces, be a necessary truth; and if so, on
what grounds its necessity ultimately rests. We shall find
that this, like the other fundamental doctrines of Statics,
justly claim a demonstrative certainty. Daniel Bernoulli, in
1726, gave the first proof of this important proposition on
pure statical principles; and thus, as he says[14\3],
'proved that statical theorems are not less necessarily true
than geometrical are.' If we examine this proof of
Bernoulli, in order to discover what are the principles on
which it rests, we shall find that the reasoning employs in
its progress such axioms as this;--That if from forces which
are in equilibrium at a point be taken away other forces
which are in equilibrium at the same point, the remainder
will be in equilibrium; and generally;--That if forces can
be resolved into other equivalent forces, these may be
separated, grouped, and recombined, in any new manner, and
the result will still be identical with what it was at
first. Thus in Bernoulli's proof, the two forces to be
compounded are represented by P and Q; P is resolved into
two other forces, X and U; and Q into two others, Y and V,
under certain conditions. It is then assumed that these
forces may be grouped into the pairs X, Y, and U, V: and
when it has been shown that X and Y are in equilibrium, they
may, by what has been said, be removed, and the forces, P,
Q, are equivalent to U, V; which, being in the same
direction by the course of the construction, have a result
equal to their sum.

[Note 14\3: _Comm. Petrop._ vol. i.]

It is clear that the principles here assumed are genuine
axioms, depending upon our conception of the nature of
equivalence of forces, and upon their being capable of
addition and composition. If the forces, P, Q, be
_equivalent_ to forces X, U, Y, V, they are equivalent to
these forces added and compounded in any order; just as a
geometrical figure is, by our conception of {225} space,
equivalent to its parts added together in any order. The
apprehension of forces as having magnitude, as made up of
parts, as capable of composition, leads to such axioms in
Statics, in the same manner as the like apprehension of
space leads to the axioms of Geometry. And thus the truths
of Statics, resting upon such foundations, are independent
of experience in the same manner in which geometrical truths
are so.

The proof of the parallelogram of forces thus given by
Daniel Bernoulli, as it was the first, is also one of the
most simple proofs of that proposition which have been
devised up to the present day. Many other demonstrations,
however, have been given of the same proposition. Jacobi, a
German mathematician, has collected and examined eighteen of
these[15\3]. They all depend either upon such principles as
have just been stated; That forces may in every way be
replaced by those which are equivalent to them;--or else
upon those previously stated, the doctrine of the lever, and
the transfer of a force from one point to another of its
direction. In either case, they are necessary results of our
statical conceptions, independent of any observed laws of
motion, and indeed, of the conception of actual motion
altogether.

[Note 15\3: These are by the following mathematicians; D.
Bernoulli (1726); Lambert (1771); Scarella (1756); Venini
(1764); Araldi (1806); Wachter (1815); Kaestner; Marini;
Eytelwein; Salimbeni; Duchayla; two different proofs by
Foncenex (1760); three by D'Alembert; and those of Laplace
and M. Poisson.]

There is another class of alleged proofs of the
parallelogram of forces, which involve the consideration of
the motion produced by the forces. But such reasonings are,
in fact, altogether irrelevant to the subject of Statics. In
that science, forces are not measured by the motion which
they produce, but by the forces which they will balance, as
we have already seen. The combination of two forces employed
in producing motion in the same body, either simultaneously
or successively, {226} belongs to that part of Mechanics
which has motion for its subject, and is to be considered in
treating of the laws of motion. The composition of motion,
(as when a man moves in a ship while the ship moves through
the water,) has constantly been confounded with the
composition of force. But though it has been done by very
eminent mathematicians, it is quite necessary for us to keep
the two subjects distinct, in order to see the real nature
of the evidence of truth in either case. The conditions of
equilibrium of two forces on a lever, or of three forces at
a point, can be established without any reference whatever
to any motions which the forces might, under _other_
circumstances, produce. And because this can be done, to do
so is the only scientific procedure. To prove such
propositions by any other course, would be to support truth
by extraneous and inconclusive reasons; which would be
foreign to our purpose, since we seek not only knowledge,
but the grounds of our knowledge.

10. _The Center of gravity seeks the lowest place._--The
principles which we have already mentioned afford a
sufficient basis for the science of Statics in its most
extensive and varied applications; and the conditions of
equilibrium of the most complex combinations of machinery
may be deduced from these principles with a rigour not
inferior to that of geometry. But in some of the more
complex cases, the results of long trains of reasoning may
be foreseen, in virtue of certain maxims which appear to us
self-evident, although it may not be easy to trace the exact
dependence of these maxims upon our fundamental conceptions
of force and matter. Of this nature is the maxim now
stated;--That in any combination of matter any how
supported, the Center of Gravity will descend into the
lowest position which the connexion of the parts allows it
to assume by descending. It is easily seen that this maxim
carries to a much greater extent the principle which the
Greek mathematicians assumed, that every body has a Center
of Gravity, that is, a point in which, if the whole matter
of the body be collected, the effect will remain unchanged.
For the Greeks asserted this of a {227} single rigid mass
only; whereas, in the maxim now under our notice, it is
asserted of any masses, connected by strings, rods, joints,
or in any manner. We have already seen that more modern
writers on mechanics, desirous of assuming as fundamental no
wider principles than are absolutely necessary, have not
adopted the Greek axiom in all its generality, but have only
asserted that two _equal_ weights have a center of gravity
midway between them. Yet the principle that every body,
however irregular, has a center of gravity, and will be
supported if that center is supported, and not otherwise, is
so far evident, that it might be employed as a fundamental
truth, if we could not resolve it into any simpler truths:
and, historically speaking, it was assumed as evident by the
Greeks. In like manner the still wider principle, that a
collection of bodies, as, for instance, a flexible chain
hanging upon one or more supports, has a center of gravity;
and that this point will descend to the lowest possible
situation, as a single body would do, has been adopted at
various periods in the history of mechanics; and especially
at conjunctures when mathematical philosophers have had new
and difficult problems to contend with. For in almost every
instance it has only been by repeated struggles that
philosophers have reduced the solution of such problems to a
clear dependence upon the most simple axioms.

11. _Stevinus's Proof for Oblique Forces._--We have an
example of this mode of dealing with problems, in Stevinus's
mode of reasoning concerning the Inclined Plane; which, as
we have stated in the History of Mechanics, was the first
correct published solution of that problem. Stevinus
supposes a loop of chain, or a loop of string loaded with a
series of equal balls at equal distances, to hang over the
Inclined Plane; and his reasoning proceeds upon this
assumption,--That such a loop so hanging will find a certain
position in which it will rest: for otherwise, says
he[16\3], its motion must go on for ever, which is absurd.
It may be asked how {228} this absurdity of a perpetual
motion appears; and it will perhaps be added, that although
the impossibility of a machine with such a condition may be
proved as a remote result of mechanical principles, this
impossibility can hardly be itself recognized as a
self-evident truth. But to this we may reply, that the
impossibility is really evident in the case contemplated by
Stevinus; for we cannot conceive a loop of chain to go on
through all eternity, sliding round and round upon its
support, by the effect of its own weight. And the ground of
our conviction that this cannot be, seems to be this
consideration; that when the chain moves by the effect of
its weight, we consider its motion as the result of an
effort to reach some certain position, in which it can rest;
just as a single ball in a bowl moves till it comes to rest
at the lowest point of the bowl. Such an effect of weight in
the chain, we may represent to ourselves by conceiving all
the matter of the chain to be collected in one single point,
and this single heavy point to hang from the support in some
way or other, so as fitly to represent the mode of support
of the chain. In whatever manner this heavy point (the
center of gravity of the chain) be supported and controlled
in its movements, there will still be some position of rest
which it will seek and find. And thus there will be some
corresponding position of rest for the chain; and the
interminable shifting from one position to another, with no
disposition to rest in any position, cannot exist.

[Note 16\3: Stevin. _Statique_, livre i. prop. 19.]

Thus the demonstration of the property of the Inclined Plane
by Stevinus, depends upon a principle which, though far from
being the simplest of those to which the case can be
reduced, is still both true and evident: and the evidence of
this principle, depending upon the assumption of a center of
gravity, is of the same nature as the evidence of the Greek
statical demonstrations, the earliest real advances in the science.

12. _Principle of Virtual Velocities._--We have referred
above to an assertion often made, that we may, from the
simple principles of Mechanics, demonstrate the
impossibility of a perpetual motion. In reality, {229}
however, the simplest proof of that impossibility, in a
machine acted upon by weight only, arises from the very
maxim above stated, that the center of gravity seeks and
finds the lowest place; or from some similar proposition.
For if, as is done by many writers, we profess to prove the
impossibility of a perpetual motion by means of that
proposition which includes the conditions of equilibrium,
and is called the _Principle of Virtual Velocities_[17\3],
we are under the necessity of first proving in a general
manner that principle. And if this be done by a mere
enumeration of cases, (as by taking those five cases which
are called the _Mechanical Powers_,) there may remain some
doubts whether the enumeration of possible mechanical
combinations be complete. Accordingly, some writers have
attempted independent and general proofs of the Principle of
Virtual Velocities; and these proofs rest upon assumptions
of the same nature as that now under notice. This is, for
example, the case with Lagrange's proof, which depends upon
what he calls the _Principle of Pulleys_. For this principle
is,--That a weight any how supported, as by a string passing
round any number of pulleys any how placed, will be at rest
then only, when it cannot get lower by any small motion of
the pulleys. And thus the maxim that a weight will descend
if it can, is assumed as the basis of this proof.

[Note 17\3: See _Hist. Ind Sc._ b. vi. c. ii. sect. 4.]

There is, as we have said, no need to assume such principles
as these for the foundation of our mechanical science. But
it is, on various accounts, useful to direct our attention
to those cases in which truths, apprehended at first in a
complex and derivative form, have afterwards been reduced to
their simpler elements;--in which, also, sagacious and
inventive men have fixed upon those truths as self-evident,
which now appear to us only certain in virtue of
demonstration. In these cases we can hardly doubt that such
men were led to assert the doctrines which they discovered,
not by any capricious conjecture of arbitrary selection, but
by having a keener and deeper insight than other persons
{230} into the relations which were the object of their
contemplation; and in the science now spoken of, they were
led to their assumptions by possessing clearly and
distinctly the conceptions of mechanical cause and
effect,--action and reaction,--force, and the nature of its
operation.

13. _Fluids press Equally in all Directions._--The doctrines
which concern the equilibrium of fluids depend on principles
no less certain and simple than those which refer to the
equilibrium of solid bodies; and the Greeks, who, as we have
seen, obtained a clear view of some of the principles of
Statics, also made a beginning in the kindred subject of
Hydrostatics. We still possess a treatise of Archimedes _On
Floating Bodies_, which contains correct solutions of
several problems belonging to this subject, and of some
which are by no means easy. In this treatise, the
fundamental assumption is of this kind: 'Let it be assumed
that the nature of a fluid is such, that the parts which are
less pressed yield to those which are more pressed.' In this
assumption or axiom it is implied that a pressure exerted
upon a fluid in one direction produces a pressure in another
direction; thus, the weight of the fluid which arises from a
downward force produces a lateral pressure against the sides
of the containing vessel. Not only does the pressure thus
diverge from its original direction into all other
directions, but the pressure is in all directions exactly
equal, an equal extent of the fluid being taken. This
principle, which was involved in the reasoning of
Archimedes, is still to the present day the basis of all
hydrostatical treatises, and is expressed, as above, by
saying that _fluids press equally in all directions_.

Concerning this, as concerning previously-noticed
principles, we have to ask whether it can rightly be said to
be derived from experience. And to this the answer must
still be, as in the former cases, that the proposition is
not one borrowed from experience in any usual or exact sense
of the phrase. I will endeavour to illustrate this. There
are many elementary propositions in physics, our knowledge
of which {231} indisputably depends upon experience; and in
these cases there is no difficulty in seeing the evidence of
this dependence. In such cases, the _experiments_ which
prove the law are prominently stated in treatises upon the
subject: they are given with exact measures, and with an
account of the means by which errours were avoided: the
experiments of more recent times have either rendered more
certain the law originally asserted, or have pointed out
some correction of it as requisite: and the names, both of
the discoverers of the law and of its subsequent reformers,
are well known. For instance, the proposition that 'The
elastic force of air varies as the density,' was first
proved by Boyle, by means of operations of which the detail
is given in his _Defence_ of his _Pneumatical
Experiments_[18\3]; and by **Mariotte in his _Traité de
l'Équilibre des Liquides_, from whom it has generally been
termed Mariotte's law. After being confirmed by many other
experimenters, this law was suspected to be slightly
inaccurate, and a commission of the French Academy of
Sciences was appointed, consisting of several distinguished
philosophers[19\3], to ascertain the truth or falsehood of
this suspicion. The result of their investigations appeared
to be, that the law is exact, as nearly as the inevitable
inaccuracies of machinery and measures will allow us to
judge. Here we have an example of a law which is of the
simplest kind and form; and which yet is not allowed to rest
upon its simplicity or apparent probability, but is
rigorously tested by experience. In this case, the
assertion, that the law depends upon experience, contains a
reference to plain and notorious passages in the history of
science.

[Note 18\3: Shaw's _Boyle_, Vol. ii. p. 671.]

[Note 19\3: The members were Prony, Arago, Ampère, Girard,
and Dulong. The experiments were extended to a pressure of
twenty-seven atmospheres; and in no instance did the
difference between the observed and calculated elasticity
amount to one-hundredth of the whole; nor did the difference
appear to increase with the increase of pressure.--Fechner,
_Repertorium_, i. 110.]

Now with regard to the principle that fluids press equally
in all directions, the case is altogether different. {232}
It is, indeed, often asserted in works on hydrostatics, that
the principle is collected from experience, and sometimes a
few experiments are described as exhibiting its effect; but
these are such as to illustrate and explain, rather than to
prove, the truth of the principle: they are never related to
have been made with that exactness of precaution and
measurement, or that frequency of repetition, which are
necessary to establish a purely experimental truth. Nor did
such experiments occur as important steps in the history of
science. It does not appear that Archimedes thought
experiment necessary to confirm the truth of the law as he
employed it: on the contrary, he states it in exactly the
same shape as the axioms which he employs in statics, and
even in geometry; namely, as an assumption. Nor does any
intelligent student of the subject find any difficulty in
assenting to this fundamental principle of hydrostatics as
soon as it is propounded to him. Experiment was not
requisite for its discovery; experiment is not necessary for
its proof at present; and we may add, that experiment,
though it may make the proposition the more readily
intelligible, can add nothing to our conviction of its truth
when it is once understood.

14. _Foundation of the above Axiom._--But it will naturally
be asked, What then is the ground of our conviction of this
doctrine of the equal pressure of a fluid in all directions?
And to this I reply, that the reasons of this conviction are
involved in our idea of a fluid, which is considered as
matter, and therefore as capable of receiving, resisting,
and transmitting force according to the general conception
of matter; and which is also considered as matter which has
its parts perfectly moveable among one another. For it
follows from these suppositions, that if the fluid be
confined, a pressure which thrusts in one side of the
containing vessel, may cause any other side to bulge
outwards, if there be a part of the surface which has not
strength to resist this pressure from within. And that this
pressure, when thus transferred into a direction different
from the original one, is not altered in intensity, {233}
depends upon this consideration; that any difference in the
two pressures would be considered as a defect of _perfect_
fluidity, since the fluidity would be still more complete,
if this entire and undiminished transmission of pressure in
all directions were supposed. If, for instance, the lateral
pressure were less than the vertical, this could be
conceived no other way than as indicating some rigidity or
adhesion of the parts of the fluid. When the fluidity is
perfect, the two pressures which act in the two different
parts of the fluid exactly balance each other: they are the
action and the reaction; and must hence be equal by the same
necessity as two directly opposite forces in statics.

But it may be urged, that even if we grant that this
conception of a perfect fluid, as a body which has its parts
perfectly moveable among each other, leads us necessarily to
the principle of the equality of hydrostatic pressure in all
directions, still this conception itself is obtained from
experience, or suggested by observation. And to this we may
reply, that the conception of a fluid, as contemplated in
mechanical theory, cannot be said to be derived from
experience, except in the same manner as the conception of a
solid and rigid body may be said to be acquired by
experience. For if we imagine a vessel full of small, smooth
spherical balls, such a collection of balls would approach
to the nature of a fluid, in having its parts moveable among
each other; and would approach to perfect fluidity, as the
balls became smoother and smaller. And such a collection of
balls would also possess the statical properties of a fluid;
for it would transmit pressure out of a vertical into a
lateral (or any other) direction, in the same manner as a
fluid would do. And thus a collection of solid bodies has
the same property which a fluid has; and the science of
Hydrostatics borrows from experience no principles beyond
those which are involved in the science of Statics
respecting solids. And since in this latter portion of
science, as we have already seen, none of the principles
depend for their evidence upon any special experience, the
doctrines of Hydrostatics also are not {234} proved by
experience, but have a necessary truth borrowed from the
relations of our ideas.

It is hardly to be expected that the above reasoning will,
at first sight, produce conviction in the mind of the
reader, except he have, to a certain extent, acquainted
himself with the elementary doctrines of the science of
Hydrostatics as usually delivered; and have followed, with
clear and steady apprehension, some of the trains of
reasoning by which the pressures of fluids are determined;
as, for instance, the explanation of what is called _the
Hydrostatic Paradox_. The necessity of such a discipline in
order that the reader may enter fully into this part of our
speculations, naturally renders them less popular; but this
disadvantage is inevitable in our plan. We cannot expect to
throw light upon philosophy by means of the advances which
have been made in the mathematical and physical sciences,
except we really understand the doctrines which have been
firmly established in those sciences. This preparation for
philosophizing may be somewhat laborious; but such labour is
necessary if we would pursue speculative truth with all the
advantages which the present condition of human knowledge
places within our reach.

We may add, that the consequences to which we are directed
by the preceding opinions, are of very great importance in
their bearing upon our general views respecting human
knowledge. I trust to be able to show, that some important
distinctions are illustrated, some perplexing paradoxes
solved, and some large anticipations of the future extension
of our knowledge suggested, by means of the conclusions to
which the preceding discussions have conducted us. But
before I proceed to these general topics, I must consider
the foundations of some of the remaining portions of the
science of Mechanics.



{{235}}
