BOOK II.


THE
PHILOSOPHY
OF THE
PURE SCIENCES.




The way in which we are led to regard human knowledge is
like the way in which Copernicus was led to regard the
heavens. When the explanation of the celestial motions could
not be made to go right so long as he assumed that all the
host of stars turns round the spectator, he tried whether it
would not answer better if he made the spectator turn, and
left the stars at rest. We may make a similar trial in
Metaphysics, as to our way of looking at objects. If our
view of them must be governed altogether by the properties
of the objects themselves, I see not how man can know
anything about them _à priori_. But if the thing, as an
object of the senses, is regulated by the constitution of
our power of knowing, I can very readily represent to myself
this possibility.

KANT, _Kritik d. R. V. Pref._


{{87}}
BOOK II.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE PURE SCIENCES.


[The principal question discussed in the last Book was this
(see chaps. V. and VI.): How are _necessary_ and _universal_
truths possible? And the answer then given was: that the
necessity and universality of truths are derived from the
_Fundamental Ideas_ which they involve. And we proceed in
this Book to exemplify this doctrine in the case of the
truths of Geometry and Arithmetic, which derive their
necessity and universality from the Fundamental Ideas of
Space, and Time, or Number.

The question thus examined is that which Kant undertook to
deal with in his celebrated work, _Kritik der reinen
Vernunft_ (_Examination of the Pure Reason_): and our
solution of the Problem, so far as the Ideas of Space and
Time are concerned, agrees in the main with his. The
arguments contained in chapters II. and **VII. of this Book,
are the leading arguments respecting Space and Time, in
Kant's _Kritik_. Kant, however, instead of calling Space and
Time _Ideas_, calls them the necessary _Forms_ of our
experience, as I have stated in the text.

But though I have adopted Kant's arguments as to Space and
Time, all that follows in the succeeding Books, with regard
to other Ideas, has no resemblance to any doctrines of Kant
or his school (with the exception, perhaps, of some of the
views on the Idea of _Cause_). The nature and character of
the other Scientific Ideas which I have examined, in the
succeeding Books, have been established by an analysis of
the history of the several Sciences to which those Ideas are
essential, and an examination of the writings of the
principal discoverers in those Sciences.]



{{88}}
CHAPTER I.

OF THE PURE SCIENCES.


1. ALL external objects and events which we can contemplate
are viewed as having relations of Space, Time, and Number;
and are subject to the general conditions which these Ideas
impose, as well as to the particular laws which belong to
each class of objects and occurrences. The special laws of
nature, considered under the various aspects which
constitute the different sciences, are obtained by a mixed
reference to Experience and to the Fundamental Ideas of each
science. But besides the sciences thus formed by the aid of
special experience, the conditions which flow from those
more comprehensive ideas first mentioned, Space, Time, and
Number, constitute a body of science, applicable to objects
and changes of all kinds, and deduced without recurrence
being had to any observation in particular. These sciences,
thus unfolded out of ideas alone, unmixed with any reference
to the phenomena of matter, are hence termed _Pure_
Sciences. The principal sciences of this class are Geometry,
Theoretical Arithmetic, and Algebra considered in its most
general sense, as the investigation of the relations of
space and number by means of general symbols.

2. These Pure Sciences were not included in our survey of
the history of the sciences, because they are not
_inductive_ sciences. Their progress has not consisted in
collecting laws from phenomena, true theories from observed
facts, and more general from more limited laws; but in
tracing the consequences of the ideas themselves, and in
detecting the most general and intimate analogies and
connexions which prevail {89} among such conceptions as are
derivable from the ideas. These sciences have no principles
besides definitions and axioms, and no process of proof but
_deduction_; this process, however, assuming here a most
remarkable character; and exhibiting a combination of
simplicity and complexity, of rigour and generality, quite
unparalleled in other subjects.

3. The universality of the truths, and the rigour of the
demonstrations of these pure sciences, attracted attention
in the earliest times; and it was perceived that they
offered an exercise and a discipline of the intellectual
faculties, in a form peculiarly free from admixture of
extraneous elements. They were strenuously cultivated by the
Greeks, both with a view to such a discipline, and from the
love of speculative truth which prevailed among that people:
and the name _mathematics_, by which they are designated,
indicates this their character of _disciplinal_ studies.

4. As has already been said, the ideas which these sciences
involve extend to all the objects and changes which we
observe in the external world; and hence the consideration
of mathematical relations forms a large portion of many of
the sciences which treat of the phenomena and laws of
external nature, as Astronomy, Optics, and Mechanics. Such
sciences are hence often termed _Mixed Mathematics_, the
relations of space and number being, in these branches of
knowledge, combined with principles collected from special
observation; while Geometry, Algebra, and the like subjects,
which involve no result of experience, are called _Pure
Mathematics_.

5. Space, time, and number, may be conceived as _forms_ by
which the knowledge derived from our sensations is moulded,
and which are independent of the differences in the _matter_
of our knowledge, arising from the sensations themselves.
Hence the sciences which have these ideas for their subject
may be termed _Formal Sciences_. In this point of view, they
are distinguished from sciences in which, besides these mere
formal laws by which appearances are corrected, we endeavour
to apply to the phenomena the idea of cause, {90} or some of
the other ideas which penetrate further into the principles
of nature. We have thus, in the History, distinguished
Formal Astronomy and Formal Optics from Physical Astronomy
and Physical Optics.

We now proceed to our examination of the Ideas which
constitute the foundation of these formal or pure
mathematical sciences, beginning with the Idea of Space.



{{91}}
