CHAPTER IV.

ATTEMPTS TO FORM IDEAS OF SEPARATE VITAL FORCES, AND FIRST
OF ASSIMILATION AND SECRETION.


SECT. I.--_Course of Biological Research._

1. IT is to be observed that at present I do not speak of
the progress of our knowledge with regard to the detail of
the processes which take place in the human body, but of the
approach made to some distinct Idea of the specially vital
part of each process. In the History of Physiology, it has
been seen[72\9] that all the great discoveries made respecting
the organs and motions of the animal frame have been
followed by speculations and hypotheses connected with such
discoveries. The discovery of the circulation of the blood
led to theories of animal heat; the discovery of the motion
of the chyle led to theories of digestion; the close
examination of the process of reproduction in plants and
animals led to theories of generation. In all these cases,
the discovery brought to light some portion of the process
which was mechanical or chemical, but it also, in each
instance, served to show that the process was something more
than mechanical or chemical. The theory attempted to explain
the process by the application of known causes; but there
always remained some part of it which must unavoidably be
referred to an unknown cause. But though unknown, such a
cause was not a hopeless object of study. As the vital
functions became better and better understood, it was seen
more and more clearly at what precise points of the process
it was necessary to assume a peculiar vital energy, and what
sort of properties {204} this energy must be conceived to
possess. It was perceived where, in what manner, in what
degree, mechanical and chemical agencies were modified,
over-ruled, or counteracted, by agencies which must be
hypermechanical and hyperchemical. And thus the discoveries
made in anatomy by a laborious examination of facts, pointed
out the necessity of introducing new ideas, in order that
the facts might be intelligible. Observation taught much;
and among other things, she taught that there was something
which could not be observed, but which must, if possible, be
conceived. I shall notice a few instances of this.

[Note 72\9: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii.]


SECT. II.--_Attempts to form a distinct Conception of
Assimilation and Secretion._

2. _The Ancients._--That plants and animals grow by taking
into their substance matter previously extraneous, is
obvious to all: but as soon as we attempt to conceive this
process distinctly in detail, we find that it involves no
inconsiderable mystery. How does the same food become blood
and flesh, bone and hair? Perhaps the earliest attempt to
explain this mystery, is that recorded by Lucretius[73\9] as
the opinion of Anaxagoras, that food contains some bony,
some fleshy particles, some of blood, and so on. We might,
on this supposition, conceive that the mechanism of the body
appropriates each kind of particle to its suitable place.

[Note 73\9: Lucr. i. 855. Nunc et Anaxagoræ scrutemur
ὁμοιομέρειαν.]

But it is easy to refute this essay at philosophizing (as
Lucretius refutes it) by remarking that we do not find milk
in grass, or blood in fruit, though such food gives such
products in cattle and in men. In opposition to this
'Homoiomereia,' the opinion that is forced upon us by the
facts is, that the process of nutrition is not a selection
merely, but an _assimilation_; the organized system does not
_find_, but _make_, the additions to its structure. {205}

3. _Buffon._--This notion of _assimilation_ may be variously
expressed and illustrated; and all that we can do here, in
order to show the progress of thought, is to adduce the
speculations of those writers who have been most successful
in seizing and marking its peculiar character. Buffon may be
taken as an example of the philosophy of his time on this
subject. 'The body of the animal,' says he[74\9], 'is a kind
of _interior mould_, in which the matter subservient to its
increase is modelled and assimilated to the whole, in such a
way that, without occasioning any change in the order and
proportion of the parts, there results an augmentation in
each part taken separately. This increase, this development,
if we would have a _clear idea_ of it, how can we obtain it,
except by considering the body of the animal, and each of
the parts which is to be developed, as so many interior
moulds which only receive the accessory matter in the order
which results from the position of all their parts? This
development cannot take place, as persons sometimes persuade
themselves, by an addition to the outside; on the contrary,
it goes on by an intimate susception which penetrates the
mass; for, in the part thus developed, the size increases in
all parts proportionally, so that the new matter must
penetrate it in all its dimensions: and it is quite
necessary that this penetration of substance must take place
in a certain order, and according to a certain measure; for
if this were not so, some parts would develope themselves
more than others. Now what can there be which shall
prescribe such a rule to the accessory matter except the
_interior mould_?'

[Note 74\9: _Hist. Nat._ b. i. c. iii.]

To speak of a _mould_ simply, would convey a coarse
mechanical notion, which could not be received as any useful
contribution to physiological speculation. But this
_interior_ mould is, of course, to be understood
figuratively, not as an assemblage of cavities, but as a
collection of laws, shaping, directing, and modifying the
new matter; giving it not only form, but motion {206} and
activity, such as belong to the parts of an organic being.

4. It must be allowed, however, that even with this
explanation, the comparison is very loose and insufficient.
A _mould_ may be permitted to mean a collection of laws, but
still it can convey no conception except that of laws
regulated by relations of space; and such a conception is
very plainly quite inadequate to the purpose. What can we
conceive of the interior mould by which chyle is separated
from the aliments at the pores of the lacteals, or tears
secreted in the lacrymatory gland?

An additional objection to this mode of expression of Buffon
is, that it suggests to us only a single marked change in
the assimilated matter, not a continuous series of changes.
Yet the animal fluids and other substances are, in fact,
undergoing a constant series of changes. Food becomes chyme,
and chyme becomes chyle; chyle is poured into the blood;
from the blood secretions take place, as the bile; the bile
is poured into the digestive canal, and a portion of the
matter previously introduced is rejected out of the system.
Here we must have a series of 'interior moulds;' and these
must impress matter at its ejection from the organic system
as well as at its reception. But, moreover, it is probable
that none of the above transformations are quite abrupt.
Change is going on between the beginning and the end of each
stage of the nutritive circulation. To express the laws of
this continuous change, the image of an interior mould is
quite unsuited. We must seek a better mode of conception.

5. Vegetable and animal nutrition is, as we have said, a
constant circulation. The matter so assumed is not all
retained: a perpetual subtraction accompanies a perpetual
addition. There is an excretion as well as an
intussusception. The matter which is assumed by the living
creature is retained only for a while, and is then parted
with. The individual is the same, but its parts are in a
perpetual flux: they come and go. For a time the matter
which belongs to the organic body is bound to it by certain
laws: but before it is thus bound, and {207} after it is
loose, this matter may circulate about the universe in any
other form. Life consists in a permanent influence over a
perpetually changing set of particles.

_Cuvier._--This condition also has been happily expressed,
by means of a comparison, by another great naturalist. 'If,'
says Cuvier[75\9], 'if, in order to obtain a just idea of
the essence of life, we consider it in the beings where its
effects are most simple, we shall soon perceive that it
consists in the faculty which belongs to certain bodily
combinations to continue during a determinate time under a
determinate form; constantly attracting into their
composition a part of the surrounding substances, and giving
up in return some part of their own substance.

[Note 75\9: _Règne Animal_, i. 11.]

'Life is thus a _vortex_, more or less rapid, more or less
complex, which has a constant direction, and which always
carries along its stream particles of the same kinds; but in
which the individual particles are constantly entering in
and departing out; so that the _form_ of the living body is
more essential to it than its matter.

'So long as this motion subsists, the body in which it takes
place is _alive_; it _lives_. When the motion stops finally,
the body _dies_. After death, the elements which compose the
body, given up to the ordinary chemical affinities, soon
separate, and the body which was alive is dissolved.'

This notion of a vortex[76\9] which is permanent while the
matter which composes it constantly changes,--of peculiar
forces which act in this vortex so long as it exists, and
which give place to chemical forces when {208} the
circulatory motion ceases,--appears to express some of the
leading conditions of the assimilative power of living
things in a simple and general manner, and thus tends to
give distinctness to the notion of this vital function.

[Note 76\9: The definition of life given by M. de Blainville
appears to me not to differ essentially from that of Cuvier:
'Un corps vivant est une sorte de foyer chimique où il-y-a à
tous momens apport de nouvelles molecules et départ de
molecules anciennes; où la composition n'est jamais fixe (si
ce n'est d'un certain nombre de parties veritablement mortes
ou en depôt), mais toujours pour ainsi dire _in nisu_, d'où
mouvement plus ou moins lent et quelquefois
chaleur.'--_Principes d'Anat._ 1822, t. i. p. 16.]

6. But we may observe that this notion of a Vortex is still
insufficient. Particles are not only taken into the system
and circulated through it for a time, but, as we have seen,
they are altered in character in a manner to us
unintelligible, both at their first admission into the
system and at every period of their progress through it. In
the vortex each particle is constantly _transformed_ while
it whirls.

It may be said, perhaps, that this transformation of the
kinds of matter may be conceived to be merely a new
arrangement of their particles, and that thus all the
changes which take place in the circulating substances are
merely so many additional windings in the course of the
whirling current. But to say this, is to take for granted
the atomic hypothesis in its rudest form. What right have we
to assume that blood and tears, bile and milk, consist of
like particles of matter differently arranged? What can
arrangement, a mere relation of space, do towards explaining
such differences? Is not the insufficiency, the absurdity of
such an assumption proved by the whole course of science?
Are not even chemical changes, according to the best views
hitherto obtained, something more than a mere new
arrangement of particles? And are not vital as much beyond
chemical, as chemical are beyond geometrical modifications?
It is not enough, then, to conceive life as a vortex. The
particles which are taken into the organic frame do more
than circulate there. They are, at every point of their
circulation, acted upon by laws of an unknown kind, changing
the nature of the substance which they compose. Life is a
vortex in which vital forces act at every point of the
stream: it is not only a current of whirling _matter_, but a
cycle of recurring _powers_.

7. _Matter and Form._--This image of a vortex is closely
connected with the representation of life offered {209} us
by writers of a very different school. In Schelling's
_Lectures on Academic Study_, he takes a survey of the
various branches of human knowledge, determining according
to his own principles the shape which each science must
necessarily assume. The peculiar character of organization,
according to him[77\9], is that the matter is only an
accident of the thing itself, and the organization consists
in Form alone. But this Form, by its very opposition to
Matter, ceases to be independent of it, and is only ideally
separable. In organization, therefore, substance and
accident, matter and form, are completely identical[78\9].
This notion, that in organization the Form is essential and
the Matter accidental, or, in other words, that the Form is
permanent and the Matter fluctuating and transitory, agrees,
if taken in the grossest sense of matter and form, with
Cuvier's image of a Vortex. In a whirlpool, or in a
waterfall, the form remains, the matter constantly passes
away and is renewed. But we have already seen[79\9] that in
metaphysical speculations in which matter and form are
opposed, the word form is used in a far more extensive sense
than that which denotes a relation of space. It may indeed
designate any change which matter can undergo; and we may
very allowably say that food and blood are the same matter
under different _forms_. Hence if we assert that _Life is a
constant Form of a circulating Matter_, we express Cuvier's
notion in a mode free from the false suggestion which
'Vortex' conveys.

[Note 77\9: Lect. xiii. p. 288.]

[Note 78\9: I have not translated Schelling's words, but
given their import as far as I could.]

[Note 79\9: Book i.]

8. We may, however, still add something to this account of
life. The circulating parts of the system not only
circulate, but they form the non-circulating parts. Or
rather, there are no non-circulating parts: all portions of
the frame circulate more or less rapidly. The food which we
take circulates rapidly in the fluids, more slowly in the
flesh, still more slowly in the bones; but in all these
parts it is taken into the system, {210} retained there for
some time, and finally replaced by other matter. But while
it remains in the body, it exercises upon the other
circulating parts the powers by which their motion is
produced. Nutriment forms and supports the organs, and the
organs carry fresh nutriment to its destination. The
peculiar forces of the living body, and its peculiar
structure, are thus connected in an indescribable manner.
The forces produce the structure; the structure, again, is
requisite for the exertion of the forces. The Idea of an
Organic or Living Being includes this peculiar
condition--that its construction and powers are such, that
it constantly appropriates to itself new portions of
substance which, so appropriated, become indistinguishable
parts of the whole, and serve to carry on subsequently the
same functions by which they were assimilated. And thus
_Organic Life is a constant Form of a circulating Matter, in
which the Matter and the Form determine each other by
peculiar laws_ (_that is, by Vital Forces_).


SECT. III.--_Attempts to conceive the forces of Assimilation
and Secretion._

9. I have already stated that in our attempts to obtain
clear and scientific Ideas of Vital Forces, we have, in the
first place, to seek to understand the course of change and
motion in each function, so as to see at what points of the
process peculiar causes come into play; and next, to
endeavour to obtain some insight into the peculiar character
and attributes of these causes. Having spoken of the first
part of this mode of investigation in regard to the general
nutrition of organic bodies, I must now say a few words on
the second part.

The Forces here spoken of are _Vital_ Forces. From what has
been said, we may see in some measure the distinction
between forces of this kind and mechanical or chemical
forces; the latter tend constantly to produce a final
condition, after which there is no further cause of change:
mechanical forces tend to produce equilibrium; chemical
forces tend to produce {211} composition or decomposition;
and this point once reached, the matter in which these
forces reside is altogether inert. But an organic body tends
to a constant motion, and the highest activity of organic
forces shows itself in continuous change. Again, in
mechanical and chemical forces, the force of any aggregate
is the sum of the forces of all the parts: the sum of the
forces corresponds to the sum of the matter. But in organic
bodies, the amount of effect does not depend on the matter,
but on the form: the particles lose their separate energy,
in order to share in that of the system; they are not added,
they are _assimilated_.

10. It is difficult to say whether anything has been gained
to science by the various attempts to assign a fixed _name_
to the vital force which is thus the immediate cause of
Assimilation. It has been called _Organic Attraction_ or
_Vital Attraction_, _Organic Affinity_ or _Vital Affinity_,
being thus compared with mechanical Attraction or chemical
Affinity. But, perhaps, as the process is certainly neither
mechanical nor chemical, it is desirable to appropriate to
it a peculiar name; and the name _Assimilation_, or _Organic
Assimilation_, by the usage of good biological writers, is
generally employed for this purpose, and may be taken as the
standard name of this Vital Force. To illustrate this, I
will quote a passage from the excellent _Elements of
Physiology_ of Professor Müller. 'In the process of
nutrition is exemplified the fundamental principle of
_organic assimilation_. Each elementary particle of an organ
attracts similar particles from the blood, and by the
changes it produces in them, causes them to participate in
the vital principle of the organ itself. Nerves take up
nervous substance, muscles, muscular substance: even morbid
structures have the assimilating power; warts in the skin
grow with their own peculiar structure; in an ulcer, the
base and border are nourished in a way conformable to the
mode of action and secretion determined by the disease.'

11. The Force of Organic Assimilation spoken of in the last
paragraph denotes peculiarly the force by which each organ
appropriates to itself a part of the {212} nutriment
received into the system, and thus is maintained and
augmented with the growth of the whole. But the growth of
the solid parts is only one portion of the function of
nutrition; besides this, we must consider the motion and
changes of the fluids, and must ask what kind of forces may
be conceived to produce these. What are the powers by which
chyle is _absorbed_ from the food, by which bile is
_secreted_ from the blood, by which the circulating _motion_
of these and all other fluids of the body are constantly
maintained? To the questions,--What are the forces by which
_absorption_, _secretion_, and the _vital motions_, of
fluids are produced?--no satisfactory answer has been
returned. Yet still some steps have been made, which it may
be instructive to point out.

12. In _Absorption_ it would appear that a part of the
agency is inorganic; for not only dead membranes, but
inorganic substances, absorb fluids, and even absorb them
with elective forces, according to the ingredients, of the
fluid. A force which is of this kind, and which has been
termed _Endosmose_, has been found to produce very curious
effects. When a membrane separates two fluids, holding in
solution different ingredients, the fluids pass through the
membrane in an imperceptible manner, and mix or exchange
their elements. The force which produces these effects is
capable of balancing a very considerable pressure. It
appears, moreover, to depend, at least among other causes,
upon attractions operating between the elements of the
solids and the fluids, as well as between the different
fluids; and this force, though thus apparently of a
mechanical and chemical nature, probably has considerable
influence in vital phenomena.

13. But still, though Endosmose may account in part for
absorption in some cases, it is certain that there is some
other vital force at work in this process. There must be, as
Müller says[80\9], 'an organic attraction of a kind hitherto
unknown.' 'If absorption,' he adds[81\9], is to be explained
in a manner analogous to {213} the laws of endosmose, it
must be supposed that a chemical affinity, resulting from
the vital process itself, is exerted between the chyme in
the intestines and the chyle in the lacteals, by which the
chyle is enabled to attract the chyme without being itself
attracted by it. But such affinity or attraction would be of
a vital nature, since it does not exist after death.'

[Note 80\9: _Physiology_, p. 299.]

[Note 81\9: _Ib._ p. 301.]

14. If the force of absorption be thus mysterious in its
nature, the force of _Secretion_ is still more so. In this
case we have an organ filled with a fine net-work of
blood-vessels, and in the cavities of some _gland_, or open
part, we have a new fluid formed, of a kind altogether
different from the blood itself. It is easily shown that
this cannot be explained by any action of pores or capillary
tubes. But what conception can we form of the forces by
which such a change is produced? Here, again, I shall borrow
the expressions of Müller, as presenting the last result of
modern physiology. He says[82\9], 'The more probable
supposition is, that by virtue of imbibition, or the general
organic porosity, the fluid portion of the blood becomes
diffused through the tissue of the secreting organ; that the
external surface of the glandular canals exerts a chemical
attraction on the elements of the fluid, infusing into them
at the same time a tendency to unite in new combinations;
and then repels them in a manner which is certainly quite
inexplicable, towards the inner surface of the secreting
membrane, or glandular canals.' 'Although quite unsupported
by facts,' he adds, 'this theory of attraction and repulsion
is not without its analogy in physical phenomena; and it
would appear that very similar powers effect the elimination
of the fluid in secretion, and cause it to be taken up by
the lymphatics in absorption.' He elsewhere says[83\9],
'Absorption seems to depend on an attraction the nature of
which is unknown, but of which the very counterpart, as it
were, takes place in secretion; the fluids altered by the
secreting action being repelled towards the free side or
open surface only of the {214} secreting membranes, and then
pressed forwards by the successive portions of the fluids
secreted.'

[Note 82\9: _Physiology_, p. 464.]

[Note 83\9:  _Ib._ p. 301.]

15. With regard to the forces which produce the _Motion_ of
absorbed or secreted fluids along their destined course, it
may be seen, from the last quoted sentence, that the same
vital force which changes the nature, also produces the
movement of the substance. The fluids are pressed forwards
by the successive portions absorbed or secreted. That this
is the sole cause, or at least a very powerful cause, of the
motion of the nutritive fluids in organic bodies, is easily
shown by experience. It is found[84\9] that the organs which
effect the ascent of the sap in trees during the spring are
the terminal parts of the roots; that the whole force by
which the sap is impelled upwards is the _vis a tergo_, as
it has been called, the force pushing from behind, exerted
in the roots. And thus the force which produces this motion
is exerted exactly at those points where the organic body
selects from the contiguous mass those particles which it
absorbs and appropriates. And the same may most probably be
taken for the cause of the motion of the lymph and chyle; at
least, Müller says[85\9] that no other motive power has been
detected which impels those fluids in their course.

[Note 84\9: Müller, p. 300.]

[Note 85\9: _Ib._ p. 254.]

Thus, though we must confess the Vital Force concerned in
Assimilation and Secretion to be unknown in its nature, we
still obtain a view of some of the attributes which it
involves. It has mechanical efficacy, producing motions,
often such as would require great mechanical force. But it
exerts at the same point both an attraction and a repulsion,
attracting matter on one side, and repelling it on the
other; and in this circumstance it differs entirely from
mechanical forces. Again, it is not only mechanical but
chemical, producing a complete change in the nature of the
substance on which it acts; to which we must add that the
changes produced by the vital forces are such as, for the
most part, our artificial chemistry {215} cannot imitate.
But, again, by the action of the vital force at any point of
an organ, not only are fluids made to pass, and changed as
they pass, but the organ itself is maintained and
strengthened, so as to continue or to increase its
operation: and thus the vital energy supports its activity
by its action, and is augmented by being exerted.

We have thus endeavoured to obtain a view of some of the
peculiar characters which belong to the Force of Organic
Assimilation;--the Force by which life is kept up, conceived
in the most elementary form to which we can reduce it by
observation and contemplation. It appears that it is a force
which not only produces motion and chemical change, but also
_vitalizes_ the matter on which it acts, giving to it the
power of producing like changes on other matter, and so on
indefinitely. It not only circulates the particles of
matter, but puts them in a stream of which the flow is
development as well as movement.

The force of Organic Assimilation being thus conceived, it
becomes instructive to compare it with the force concerned
in Generation, which we shall therefore endeavour to do.


SECT. IV.--_Attempts to conceive the Process of Generation._

16. At first sight the function of Nutrition appears very
different from the function of Generation. In the former
case we have merely the existing organs maintained or
enlarged, and their action continued; in the latter, we have
a new individual produced and extricated from the parent.
The term _Reproduction_ has, no doubt, been applied, by
different writers, to both these functions;--to the
processes by which an organ when mutilated, is restored by
the forces of the living body, and to the process by which a
new generation of individuals is produced which may be
considered as taking the place of the old generation, as
these are gradually removed by death. But these are
obviously different senses of the word. In the latter case,
the {216} term _Reproduction_ is figuratively used; for the
_same_ individuals are not reproduced; but the species is
kept up by the propagation of new individuals, as in
nutrition the organ is kept up by the assimilation of new
matter. To escape ambiguity, I shall avoid using the term
_Reproduction_ in the sense of _Propagation_.

17. In Nutrition, as we have seen, the matter, which from
being at first extraneous, is appropriated by the living
system, and directed to the sustentation of the organs,
undergoes a series of changes of which the detail eludes our
observation and apprehension. The nutriment which we receive
contributes to the growth of flesh and bone, viscera and
organs of sense. But we cannot trace in its gradual changes
a visible preparation for its final office. The portion of
matter which is destined to repair the waste of the eye or
the skin, is not found assuming a likeness to the parts of
the eye or the structure of the skin, as it comes near the
place where it is moulded into its ultimate form. The new
parts are insinuated among the old ones, in an obscure and
imperceptible matter. We can trace their progress only by
their effects. The organs _are_ nourished, and that is
almost all we can learn: we cannot discover _how_ this is
done. We cannot follow nature through a series of manifest
preparations and processes to this result.

18. In Generation the case is quite different. The young
being is formed gradually and by a series of distinguishable
processes. It is included within the parent before it is
extruded, and approaches more or less to the likeness of the
parent before it is detached. While it is still an embryo,
it shares in the nutriment which circulates through the
system of the mother; but its destination is already clear.
While the new and the old parts, in every other portion of
the mother, are undistinguishably mixed together, this new
part, the fœtus, is clearly distinct from the rest of the
system, and becomes rapidly more and more so, as the time
goes on. And thus there is formed, not a new part, but a new
whole; it is not an organ which is kept up, but an offspring
which is prepared. The progeny is {217} included in the
parent, and is gradually fitted to be separated from it. The
young is at first only the development of a part of the
organization of the mother;--of a germ, an ovule. But it is
not developed like other organs, retaining its general form.
It does not become merely a larger bud, a larger ovule; it
is entirely changed; it becomes--from a bud--a blossom, a
flower, a fruit, a seed; from an ovule it becomes an egg, a
chick, a bird; or it may be, a fœtus, a child. The original
rudiment is not merely nourished, but unfolded and
transformed through the most marked and remote changes,
gradually tending to the form of the new individual.

19. But this is not all. The fœtus is, as we have said, a
development of a portion of the mother's organization. But
the fœtus (supposing it female) is a likeness of the mother.
The mother, even before conception, contains within herself
the germs of her progeny; the female fœtus, therefore, at a
certain stage of development, will contain also the germs of
possible progeny; and thus we may have the germs of future
generations, pre-existing and included successively within
one another. And this state of things, which thus suggests
itself to us as possible, is found to be the case in facts
which observation supplies. Anatomists have traced ovules in
the unborn fœtus, and thus we have three generations
included one within another.

20. Supposing we were to stop here, the process of
propagation might appear to be altogether different from
that of nutrition. The latter, as we have seen, may be in
some measure illustrated by the image of a _vortex_; the
former has been represented by the image of a series of
germs, _sheathed_ one within another successively, and this
without any limit. This view of the subject has been termed
the doctrine of the _Pre-existence of germs_; and has been
designated by German writers by a term 'Einschachtelungs-theorie'
descriptive of the successive sheathing of which I have
spoken. Imitating this term, we may call it _the Theory of
successive inclusion_. It has always had many {218}
adherents; and has been, perhaps, up to the present time,
the most current opinion on the subject of generation.
Cuvier inclines to this opinion[86\9]. 'Fixed forms
perpetuating themselves by generation distinguish the
species of living things. These forms do not produce
themselves, do not change themselves. Life supposes them to
exist already; its flame can be lighted only in organization
previously prepared; and the most profound meditations and
the most delicate researches terminate alike in the mystery
of the _pre-existence of germs_.'

[Note 86\9: _Règne Animal_, p. 20.]

21. Yet this doctrine is full of difficulty. It is, as
Cuvier says, a mysterious view of the subject;--so
mysterious, that it can hardly be accepted by us, who seek
distinct conceptions as the basis of our philosophy. Can it
be true, not only that the germ of the offspring is
originally included in the parent, but also the germs of
_its_ progeny, and so on without limit:--so that each
fruitful individual contains in itself an infinite
collection of future possible individuals;--a reserve of
infinite succeeding generations? This is hard to admit. Have
we no alternative? What is the opposite doctrine?

22. The opposite doctrine deserves at least some notice. It
extends, to the production of a new individual, the
conception of growth by nutrition. According to this view,
we suppose propagation to take place, not as in the view
just spoken of, by inclusion and extrusion, but by
assimilation and development;--not by the material
pre-existence of germs, but by the communication of vital
forces to new matter. This opinion appears to be entertained
by some of the most eminent physiologists of the present
time. Thus, Müller says, 'The organic force is also
creative. The organic force which resides in the whole, and
on which the existence of each part depends, has also the
property of generating, from organic matter, the parts
necessary to the whole.' Life, he adds, is not merely a
harmony of the {219} parts. On the contrary, the harmonious
action of the parts subsists only by the influence of a
force pervading all parts of the body. 'This force exists
before the harmonizing parts, which are in fact formed by it
during the development of the embryo.' And again; 'The
creative force exists in the germ, and creates in it the
essential force of the future animal. The germ is
_potentially_ the whole animal: during the development of
the germ the parts which constitute the actual whole are
produced.'

23. In this view, we extend to the reproduction of an
individual the same conception of organic assimilation which
we have already arrived at, as the best notion we can form
of the force by which the reproduction and sustentation of
parts takes place. And is not such an extension really very
consistent? If a living thing can appropriate to itself
extraneous matter, invest it with its own functions, and
thus put it in the stream of constant development, may we
not conceive the development of a new _whole_ to take place
in this way as well as of a _part_? If the organized being
can infuse into new matter its vital forces, is there any
contradiction in supposing this infusion to take place in
the full measure which is requisite for the production of a
new individual? The force of organic assimilation is
transferred to the very matter on which it acts; it may be
transferred so that the operation of the forces produces not
only an organ, but a system of organs.

24. This identification of the forces which operate in
Nutrition and Generation may at first seem forced and
obscure, in consequence of the very strong apparent
differences of the two processes which we have already
noticed. But this defect in the doctrine is remedied by the
consideration of what may be considered as intermediate
cases. It is not true that, in the nutrition of special
organs, the matter is always conveyed to its ultimate
destination without being on its way moulded into the form
which it is finally to bear, as the embryo is moulded into
the form of the {220} future individual. On the contrary,
there are cases in which the waste of the organs is supplied
by the growth of new ones, which are prepared and formed
before they are used, just as the offspring is prepared and
formed before it is separated from the parent. This is the
case with the teeth of many animals, and especially with the
teeth of animals of the crocodile kind. Young teeth grow
near the root of the old ones, like buds on the stem of a
plant; and as these become fully developed, they take the
place of the parent tooth when that dies and is cast away.
And these new teeth in their turn are succeeded by others
which germinate from them. Several generations of such
teeth, it is said as many as four, have been detected by
anatomists, visibly existing at the same time; just as
several generations of germs of individuals have been, as we
already stated, observed included in one another. But this
case of the teeth appears to show very strikingly how
insufficient such observations are to establish the doctrine
of successive inclusion, or of the pre-existence of germs.
Are we to suppose that every crocodile's tooth includes in
itself the germs of an infinite number of possible teeth, as
in the theory of pre-existing germs every individual
includes an infinite number of individuals? If this be true
of teeth, we must suppose that organ to follow laws entirely
different from almost every other organ; for no one would
apply to the other organs in general such a theory of
reproduction. But if such a theory be not maintained
respecting the teeth, how can we maintain the theory of the
pre-existing germs of individuals, which has no
recommendation except that of accounting for exactly the
same phenomena?

It would seem, then, that we are, by the closest
consideration of the subject, led to conceive the forces by
which generation is produced, as forces which vitalize
certain portions of matter, and thus prepare them for
development according to organic forms; and thus the
conception of this Generative Force is identified with the
conception of the Force of Organic Assimilation, to {221}
which we were led by the consideration of the process of
nutrition.

I shall not attempt to give further distinctness and fixity
to this conception of one of the vital forces; but I shall
proceed to exemplify the same analysis of life by some
remarks upon another Vital Process, and the Forces of which
it exhibits the operation.



{{222}}
