CHAPTER VI.

THE FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS ARE NOT DERIVED FROM EXPERIENCE.


1. BY the course of speculation contained in the last three
Chapters, we are again led to the conclusion which we have
already stated, that our knowledge contains an ideal
element, and that this element is not derived from
experience. For we have seen that there are propositions
which are known to be necessarily true; and that such
knowledge is not, and cannot be, obtained by mere
observation of actual facts. It has been shown, also, that
these necessary truths are the results of certain
fundamental ideas, such as those of space, number, and the
like. Hence it follows inevitably that these ideas and
others of the same kind are not derived from experience. For
these ideas possess a power of infusing into their
developments that very necessity which experience can in no
way bestow. This power they do not borrow from the external
world, but possess by their own nature. Thus we unfold out
of the Idea of Space the propositions of geometry, which are
plainly truths of the most rigorous necessity and
universality. But if the idea of space were merely collected
from observation of the external world, it could never
enable or entitle us to assert such propositions: it could
never authorize us to say that not merely some lines, but
_all_ lines, not only have, but _must_ have, those
properties which geometry teaches. Geometry in every
proposition speaks a language which experience never dares
to utter; and indeed of which she but half comprehends the
meaning. Experience sees that the assertions are true, but
she sees not how profound and absolute is their truth. {77}
She unhesitatingly assents to the laws which geometry
delivers, but she does not pretend to see the origin of
their obligation. She is always ready to acknowledge the
sway of pure scientific principles as a matter of fact, but
she does not dream of offering her opinion on their
authority as a matter of right; still less can she justly
claim to be herself the source of that authority.

David Hume asserted[7\1], that we are incapable of seeing in
any of the appearances which the world presents anything of
necessary connexion; and hence he inferred that our
knowledge cannot extend to any such connexion. It will be
seen from what we have said that we assent to his remark as
to the fact, but we differ from him altogether in the
consequence to be drawn from it. Our inference from Hume's
observation is, not the truth of his conclusion, but the
falsehood of his premises;--not that, therefore, we can know
nothing of natural connexion, but that, therefore, we have
some other source of knowledge than experience:--not, that
we can have no idea of connexion or causation, because, in
his language, it cannot be the copy of an impression; but
that since we have such an idea, our ideas are not the
copies of our impressions.

[Note 7\1: _Essays_, vol. ii. p. 70.]

Since it thus appears that our fundamental ideas are not
acquired from the external world by our senses, but have
some separate and independent origin, it is important for us
to examine their nature and properties, as they exist in
themselves; and this it will be our business to do through a
portion of the following pages. But it may be proper first
to notice one or two objections which may possibly occur to
some readers.

2. It may be said that without the use of our senses, of
sight and touch, for instance, we should never have any idea
of space; that this idea, therefore, may properly be said to
be derived from those senses. And to this I reply, by
referring to a parallel instance. Without light we should
have no perception of visible {78} figure; yet the power of
perceiving visible figure cannot be said to be derived from
the light, but resides in the structure of the eye. If we
had never seen objects in the light, we should be quite
unaware that we possessed a power of vision; yet we should
not possess it the less on that account. If we had never
exercised the senses of sight and touch (if we can conceive
such a state of human existence) we know not that we should
be conscious of an idea of space. But the light reveals to
us at the same time the existence of external objects and
our own power of seeing. And in a very similar manner, the
exercise of our senses discloses to us, at the same time,
the external world, and our own ideas of space, time, and
other conditions, without which the external world can
neither be observed nor conceived. That light is necessary
to vision, does not, in any degree, supersede the importance
of a separate examination of the laws of our visual powers,
if we would understand the nature of our own bodily
faculties and the extent of the information they can give
us. In like manner, the fact that intercourse with the
external world is necessary for the conscious employment of
our ideas, does not make it the less essential for us to
examine those ideas in their most intimate structure, in
order that we may understand the grounds and limits of our
knowledge. Even before we see a single object, we have a
faculty of vision; and in like manner, if we can suppose a
man who has never contemplated an object in space or time,
we must still assume him to have the faculties of
entertaining the ideas of space and time, which faculties
are called into play on the very first occasion of the use
of the senses.

3. In answer to such remarks as the above, it has sometimes
been said that to assume separate faculties in the mind for
so many different processes of thought, is to give a mere
verbal explanation, since we learn nothing concerning our
idea of space by being told that we have a faculty of
forming such an idea. It has been said that this course of
explanation leads to an endless multiplication of elements
in man's nature, without any advantage to our knowledge of
his true {79} constitution. We may, it is said, assert man
to have a faculty of walking, of standing, of breathing, of
speaking; but what, it is asked, is gained by such
assertions? To this I reply, that we undoubtedly have such
faculties as those just named; that it is by no means
unimportant to consider them; and that the main question in
such cases is, whether they are separate and independent
faculties, or complex and derivative ones; and, if the
latter be the case, what are the simple and original
faculties by the combination of which the others are
produced. In walking, standing, breathing, for instance, a
great part of the operation can be reduced to one single
faculty; the voluntary exercise of our muscles. But in
breathing this does not appear to be the whole of the
process. The operation is, in part at least, involuntary;
and it has been held that there is a certain sympathetic
action of the nerves, in addition to the voluntary agency
which they transmit, which is essential to the function. To
determine whether or no this sympathetic faculty is real and
distinct, and if so, what are its laws and limits, is
certainly a highly philosophical inquiry, and well deserving
the attention which has been bestowed upon it by eminent
physiologists. And just of the same nature are the inquiries
with respect to man's intellectual constitution, on which we
propose to enter. For instance, man has a faculty of
apprehending time, and a faculty of reckoning numbers: are
these distinct, or is one faculty derived from the other? To
analyze the various combinations of our ideas and
observations into the original faculties which they involve;
to show that these faculties are original, and not capable
of further analysis: to point out the characters which mark
these faculties and lead to the most important features of
our knowledge;--these are the kind of researches on which we
have now to enter, and these, we trust, will be found to be
far from idle or useless parts of our plan. If we succeed in
such attempts, it will appear that it is by no means a
frivolous or superfluous step to distinguish separate
faculties in the mind. If we do not learn much by being told
that we have a faculty {80} of forming the idea of space, we
at least, by such a commencement, circumscribe a certain
portion of the field of our investigations, which, we shall
afterwards endeavour to show, requires and rewards a special
examination. And though we shall thus have to separate the
domain of our philosophy into many provinces, these are, as
we trust it will appear, neither arbitrarily assigned, nor
vague in their limits, nor infinite in number.



{{81}}
