CHAPTER III.

OF THE DOCTRINE OF CATASTROPHES AND THE DOCTRINE OF
UNIFORMITY.


1. _Doctrine of Catastrophes._--I HAVE already shown, in the
History of Geology, that the attempts to frame a theory of
the earth have brought into view two completely opposite
opinions:--one, which represents the course of nature as
_uniform_ through all ages, the causes which produce change
having had the same intensity in former times which they
have at the present day;--the other opinion, which sees, in
the present condition of things, evidences of
_catastrophes_;--changes of a more sweeping kind, and
produced by more powerful agencies than those which occur in
recent times. Geologists who held the latter opinion,
maintained that the forces which have elevated the Alps or
the Andes to their present height could not have been any
forces which are now in action: they pointed to vast masses
of strata hundreds of miles long, thousands of feet thick,
thrown into highly-inclined positions, fractured,
dislocated, crushed: they remarked that upon the shattered
edges of such strata they found enormous accumulations of
fragments and rubbish, rounded by the action of water, so as
to denote ages of violent aqueous action: they conceived
that they saw instances in which whole mountains of rock in
a state of igneous fusion, must have burst the earth's crust
from below: they found that in the course of the revolutions
by which one stratum of rock was placed upon another, the
whole collection of animal species which tenanted the earth
and the seas had been removed, and a new set of living
things introduced in its place: finally, they found, above
all the strata, {285} vast masses of sand and gravel
containing bones of animals, and apparently the work of a
mighty deluge. With all these proofs before their eyes, they
thought it impossible not to judge that the agents of change
by which the world was urged from one condition to another
till it reached its present state must have been more
violent, more powerful, than any which we see at work around
us. They conceived that the evidence of 'catastrophes' was
irresistible.

2. _Doctrine of Uniformity._--I need not here repeat the
narrative (given in the History[14\10]) of the process by
which this formidable array of proofs was, in the minds of
some eminent geologists, weakened, and at last overcome.
This was done by showing that the sudden breaks in the
succession of strata were apparent only, the discontinuity
of the series which occurred in one country being removed by
terms interposed in another locality:--by urging that the
total effect produced by existing causes, taking into
account the accumulated result of long periods, is far
greater than a casual speculator would think possible:--by
making it appear that there are in many parts of the world
evidences of a slow and imperceptible rising of the land
since it was the habitation of now existing species:--by
proving that it is not universally true that the strata
separated in time by supposed catastrophes contain distinct
species of animals:--by pointing out the limited fields of
the supposed diluvial action:--and finally, by remarking
that though the _creation_ of species is a mystery, the
_extinction_ of species is going on in our own day.
Hypotheses were suggested, too, by which it was conceived
that the change of climate might be explained, which, as the
consideration of the fossil remains seemed to show, must
have taken place between the ancient and the modern times.
In this manner the whole evidence of catastrophes was
explained away: the notion of a series of paroxysms of
violence in the causes of change was represented as a
delusion arising from our {286} contemplating short periods
only, in the action of present causes: length of time was
called in to take the place of intensity of force: and it
was declared that Geology need not despair of accounting for
the revolutions of the earth, as Astronomy accounts for the
revolutions of the heavens, by the universal action of
causes which are close at hand to us, operating through time
and space without variation or decay.

[Note 14\10: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xviii. c. viii. sect. 2.]

An antagonism of opinions, somewhat of the same kind as
this, will be found to manifest itself in the other
Palætiological Sciences as well as in Geology; and it will
be instructive to endeavour to balance these opposite
doctrines. I will mention some of the considerations which
bear upon the subject in its general form.

3. _Is Uniformity probable à priori?_--The doctrine of
Uniformity in the course of nature has sometimes been
represented by its adherents as possessing a great degree of
_à priori_ probability. It is highly unphilosophical, it has
been urged, to assume that the causes of the geological
events of former times were of a different kind from causes
now in action, if causes of this latter kind can in any way
be made to explain the facts. The analogy of all other
sciences compels us, it was said, to explain phenomena by
known, not by unknown, causes. And on these grounds the
geological teacher recommended[15\10] 'an earnest and
patient endeavour to reconcile the indications of former
change with the evidence of gradual mutations now in
progress.'

[Note 15\10: Lyell, 4th ed. b. iv. c. i. p. 328.]

But on this we may remark, that if by _known_ causes we mean
causes acting with the same intensity which they have had
during historical times, the restriction is altogether
arbitrary and groundless. Let it be granted, for instance,
that many parts of the earth's surface are now undergoing an
imperceptible rise. It is not pretended that the rate of
this elevation is rigorously uniform; what, then, are the
limits of its velocity? Why may it not increase so as to
assume that character of violence which we may term a {287}
_catastrophe_ with reference to all changes hitherto
recorded? Why may not the rate of elevation be such that we
may conceive the strata to assume _suddenly_ a position
nearly vertical? And is it, in fact, easy to conceive a
position of strata nearly vertical, a position which occurs
so frequently, to be _gradually_ assumed? In cases where the
strata are nearly vertical, as in the Isle of Wight, and
hundreds of other places, or where they are actually
inverted, as sometimes occurs, are not the causes which have
produced the effect as truly known causes, as those which
have raised the coasts where we trace the former beach in an
elevated terrace? If the latter case proves _slow_
elevation, does not the former case prove _rapid_ elevation?
In neither case have we any measure of the time employed in
the change; but does not the very nature of the results
enable us to discern, that if one was gradual, the other was
comparatively sudden?

The causes which are now elevating a portion of Scandinavia
can be called known _causes_, only because we know the
_effect_. Are not the causes which have elevated the Alps
and the Andes known causes in the same sense? We know
nothing in either case which confines the intensity of the
force within any limit, or prescribes to it any law of
uniformity. Why, then, should we make a merit of cramping
our speculations by such assumptions? Whether the causes of
change do act uniformly;--whether they oscillate only within
narrow limits;--whether their intensity in former times was
nearly the same as it now is;--these are precisely the
questions which we wish Science to answer to us impartially
and truly: where is then the wisdom of 'an earnest and
patient endeavour' to secure an _affirmative_ reply?

Thus I conceive that the assertion of an _à priori_ claim to
probability and philosophical spirit in favour of the
doctrine of uniformity, is quite untenable. We must learn
from an examination of all the facts, and not from any
assumption of our own, whether the course of nature be
uniform. The limit of intensity being really unknown,
catastrophes are just as probable {288} as uniformity. If a
volcano may repose for a thousand years, and then break out
and destroy a city; why may not another volcano repose for
ten thousand years, and then destroy a continent; or if a
continent, why not the whole habitable surface of the earth?

4. _Cycle of Uniformity indefinite._--But this argument may
be put in another form. When it is said that the course of
nature is uniform, the assertion is not intended to exclude
certain smaller variations of violence and rest, such as we
have just spoken of;--alternations of activity and repose in
volcanoes; or earthquakes, deluges, and storms, interposed
in a more tranquil state of things. With regard to such
occurrences, terrible as they appear at the time, they may
not much affect the average rate of change; there may be a
_cycle_, though an irregular one, of rapid and slow change;
and if such cycles go on succeeding each other, we may still
call the order of nature uniform, notwithstanding the
periods of violence which it involves. The maximum and
minimum intensities of the forces of mutation alternate with
one another; and we may estimate the average course of
nature as that which corresponds to something between the
two extremes.

But if we thus attempt to maintain the uniformity of nature
by representing it as a series of _cycles_, we find that we
cannot discover, in this conception, any solid ground for
excluding catastrophes. What is the length of that cycle,
the repetition of which constitutes uniformity? What
interval from the maximum to the minimum does it admit of?
We may take for our cycle a hundred or a thousand years, but
evidently such a proceeding is altogether arbitrary. We may
mark our cycles by the greatest known paroxysms of volcanic
and terremotive agency, but this procedure is no less
indefinite and inconclusive than the other.

But further; since the cycle in which violence and repose
alternate is thus indefinite in its length and in its range
of activity, what ground have we for assuming more than one
such cycle, extending from the origin of things to the
present time? Why may we not suppose the maximum force of
the causes of change {289} to have taken place at the
earliest period, and the tendency towards the minimum to
have gone on ever since? Or instead of only one cycle, there
may have been several, but of such length that our
historical period forms a portion only of the last;--the
feeblest portion of the latest cycle. And thus violence and
repose may alternate upon a scale of time and intensity so
large, that man's experience supplies no evidence enabling
him to estimate the amount. The course of things is
_uniform_, to an Intelligence which can embrace the
succession of several cycles, but it is _catastrophic_ to
the contemplation of man, whose survey can grasp a part only
of one cycle. And thus the hypothesis of uniformity, since
it cannot exclude degrees of change, nor limit the range of
these degrees, nor define the interval of their recurrence,
cannot possess any essential simplicity which, previous to
inquiry, gives it a claim upon our assent superior to that
of the opposite catastrophic hypothesis.

5. _Uniformitarian Arguments are Negative only._--There is
an opposite tendency in the mode of maintaining the
catastrophist and the uniformitarian opinions, which depends
upon their fundamental principles, and shows itself in all
the controversies between them. The Catastrophist is
affirmative, the Uniformitarian is negative in his
assertions: the former is constantly attempting to construct
a theory; the latter delights in demolishing all theories.
The one is constantly bringing fresh evidence of some great
past event, or series of events, of a striking and definite
kind; his antagonist is at every step explaining away the
evidence, and showing that it proves nothing. One geologist
adduces his proofs of a vast universal deluge; but another
endeavours to show that the proofs do not establish either
the universality or the vastness of such an event. The
inclined broken edges of a certain formation, covered with
their own fragments, beneath superjacent horizontal
deposits, are at one time supposed to prove a catastrophic
breaking up of the earlier strata; but this opinion is
controverted by showing that the same formations, when
pursued into other countries, {290} exhibit a uniform
gradation from the lower to the upper, with no trace of
violence. Extensive and lofty elevations of the coast,
continents of igneous rock, at first appear to indicate
operations far more gigantic than those which now occur; but
attempts are soon made to show that time only is wanting to
enable the present age to rival the past in the production
of such changes. Each new fact adduced by the catastrophist
is at first striking and apparently convincing; but as it
becomes familiar, it strikes the imagination less
powerfully; and the uniformitarian, constantly labouring to
produce some imitation of it by the machinery which he has
so well studied, at last in every case seems to himself to
succeed, so far as to destroy the effect of his opponent's
evidence.

This is so with regard to more remote, as well as with
regard to immediate evidences of change. When it is
ascertained that in every part of the earth's crust the
temperature increases as we descend below the surface, at
first this fact seems to indicate a central heat: and a
central heat naturally suggests an earlier state of the
mass, in which it was incandescent, and from which it is now
cooling. But this original incandescence of the globe of the
earth is manifestly an entire violation of the present
course of things; it belongs to the catastrophist view, and
the advocates of uniformity have to explain it away.
Accordingly, one of them holds that this increase of heat in
descending below the surface may very possibly not go on all
the way to the center. The heat which increases at first as
we descend, may, he conceives, afterwards decrease; and he
suggests causes which may have produced such a succession of
hotter and colder shells within the mass of the earth. I
have mentioned this suggestion in the History of Geology;
and have given my reasons for believing it altogether
untenable[16\10]. Other persons also, desirous of
reconciling this subterraneous heat with the tenet of
uniformity, have {291} offered another suggestion:--that the
warmth or incandescence of the interior parts of the earth
does not arise out of an originally hot condition from which
it is gradually cooling, but results from chemical action
constantly going on among the materials of the earth's
substance. And thus new attempts are perpetually making, to
escape from the cogency of the reasonings which send us
towards an original state of things different from the
present. Those who theorize concerning an origin go on
building up the fabric of their speculations, while those
who think such theories unphilosophical, ever and anon dig
away the foundation of this structure. As we have already
said, the uniformitarian's doctrines are a collection of
negatives.

[Note 16\10: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xviii. c. v. sect. 5, and note.]

This is so entirely the case, that the uniformitarian would
for the most part shrink from maintaining as positive tenets
the explanations which he so willingly uses as instruments
of controversy. He puts forward his suggestions as
difficulties, but he will not stand by them as doctrines.
And this is in accordance with his general tendency; for any
of his hypotheses, if insisted upon as positive theories,
would be found inconsistent with the assertion of
uniformity. For example, the nebular hypothesis appears to
give to the history of the heavens an aspect which
obliterates all special acts of creation, for, according to
that hypothesis, new planetary systems are constantly
forming; but when asserted as the origin of our own solar
system, it brings with it an original incandescence, and an
origin of the organic world. And if, instead of using the
chemical theory of subterraneous heat to neutralize the
evidence of original incandescence, we assert it as a
positive tenet, we can no longer maintain the infinite past
duration of the earth; for chemical forces, as well as
mechanical, tend to equilibrium; and that condition once
attained, their efficacy ceases. Chemical affinities tend to
form new compounds; and though, when many and various
elements are mingled together, the play of synthesis and
analysis may go on for a long time, it must at last end. If,
for instance, a large portion of the earth's mass were
originally pure potassium, we {292} can imagine violent
igneous action to go on so long as any part remained
unoxidized; but when the oxidation of the whole has once
taken place, this action must be at an end; for there is in
the hypothesis no agency which can reproduce the deoxidized
metal. Thus a perpetual motion is impossible in chemistry,
as it is in mechanics; and a theory of constant change
continued through infinite time, is untenable when asserted
upon chemical, no less than upon mechanical principles. And
thus the Skepticism of the uniformitarian is of force only
so long as it is employed against the Dogmatism of the
catastrophist. When the Doubts are erected into Dogmas, they
are no longer consistent with the tenet of Uniformity. When
the Negations become Affirmations, the Negation of an Origin
vanishes also.

6. _Uniformity in the Organic World._--In speaking of the
violent and sudden changes which constitute catastrophes,
our thoughts naturally turn at first to great _mechanical_
and _physical_ effects;--ruptures and displacements of
strata; extensive submersions and emersions of land; rapid
changes of temperature. But the catastrophes which we have
to consider in geology affect the _organic_ as well as the
inorganic world. The sudden extinction of one collection of
species, and the introduction of another in their place, is
a Catastrophe, even if unaccompanied by mechanical violence.
Accordingly, the antagonism of the catastrophist and
uniformitarian schools has shown itself in this department
of the subject, as well as in the other. When geologists had
first discovered that the successive strata are each
distinguished by appropriate organic fossils, they assumed
at once that each of these collections of living things
belonged to a separate creation. But this conclusion, as I
have already said, Sir C. Lyell has attempted to invalidate,
by proving that in the existing order of things, some
species become extinct; and by suggesting it as possible,
that in the same order, it may be true that new species are
from time to time produced, even in the present course of
nature. And in this, as in the other part of the subject, he
calls in {293} the aid of vast periods of time, in order
that the violence of the changes may be softened down: and
he appears disposed to believe that the actual extinction
and creation of species may be so slow as to excite no more
notice than it has hitherto obtained; and yet may be rapid
enough, considering the immensity of geological periods, to
produce such a succession of different collections of
species as we find in the strata of the earth's surface.

7. _Origin of the present Organic World._--The last great
event in the history of the vegetable and animal kingdoms
was that by which their various tribes were placed in their
present seats. And we may form various hypotheses with
regard to the sudden or gradual manner in which we may
suppose this distribution to have taken place. We may assume
that at the beginning of the present order of things, a
stock of each species was placed in the vegetable or animal
_province_ to which it belongs, by some cause out of the
common order of nature; or we may take a uniformitarian view
of the subject, and suppose that the provinces of the
organic world derived their population from some anterior
state of things by the operation of natural causes.

Nothing has been pointed out in the existing order of things
which has any analogy or resemblance, of any valid kind, to
that creative energy which must be exerted in the production
of a new species. And to assume the introduction of new
species as 'a part of the order of nature,' without pointing
out any natural fact with which such an event can be
classed, would be to reject creation by an arbitrary act.
Hence, even on natural grounds, the most intelligible view
of the history of the animal and vegetable kingdoms seems to
be, that each period which is marked by a distinct
collection of species forms a cycle; and that at the
beginning of each such cycle a creative power was exerted,
of a kind to which there was nothing at all analogous in the
succeeding part of the same cycle. If it be urged that in
some cases the same species, or the same genus, runs through
two geological formations, {294} which must, on other
grounds, be referred to different cycles of creative energy,
we may reply that the creation of many new species does not
imply the extinction of all the old ones.

Thus we are led by our reasonings to this view, that the
present order of things was commenced by an act of creative
power entirely different to any agency which has been
exerted since. None of the influences which have modified
the present races of animals and plants since they were
placed in their habitations on the earth's surface can have
had any efficacy in producing them at first. We are
necessarily driven to assume, as the beginning of the
present cycle of organic nature, an event not included in
the course of nature. And we may remark that this necessity
is the more cogent, precisely because other cycles have
preceded the present.

8. _Nebular Origin of the Solar System._--If we attempt to
apply the same antithesis of opinion (the doctrines of
Catastrophe and Uniformity) to the other subjects of
palætiological sciences, we shall be led to similar
conclusions. Thus, if we turn our attention to Astronomical
Palætiology, we perceive that the Nebular Hypothesis has a
uniformitarian tendency. According to this hypothesis the
formation of this our system of sun, planets, and
satellites, was a process of the same kind as those which
are still going on in the heavens. One after another, nebulæ
condense into separate masses, which begin to revolve about
each other by mechanical necessity, and form systems of
which our solar system is a finished example. But we may
remark, that the uniformitarian doctrine on this subject
rests on most unstable foundations. We have as yet only very
vague and imperfect reasonings to show that by such
condensation a _material_ system such as ours could result;
and the introduction of _organized_ beings into such a
material system is utterly out of the reach of our
philosophy. Here again, therefore, we are led to regard the
present order of the world as pointing towards an origin
altogether of a different kind from anything which our
material science can grasp. {295}

9. _Origin of Languages._--We may venture to say that we
should be led to the same conclusion once more, if we were
to take into our consideration those palætiological sciences
which are beyond the domain of matter; for instance, the
History of Languages. We may explain many of the differences
and changes which we become acquainted with, by referring to
the action of causes of change which still operate. But what
glossologist will venture to declare that the efficacy of
such causes has been uniform;--that the influences which
mould a language, or make one language differ from others of
the same stock, operated formerly with no more efficacy than
they exercise now. 'Where,' as has elsewhere been asked, 'do
we now find a language in the process of formation,
unfolding itself in inflexions, terminations, changes of
vowels by grammatical relations, such as characterise the
oldest known languages?' Again, as another proof how little
the history of languages suggests to the philosophical
glossologist the persuasion of a uniform action of the
causes of change, I may refer to the conjecture of Dr.
Prichard, that the varieties of language produced by the
separation of one stock into several, have been greater and
greater as we go backwards in history:--that[17\10] the
formation of sister dialects from a common language (as the
Scandinavian, German, and Saxon dialects from the Teutonic,
or the Gaelic, Erse and Welsh from the Celtic) belongs to
the first millennium before the Christian era; while the
formation of cognate languages of the same family, as the
Sanskrit, Latin, Greek and Gothic, must be placed at least
two thousand years before that era; and at a still earlier
period took place the separation of the great families
themselves, the Indo-European, Semitic, and others, in which
it is now difficult to trace the features of a common
origin. No hypothesis except one of this kind will explain
the existence of the families, groups, and dialects of
languages, which we find in existence. Yet this is an
entirely different view from that which {296} the hypothesis
of the uniform progress of change would give. And thus, in
the earliest stages of man's career, the revolutions of
language must have been, even by the evidence of the
theoretical history of language itself, of an order
altogether different from any which have taken place within
the recent history of man. And we may add, that as the early
stages of the progress of language must have been widely
different from those later ones of which we can in some
measure trace the natural causes, we cannot place the origin
of language in any point of view in which it comes under the
jurisdiction of natural causation at all.

[Note 17\10: _Researches_, ii. 224.]

10. _No Natural Origin discoverable._--We are thus led by a
survey of several of the palætiological sciences to a
confirmation of the principle formerly asserted[18\10], That
in no palætiological science has man been able to arrive at
a beginning which is homogeneous with the known course of
events. We can in such sciences often go very far
back;--determine many of the remote circumstances of the
past series of events;--ascend to a point which seems to be
near the origin;--and limit the hypotheses respecting the
origin itself: but philosophers never have demonstrated,
and, so far as we can judge, probably never will be able to
demonstrate, what was that primitive state of things from
which the progressive course of the world took its first
departure. In all these paths of research, when we travel
far backwards, the aspect of the earlier portions becomes
very different from that of the advanced part on which we
now stand; but in all cases the path is lost in obscurity as
it is traced backwards towards its starting-point: it
becomes not only invisible, but unimaginable; it is not only
an interruption, but an abyss, which interposes itself
between us and any intelligible beginning of things.

[Note 18\10: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xviii. c. vi. sect 5.]



{{297}}
