CHAPTER IX.

OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.


THE doctrine of universal gravitation is a feature of so
much importance in the history of science that we shall not
pass it by without a few remarks on the nature and evidence
of the doctrine.

1. To a certain extent the doctrine of the attraction of
bodies according to the law of the inverse square of the
distance, exhibits in its progress among men the same
general features which we have noticed in the history of the
laws of motion. This doctrine was maintained _à priori_ on
the ground of its simplicity, and was asserted positively,
even before it was clearly understood:--notwithstanding this
anticipation, its establishment on the ground of facts was a
task of vast labour and sagacity:--when it had been so
established in a general way, there occurred at later
periods, an occasional suspicion that it might be
approximately true only:--these suspicions led to further
researches, which showed the rule to be rigorously
exact:--and at present there are mathematicians who
maintain, not only that it is true, but that it is a
necessary property of matter. A very few words on each of
these points will suffice.

2. I have shown in the _History of Science_[41\3], that the
attraction of the sun according to the inverse square of the
distance, had been divined by Bullialdus, Hooke, Halley, and
others, before it was proved by Newton. Probably the reason
which suggested this conjecture was, that gravity might be
considered {273} as a sort of emanation; and that thus, like
light or any other effect diffused from a center, it must
follow the law just stated, the efficacy of the force being
weakened in receding from the center, exactly in proportion
to the space through which it is diffused. It cannot be
denied that such a view appears to be strongly recommended
by analogy.

[Note 41\3: B. vii. c. i.]

When it had been proved by Newton that the planets were
really retained in their elliptical orbits by a central
force, his calculations also showed that the above-stated
_law_ of the force must be at least very approximately
correct, since otherwise the aphelia of the orbits could not
be so nearly at rest as they were. Yet when it seemed as if
the motion of the moon's apogee could not be accounted for
without some new supposition, the _à priori_ argument in
favour of the inverse square did not prevent Clairaut from
trying the hypothesis of a small term added to that which
expressed the ancient law: but when, in order to test the
accuracy of this hypothesis, the calculation of the motion
of the moon's apogee was pushed to a greater degree of
exactness than had been obtained before, it was found that
the new term vanished of itself; and that the inverse square
now accounted for the whole of the motion. And thus, as in
the case of the second law of motion, the most scrupulous
examination terminated in showing the simplest rule to be
rigorously true.

3. Similar events occurred in the history of another part of
the law of gravitation: namely, that the attraction is
proportional to the quantity of matter attracted. This part
of the law may also be thus stated, That the weight of
bodies arising from gravity is proportional to their
inertia; and thus, that the _accelerating force_ on all
bodies under the same circumstances is the same. Newton made
experiments which proved this with regard to terrestrial
bodies; for he found that, at the end of equal strings,
balls of all substances, gold, silver, lead, glass, wood,
&c., oscillated in equal times[42\3]. But a few years ago,
doubts {274} arose among the German astronomers whether this
law was rigorously true with regard to the planetary bodies.
Some calculations appeared to prove, that the attraction of
Jupiter as shown by the perturbations which he produces in
the small planets Juno, Vesta, and Pallas, was different
from the attraction which he exerts on his own satellites.
Nor did there appear to these philosophers anything
inconceivable in the supposition that the attraction of a
planet might be thus _elective_. But when Mr. Airy obtained
a more exact determination of the mass of Jupiter, as
indicated by his effect on his satellites, it was found that
this suspicion was unfounded; and that there was, in this
case, no exception to the universality of the rule, that
this cosmical attraction is in the proportion of the
attracted mass.

[Note 42\3: _Prin._ lib. iii. prop. 6.]

4. Again: when it had thus been shown that a mutual
attraction of parts, according to the law above mentioned,
prevailed throughout the extent of the solar system, it
might still be doubted whether the same law extended to
other regions of the universe. It might have been perhaps
imagined that each fixed star had its peculiar law of force.
But the examination of the motions of double stars about
each other, by the two Herschels and others, appears to show
that these bodies describe ellipses as the planets do; and
thus extends the law of the inverse squares to parts of the
universe immeasurably distant from the whole solar system.

5. Since every doubt which has been raised with regard to
the universality and accuracy of the law of gravitation, has
thus ended in confirming the rule, it is not surprizing that
men's minds should have returned with additional force to
those views which had at first represented the law as a
necessary truth, capable of being established by reason
alone. When it had been proved by Newton that gravity is
really a _universal_ attribute of matter as far as we can
learn, his pupils were not content without maintaining it to
be an _essential_ quality. This is the doctrine held by
Cotes in the preface to the second edition of the
_Principia_ (1712): {275} 'Gravity,' he says, 'is a primary
quality of bodies, as extension, mobility, and
impenetrability are.' But Newton himself by no means went so
far. In his second Letter to Bentley (1693), he says, 'You
sometimes speak of gravity as essential and inherent to
matter; pray do not ascribe that notion to me. The cause of
gravity,' he adds, 'I do not pretend to know, and would take
more time to consider of it.'

Cotes maintains his opinion by urging, that we learn by
_experience_ that all bodies possess gravity, and that we do
not learn in any other way that they are extended, moveable,
or solid. But we have already seen, that the ideas of space,
time, and reaction, on which depend extension, mobility, and
solidity, are not results, but conditions, of experience. We
cannot conceive a body except as extended; we cannot
conceive it to exert mechanical action except with some kind
of solidity. But so far as our conceptions of body have
hitherto been developed, we find no difficulty in conceiving
two bodies which do not attract each other.

6. Newton lays down, in the second edition of the
_Principia_, this 'Rule of Philosophizing' (book iii.); that
'The qualities of bodies which cannot be made more or less
intense, and which belong to all bodies on which we are able
to make experiments, are to be held to be qualities of all
bodies in general.' And this Rule is cited in the sixth
Proposition of the Third Book of the _Principia_, (Cor. 2,)
in order to prove that gravity, proportional to the quantity
of matter, may be asserted to be a quality of all bodies
universally. But we may remark that a Rule of
Philosophizing, itself of precarious authority, cannot
authorize us in ascribing universality to an empirical
result. Geometrical and statical properties are seen to be
necessary, and _therefore_ universal: but Newton appears
disposed to assert a like universality of gravity, quite
unconnected with any necessity. It would be a very
inadequate statement, indeed a false representation, of
statical truth, if we were to say, that because every body
which has hitherto been tried _has been found_ to have a
center of gravity, we venture to assert that all bodies
whatever {276} have a center of gravity. And if we are ever
able to assert the absolute universality of the law of
gravitation, we shall have to rest this truth upon the
clearer development of our ideas of matter and force; not
upon a Rule of Philosophizing, which, till otherwise proved,
must be a mere rule of prudence, and which the opponent may
refuse to admit.

7. Other persons, instead of asserting gravity to be in its
own nature essential to matter, have made hypotheses
concerning some mechanism or other, by which this mutual
attraction of bodies is produced[43\3]. Thus the Cartesians
ascribed to a vortex the tendency of bodies to a center;
Newton himself seems to have been disposed to refer this
tendency to the elasticity of an ether; Le Sage propounded a
curious hypothesis, in which this attraction is accounted
for by the impulse of infinite streams of particles flowing
constantly through the universe in all directions. In these
speculations, the force of gravity is resolved into the
pressure or impulse of solids or fluids. On the other hand,
hypotheses have been propounded, in which the solidity, and
other physical qualities of bodies, have been explained by
representing the bodies as a collection of points, from
which points, repulsive, as well as attractive, forces
emanate. This view of the constitution of bodies was
maintained and developed by Boscovich, and is hence termed
'Boscovich's Theory:' and the discussion of it will more
properly come under our review at a future period, when we
speak of the question whether bodies are made up of atoms.
But we may observe, that Newton himself appears to have
inclined, as his followers certainly did, to this mode of
contemplating the physical properties of bodies. In his
Preface to the _Principia_, after speaking of the central
forces which are exhibited in cosmical phenomena, he says:
'Would that we could derive the other phenomena of Nature
from mechanical principles by the same mode of reasoning.
For many things move me {277} so that I suspect all these
phenomena may depend upon certain forces, by which the
particles of bodies, through causes not yet known, are
either impelled to each other and cohere according to
regular figures, or are repelled and recede from each other:
which forces being unknown, philosophers have hitherto made
their attempts upon nature in vain.'

[Note 43\3: See Vince, _Observations on the Hypothesis
respecting Gravitation_, and the Critique of that work,
_Edinb. Rev._ vol. xiii.]

8. But both these hypotheses;--that by which cohesion and
solidity are reduced to attractive and repulsive forces, and
that by which attraction is reduced to the impulse and
pressure of media;--are hitherto merely modes of
representing mechanical laws of nature; and cannot, either
of them, be asserted as possessing any evident truth or
peremptory authority to the exclusion of the other. This
consideration may enable us to estimate the real weight of
the difficulty felt in assenting to the mutual attraction of
bodies not in contact with each other; for it is often urged
that this attraction of bodies at a distance is an absurd
supposition.

The doctrine is often thus stigmatized, both by popular and
by learned writers. It was long received as a maxim in
philosophy (as Monboddo informs us[44\3]), that a body
cannot act _where_ it is not, any more than _when_ it is
not. But to this we reply, that time is a necessary
condition of our conception of causation, in a different
manner from space. The action of force can only be conceived
as taking place in a succession of moments, in each of which
cause and effect immediately succeed each other: and thus
the interval of time between a cause and its remote effect
is filled up by a continuous succession of events connected
by the same chain of causation. But in space, there is no
such visible necessity of continuity; the action and
reaction may take place at a distance from each other; all
that is necessary being that they be equal and opposite.

[Note 44\3: _Ancient Metaphysics_, vol. ii. p. 175.]

Undoubtedly the existence of attraction is rendered more
acceptable to common apprehension by supposing {278} some
intermediate machinery,--a cord, or rod, or fluid,--by which
the forces may be conveyed from one point to another. But
such images are rather fitted to satisfy those prejudices
which arise from the earlier application of our ideas of
force, than to exhibit the real nature of those ideas. If we
suppose two bodies to pull each other by means of a rod or
cord, we only suppose, in addition to those equal and
opposite forces acting upon the two bodies, (which forces
are alone essential to mutual attraction) a certain power of
resisting transverse pressure at every point of the
intermediate line: which additional supposition is entirely
useless, and quite unconnected with the essential conditions
of the case. When the Newtonians were accused of introducing
into philosophy an unknown cause which they termed
_attraction_, they justly replied that they knew as much
respecting attraction as their opponents did about impulse.
In each case we have a knowledge of the conception in
question so far as we clearly apprehend it under the
conditions of those axioms of mechanical causation which
form the basis of our science on such subjects.

Having thus examined the degree of certainty and generality
to which our knowledge of the law of universal gravitation
has been carried, by the progress of mechanical discovery
and speculation up to the present time, we might proceed to
the other branches of science, and examine in like manner
their grounds and conditions. But before we do this, it will
be worth our while to attend for a moment to the effect
which the progress of mechanical ideas among mathematicians
and mechanical philosophers has produced upon the minds of
other persons, who share only in an indirect and derivative
manner in the influence of science.



{{279}}
