CHAPTER V.

OF THE GROUNDS OF NECESSARY TRUTHS.


1. TO the question just stated, I reply, that the necessity
and universality of the truths which form a part of our
knowledge, are derived from the _Fundamental Ideas_ which
those truths involve. These ideas entirely shape and
circumscribe our knowledge; they regulate the active
operations of our minds, without which our passive
sensations do not become knowledge. They govern these
operations, according to rules which are not only fixed and
permanent, but which may be expressed in plain and definite
terms; and these rules, when thus expressed, may be made the
basis of demonstrations by which the necessary relations
imparted to our knowledge by our Ideas may be traced to
their consequences in the most remote ramifications of
scientific truth.

These enunciations of the necessary and evident conditions
imposed upon our knowledge by the Fundamental Ideas which it
involves, are termed _Axioms_. Thus the Axioms of Geometry
express the necessary conditions which result from the Idea
of Space; the Axioms of Mechanics express the necessary
conditions which flow from the Ideas of Force and Motion;
and so on.

2. It will be the office of several of the succeeding Books
of this work to establish and illustrate in detail what I
have thus stated in general terms. I shall there pass in
review many of the most important fundamental ideas on which
the existing body of our science depends; and I shall
endeavour to show, for each such idea in succession, that
knowledge involves an active as well as a passive element;
that it is not possible without an act of the mind,
regulated by certain {70} laws. I shall further attempt to
enumerate some of the principal fundamental relations which
each idea thus introduces into our thoughts, and to express
them by means of definitions and axioms, and other suitable
forms.

I will only add a remark or two to illustrate further this
view of the ideal grounds of our knowledge.

3. To persons familiar with any of the demonstrative
sciences, it will be apparent that if we state all the
Definitions and Axioms which are employed in the
demonstrations, we state the whole basis on which those
reasonings rest. For the whole process of demonstrative or
deductive reasoning in any science, (as in geometry, for
instance,) consists entirely in combining some of these
first principles so as to obtain the simplest propositions
of the science; then combining these so as to obtain other
propositions of greater complexity; and so on, till we
advance to the most recondite demonstrable truths; these
last, however intricate and unexpected, still involving no
principles except the original definitions and axioms. Thus,
by combining the Definition of a triangle, and the
Definitions of equal lines and equal angles, namely, that
they are such as when applied to each other, coincide, with
the Axiom respecting straight lines (that two such lines
cannot inclose a space,) we demonstrate the equality of
triangles, under certain assumed conditions. Again, by
combining this result with the Definition of parallelograms,
and with the Axiom that if equals be taken from equals the
wholes are equal, we prove the equality of parallelograms
between the same parallels and upon the same base. From this
proposition, again, we prove the equality of the square on
the hypotenuse of a triangle to the squares on the two sides
containing the right angle. But in all this there is nothing
contained which is not rigorously the result of our
geometrical Definitions and Axioms. All the rest of our
treatises of geometry consists only of terms and phrases of
reasoning, the object of which is to connect those first
principles, and to exhibit the effects of their combination
in the shape of demonstration. {71}

4. This combination of first principles takes place
according to the forms and rules of _Logic_. All the steps
of the demonstration may be stated in the shape in which
logicians are accustomed to exhibit processes of reasoning
in order to show their conclusiveness, that is, in
_Syllogisms_. Thus our geometrical reasonings might be
resolved into such steps as the following:--
All straight lines drawn from the centre of a circle to its
circumference are equal:
But the straight lines AB, AC, are drawn from the centre of
a circle to its circumference:
Therefore the straight lines AB, AC, are equal.

Each step of geometrical, and all other demonstrative
reasoning, may be resolved into three such clauses as these;
and these three clauses are termed respectively, the _major
premiss_, the _minor premiss_, and the _conclusion_; or,
more briefly, the _major_, the _minor_, and the
_**conclusion_.

The principle which justifies the reasoning when exhibited
in this syllogistic form, is this:--that a truth which can
be asserted as generally, or rather as universally true, can
be asserted as true also in each particular case. The
_minor_ only asserts a certain particular case to be an
example of such conditions as are spoken of in the _major_;
and hence the conclusion, which is true of the major by
supposition, is true of the minor by consequence; and thus
we proceed from syllogism to syllogism, in each one
employing some general truth in some particular instance.
Any proof which occurs in geometry, or any other science of
demonstration, may thus be reduced to a series of processes,
in each of which we pass from some general proposition to
the narrower and more special propositions which it
includes. And this process of deriving truths by the mere
combination of general principles, applied in particular
hypothetical cases, is called _deduction_; being opposed to
_induction_, in which, as we have seen (chap. i. sect. 3), a
new general principle is introduced at every step.

5. Now we have to remark that, this being so, however far we
follow such deductive reasoning, we can {72} never have, in
our conclusion any truth which is not virtually included in
the original principles from which the reasoning started.
For since at any step we merely take out of a general
proposition something included in it, while at the preceding
step we have taken this general proposition out of one more
general, and so on perpetually, it is manifest that our last
result was really included in the principle or principles
with which we began. I say _principles_, because, although
our logical conclusion can only exhibit the legitimate issue
of our first principles, it may, nevertheless, contain the
result of the combination of several such principles, and
may thus assume a great degree of complexity, and may appear
so far removed from the parent truths, as to betray at first
sight hardly any relationship with them. Thus the
proposition which has already been quoted respecting the
squares on the sides of a right-angled triangle, contains
the results of many elementary principles; as, the
definitions of parallels, triangle, and square; the axioms
respecting straight lines, and respecting parallels; and,
perhaps, others. The conclusion is complicated by containing
the effects of the combination of all these elements; but it
contains nothing, and can contain nothing, but such elements
and their combinations.

This doctrine, that logical reasoning produces no new
truths, but only unfolds and brings into view those truths
which were, in effect, contained in the first principles of
the reasoning, is assented to by almost all who, in modern
times, have attended to the science of logic. Such a view is
admitted both by those who defend, and by those who
depreciate the value of logic. 'Whatever is established by
reasoning, must have been contained and virtually asserted
in the premises[6\1].' 'The only truth which such
propositions can possess consists in conformity to the
original principles.'

[Note 6\1: Whately's _Logic_, pp. 237, 238.]

In this manner the whole substance of our geometry is
reduced to the Definitions and Axioms which we employ in our
elementary reasonings; and in like {73} manner we reduce the
demonstrative truths of any other science to the definitions
and axioms which we there employ.

6. But in reference to this subject, it has sometimes been
said that demonstrative sciences do in reality depend upon
Definitions only; and that no additional kind of principle,
such as we have supposed Axioms to be, is absolutely
required. It has been asserted that in geometry, for
example, the source of the necessary truth of our
propositions is this, that they depend upon definitions
alone, and consequently merely state the identity of the
same thing under different aspects.

That in the sciences which admit of demonstration, as
geometry, mechanics, and the like, Axioms as well as
Definitions are needed, in order to express the grounds of
our necessary convictions, must be shown hereafter by an
examination of each of these sciences in particular. But
that the propositions of these sciences, those of geometry
for example, do not merely assert the identity of the same
thing, will, I think, be generally allowed, if we consider
the assertions which we are enabled to make. When we declare
that 'a straight line is the shortest distance between two
points,' is this merely an identical proposition? the
definition of a straight line in another form? Not so: the
definition of a straight line involves the notion of form
only, and does not contain anything about magnitude;
consequently, it cannot contain anything equivalent to
'shortest.' Thus the propositions of geometry are not merely
identical propositions; nor have we in their general
character anything to countenance the assertion, that they
are the results of definitions alone. And when we come to
examine this and other sciences more closely, we shall find
that axioms, such as are usually in our treatises made the
fundamental principles of our demonstrations, neither have
ever been, nor can be, dispensed with. Axioms, as well as
Definitions, are in all cases requisite, in order properly
to exhibit the grounds of necessary truth.

7. Thus the real logical basis of every body of demonstrated
truths are the Definitions and Axioms {74} which are the
first principles of the reasonings. But when we are arrived
at this point, the question further occurs, what is the
ground of the truth of these Axioms? It is not the logical,
but the philosophical, not the formal, but the real
foundation of necessary truth, which we are seeking. Hence
this inquiry necessarily comes before us, What is the ground
of the Axioms of Geometry, of Mechanics, and of any other
demonstrable science?

The answer which we are led to give, by the view which we
have taken of the nature of knowledge, has already been
stated. The ground of the axioms belonging to each science
is the _Idea_ which the axiom involves. The ground of the
Axioms of Geometry is the _Idea of Space_: the ground of the
Axioms of Mechanics is the _Idea of Force_, of _Action_ and
_Reaction_, and the like. And hence these Ideas are
Fundamental Ideas; and since they are thus the foundations,
not only of demonstration but of truth, an examination into
their real import and nature is of the greatest consequence
to our purpose.

8. Not only the Axioms, but the definitions which form the
basis of our reasonings, depend upon our Fundamental Ideas.
And the Definitions are not arbitrary definitions, but are
determined by a necessity no less rigorous than the Axioms
themselves. We could not think of geometrical truths without
conceiving a circle; and we could not reason concerning such
truths without defining a circle in some mode equivalent to
that which is commonly adopted. The Definitions of
parallels, of right angles, and the like, are quite as
necessarily prescribed by the nature of the case, as the
Axioms which these Definitions bring with them. Indeed we
may substitute one of these kinds of principles for another.
We cannot always put a Definition in the place of an Axiom;
but we may always find an Axiom which shall take the place
of a Definition. If we assume a proper Axiom respecting
straight lines, we need no Definition of a straight line.
But in whatever shape the principle appear, as Definition or
as Axiom, it has about it nothing casual or {75} arbitrary,
but is determined to be what it is, as to its import, by the
most rigorous necessity, growing out of the Idea of Space.

9. These principles,--Definitions, and Axioms,--thus
exhibiting the primary developments of a fundamental idea,
do in fact express the idea, so far as its expression in
words forms part of our science. They are different views of
the same body of truth; and though each principle, by
itself, exhibits only one aspect of this body, taken
together they convey a sufficient conception of it for our
purposes. The Idea itself cannot be fixed in words; but
these various lines of truth proceeding from it, suggest
sufficiently to a fitly-prepared mind, the place where the
idea resides, its nature, and its efficacy.

It is true that these principles,--our elementary
Definitions and Axioms,--even taken all together, express
the Idea incompletely. Thus the Definitions and Axioms of
Geometry, as they are stated in our elementary works, do not
fully express the Idea of Space as it exists in our minds.
For, in addition to these, other Axioms, independent of
these, and no less evident, can be stated; and are in fact
stated when we come to the Higher Geometry. Such, for
instance, is the Axiom of Archimedes--that a curve line
which joins two points is less than a broken line which
joins the same points and includes the curve. And thus the
Idea is disclosed but not fully revealed, imparted but not
transfused, by the use we make of it in science. When we
have taken from the fountain so much as serves our purpose,
there still remains behind a deep well of truth, which we
have not exhausted, and which we may easily believe to be
inexhaustible.



{{76}}
