PART II

SPECIAL MORAL THEOLOGY

743. In the First Part of this work, the means to man’s Last End were
spoken of in a general way; the features that are common to all good
acts--that they be human, morally deserving, directed according to law
and conscience--were treated. In the present Part the means to the Last
End will be discussed in particular, and we shall consider in turn the
kinds of duties that are owed by all men and those owed by persons in
special states of life.


Question I

THE DUTIES OF ALL CLASSES OF MEN

744. Good habits, specifically different, are all reducible to seven
most general virtues (see 150, 151), and hence in studying these seven
virtues, we shall at the same time study all the common duties of man.

745. The properties of the seven infused virtues are chiefly four:

(a) In the first place, these virtues may be increased: “This I pray,
that your charity may more and more abound” (Phil, i. 9). The increase
takes place _ex opere operato_ through the Sacraments, or _ex opere
operantis_ through meritorious works--that is, whenever sanctifying
grace, their root, is increased.

(b) A second property of the infused virtues is that they may be lost:
“I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first
charity” (Apoc., ii. 4); “Some have made shipwreck concerning the
faith” (I Tim., i. 19). The loss is caused by the contrary of the
virtue: faith is lost by disbelief, hope by despair; charity and the
moral virtues are lost by any mortal sin, for they are built on
sanctifying grace, which mortal sin destroys.

(c) A third property of the infused virtues is that they cannot be
diminished directly. If we leave out of consideration their opposites
(which, as just said, remove these virtues entirely), there is nothing
else that can act directly upon them. Mere failure to exercise them
cannot lessen them, since they are caused by divine infusion, not by
human exercise; venial sin cannot lessen them, since it does not lessen
grace on which they depend.

(d) A fourth property of the infused virtues is that they are
diminished indirectly. Failure to practise them or venial sin does
diminish the ease and fervor with which the acts of these virtues are
exercised; and thus indirectly--that is, by preparing the way for acts
that are directly contrary--neglect or venial sin diminishes the habits
themselves.




Art. 2: THE VIRTUE OF FAITH

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 1-9.)

746. The order of the theological virtues here followed is that given
by St. Paul in I Cor., xiii. 13--viz., faith, hope, charity. The order
of these virtues is twofold: (a) according to dignity the order is
charity, hope, faith; (b) according to time, the order is that of I
Cor., xiii. The habits of these three virtues are infused at the same
time (i.e., at the moment when grace is conferred), but their acts are
not simultaneous, and one must believe before one can hope or love.

747. Excellence of the Virtue of Faith.--(a) Faith is the beginning of
the supernatural life, the foundation and the root of justification,
without which it is impossible to please God and arrive at fellowship
with Him. (b) It is an anticipation of the end of the supernatural
life, for by faith we believe that which we shall behold in the
beatific vision: “All these died according to faith, not having
received the promises, but beholding them afar off, and saluting them
and confessing that they are pilgrims and strangers on the earth”
(Heb., xi. 13).

748. Utility of Faith for the Individual.--(a) Through faith the
intellect receives a new light, which discloses to it a higher
world--“the wisdom of God in a mystery” (I Cor., ii. 7)--and which
illuminates even this lower world with a heavenly brightness, that man
may know more quickly, more surely, and more perfectly the natural
truths that pertain to God and duty. (b) The will is strengthened to
perform duties valiantly through the motives and examples which faith
offers: the patriarchs of old “by faith conquered kingdoms, wrought
justice, obtained promises, recovered strength from weakness” (Heb.,
xi. 33). In adversity faith is a stay and a consolation: “For what
things soever were written, were written for our learning, that through
patience and the comfort of the scriptures, we might have hope” (Rom.,
xv. 4).

749. Utility of Faith for Society.--(a) Domestic society is defended in
its security and happiness by faith, which teaches the sacramental
character of marriage, which offers the model of the Holy Family to
Christian homes, which never ceases to declare in the name of God the
duties of husbands and wives, parents and children. (b) Without faith
and religion civil society cannot be maintained in strength and
prosperity. It is faith in God more than laws or armies that gives
security to life, reputation, and property, with order and peace at
home and abroad.

750. The Meaning of Faith.--In Holy Scripture and other religious
writings the word _faith_ has various meanings.

(a) Sometimes it stands for a promise, or for the quality of being true
to one’s promises. Examples: St. Paul condemns widows who remarry
against their word, “because they have made void their first faith
(promise)” (I Tim., v. 12). Speaking of the unbelief of the Jews, he
says: “Shall their unbelief make the faith (i.e., fidelity to promise
or faithfulness) of God without effect? God forbid. But God is true”
(Rom, iii. 3, 4).

(b) Sometimes the term _faith_ stands for good reputation, or for
confidence in another. Examples: “He that discloseth the secret of a
friend loseth his faith (credit, reputation), and shall never find a
friend to his mind” (Ecclus., xxvii. 17); “O thou of little faith
(trust, confidence), why didst thou doubt?” (Matt., xiv. 31).

(c) Sometimes _faith_ stands for truths or doctrines offered for one’s
belief, or for the assent of the mind to the judgment of conscience or
to the revelation of God. Examples: “Thou has not denied My faith”
(that is, “the truths revealed by Me,” Apoc. ii. 13); “All that is not
of faith (i.e., from the firm conviction of conscience) is sin” (Rom,
xiv. 23); “Without faith (i.e., assent to the unseen on the word of
God) it is impossible to please God; for he that cometh to God must
believe” (Heb., xi. 6).

751. It is faith only in the last sense that is known as the
theological virtue of faith, and hence with it alone we are here
concerned. St. Paul describes this faith as follows: “Faith is the
substance of things to be hoped for, the evidence of things that appear
not” (Heb., xi. 1). This verse is variously interpreted. (a) According
to St. Chrysostom, the meaning is: Faith is the subsistence or
anticipated existence in the soul of future blessings that are hoped
for, through the firm confidence it gives; it is the conviction of the
reality of the unseen. (b) According to St. Thomas, the meaning is:
Faith is the substance or basis on which is built the hope of
blessedness, or on which rests as on its foundation the whole work of
justification; it is an argument producing certainty of that which is
not seen. The elements of St. Thomas’ interpretation have been
incorporated into the Vatican Council’s definition: “The Catholic
Church professes that this faith which is the beginning of human
salvation is a supernatural virtue by which we, with the aid and
inspiration of the grace of God, believe that the things revealed by
Him are true, not because the intrinsic truth of these things has been
perceived by the natural light of reason, but because of the authority
of God Himself revealing, who can neither deceive nor be deceived”
(Sess. 3, chap. 3, Denz. 1789).

752. Thus, faith is an intellectual habit and act, but it differs from
all other intellectual habits and acts as follows: (a) it differs from
science, vision, understanding, for its object is “the things that
appear not”; (b) it differs from opinion, doubt, suspicion, for it is a
firm “substance,” a certain “evidence”; (c) it differs from human faith
or belief resting on man’s word and promises, for it is the pledge,
beginning and cornerstone of the happiness promised by God Himself.

753. Faith will now be considered according to two aspects: (a)
objectively, as regards the things that are believed by him who has
faith; (b) subjectively, as regards the habit and act of the believer
which put him in contact with these truths of the unseen world.

754. The Object of Faith.--There is a twofold object of faith, viz.,
material and formal.

(a) The material object, or the truth that is believed, includes all
that is contained in the Word of God, whether written or handed down by
tradition. The principal material object is God Himself as the Deity,
or Supreme Truth in Being (_prima veritas in essendo_); the secondary
material object embraces all other revealed truths.

(b) The formal object of faith, or the motive that prompts one to give
assent to the material object, is the authority of God, who is Supreme
Truth in Knowing and Speaking (_prima veritas in cognoscendo et
dicendo_), and hence He can neither be deceived nor deceive.

755. The material object of faith includes all truths revealed by God;
but, since it belongs to the Church to teach those truths, there is a
distinction of truths that are revealed by God but not defined by the
Church, and truths that are revealed by God and defined by the Church
as revealed. Thus: (a) divine faith is belief in revealed truth that
has not been declared by the Church as revealed; (b) divine and
Catholic faith is belief in a revealed truth that has been proposed as
such by the Church, either solemnly or ordinarily. Example: Dogmas
contained in creeds, definitions of Popes or general councils. The
Vatican Council has determined the object of this faith: By divine and
Catholic faith all those things must be believed which are contained in
the written word of God and in tradition, and which are proposed by the
Church, either by a solemn pronouncement or by her ordinary and
universal magisterium, to be believed as divinely revealed (Ibid., Denz.
1792).

756. The formal object of faith extends to all truths that have been
revealed and to no others. Theologians discuss the status of certain
truths connected with revelation concerning which the Church is
guaranteed infallibility on account of her teaching office. Special
difficulties arise in relation to: a) dogmatic facts, that is,
definitions concerning particular facts closely related to dogma (e.g.,
that Anglican orders are invalid; that a particular book contains a
sense contrary to revelation; that this Supreme Pontiff, legitimately
elected, is the successor of St. Peter in the primacy and consequently
infallible); b) theological conclusions, that is, deductions drawn from
revealed truth.

Many theologians teach that both dogmatic facts and theological
conclusions when defined by the Church constitute a special object of
faith distinct from divine and Catholic faith, namely, ecclesiastical
faith. Accordingly, for them, ecclesiastical faith is the internal
assent given to truths connected with revelation and defined by the
Church as true, the motive of assent being the infallibility of the
Church in her teaching office.

Others deny the existence of such faith and insist a) that dogmatic
facts are contained in revealed doctrine implicitly as singulars in
universals and hence are believed before definition by divine faith
implicitly, and after definition by divine and Catholic faith, b) that
theological conclusions before definition are held by theological
assent, afterwards by divine and Catholic faith. Some also have
maintained that before definition such conclusions belong to divine
faith. (For a summary of the various teachings on this problem see
Reginaldo-Maria Schultes, O.P., _Introductio in Historiam Dogmatum_,
pp. 46 ff.; Marin-Sola, O.P., _L’Evolution homogene du Dogme
Catholique_).

757. Private revelations, even when approved by the Church, are not an
object of divine and Catholic faith, for they form no part of the
revelation given to the whole human race that was closed with the death
of the Apostles and committed to the Church. Hence: (a) if they are
negatively approved by the Church, the approval means only that such
revelations contain nothing contrary to faith and morals, and are
useful and edifying; (b) if they are approved positively (as is the
case with the revelations of St. Hildegarde, St. Brigit, and St.
Catherine of Siena), the approval means that they appear to be true
divine revelations and may be prudently accepted as such.

758. The assent to be given to private revelations, therefore, is as
follows:

(a) Such revelations should receive the assent of divine faith, if it
is certain that they are genuine. This applies to those to whom and for
whom they were given, and probably to others also. It rarely happens,
however, that the genuineness of a private revelation can be critically
established, and the Church does not require that such revelations be
accepted by all the faithful. To refuse assent, therefore, to a private
revelation is not generally an offense against divine faith.

(b) Private revelations cannot receive the assent of Catholic faith,
since, even when approved by the Church, they are not proposed as a
part of the Christian revelation committed to her care. To dissent from
them, therefore, is not a sin against Catholic faith, unless in
rejecting them one would also reject defined dogma (e.g., by denying
the possibility of revelation).

(c) Private revelations are not offered for the assent of
ecclesiastical faith, since in approving them the Church does not
propose them as necessarily connected with the exercise of her teaching
office or under guarantee of infallibility. To dissent from them,
therefore, is not a sin against ecclesiastical faith, unless other
errors (e.g., against the authority of the Church in matters connected
with revelation) are also involved.

(d) Private revelations are offered for the assent of human faith,
since the Church proposes them to the faithful, if approved, as matters
of pious opinion, which are according to the rules of prudence truly
probable on account of traditions in their favor, supported by suitable
testimony and documents (Benedict XIV, _De Canonizatione Sanctorum_,
lib. II, cap. 23; III, cap. ult.; Sacred Cong. Rites, May 12, 1877, n.
3419, ad 2). The Church permits, but does not exact belief in these
revelations. One would not be excused, however, who rejected them
through pride or contempt, or without sufficient reason.

759. Similarly, although the Church offers for human faith alone
certain particular facts of history, one who rejects them may easily be
guilty of contempt or temerity. Such particular facts are: (a)
apparitions of heavenly beings in post-Biblical times, such as the
appearance of the Archangel Michael in Monte Gargano about 525 and the
appearance of the Blessed Virgin at Lourdes in 1858, for which the
Church has instituted feasts; (b) deeds related in the legends of the
Saints, such as the victory of St. Catherine of Alexandria over the
pagan philosophers and the carrying of her body to Mt. Sinai by Angels,
which the Church inserts in the Breviary lessons; (c) the authenticity
of relics. In granting certificates of genuineness, the Church
guarantees only that there is sufficient historical evidence or
probability for the belief that particular bones or other objects
belonged to a particular Saint.

760. Many tenets of the Church, indeed, have not the prerogative of
infallibility--for example, decrees of the Popes not given _ex
cathedra_, decisions of Congregations made with Papal approval,
teachings of Bishops to particular members of the Church, doctrines
commonly held by Catholics as theological truths or certain
conclusions. These decrees, decisions, etc., receive not the assent of
Catholic faith, but what is called religious assent, which includes two
things, viz., external and internal assent.

(a) External assent should be given such teachings--that is, the homage
of respectful silence due to public authority. This does not forbid the
submission of difficulties to the teaching authority, or the scientific
examination of objections that seem very strong.

(b) Internal assent should be given such teaching--that is, the
submission of the judgment of the individual to the judgment of the
teacher who has the authority from Christ and assistance from the Holy
Spirit. This internal assent differs, however, from the assent of
faith, inasmuch as it excludes fear of error, but not of the
possibility of error, and it may later on be suspended, called into
doubt, or even revoked. Pope Pius X in his _Motu proprio_, “Praestantia
scripturae Sacrae” (Nov. 18, 1907), indicated the binding force of the
decrees both of the Pontifical Biblical Commission and of all doctrinal
decrees: All are bound in conscience to submit to the decisions of the
Biblical Commission which have been given in the past and which shall
be given in the future, in the same way as to the decrees which
appertain to doctrine, issued by the Sacred Congregations and approved
by the Supreme Pontiff; nor can they escape the stigma both of
disobedience and temerity, nor be free from grave guilt as often as
they impugn their decisions either in word or writing; and this over
and above the scandal which they give and the sins of which they may be
the cause before God by making other statements on these matters which
are very frequently both rash and false. (Reaffirmed by the Biblical
Commission on Feb. 27, 1934.)

761. The objects, therefore, which formally or reductively pertain to
the virtue of faith, are as follows:

(a) Divine faith has for its object all the truths revealed by God as
contained in the Canonical scriptures approved by the Church, and in
the teachings received by the Apostles from Christ or the Holy Spirit
and handed down to the Church as Tradition. Private revelations in
exceptional cases may also be the object of divine faith.

(b) Catholic faith has for its object all the truths formally revealed
in scripture and Tradition that have been defined as such by the
Church. The definitions of the Church are either solemn (e.g., those
given in the Creeds, _ex cathedra_ definitions of the Popes, decisions
of Ecumenical Councils) or ordinary (e.g., those contained in the
universal preaching, practice or belief of the Church, encyclical
letters [see _Humani Generis_, n.20]). Equivalent to definitions are
the condemnations of error opposed to revealed truths.

(c) According to some theologians ecclesiastical faith has for its
object all infallible decisions of the Church about matters not
revealed, but connected with revelation, or necessary for the exercise
of the teaching office of the Church. Such are: (i) definitions, that
is, definitive declarations of theological conclusions or of dogmatic
facts, disciplinary laws made for the entire Church, canonization of
the saints, solemn approbation of religious Orders, express or special
recognition of Doctors of the Church, declaration of the relation of
private revelations to the public revelation; and (ii) censures, that
is, condemnations of teachings, on account of falsity, as heretical,
near to heresy, savoring of heresy, erroneous, rash, etc.; on account
of their expression, as equivocal, ambiguous, presumptuous, captious,
suspected, ill-sounding, offensive to pious ears, etc.; on account of
their tendency, as scandalous, schismatical, seditious, unsafe, etc.
Examples: The definitions concerning the sense of the book
_Augustinus_, the suitability of the terms “consubstantial” and
“transubstantiation,” the agreement of the Vulgate with the original
scriptures, the lawfulness of the insertion of the _Filioque_.

(d) Religious assent has for its object all doctrinal pronouncements of
the Church that are not infallible, but are yet official and
authoritative. Examples are ordinary instructions and condemnations
given by Pontifical Congregations and Commissions. The Syllabus of
Modern Errors issued by Pius IX was most likely not an infallible or
definitive document, although many of the errors it rejects are
contrary to dogma, and hence, even apart from the Syllabus, they are to
be rejected as opposed to Catholic faith. Likewise, many of its tenets
are drawn from encyclical letters. Papal allocutions, radio addresses,
and the doctrinal parts of Apostolic Constitutions, in themselves, are
in this class.

(e) Respect is due to the judgment of the Church even in non-doctrinal
matters and where no obligation is imposed by her, on account of her
position and the careful examination given before decision. Example: It
would be disrespectful to reject without good reason a pious belief
which the Church after mature deliberation has permitted to be held.

762. Though the truths of faiths are many, the duty of believing
imposes no great burden on the believer. Thus: (a) it is not required
that explicit belief be given to all the teachings of faith; (b) it is
not required that one distinguish the particular kind of assent in case
of uncertainty, but it suffices to yield assent according to the mind
and intention of the Church. Example: When a group of propositions is
condemned under various censures, no indication being made of the
censure that applies to particular propositions, it suffices to hold
that all of them are false, and that to each of them applies one or
more of the censures listed.

763. Faith is divided into explicit and implicit, according as the
object believed is unfolded or not to the mind.

(a) Faith is explicit regarding any truth, when assent is given to that
truth as known in itself and expressed in terms proper to itself.
Example: He has explicit faith in the Eucharist who has been instructed
concerning the meaning of the mystery, and who assents to it according
to that distinct knowledge.

(b) Faith is implicit regarding any truth, when that truth is not known
or not accepted in itself, but is accepted in another truth. Example:
He has implicit faith in the Eucharist who has not yet heard of it, but
who accepts all the teachings of the Church, even those he does not
know.

764. Faith is implicit as follows:

(a) Improperly, faith is implicit, if one does not give assent, but is
prepared to give it, if necessary, or wishes to give it. These pious
dispositions are not the act of faith itself, but they are its
beginnings, or preparations leading up to it; they are good, but not
sufficient. Example: A pagan who says he would accept the Christian
creed, if he thought it were true, or who wishes that he could believe
it.

(b) Properly, faith is implicit, if one gives assent to a truth by
accepting another in which it is contained, as a particular is
contained in a universal (e.g., he who explicitly accepts all the
truths of Christianity, implicitly accepts the Eucharist, even when in
good faith he thinks it is not revealed), or as an instrument is
involved in its principal cause (e.g., he who explicitly believes in
the Redemption implicity believes in Baptism, which is the instrument
by which Redemption is applied), or as means are contained in their end
(e.g., he who explicitly believes that eternal life is a reward,
implicitly believes that good works must be performed as a means to
that end), or as the reality is expressed in the figure (e.g., those in
the Old Testament who explicitly believed in the Paschal Lamb,
implicitly believed in the sacrifice of Christ of which the Paschal
Lamb was the figure), or as the assent of the disciple is bound up with
the assent of the teacher (e.g., the child who explicitly accepts as
true the doctrines of faith taught by his pastor, implicitly believes
the sense and implications contained in the latter’s instructions).

765. The points about which explicit faith is required can be reduced
to four heads (see Catechism of the Council of Trent). These heads are:

(a) The things to be believed: “Preach the Gospel to every creature. He
that believeth shall be saved” (Mark, xvi. 15). The Gospel doctrine is
summarized in the Apostles’ Creed;

(b) The things to be done: “Teach them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you” (Matt., xxviii. 20). The Ten Commandments (see
Vol. II) are called the epitome of the whole law;

(c) The ordinances to be observed; “Baptize them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost” (Matt, xxviii. 19). The
Seven Sacraments are the sacred instruments through which the merits of
the Passion of Christ are applied to the soul;

(d) The petitions to be made to God: “Thus shall you pray: Our Father,
etc.” (Matt., vi. 9). The prayer (see Vol. II) given us by Christ
teaches us both the manner of prayer and the requests that should be
offered.

766. Faith in the revelation given by God is necessary for salvation
(Heb., xi. 6), but in the usual providence of God faith cannot be had or
safeguarded without short formulas of its principal doctrines.

(a) Faith cannot be received without such formulas, because, its
doctrines being many and frequently difficult and the study of all
scripture and Tradition being impossible for most persons, a list of
short and clear propositions of revealed truths (Creed) is needed that
the faith may be proposed and accepted.

(b) Faith cannot be retained without such formulas, because, being
unchanging in itself and yet for all times and places, its doctrines
would be easily corrupted if there were not an official standard
(Symbol) by which both truth and error could be at once recognized (I
Cor., i. 10; II Tim., i. 13).

767. The formulas of Christian teaching as summarized in the Creeds,
since they must be brief and orderly, are divided into short and
connected propositions, which are therefore known as articles. Brevity
being the character of Creeds, not all revealed truths are expressed in
them as articles, but only those that have the following
characteristics:

(a) An article of the Creed deals with one of the two main objects of
belief, namely, the end of man, which is eternal life (Heb., xi. 1), and
the means thereto, which is Jesus Christ (John, xvii. 3). Other things,
which are proposed for faith, not for their own sake, but only on
account of their relation to these two main objects (e.g., the
wandering of the Israelites in the desert, the details of the journeys
of St. Paul, etc.), are not mentioned in the Creeds.

(b) An article of the Creed deals only with those doctrines concerning
eternal life and Christ which are in a special manner unseen or
difficult, for faith is “the evidence of things that appear not” (Heb.,
xi. 1). Other doctrines which have no special difficulty of their own
are considered as implicit in those that express the general mysteries,
and hence they are not mentioned. Thus, the three Persons of the
Trinity are given distinct articles, because the mysteriousness of the
Triune God cannot be reduced to any more general mystery, whereas the
Eucharist is not mentioned, as having no mystery that is not implied in
the articles on the divine omnipotence and the sanctification of man
through Christ.

768. Has there been an increase in the articles of faith?

(a) If by increase is meant the addition through new revelation of main
beliefs not contained in the primitive revelation, there has never been
an increase in the articles of faith; for from the beginning God made
known His own being, which includes the eternal things of God and the
end or happiness of man, and His providence, which includes the
temporal dispensations of God and the means for the salvation of man
(Heb., xi. 6).

(b) If by increase is meant the addition of new revelations that
brought out more clearly and definitely things contained in previous
revelation, there was an increase in the articles of faith from the
beginning of revelations down to the end of the Apostolic age. Thus,
the nature of God and His purpose as regards the redemption of humanity
were brought out ever more distinctly by new revelations in Old
Testament times (Exod., vi. 2), and were given in final and complete
form by the revelation of Christ (Heb., i. 1; Eph., iii. 5; Heb., xii.
27, 28; II Tim., i. 13).

(c) If by increase is meant a clearer and fuller explanation of the
revelation once delivered to the Saints, there has been and always can
be an increase of articles of faith. Thus, in the Council of Nicaea the
Apostles’ Creed was amplified; in the Council of Constantinople the
Creed of Nicaea was added to, and similarly today or tomorrow the Pope
could add new explanations or developments to the Creed, if new
heresies or necessities required that the true sense of revelation
already given should be brought out more clearly or fully.

769. There are three principal Creeds used by the Church:

(a) the Apostles’ Creed, which according to an early tradition was
composed by the Apostles themselves before they separated to preach the
Gospel. It was in use from the first centuries in the Roman Church,
which required that the catechumens learn and recite it before
receiving Baptism. It is divided into twelve articles;

(b) the Nicene Creed, which is used in the Mass and was drawn up at the
Council of Nicaea (325) against the Arian denial of the divinity of
Christ, and was revised by the Council of Constantinople (381) against
the Macedonians, who refused to acknowledge the divinity of the Holy
Ghost;

(c) the Athanasian Creed, which is used in the Office of Prime and is a
resume of the teaching of St. Athanasius on the Trinity and
Incarnation. It was composed in the West some time after the beginning
of the fifth century.

770. Summary of the teaching of the First Article of the Creed: “I
believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth.”--(a)
“I believe,” i.e., I give unhesitating assent to God revealing His
mysterious truths; (b) “in God,” i.e., the Supreme Being, one in nature
and three in persons; (c) “the Father,” i.e., our Maker and Provider,
from whom also we receive the spirit of adoption of sons; (d)
“almighty,” i.e., all-powerful, and therefore all-wise and endowed with
every other perfection in the highest degree; (e) “Creator,” i.e., who
freely produced the world out of nothing, without external model or
effort of any sort, and who preserves, rules and moves all creatures;
(f) “of heaven and earth,” i.e., of the world of pure spirits, of
matter, and of man, who is at the confines of matter and spirit--in
other words, of all finite things, visible and invisible.

771. Summary of the Second Article: “And in Jesus Christ, His only Son,
our Lord.”--(a) “Jesus,” a name given by command of God and meaning
“Saviour”; (b) “Christ,” i.e., “the anointed,” because He was King,
Priest, and Prophet; (c) “His only Son,” i.e., born of the Father before
all ages, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God, begotten
not made, consubstantial with the Father, by whom all things were made;
(d) “our Lord,” for as God He shares all the perfections of the divine
nature, as man He has redeemed us and thus deservedly acquired the
title of Lord over us, while as the God-man He is the Lord of all
created things. It should be noted that there is nothing imperfect or
carnal in the generation of the Son, or in the procession of the Holy
Ghost, for God is a spirit and all-perfect.

772. Summary of the Third Article: “Who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.”--(a) “Who was conceived.” The
Only-begotten Son, the second Person of the Trinity, for us men and for
our salvation, became incarnate and was made man. Thus, the same Divine
Person is in both the divine and human natures, and the union preserves
the properties and the actions of both natures. (b) “By the Holy
Ghost.” At the moment when Mary consented to the announcement of the
angel, the body of Christ was formed in her womb from her flesh, the
rational soul was infused, and the divine and human natures were united
in the Person of the Word. Thus, Mary is truly the Mother of God. This
conception was miraculous, accomplished without the aid of man, through
the sole operation of the three Persons of the Trinity. Being an
external work of God in which love towards us is especially manifested,
the Incarnation is attributed to the Holy Ghost, who in the internal
life of the Deity proceeds as the mutual love of Father and Son. (c)
“Born of the Virgin Mary.” Mary was ever a virgin, before, during, and
after childbirth; immaculate and holy in soul; the spiritual Mother of
whom Christians are born in holiness.

773. Summary of the Fourth Article: “Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried.”--(a) The effect of that which is contained
in this article is expressed in the words of the Nicene Creed, “for
us.” The passion and death of Christ, willed by Himself, accomplished
our salvation, as satisfaction, sacrifice and redemption; (b) The
manner in which this was brought about is declared in the words above
quoted. In His human nature Christ suffered agony and pain of body; He
was sentenced to death by the Roman governor and nailed to the cross.
His soul and body were separated in death, although the Divinity never
departed from either, and His dead body was laid in the tomb.

774. Summary of the Fifth Article: “He descended into hell; the third
day He rose again from the dead.”--(a) “He descended.” After His death
the soul of Christ went to the abode of the departed, to liberate those
who were there. (b) “Into hell.” The name hell is applied in a wide
sense to all those secret abodes in which are detained the souls of
those who have not obtained the happiness of heaven--viz., the hell of
the damned, in which the impenitent suffer eternal pain of loss and
sense; purgatory, in which the souls of just men are cleansed by
temporary punishments; limbo, where the fathers of the Old Testament
awaited in peaceful repose the coming of Christ. It was this last abode
into which the soul of Christ entered. (c) “The third day”--i.e., on
Sunday morning, the third day after His burial. (d) “He rose again.” As
He had laid down His life by His own power, so He took it up again by
His own power. (e) “From the dead.” Christ not only returned to life,
He also conquered death; He rose to die no more, and thus He is first
in the final resurrection. (f) “According to the scriptures.” These
words are added in the Creed of Constantinople, to call attention to
the fact that the resurrection is the attestation of the truth of our
Lord’s claims and doctrine (I Cor., xv. 14, 17; Matt., xii. 39, 40).

775. Summary of the Sixth Article: “He ascended into heaven, sitteth at
the right hand of God, the Father almighty.”--(a) “He ascended.” By His
own power as God and man Christ ascended into heaven. (b) “Into
heaven.” As God, He never forsook heaven, the Divinity being
omnipresent; but as man, body and soul, He ascended to the abode of
glory forty days after the resurrection. (c) “Sitteth at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty.” Christ is said to stand at the right hand
of God, inasmuch as He is our Mediator with the Father (Acts, vii. 55;
Heb., vii. 25; John, xiv. 2); He is said to sit at the right hand of
the Father to express the permanent possession of royal and supreme
power and glory (Eph., i. 20-22; Heb., i. 13).

776. Summary of the Seventh Article: “From thence He shall come to
judge the living and the dead.”--There is a particular judgment at
death; at the end of the World, of which the time is uncertain, there
will be a general judgment, both of the living and the dead. Christ
will come a second time, and as Judge will pass sentence either of
eternal loss and pain or of eternal happiness.

777. Summary of the Eighth Article: “I believe in the Holy Ghost.”--The
Third Person of the Trinity is equal to the Father and the Son,
proceeds from them both as their mutual love, and is spoken of,
therefore, by appropriation, as the Author of works of grace and
sanctification, in which especially the charity of God is manifested:
“The Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who proceedeth from the
Father and the Son, who together with the Father and the Son is adored
and glorified, who spoke by the prophets” (Creed of Constantinople).

778. Summary of the Ninth Article: “I believe the Holy Catholic Church;
the Communion of Saints.”--(a) The Church pertains to the material, not
the formal object of divine faith (see 754), and hence it is not said:
“I believe in the Church.” We believe of the Church that she is the
visible society made up of the faithful scattered throughout the world,
called also the house of God (I Tim., iii. 15), the flock of Christ,
the spouse of Christ (II Cor., xi. 2), the body of Christ (Eph., i. 23;
Col., i. 24); that besides the Church militant on earth, composed of
both the good and the bad, and outside of which are unbelievers and the
excommunicated, there is the Church triumphant in heaven and the Church
suffering in purgatory; that there are four marks by which the true
Church may be recognized--viz., that she is one, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic; that she is divine in her origin and possesses divinely
given powers. (b) “The Communion of Saints.” The members of the Church
have different offices, but there is among them a community of
spiritual goods, the Sacraments being a bond of union, and each one
profiting according to his condition in the good works done by others,
The Church suffering is assisted by our suffrages, while we in turn are
helped by the intercessions of the Church triumphant.

779. Summary of the Tenth Article: “The forgiveness of sins.”--God
forgives all sins, when they are truly repented of, either through
Baptism (in case of sins before Baptism) or through the due exercise of
the power of the keys given the Church (in case of sins after Baptism).
Venial sins may be forgiven by private repentance.

780. Summary of the Eleventh Article: “The resurrection of the
body.”--The soul is immortal, the body mortal. But at the end of the
world the bodies of all the dead, even though corrupted, shall be
restored and reunited with their principle of life--i.e., the soul to
which they belonged. Substantially, the risen body will be identical
with the mortal body, but it will have certain new qualities
corresponding to its new state.

781. Summary of the Twelfth Article: “Life everlasting.”--Those who die
in the friendship of God will be received into unending happiness, in
which they will be exempted from all evil and enjoy the beatific vision
and other divine gifts.

782. The Acts of Faith.--According to St. Paul, there are two acts of
faith, one internal, the other external: “With the heart we believe
unto justice, but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation”
(Rom., x. 10). (a) The internal act of faith is the firm and constant
judgment of the intellect assenting to divine revelation (II Cor., x.
5), but freely and under the command of the will (Mark, xvi. 16), being
moved thereto by divine grace (Eph., ii. 5). (b) The external act of
faith is the profession before the world by signs, such as words or
deeds, of the internal assent given to divine revelation.

783. The internal act of faith is one, but it has a threefold
relationship: (a) it believes about God, if we consider the intellect
as assenting to the material object; (b) it believes God, if we
consider the intellect as assenting to the formal object; (c) it
believes in God, if we consider the will as moving the intellect to
assent, and tending towards God as the Last End.

784. The truths to which the assent of faith is given are either
supernatural or natural. (a) Supernatural truths or mysteries (e.g.,
the Trinity of Persons in God) are revealed for faith, that man may
know, desire and work for the supernatural destiny to which he has been
raised. (b) Natural truths (e.g., the Oneness of God) are revealed for
faith, so that mankind may obtain more quickly, more generally, and
more certainly the knowledge of divine things which reason can afford.
It is impossible, however, that an act of faith and an act of knowledge
should coexist in the same individual about the same truth, for faith
is of things that appear not.

785. The act of faith is a necessary preliminary to other supernatural
acts, for we do not tend towards the supernatural, unless we first
accept it by belief; hence, faith is necessary. But the act of faith
may also be made after other supernatural acts, like those of hope and
charity; and so it may be meritorious. (a) The act of faith is
necessary, both as a means and as a precept (see 360). The necessity of
means will be treated now, the necessity of precept later, when we
speak of the commandments of faith (see 913 sqq.). (b) The act of faith
before justification is meritorious congruously and in a wide sense;
but after justification it has condign merit (see 110).

786. For all adults the act of faith is necessary for salvation as a
necessity of means (see 360), for the Apostle says: “Without faith it
is impossible to please God” (Heb., xi. 6). The truths which must be
believed under necessity of means are of two kinds. (a) One must
believe with implicit faith all revealed truths which one does not know
and is not bound to know. An act of implicit faith is contained in the
formula: “O my God, I firmly believe all the truths the Catholic Church
teaches, because Thou hast revealed them.” (b) One must believe with
explicit faith all the truths which one is bound to know. An act of
explicit faith in all the truths necessary by necessity of means is
contained in the Apostles’ Creed. Other truths that must be explicitly
believed on account of a necessity of precept will be discussed in 918,
920.

787. What specifically are the truths just referred to that all are
bound to know as a necessary means? (a) Theologians generally agree
that it has always been necessary for adults to know and accept two
basic mysteries--God’s existence, as the supernatural End or happiness
of man, and His providence as exercised in supplying the means
necessary for supernatural salvation (see 768). Without such belief,
supernatural hope and charity, at all times necessary, are impossible.
(b) A majority of theologians hold, and with greater probability it
seems, that since the promulgation of the Gospel it is necessary for
adults to know and accept the two basic mysteries of Chrisitanity--
viz., that in God, who is our beatitude, there are three persons (the
Trinity), and that the way to our beatitude is through Christ our
Redeemer (the Incarnation).

788. Even before the Gospel, it was always necessary as a means that
one believe explicitly in God as our supernatural happiness and as the
provider of the means thereto. Thus, the Apostle, speaking of the
ancient patriarchs, says: “He that cometh to God, must believe that He
is, and is a rewarder to them that seek Him” (Heb., xi. 6). He that
would come to God (i.e., be saved), must believe in God as the Author
of glory and of grace. Hence, one must believe: (a) that God exists,
who is not ashamed to be called our God, and who prepares for us a
better, that is, a heavenly country (Heb., xi. 6); (b) that God is a
remunerator, from whom must be expected the working out of His promises
and the helps to attain the reward, as well as the meting out of
justice. In this faith is included implicitly a faith in Christ, and
thus in the Old Testament a belief, at least implicit, in the Messiah
to come was always necessary: “Man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ” (Gal., ii. 16).

789. Since the promulgation of the Gospel (see 342, 354), it is also
necessary as a means that one believe explicitly in the mysteries of
the Trinity and Incarnation. For he who does not accept these, does not
accept the Gospel, whereas Christ says: “Go ye into the whole world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth not shall be
condemned” (Mark, xvi. 15, 16).

(a) Theoretically, this opinion seems more probable than the opposite
opinion; but chiefly on account of the difficulty about negative
infidels, which is discussed in dogmatic treatises on Predestination
and Grace, many theologians either reject it (e.g., those who say that
belief in the two great Christian mysteries is necessary only as a
precept, or that implicit faith suffices), or modify it (e.g., those
who say that belief in these two mysteries is not necessary as a means
for justification, but only for glorification, and those who say that
regularly such faith is a necessary means, but that an exception is
allowed for invincible ignorance, or for the insufficient promulgation
of the Gospel in many regions).

(b) Practically, this opinion is safer, and hence all theologians, even
Probabilists, hold that one must act as if it were true and certain,
whenever it is possible to give instruction on the Trinity and
Incarnation.

790. Knowledge about the mysteries of faith is either substantial (by
which one knows the essentials of a mystery) or scientific (by which
one knows also its circumstances and details, and is able to give a
more profound explanation of it). Scientific knowledge is required, on
account of their office, in those who are bound to teach the faith, but
substantial knowledge suffices for salvation. Hence, for an adult to be
saved, it suffices that he have the following kind of knowledge about
the four great mysteries:

(a) There is a God who has spoken to us, promising freely that He will
take us to Himself as our reward. It is not necessary that one
understand such theological concepts as the essence of deity, the
definition of supernaturality, the formal and material objects of
beatitude, etc.; for many persons are incapable of understanding them.

(b) This God, who will be our reward, is one, but there are three
divine Persons--the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, really distinct
and equal. It is not necessary that one understand the distinction
between nature and person, nor subtle questions about the processions
and properties.

(c) God provides for us, giving us the helps we need, and also, if we
serve Him, the reward He has promised. It is not necessary that one
understand the theology of providence, grace, and merit.

(d) Jesus Christ, who is God the Son, became man, suffered and died for
us, thus saving us from sin and winning back for us the right to
heaven. It is not necessary that one understand scientifically that in
Christ there are two natures united hypostatically in the one Person of
the Word.

791. Since Baptism is fruitless without due faith in the recipient, it
is not lawful as a rule to baptize those who lack substantial knowledge
of the four mysteries just mentioned. (a) Outside of danger of death,
it is never lawful to baptize a person, adult in mind, who is in
substantial ignorance of any of these four mysteries. Such a person
must first receive instruction. (b) In danger of death, when
instruction cannot be given, an adult in substantial ignorance about
the Trinity and the Incarnation may be baptized conditionally; for it
is probable that explicit knowledge of those two mysteries is not a
necessity of means (see 789; Canon 752, Sec.2).

792. Since absolution is invalid if the person absolved is incapable of
receiving grace, and since acts of faith in the four chief mysteries
are an essential means to justification in adults, absolution given to
one who is in substantial ignorance about one of the four mysteries
above mentioned is certainly or probably invalid, as the case may be.
Absolution certainly invalid is never lawful, but absolution probably
valid may in certain cases be regarded as lawful before administration,
and as valid after administration. Hence, the following cases must be
distinguished:

(a) Outside of danger of death, it is not lawful to absolve one who is
in substantial ignorance about any of those four mysteries. Such a
person should be sent away for further instruction, or given a brief
instruction then and there, if there is time.

(b) In danger of death, when instruction cannot be given, an adult in
substantial ignorance about the Trinity and Incarnation may be absolved
conditionally, for the reason given in the similar case of Baptism.

(c) After the fact, absolution given to one who was in substantial
ignorance of the Trinity and Incarnation, may be regarded as valid,
since the opinion that explicit knowledge of these mysteries is not a
necessary means, is at least probable. Hence, according to the
principles of Probabilism a penitent who made confessions While
ignorant of those two mysteries is not obliged to repeat his
confessions, since he has probably satisfied his obligation.

793. In the following cases (which would be rare, it seems) Baptism or
absolution cannot be administered, even to the dying who are unable to
receive instruction: (a) when it is certain that the dying person is
substantially ignorant about the existence of God, the Author of grace
and glory; (b) when it is certain that the dying person is
substantially ignorant of the Trinity and Incarnation through his own
fault, and is unwilling to hear about them.

794. Practical rules for granting the Sacraments in case of doubt or
urgency to those who seem to be indisposed on account of substantial
ignorance are the following:

(a) In danger of death, when instruction is out of the question, if
there is doubt about his ignorance, the dying person should be given
the benefit of the doubt.

(b) In danger of death, and when instruction is impossible, if there is
doubt about the mental ability of the dying person and his obligation
to have explicit faith, he should receive the benefit of the doubt.

(c) In danger of death or other urgent necessity, when instruction is
needed and possible, it should be given briefly as follows: “Let us say
the act of faith: I believe in one God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
who has promised to take to Himself after this life all those that love
Him, and who punishes the wicked. I hope to have the happiness of being
received into His companionship through the help of Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, who became man and died for my salvation.” This or a
similar instruction should be given by the priest or lay person present
in baptizing an adult who is about to die. When there is not immediate
danger of death, a person who is baptized or absolved after short
instruction on account of emergency, should be admonished of the duty
of receiving fuller instruction later on.

795. Faith is the free exercise of the free assent of the intellect
to the unseen, an acceptance of obligations and tasks hard to human
nature. It is, therefore, an act of homage to the authority of God, and
is meritorious: “By faith the ancient patriarchs obtained the promises”
(Heb., xi. 33). Is the freedom and meritoriousness of this act of
faith lessened if one seeks for other arguments than the authority of
God in giving one’s assent to revelation? (a) The merit of the act of
faith is not lessened, when one seeks human arguments for the assent
of credibility which is prior to the assent of faith; for it is only
the part of prudence that one should first assure oneself of the fact
that a revelation has been made, before one assents on faith to the
doctrines contained in that revelation. Now, the arguments by which
one assures oneself of the fact of a revelation are human arguments,
such as proofs that revelation is possible and suitable, that there are
miracles, prophecies and other signs to guarantee the divine mission of
those who delivered the revelation, etc.

(b) The merit of the act of faith is not lessened if one seeks human
arguments for the preambles of faith, that is, for those divine truths
that can be established by natural reason (such as the existence
of God, His infinite knowledge and truthfulness). The person who
demonstrates these preambles by philosophical proofs, has knowledge,
not belief, about them; but the merit of faith is not lost, if,
while knowing these truths, he remains willing to accept them on the
authority of revelation.

(c) The merit of faith is not lessened, if one seeks human arguments
for the mysteries of faith, that is, for those truths of revelation
that are above human reason (such as the Trinity and the Incarnation),
provided these arguments are sought not for the demonstration, but for
the confirmation or defense of dogma. Nay, a person ought, in so far as
he is able, to use his reason in the service of faith, and to do so is
a sign, not of little, but of great faith. “Be ready always,” says St.
Peter (I Peter, iii. 15), “to satisfy everyone that asketh you a reason
of that hope which is in you.” And St. Anselm says: “It appears to me a
sign of carelessness, if, having been confirmed in the faith, we do not
take pains to understand what we believe.” St. Thomas writes: “When a
man is willing to believe, he loves the truth, meditates upon it, and
takes to heart whatever reasons he can find in support thereof; and
with regard to this, human reason does not exclude the merit of faith,
but is a sign of greater merit.”

(d) The merit of faith is lessened if one seeks human arguments as the
formal object, that is, as the motive on which faith is grounded; for
then one does not wish to believe, or to believe so readily, on the
word of God alone, but feels one must call in other testimony to
support it.

The attempt to understand mysteries or to establish them by natural
reason is opposed to the humble assent of faith: “He that is a
searcher of majesty, shall be overwhelmed by glory” (Prov., xxv. 27);
“Seek not the things that are too high for thee, and search not into
things above thy ability” (Ecclus., iii. 22); “Faith loses its merit,
if it is put to the test of reason” (St. Gregory the Great, Hom. xxvi).

796. Besides the internal act of acceptance of revealed truth, faith
has also external acts. (a) It commands the external acts of the other
virtues, that is, acts directed to the specific ends of those virtues.
Hence, one who fasts exercises an external act of the virtue of
temperance, but it is his faith in the virtue that commands the fast.
(b) Faith elicits the external act of profession of faith as its own
proper external act directed to its own specific end: “I believed, for
which cause I have spoken” (Ps. cxv. 10; II Cor., iv. 13). External
profession of faith, therefore, is not an act proceeding from faith; it
is an act of faith. The necessity of this act will be considered below
in the article about the commandments of faith.

797. The Habit of Faith.--Faith is not only an act that passes, but it
is also a permanent quality or habit conferred by God, one of the “most
great and perfect promises” which man must make use of (II Peter, i. 3
sqq.), a charism that is not for a time but for all this life, just
like hope and charity (I Cor., xiii. 13). God, who does all things
sweetly (Wis., viii. 1), and who has provided for His natural creatures
internal powers by which they incline and move themselves towards the
ends of their activities, has not done less for those whom He moves to
a supernatural destiny; and, in justifying the sinner, He infuses along
with grace the supernatural virtues of faith, hope and charity (Council
of Trent, Sess. VI, Cap. 6).

798. The virtue of faith is thus defined by the Council of the Vatican:
“Faith is a supernatural virtue, by which, with the help of God’s
grace, we believe the truths revealed by Him, not on account of an
intrinsic evidence of the truths themselves, perceived by natural
reason, but on account of the authority of God who revealed them.”

799. Hence, the virtue of faith has the following properties:

(a) It is supernatural, not only because its object and motive are
supernatural, but because it proceeds from a supernatural principle,
i.e., grace (John, vi, 29; Eph., ii. 8).

(b) It is obscure, because the believer assents to that which has no
intrinsic evidence for him. He does not see its truth as the blessed
see God, for “we see now through a glass in a dark manner, but then
face to face” (I Cor., xiii. 12). He does not know its truth as he
knows evident or naturally demonstrated propositions, for faith is
about truths that surpass reason--things “that appear not.” This, of
course, does not mean that faith is not rightly called a new light
added to the mind, and that the motives which call for the acceptance
of faith are not evidently credible.

(c) It is free, because, although one cannot dissent from that which is
evident intrinsically (e.g., that two and two make four), one is able
to dissent from that which is obscure.

(d) It is not a process of reasoning, but a simple act of assent, in
which one accepts at the same time the authority of the Revealer and
the truth of His revelation. “Jesus said to her (Martha): I am the
resurrection and the life .... Believest thou this? She saith to Him:
Yea, Lord, I have believed that Thou art the Christ, etc.” (John, xi.
25-27).

(e) It is firm and unshaken in a far higher degree than the assent of
understanding and science, since it rests on the infallible authority
of God (I Thess., ii. 13).

800. Before justification, faith exists, it seems, only as an act
performed under the influence of actual or transitory grace. After the
infusion of habitual grace, faith is a habit or infused virtue. But
there are two modes of existence characteristic of this one habit, and
hence the distinction of living and dead faith (Gal., v. 6; James, ii.
26).

(a) Living faith is that which is informed or animated by charity. This
latter virtue is called the soul of all the other virtues, inasmuch as
it directs them to their supreme end, divine friendship, and gives
meritorious value to their works. All those have living faith who join
to belief a life in agreement with belief--that is, the state of grace,
love of God and good works.

(b) Dead faith is that which is separated from charity. It is a true
virtue, because it directs the assent of the intellect to its proper
end; but it is an imperfect virtue, because its acts are not directed
to the Last End, and are not meritorious of eternal life. All those who
believe, but who do not live up to their belief in matters of
importance, who neglect serious duties to God or others, have dead
faith. Examples are those who call themselves Catholics, but neglect
attendance at church and the reception of the Sacraments.

801. Those who have, or who had faith, are the following:

(a) the Angels in the state of probation and our first parents in
Paradise, for faith is necessary as a means in every condition short of
the beatific vision (see 785, 158); (b) those in this life who are in
the friendship of God, and also those believers who are not in the
friendship of God, the former having living, and the latter dead faith
(see 800); (c) the souls in purgatory, the ancient patriarchs in limbo.

802. Those who have not faith are the following: (a) those who have
vision of the truths of faith, that is, the Saints in heaven and Christ
while on earth (I Cor., xiii. 10); (b) those who reject obstinately
even one doctrine of faith, for, if individual judgment is put above
the authority of God even in one point, the motive or keystone of
faith, and therefore faith itself, is no longer assented to; (c) the
lost, for, being cut off entirely from grace, these possess no virtue
infused by God. “The devils believe and tremble” (James, ii. 19), but
their belief is not supernatural or free, but natural and unwilling.

803. Of those who have faith, some have greater, and some less faith.
Thus, our Lord reproved St. Peter for his little faith (Matt., xiv.
31), and praised the Woman of Canaan for her great faith (Matt., xv.
28). But since all are obliged to have supreme confidence in God and to
accept all He teaches, how is there room for different degrees of faith?

(a) Faith must be supreme appreciatively, that is, all must put the
formal object of faith, the motive of its assent, above every other
motive of assent, for the First Truth speaking deserves more adherence
than any other authority. In this respect, therefore, and in the
exclusion of every doubt, the faith of all is equal. But faith need not
be supreme intensively, that is, it is not required that the intellect
should feel the assent of faith more than the assent given to natural
truth, or that the will must experience the highest alacrity, devotion
and confidence; for the truths that are nearer to us move us more
vehemently than do higher and invisible truths. Hence, in this respect
the faith of one may be more firm or fervent than the faith of another,
according as one is more childlike, more loving, more intense in his
acceptance of God’s Word than another.

(b) Faith must be universal, that is, we must accept the entire
material object of revelation, and none may pick and choose according
to his likes or fancies, for all of revelation has God for its Author.
In this respect the faith of all is equal, all believers accepting
twelve articles, while those who accept eleven or six or one or none,
are not believers. But faith need not be explicit as to all its
doctrines, and hence, while one believer who is not thoroughly
instructed may know only the twelve articles of the Creed, another
believer who is better instructed may know the hundreds of other truths
that are contained in the articles. In this way the faith of one is
greater extensively.

804. Can faith grow or decline in the same person? (a) If there is
question of acts of faith, the later acts can be more or less firm or
fervent than those that preceded, in the way explained in the previous
paragraph. In this sense we may understand the Apostles to have asked
of our Lord a higher degree of faith, that they might work miracles in
His name (Luke, xvii. 5). (b) If there is question of the habit of
faith, it itself is increased at every increase of sanctifying grace
(see 745). St. Paul writes to the Corinthians (II Cor., x. 15) that he
has hope of their “increasing faith.” Moreover, by repeated acts of
faith the ease and delight with which the habit is exercised increases,
as is the case with acquired habits. But the habit of faith is not
diminished directly as was explained regarding the infused virtues in
general (see 745).

805. The means of growing in faith are: (a) prayer to the Father of
lights: “Lord, increase our faith” (Luke, xvii. 5); (b) reading of the
scriptures, the Lives of the Saints and other similar works, and
attendance at spiritual instructions; (c) frequent acts of faith in the
world we see not and its coming rewards; (d) exercise of faith, by
directing our thoughts, words, and actions according to the teaching of
faith, rather than according to the maxims of the world; for “the just
man liveth by faith” (Heb., x. 38), and “faith without works is dead”
(James, ii. 20).

806. The cause of faith is God. (a) It is God who directly through
revelation, or indirectly through the Church, the evangelists,
preachers, etc., “brings the message before man” (Rom., x. 15); (b) it
is God who “causes the mind of man to assent” to His message. No matter
how persuasive the teacher or how well disposed or learned the hearer
may be, faith will not come unless the light of grace leads the way
(Eph., ii. 8).

807. The effects of faith are fear of God and purification of the
heart. (a) Dead faith causes one to fear the penalties of divine
justice, that is, to have servile fear (James, ii. 19): living faith
causes one to fear sin itself, that is, to have filial fear. (b) Faith,
by elevating man to higher things, purifies his soul from the
defilements of lower things (Acts, xv. 9): if faith is dead, it at
least purifies the intellect from error; if it is living, it also
purifies the will from evil.

808. The Gifts of Understanding and Knowledge.--As was said above (see
159), the Gifts of the Holy Ghost are intended as means for perfecting
the theological virtues. There are two Gifts that serve the virtue of
faith, namely, the Gifts of Understanding and Knowledge.

(a) Faith, being assent, must have a right idea of what is proposed for
acceptance; but, as it is obscure (see 799), and as there are things
apart from faith that may corrupt our notion of it, the Gift of
Understanding is conferred, a simple perception and divine intuition
through which one receives a correct notion of the mysteries of faith.

(b) Faith, being the starting point of all supernatural activities,
must be the norm by which we judge of what we should think and do in
the affairs of life; but, as it is a simple act of assent (see 799) and
as the creatures of the world are a temptation and a snare (Wis., xiv.
11), the Gift of Knowledge is given, through which one receives a
correct judgment about the things of this world. These then take on a
new and fuller significance in the light of the teachings of faith.

809. The Gift of Understanding must not be confused with the Beatific
Vision. (a) A perfect penetration of the mysteries, which enables one
to perceive their essence and causes (e.g., the how and the why of the
Trinity), is given by the Beatific Vision; but such understanding
removes all obscurity, and is therefore insociable with faith. (b) An
imperfect penetration of the teachings of faith, which does not take
away the obscurity and mysteriousness, is given by the Gift of
Understanding, and is therefore sociable with faith. The effects of
this Gift are: it distinguishes the truths of faith from false
doctrines; it conveys a clear view of the credibility of the mystery of
faith against all difficulties and objections; it gives knowledge of
the supernatural import of the secondary truths of faith, that is, of
those revealed happenings and facts that are not themselves
supernatural (Luke, xxiv. 32); it gives understanding of the practical
aspect of a mystery--for example, that the intratrinitarian relations
of the Divine Persons are a model for the regulation of the Christian
life, in knowledge and love of divine things.

810. The Gift of Knowledge, which like the other Gifts is had by all
the just, must not be confused with sacred knowledge or theology, nor
with the extraordinary gifts of infused knowledge and the charism of
knowledge.

(a) The Gift of Knowledge resembles theology in that it reproduces
objectively what reason does when it argues from the visible world to
the invisible Creator; but, while subjectively theology is the result
of study in which one passes successively from premise to conclusion.
Knowledge is the result of a divine light that may be found even in the
illiterate, and it takes in at a glance all that is contained in a
process of argumentation. Through this Gift the wonders of nature, the
events of history, the arguments of philosophy, lead one firmly and
spontaneously to the Last End and the supernatural realities of faith.

(b) Infused knowledge may have for its object things purely natural
(such as truths of philosophy and the ability to speak foreign
languages), while the Gift of Knowledge is concerned only with faith,
judging what is to be believed or done according to faith.

(c) The charism of knowledge (I Cor., xii. 8) is a grace given one for
the benefit of others, by which one is able to communicate to them
successfully the teachings of faith; the Gift of Knowledge, on the
contrary, proceeds from the habit of sanctifying grace, and is intended
for the benefit of its recipient.

811. To each of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost correspond Beatitudes and
Fruits (see 159).

(a) To the Gift of Understanding corresponds the Sixth Beatitude:
“Blessed are the pure of heart, for they shall see God.” For by
Understanding the mind is pure from wrong ideas of truth, and sees that
God is above all that the intellect can comprehend. The two fruits that
proceed from Understanding are faith (i.e., conviction about revealed
truth) and ultimately joy, in union with God through charity. (b) To
the Gift of Knowledge corresponds the Third Beatitude: “Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.” For by Knowledge one
judges rightly about created things, grieves over the wrong use made of
them, and is comforted when they are turned to their proper end.




Art. 2: THE SINS AGAINST FAITH

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 10-15.)

812. The sins against faith can all be reduced to four heads: (a) sins
of unbelief (see 813-886), which are opposed to the internal act of
faith; (b) sins of blasphemy (see 887-903), which are opposed to the
external act of faith; (c) sins of ignorance (see 904-911), which are
opposed to the Gift of Knowledge; (d) sins of blindness and dullness
(912), which are opposed to the Gift of Understanding.

813. The Sin of Unbelief.--Unbelief in general is a want of faith. It
is of two kinds, negative and positive.

(a) Negative unbelief is the absence of faith in a person who has never
heard of it at all, or only insufficiently. Thus, the Indians in
America before the coming of Christian missionaries were negative
unbelievers. This kind of unbelief is a punishment, since it results
from original sin; but it is not a sin itself, and those who die in
negative unbelief are lost, not on account of this, but on account of
sins against the natural law (John, xv. 22; Rom., x. 14). With this
kind of unbelief we are not here concerned.

(b) Positive unbelief is the absence of faith in one who has heard it
sufficiently, so that the lack of it is due to his own fault. This kind
of unbelief is, of course, a sin, for it supposes that one is acting
against the light one has received.

814. Positive unbelief is either a refusal or a renouncement of faith.
(a) Ordinary unbelief is a refusal of faith, that is, non-acceptance of
faith by one who has never had faith; (b) apostasy, or desertion, is
the abandonment of faith by one who formerly accepted it. This is not a
distinct kind of unbelief, since, like ordinary unbelief, it has for
its object or term the denial of revealed truth; but it is an
aggravating circumstance of unbelief (II Peter, ii. 21).

815. The sin of unbelief is, committed either directly or indirectly.
(a) It is committed directly, when one rejects what pertains to faith
(its acts, objects or motive); (b) it is committed indirectly, when one
guiltily places oneself or others in the occasion or danger of
unbelief. The dangers against faith will be considered after the sins
of unbelief (see 848-886).

816. Direct sins of unbelief are those opposed to the elements that
belong to the nature of faith and that are contained in its definition
(see 751, 798). (a) Opposed to the act of assent are sins of non-assent
or dissent (see 817-839); (b) opposed to the certitude and firmness of
assent are sins of doubt (840-846); (c) opposed to the right object of
faith are sins of credulity (847); (d) opposed to the motive of faith
is rationalism (847).

817. Sins of non-assent are those by which one omits to make an act of
faith when one should. This kind of sin will be treated when we come to
the commandments of faith as to its internal and external acts (see 925
sqq.)

818. Sins of dissent are sins of commission, and are of two kinds: (a)
privative unbelief, which is the want of faith in one who has heard the
faith sufficiently and should realize the obligation of embracing it,
but who refuses to believe, although he makes no opposition to faith;
(b) contrary unbelief, which is the want of faith in one who has heard
the faith and its motives of credibility sufficiently to know the duty
of embracing it, and who not only refuses to believe, but even accepts
the errors opposed to faith.

819. What is the gravity of sins of dissent, doubt, and rationalism?
(a) From their nature, these sins are always mortal, for they refuse to
God the homage of the intellect and will that is due Him, deprive man
of the beginning of spiritual life, and lead to eternal condemnation
(Mark, xvi. 16). (b) From their circumstances, these and other sins
against faith may be venial (see 180-184). Thus, if a man refuses to
believe or accepts error, not having sufficient knowledge of his
obligation or not fully consenting to the sin, his fault is venial
subjectively or formally.

820. Are sins against faith more serious than all other kinds of sin?
(a) From their nature, sins against faith are worse than sins against
the moral virtues, for the former offend directly against God Himself,
but not so the latter. Hatred of God, however, is a greater sin than
sins of unbelief, as will be shown when we treat of sins against
charity. (b) From their circumstances, sins against faith may be less
serious than sins against the moral virtues. Example: A venial sin
against faith is less serious than a mortal sin against justice.

821. With regard to the effect of sins against faith on good acts it
should be noted: (a) an unbeliever is able to perform works that are
ethically or naturally good (Rom., ii. 14), and the Church has
condemned the opposite teaching of Baius (Denzinger, _Enchiridion_, n.
1025). (b) an unbeliever is not able to perform works that are
supernaturally good and meritorious (see 112).

822. Contrary unbelief (see 818), which not only refuses to believe but
also assents to contrary errors, has three degrees according to the
greater or less number of truths denied or errors admitted in these
three degrees. Some theologians see different species of unbelief,
while other theologians regard them as only accidental modes or
circumstances of the one species of sin.

(a) The most extensive denial of faith is found in infidelity, which
rejects both Christ and His revelation. To this form of unbelief belong
atheism, agnosticism, pantheism, paganism, polytheism, animism, and
denials of Christ and Christianity. The chief religious bodies today
that profess such errors are: Confucianism, Taoism and Shintoism
(founded in China and Japan), which are polytheistic and practise
idolatry and ancestor worship; Brahmanism (founded about 14 centuries
before Christ), which is polytheistic or animistic: Buddhism (founded
6th century B.C. in India), which is polytheistic and practises
idolatry; Zoroastrianism (founded in Persia about the 7th century
B.C.), which is dualistic; Mohammedanism (founded in Arabia in the
6th century A.D.), which makes Mohammed and his religion superior to
Christ and Christianity, and rejects the Trinity and the Incarnation.
(b) A less complete departure from faith is found when Christ and His
revelation are accepted as contained in the figures and prophecies of
the Old Testament, but rejected in their fulfillment and development in
Jesus and the New Testament. This is the error of Judaism, which today
has about 15 million adherents.

(c) A still smaller degree of rejection of faith exists when Christ
is recognized as leader and teacher, but not all of His revelation
is accepted. This kind of error is called heresy, and those bodies
which profess it are known as sects. The chief heresies in times past
were Gnosticism and Manicheism in the first centuries; Arianism and
Macedonianism in the fourth century; Nestorianism, Monophysism and
Pelagianism in the fifth century; Monothelism in the seventh century;
Iconoclasm in the eighth century; Photianism in the ninth century;
Albigensianism in the eleventh century; Waldensianism in the twelfth
century; Wicliffism in the fourteenth century; Hussism in the fifteenth
century; Protestantism in the sixteenth century, and Modernism in the
twentieth century. Today, the erring Christian groups outside the
Church are the Orientals, called Orthodox, and the Protestants.

823. Since error is not consistent, false teachings are found that
accept all the above-mentioned degrees of unbelief, or borrow
impartially from all.

(a) Indifferentism or Latitudinarianism holds that all forms of
religion are equally true, and that it makes no difference whether
one is Buddhist, Jew or Christian. In a modified form, Indifferentism
teaches that any form of Christian belief, provided it suits the
inclinations of the individual concerned, may be followed, and hence it
is left to each one to decide whether he prefers Catholicism or one of
the bodies of the Orthodox Church or of Protestantism. Many who profess
a denominational creed or confession are Indifferentists in belief.

(b) Syncretism holds that there are truths in all separate religions,
but that none of them has all the truth, and hence that one must select
what is good from each, rejecting the evil. Thus, the Judaizers of the
first century borrowed from Judaism, the Gnostics and Manicheans from
paganism, while today Freemasonry, Theosophy, Christian Science and
Spiritism accept, along with the Gospel, ancient pagan, Buddhistic,
Brahmanistic and Mohammedan theories; finally, Mormonism endeavors to
unite characteristics of the Old and the New Testament dispensations.
In a restricted form, religious Syncretism teaches the doctrine of
Pan-Christianism--that is, that truth is scattered among the various
Christian denominations, and that all should confederate as equals on
the basis of more important doctrines to be agreed on by all.

824. What is the order of gravity in unbelief, as between infidelity,
Judaism, heresy?

(a) The gravity of a sin against faith is to be determined primarily
from the subjective resistance made to faith, so that he sins more
against the light to whom greater light was given. The sin of unbelief
in one who has received the Gospel (heresy), is greater than the same
sin in one who has accepted only the Old Testament (Judaism); in one
who has received the revelation of the Old Testament (Judaism) the
sin of unbelief is more serious than the same sin in one who has not
received that revelation (infidelity).

(b) The gravity of unbelief is measured secondarily from the objective
opposition of error to truth, so that he is farther away from faith who
is farther away from Christ and the Gospel. Thus, a Buddhist denies
Christian truths more radically than a Jew, and a Jew more radically
than a Protestant. Hence, of three apostates, one to Protestantism,
another to Judaism and a third to Buddhism, the second sins more
grievously than the first, the third more grievously than the second.

825. If we leave out of consideration the radical truth of divine
revelation (formal object of faith), it is possible that a heretic,
in spite of his acceptance of Christ and the scriptures, should be
farther away objectively from faith than an infidel--that is, that he
should deny more revealed truths (material objects of faith). Thus, the
Manicheans called themselves followers and disciples of Christ, but
their teaching on God contains more errors than does the doctrine of
many pagans.

826. Heresy.--Heresy is defined as “an error manifestly opposed to
faith and assented to obstinately by one who had sincerely embraced the
faith of Christ.”

(a) It is called “error,” that is, positive assent given to error, or
dissent from truth. Hence, those who merely act or speak as if they do
not believe, but who internally do believe, are not heretics, although
in the external forum they may fall under the presumption of heresy.
Similarly, those who have doubts or difficulties in matters of faith,
but who do not allow these to sway their judgment, are not guilty of
heresy, since they give no positive assent to error (see 842 sqq.).
Examples: Titus is internally convinced of the truth of the Church’s
teaching; but he attends Protestant services, says he does not believe
the Trinity, refuses to make a profession of faith required by the
Church, separates himself from obedience to the authorities of the
Church, and calls himself an independent. By his former external acts
he makes himself guilty of disobedience and falls under the suspicion
of heresy, and by his last external act he incurs the guilt of schism;
but, since internally he does not disbelieve, he is not a heretic.
Balbus has doubts before his mind from his reading or conversation, but
he must immediately give his whole attention to a very pressing matter
of business, and so gives neither assent nor dissent to the doubts. He
is not guilty of heresy, since he formed no positive erroneous judgment.

(b) Heresy is “opposed to faith.” By faith here is understood divine
faith, especially divine and Catholic faith (see 755). Hence, an error
opposed to what one held to be a genuine private revelation, or to the
public revelation, especially when dogmatically defined by the Church,
is heretical. On the contrary, an error opposed to ecclesiastical faith
alone, to human faith, or to human science, is not of itself heretical.
Examples: The Saints who received special private revelations from
Christ with proofs of their genuineness would have been guilty of
heresy, had they refused to believe. Sempronius refuses to believe some
Biblical teachings about things not pertaining to faith and morals and
not expressly defined by the Church (e.g., chronological, physical,
geographical, statistical data). If he really believes that what he
denies is contained in the Bible, he is guilty of heresy. Balbus admits
the infallibility and authority of the Church, but he does not believe
that a certain Saint solemnly canonized is in heaven, that a certain
non-infallible decision of a Roman Congregation is true, that certain
second lessons of the Breviary or certain relics are genuine. He is
not a heretic, since, as supposed, he denies no revealed truth; but
in his first unbelief he sins against ecclesiastical faith; in his
second unbelief, if the contrary of the decision has not been clearly
established, he sins against the duty of religious assent; in his
third unbelief, he sins against prudence, if he has no good grounds
for his opinion, or against the respect due the Church, if he is moved
by contempt for its judgment. In a conversation between A, B, C, D
and E, the following opinions are defended. A thinks that any use of
natural knowledge with reference to matters of faith is wrong; B, that
the theologian should employ mathematics and physical science, but
avoid reasoning and philosophy; C, that the method and principles of
Scholasticism are not suited to our ago or to all peoples; D, that the
psychology and cosmology of the Scholastics should be remade entirely;
E, that many hypotheses of Aristotle in physics have been proved false.
The opinion of A contains heresies condemned in the Vatican Council
regarding the preambles of faith and the motives of credibility. The
opinions of B and C are at least contrary to the religious assent due
the authority of the Church (see Denzinger, Enchiridion, nn. 1652,
1680, 1713, Code of Canon Law, Canon 1366, Sec.2, _Humani Generis_, n.
11-14). The opinion of D, as it stands, contains a denial of several
doctrines of faith, such as the immortality of the soul and the
creation of the world, and is thus implicitly heretical. The opinion of
E is true and admitted by all.

(c) By “opposed” to faith is meant any judgment which, according to the
logical rules of opposition between propositions, is irreconcilable
with the truth of a formula of dogma or of a censure of heresy.
Examples: The Council of Trent defined that “all sins committed after
Baptism can be forgiven in the Sacrament of Penance.” It would be
heretical, therefore, to hold that “no sins committed after Baptism can
be pardoned in the Sacrament of Penance” (contrary opposition), or that
“some sins committed after Baptism cannot be absolved” (contradictory
opposition), Similarly, the Council of Trent (Sess. VI, Can. 7)
rejected the proposition that “all Works done before justification are
sinful,” and hence according to Logic the contradictory--viz., that
“some works before justification are not sinful”--is of faith, for two
contradictories cannot both be false; the contrary--viz., that “no
works before justification are sinful”--is not, however, defined, for
two contraries can both be false.

(d) Heresy is “manifestly opposed to faith.” He who denies what is
only probably a matter of faith, is not guilty of heresy. Example: The
Instruction of Eugenius IV on the matter of the Sacraments is held by
some authorities of note not to be a definition, and hence those who
accept opposite theories are not on that account heretical.

(e) Heresy is “assented to obstinately,” This is the distinctive note
of heresy, and hence those who assent to error through ignorance,
whether vincible or invincible, are not heretics, if they are willing
to accept the truth when known. A heretic, therefore, is one who
knowingly refuses to admit a truth proposed by the Church, whether his
motive be pride, desire of contradicting, or any other vice.

(f) Heresy is held “by one who had sincerely embraced the faith of
Christ.” This includes only catechumens and the baptized, for others
who deny the truths of faith are Jews or infidels, not heretics.

827. The sin of heresy (heresy before God), as just defined, differs
from the canonical crime of heresy (heresy before the Church), since
it is more inclusive. (a) These two differ as regards the error in the
intellect, for one is guilty of the sin, but not of the crime, even
without error--that is, if one denies what is really false, thinking
it to be defined doctrine; (b) they differ as regards the obstinacy in
the will, for one is guilty of the sin, but not of the crime, if one
is prepared in mind and purpose to deny a truth not yet defined, if it
is ever defined; (c) they differ as regards the truths rejected, for
one is guilty of the sin, but not of the crime, if one rejects divinely
revealed truths not defined as such by the Church; (d) they differ as
regards the person who denies, for not everyone who merely accepted the
faith of Christ can be guilty of the crime of heresy, but only those
who after Baptism retain the name of Christian (Canon 1325, Sec.2).

828. Various Kinds of Heresy.--(a) Heresy is positive when error is
accepted (e.g., the doctrine of consubstantiation); it is negative when
truth is denied (e.g., the doctrine of transubstantiation).

(b) Heresy is internal, when it is in the mind alone and not externally
professed. It is external, when expressed in an external way (i.e.,
by words, signs, acts or circumstances that clearly indicate present
heresy), if this is done not for a good purpose, such as that of asking
advice, but for the purpose of professing error.

(c) External heresy is occult, when it is made known to no one, or only
to a few; it is public or notorious, when it is made known before a
large number and cannot be concealed. Example: One who calls himself
a Catholic and is known as such, but who in conversation with a few
intimate friends declares himself a Modernist, is an occult heretic.
One who declares in public addresses or articles that he agrees with
Modernism, or who joins openly an heretical sect or has always belonged
to one, is a public heretic.

(d) Occult and public heresy may be either formal or material,
according as one is in good or bad faith. Heresy is formal, if its
malice is known and willed by the one in error; if its malice is not
known by him, it is material.

829. Heresy is not formal unless one pertinaciously rejects the truth,
knowing his error and consenting to it.

(a) One must know that one’s belief is opposed to divine revelation
or to Catholic faith. Hence, those who were born and brought up in
Protestantism, and who in good faith accept the confession of their
denomination, are not formal but material heretics. Even those who
are ignorant of their errors through grave fault and who hold to them
firmly, are guilty, not of formal heresy, but of sinful ignorance (see
904 sqq.)

(b) One must willingly consent to the error. But for formal heresy it
is not required that a person give his assent out of malice, or that
he continue in obstinate rejection for a long time, or that he refuse
to heed admonitions given him. Pertinacity here means true consent
to recognized error, and this can proceed from weakness (e.g., from
anger or other passion); it can be given in an instant, and does not
presuppose an admonition disregarded. Hence, if one sees the truth
of the Catholic Church, but fears that assent will involve many
obligations and out of weakness turns away from the truth, one then and
there pertinaciously consents to error.

830. Examples of material heresy are: (a) Catholics who deny certain
dogmas of faith, because they have not been well instructed, but who
are ready to correct their errors, whenever the Church’s teaching is
brought home to them; (b) non-Catholics who do not accept the Catholic
Church, but who have never had any misgivings about the tenets of their
own denomination, or who in doubts have searched for the truth to the
best of their ability.

831. The sinfulness of heresy is as follows: (a) formal heresy is a
grave sin, as was said above regarding unbelief in general (see 819;
Tit., iii. 10); (b) material heresy is no sin at all, if the ignorance
is invincible; it is a grave or a venial sin, according to the amount
of negligence, if the ignorance is vincible.

832. Circumstances of the sin of heresy are of various kinds. (a)
Circumstances that change the species. Most theologians hold that
the particular article denied, or the particular sect adhered to,
does not constitute a particular species of heresy, and hence that
in confession it suffices for one to accuse oneself generically of
heresy. (b) Circumstances that aggravate the sin. The facts that heresy
is external, that it is manifested to a large number, that it is
joined with apostasy and adhesion to an heretical sect, etc., increase
the accidental malice of this sin. (c) Circumstances that multiply
the number of sins. It seems that when several articles or defined
truths are denied at the same time, so many numerically distinct sins
are committed (see 219). Example: Titus says: “I do not accept the
Resurrection, either of Christ or of the dead.” The act is one, but two
sins are committed.

833. Various penalties and inhabilities are incurred through heresy,
for example, excommunication _latae sententiae_ reserved to the Pope
(Canon 2314), loss of the power of suffrage (Canon 167, Sec.1, n.4),
irregularity (Canon 984, n. 5; 985), inhability for the office of
sponsor (Canons 765, 795), deprivation of ecclesiastical burial (Canon
1240, Sec.1, n. 1). The excommunication which perhaps had been incurred
by those who now wish to join the Church is absolved according to the
form for the reception of converts prescribed by the Congregation of
the Holy Office, July 20, 1859, and found in rituals. Rituals published
after March, 1942, contain the formula of profession of faith and
abjuration approved by the Holy Office.

834. If a confessor should meet with a case of heresy, his procedure
will be as follows: (a) If the heresy was merely internal, no censure
was incurred, and every confessor has power to absolve from the sin,
no matter how serious it was. (b) If the heresy was external, but the
person was in good faith, or even in affected ignorance of the sin, or
inculpably ignorant of the penalty, no censure was incurred; for the
excommunication attaches only to formal heresy, and contumacity (Canon
2242). (c) If the heresy was external and formal, but not notorious
(i.e., the party did not publicly join an heretical sect), ordinarily
the case should be brought before the bishop for absolution in the
external or internal forum. But in urgent cases every confessor has
power to absolve as prescribed in Canon 2254. (d) If the heresy was
public and notorious (i.e., if the party joined officially an heretical
sect), absolution is regularly to be given in both the external and
internal forums. The case should be submitted first to the Ordinary,
unless there is urgency (Cfr. Canon 2254), or the confessor has special
powers from Rome. The Ordinary can absolve in the external forum.
Afterwards, the heretic can be absolved by any confessor in the forum
of conscience (see Canon 2314, Sec.2.)

835. Apostasy.--Apostasy (etymologically, desertion) has various
meanings in theology.

(a) In a special sense, it means the abandonment of the religious or
clerical state; but in its usual sense it means the abandonment of the
Christian religion.

(b) Apostasy from faith in a wide sense includes both partial
abandonment (heresy) and total abandonment; but, in the strict sense,
it means only total abandonment of Christianity.

Example: A Christian who denies one article of the Creed becomes a
heretic and an apostate in a wide sense; if he rejects the entire
Creed, he becomes an infidel and an apostate in the strict sense.

(c) Apostasy which extends to infidelity is also twofold: before God
and before the Church. The first kind is committed by any person
who really had faith, even though unbaptized or not a Catholic; the
second kind is committed only by those who were baptized and were
Catholics. Examples: A catechumen who accepted Christianity and asked
for Baptism, becomes an apostate before God if he abandons his belief
and purpose and goes back to paganism. Similarly, a person brought up
as a Lutheran becomes an apostate before God, if he abandons all belief
in Christianity. But the crime of apostasy of which the Church takes
cognizance is the desertion of Christianity by a baptized Catholic.

(d) A Catholic apostatizes from Christianity, either privatively (by
merely renouncing all belief in Christ), or contrarily (by taking up
some form of unbelief, such as indifferentism or free thought, or by
joining some infidel sect, such as Mohammedanism or Confucianism).

836. What was said above regarding the gravity, divisions, penalties
and absolution of heresy, can be applied also to apostasy.

887. As to the comparative gravity of sins of apostasy, the following
should be noted. (a) Apostasy is not a species of sin distinct from
heresy, since both are essentially the same in malice, being rejections
of the authority of divine revelation; but it is a circumstance that
aggravates the malice of unbelief, since it is more sweeping than
heresy (see 822, 824). (b) Apostasy into one form of infidelity is
not specifically different from apostasy into another, but the form
of infidelity is an aggravating or extenuating circumstance. Example:
Paganism is further from faith than Mohammedanism; atheism further than
paganism.

838. Could one ever have a just reason for abandoning the Catholic
Church or remaining outside its faith? (a) Objectively speaking, there
can never be a just cause for giving up Catholicism or for refusing
to embrace it. For the Catholic Church is the only true Church, and
it is the will of Christ that all should join it. (b) Subjectively
speaking, there may be a just cause for leaving or not entering the
Church, namely, the fact that a person, ignorant in this matter but
in good faith, believes that the Catholic Church is not the true
Church. For one is obliged to follow an erroneous conscience, and,
if the error is invincible, one is excused from sin (see 581-583).
Examples: A Protestant taught to believe that the teachings of the
Church are idolatrous, superstitious and absurd, is not blamed for not
accepting them. A Catholic, poorly instructed in religion and thrown
in with non-Catholic and anti-Catholic associates, might become really
persuaded, and without sinning against faith itself, that it was his
duty to become a Protestant.

839. Apostasy is committed not only by those who leave the Church and
join some contrary religion (e.g., Mormonism), but also by those who,
while professing to be Catholics, assent to the non-Catholic principles
of some society that claims to be philosophical, charitable, economic,
patriotic, etc. Much more are those apostates who join societies that
openly conspire against the Church. Such are: (a) Societies that are
really non-Catholic sects, because they have an infidel or heretical
creed--e.g., Freemasonry (which, according to its own authorities, is
a brotherhood based on Egyptian mysteries and claiming superiority to
Christianity), Theosophy (which is a conglomeration of nonsensical
ideas about the Deity, Christ and Redemption), the Red International,
whose aims are the destruction of property rights, etc; (b) Societies
that are anti-Catholic sects, because their creed is hatred of the
Church--e.g., the Orangemen’s Society, the Grand Orient, the Ku Klux
Klan, Junior Order, etc.

840. The Sin of Doubt.--Faith as explained above must be firm assent,
excluding doubt (see 752, 799), and hence the saying: “He who doubts
is an unbeliever.” The word “doubt,” however, has many meanings, and
in some of those meanings it is not opposed to firm assent, or has not
the voluntariness or acceptance of error that the unbelief of heresy or
infidelity includes. To begin with, doubt is either methodical or real.

(a) Methodical doubt in matters of faith is an inquiry into the motives
of credibility of religion and the reasons that support dogma, made
by one who has not the slightest fear that reason or science can ever
contradict faith, but who consults them for the purpose of clarifying
his knowledge and of strengthening his own faith or that of others.
This kind of doubt is employed by St. Thomas Aquinas, who questions
about each dogma in turn (e.g., “Whether God is good”), and examines
the objections of unbelievers against it; but unlike his namesake, the
doubting Apostle, he does not withhold assent until reason has answered
the objectors, but answers his own questions by an act of faith: “In
spite of all difficulties, God is good, for His Word says: ‘The Lord is
good to them that hope in Him, to the soul that seeketh Him’ (Lament,
iii. 25).”

(b) Real doubt, on the contrary, entertains fears that the teachings
of revelation or of the Church may be untrue, or that the opposite
teachings may be true.

841. Real doubt in matters of faith is always unjustifiable in itself,
for there is never any just reason for doubting God’s word; but it
is not always a sin of heresy or of infidelity. There are two kinds
of real doubt, viz., the involuntary and the voluntary. (a) Doubt is
involuntary, when it is without or contrary to the inclination of the
will, or when it proceeds from lack of knowledge (see 40-55 on the
Impediments to Voluntariness). Example: Indeliberate doubts, and doubts
that persist in spite of one, lack the inclination of the will, while
doubts that proceed from invincible ignorance lack knowledge. (b) Doubt
is voluntary, when it is according to inclination and with sufficient
knowledge.

842. Involuntary doubt in matters of faith is neither heretical nor
sinful, for an act is not sinful, unless it is willed (see 99).

(a) Indeliberate doubts arise in the mind before they are adverted to
and without any responsibility of one’s own for their appearance. From
what was said above on first motions of the soul (see 129), it is clear
that such doubts are not sinful.

(b) Unwelcome doubts persist in the mind after they have been adverted
to, and, since faith is obscure (see 752, 799), it is not possible to
exclude all conscious doubts, or even to prevent them from occurring
often or lasting a considerable time. From what was said above on
temptation (see 253 sqq.), it is clear that, if the person troubled
with unwished doubts makes prompt and sufficient resistance, he not
only does not sin, but gains merit. But, if his resistance is not all
it should be, and there is no danger of consent to the temptation, he
sins venially.

(c) Ignorant doubts occur in persons who have not received sufficient
religious instruction, through no fault of their own, and who therefore
regard the doctrines of faith as matters of opinion, or at least look
upon doubts as not sinful. From what was said above on invincible
ignorance (see 30), it is clear that such persons do not sin by their
doubts.

843. Voluntary doubt is entertained either in ignorance for which
one is responsible, or in full knowledge; in the former case it is
indirectly voluntary, in the latter, directly voluntary.

(a) The doubts of one who is responsible for them because he did not
use the means to instruct himself in the faith, are a sin of willful
ignorance proportionate to the negligence of which he was guilty; but,
if he is willing on better knowledge to put aside his doubts and accept
the teaching of the Church, he is not pertinacious, and hence not
guilty of heresy or infidelity.

(b) The doubts of one who is responsible for them, and not uninstructed
or ignorant in faith, are sometimes positive, sometimes negative.
Neither of these kinds of doubt is equivalent to heresy or infidelity
in every case.

844. Negative doubt is the state of mind in which one remains suspended
between the truth contained in an article of faith and its opposite,
without forming any positive judgment either of assent to or dissent
from the article, or its certainty or uncertainty.

(a) If this suspension of decision results from a wrong motive of
the will, which directs one not to give assent on the plea that the
intellect, while not judging, offers such formidable difficulties that
deception is possible, then it seems that the doubter is guilty of
implicit heresy, or at least puts himself in the immediate danger of
heresy.

(b) If this suspension of judgment results from some other motive of
the will (e.g., from the wish to give attention here and now to other
matters), the guilt of heresy is not incurred, for no positive judgment
is formed. Neither does it seem, apart from the danger of consent
to positive doubt or from the obligation of an affirmative precept
of faith then and there (see 925), that any serious sin in matters
of faith is committed by such a suspension of judgment. Examples:
Titus, being scandalized by the sinful conduct of certain Catholics,
is tempted to doubt the divinity of the Church. He does not yield to
the temptation by deciding that the divinity of the Church is really
doubtful, but the difficulty has so impressed him that he decides to
hold his judgment in abeyance. It seems that there is here an implicit
judgment (i.e., one contained in the motive of the doubt) in favor of
the uncertainty of the divinity of the Church. Balbus has the same
difficulty as Titus, and it prevents him from eliciting an act of
faith on various occasions. But the reason for this is that an urgent
business matter comes up and he turns his attention to it, or that he
does not wish at the time to weary his brain by considering such an
important question as that of faith, or that he thinks he can conquer a
temptation more easily by diverting his thoughts to other subjects (see
257), or that he puts off till a more favorable moment the rejection
of the difficulty. In these cases there is not heretical doubt,
since Balbus forms no positive judgment, even implicitly, but there
may be a sin against faith. Thus, Balbus would sin seriously if his
suspension of assent should place him in immediate danger of positive
doubt; he would sin venially, if that suspension be due to some slight
carelessness.

845. Positive doubt is the state of mind in which one decides, on
account of some difficulty against faith, that the latter is really
doubtful and uncertain, and that assent cannot be given to either
side. With regard to such a state of mind note: (a) If this judgment
is formed by a Catholic, it is heretical; for his faith, as he knows
and admits, is the true faith, revealed and proposed as absolutely
certain. Hence, although he does not deny the faith, he does positively
judge that what is revealed by God and proposed infallibly by the
Church as certain, is not certain, and thus in his intellect there is
pertinacious error.

(b) If this judgment is formed by a non-Catholic, it is likewise
heretical, if the truth doubted belongs to divine or Catholic faith,
for we are now considering the formal heretic who belongs to a
non-Catholic sect against conviction; but it is not heretical, if the
doctrine doubted belongs only to what is wrongly considered in his sect
as divine faith, or to what may be called Protestant faith (i.e., the
official confession of his religion), for he does not profess to accept
his church as an infallible interpreter.

846. The doubts We have been just discussing are the passing doubts
that come to those who are believers, or who consider themselves
believers. There are also doubts that are permanent, and that are held
by those who class themselves, not as believers, but as doubters or
agnostics. Some of these sceptics doubt all religious creeds, holding
that it is works and not beliefs that matter. This doctrine amounts to
infidelity, since it rejects Christian faith entirely. Others profess
Fundamentalism, which accepts a few Christian beliefs and considers the
others as optional, pretending that the true faith cannot be recognized
amid so much diversity of opinions. This doctrine is heretical, since
it accepts some and rejects others of the articles of faith.

847. Credulity and Rationalism.--Opposed in special ways to the
material and formal objects of faith are credulity and errors about the
existence and nature of revelation.

(a) Other sins against faith are opposed to its material object (i.e.,
the articles of belief), inasmuch as they subtract from it by denying
this or that article. Credulity, on the contrary, adds to the material
object of faith by accepting a doctrine as revealed when there is no
prudent reason for so doing, contrary to the teaching of scripture
that “he who is hasty to believe is light of heart” (Ecclus., xix. 4).
This sin is opposed rather to prudence, inasmuch as it causes one to
neglect the consideration of the reasons on which a prudent judgment
rests (see Vol. II), and hence it does not destroy the virtue of faith.
It is, nevertheless, injurious to faith, since it brings Christianity
into contempt, keeps others from embracing the teachings of the Church,
and leads to superstition, the “twin-sister of unbelief.” Examples:
Sempronia, who is not well educated, accepts as matters of faith every
pious legend, every marvellous report of miracle no matter from what
source it comes or how suspicious may be its appearance. Titus holds
many views considered by good authorities as improbable or false, or
as at best only opinions, but he gives them out as doctrines of the
Church that must be accepted, or as infallible or revealed teaching.
The credulity of Sempronia is excusable imprudence on account of her
ignorance, if she has not neglected instruction; but that of Titus is
blameworthy, for he ought to inform himself better before attempting to
instruct others.

(b) Other kinds of unbelief are opposed to the formal object of faith
(i.e., to the authority of revelation as the motive of belief); for
implicitly at least they substitute private judgment for authority. The
various systems of Naturalism, such as Deism, go farther and openly
attack supernatural revelation as the ground of belief. Some of these
systems deny the fact of revelation (e.g., Deism), others its character
(e.g., Modernism, which makes revelation to consist in the internal
experience of the believer), others its necessity (e.g., Rationalism).
These heterodox teachings pertain, some to infidelity (e.g., Deism),
some to heresy (c.g., Modernism). The great majority of Protestants
nowadays cannot be said to have faith, declares Cardinal Newman, since
they deduce from scripture, instead of believing a teacher. What looks
like faith is mere hereditary persuasion.

848. Dangers to Faith.--One becomes guilty of heresy, infidelity,
doubts against faith, etc., indirectly, by placing oneself in the
danger of those sins (see 258 sqq., on the Dangers of Sin). Dangers of
this kind are partly internal, partly external.

(a) Internal dangers to faith are especially the following:
intellectual pride or an excessive spirit of independence, which
makes one unwilling to accept authority; love of pleasure, which sets
one at odds with the precepts of faith; neglect of prayer and piety,
particularly in time of temptation.

(b) External dangers to faith are especially as follows: literature
opposed to religion; schools where unbelief is defended; mixed
marriages; association with unbelievers in religious matters; certain
societies.

849. Dangerous Reading.--There is a threefold prohibition against the
reading of literature dangerous to faith.

(a) The natural law forbids one to read or hear read written matter
of any description which one knows is dangerous to one’s faith, even
though it is not dangerous to others and not forbidden by the law of
the Church. For a similar reason one may not keep such material in
one’s possession. Example: Titus and Balbus read the letters of a
friend on Evolution. Titus finds nothing unsound in the letters, and
is not troubled by reading them; but they fill the mind of Balbus with
doubts and perplexities, as the subject is above him. This reading is
naturally dangerous for Balbus, but not for Titus.

(b) The law of the Church forbids the use of certain kinds of writings
or representations dangerous to faith (Canon 1399), as well as of those
individual writings that have been denounced to the Holy See and placed
on the Index, or forbidden by other ecclestiastical authorities. (See
Appendix I for Summary of Common Law on Prohibition of Books.)

(c) The law of the Church also pronounces ipso facto excommunication
against those who make use of works written by unbelievers in favor of
their errors (Canon 2318).

850. As regards the kind of sin committed by using writings dangerous
to faith, the following points must be noted:

(a) If a writing is dangerous and forbidden under natural law, the sin
committed is of itself grave whenever the danger itself is serious and
proximate; it is venial, when the danger is slight or remote. The sin
committed depends, therefore, not on the time spent in reading or the
number of pages covered, but on the danger (see 260-261, on the Dangers
of Sin). No sin at all is committed, if the danger is slight or remote,
and there is reason for reading the writing in question (e.g., the
defense of truth).

(b) If the writing is forbidden under ecclesiastical law, the sin
committed is of itself grave, even though the danger to an individual
is not serious or proximate, for the law is based on the presumption
of a common and great danger (see 460). The sin is not grave, however,
when the prohibition is generally regarded as not binding under grave
sin, or when the use made of the writing is inconsiderable. No sin at
all is committed, if one has obtained the necessary permission to read
forbidden works, and is not exposed to spiritual danger in using the
permission.

851. There are two cases in which the use of writings forbidden by the
Church is only a venial sin. (a) When a writing, which in itself is
not dangerous or only slightly dangerous, is forbidden, not on account
of its contents, but only on account of its lack of ecclesiastical
approval, it is not ordinarily regarded as forbidden under grave sin
(e.g., Catholic Translations of scripture that have not received the
Imprimatur). (b) When a writing has been condemned on account of its
contents or manner of presentation, one does not sin mortally, if the
use one makes of it is only slight.

852. What constitutes notable use of forbidden matter is not determined
by law, but recent moralists, bearing in mind the character of the law
and what would prove proximately dangerous to faith for the generality
today, offer the following rules: (a) notable matter in reading a book
is three or four pages from the more dangerous parts, from thirty to
sixty pages from the slightly dangerous parts; (b) notable matter in
reading a paper or periodical is habitual use of it, or even one very
bitter article; (c) notable matter in retention of forbidden writings
is a period in excess of the reasonable time (say, a month) for
securing permission or for delivering the writings to those who have a
right to have them.

853. It is more difficult to decide what is notable matter, when a book
has been condemned on account of its general tendency. (a) Under the
natural law, of course, even a page or less is notable matter, if it
places an individual in proximate danger; (b) under the positive law,
perhaps anything in excess of one-tenth of the book would place one in
proximate danger. But, as we are dealing now with the general tendency
of a writing, this may have its effect on the reader before he has read
one-tenth, if the book is large, or the treatment is very seductive.
Hence, “one-tenth” is an approximation, rather than a rule.

854. The kinds of printed matter forbidden by the Code (Canon 1399) are
as follows: (a) the prohibition extends to books, to other published
matter (such as magazines and newspapers), and to illustrations that
attack religion and what are called “holy pictures” (i.e., images of
our Lord and the Saints), if opposed to the mind of the Church; (b)
the prohibition extends to published matter dangerous to faith, and
therefore to the following; to writings or caricatures that attack the
existence of God, miracles or other foundations of natural or revealed
religion, Catholic dogma, worship or discipline, the ecclesiastical
hierarchy as such, or the clerical or religious state; to those that
defend heresy, schism, superstition, condemned errors, subversive
societies, or suicide, duelling, divorce; to non-Catholic publications
of the Bible and to non-Catholic works on religion that are not clearly
free from opposition to Catholic faith; to liturgical works that do
not agree with the authentic texts; to books that publish apocryphal
indulgences and to printed images of holy persons that would be the
occasion of error (e.g., the representation of the Holy Ghost in human
form).

855. The mere presence, however, of condemned matter in a writing does
not cause it to fall under prohibition.

(a) Some works are not forbidden unless the author’s purpose to teach
error or attack the truth is known. Hence, books on religion written
by non-Catholics which contain errors against the Catholic Faith are
not forbidden, unless they deal with religion _ex professo_ (i.e., not
incidentally or cursorily, but clearly for the purpose of teaching).
It is not necessary, however, that religion be the main theme of the
book, Similarly, books that attack religion are forbidden, not when
attacks are casual or by the way, but when they are made purposely;
and the same is true as regards books that insult the clerical state.
The purpose is recognized from the declaration of the author, from the
nature of the work, from the systematic treatment, length or frequency
of argumentation or attack, etc.

(b) Other works are not forbidden, unless they contain not only
agreement with error, but also argument in defense of error. Thus,
books in favor of heresy, schism, suicide, duelling, divorce,
Freemasonry, etc., are forbidden when they champion wrong causes by
disputing in their behalf.

(c) Other works are forbidden, not because they state, but because
they approve of error. Such are books that attack or ridicule the
foundations of religion or the dogmas of faith, those that disparage
worship, those that are subversive of discipline, those that defend
proscribed propositions, those that teach and favor superstition, etc.

856. Books that deal with religion _ex professo_ (i.e., of set
purpose), or _obiter_ (i.e., incidentally), are as follows: (a) Books
that are _ex professo_ religious are manuals of theology, works of
sermons, treatises on the Bible, instructions on religious duties,
works of piety, text-books of church history. Works of a profane
character, such as scientific books, may also teach religion _ex
professo_, but it is not easy as a rule to perceive the intention of
teaching religion in works of this kind. (b) Books that deal with
religion only _obiter_ are works of a profane character, in which
the subject of religion is introduced only briefly (e.g., by way of
illustration).

857. Books dealing _ex professo_ with religion and written by
non-Catholics are: (a) forbidden, if they contain matter contrary to
Catholic faith; (b) not forbidden, if it is clear to one (e.g., from a
competent review) that they contain nothing contrary to Catholic faith.

858. How is one to know in a particular case whether a book falls under
one of the foregoing classes forbidden by the Code? (a) If the Holy
See has made a declaration, the matter is of course clear; (b) if no
declaration has been made, and one is competent to judge for oneself,
one may read as much as is necessary to decide whether the book is one
of those proscribed by the Code; but if a person has not received the
education that would fit him for judging, he should consult some person
more skilled than himself, such as his parish priest or confessor.

859. Is it lawful to read newspapers, magazines, or reference works
(such as encyclopedias), which contain some articles contrary to faith,
and others that are good or indifferent, if these papers or books have
not been condemned? (a) If the reading or consultation, on account of
one’s individual character, will subject one to grave temptations,
then according to natural law it should be avoided. (b) If there is no
serious danger or temptation, but the policy of the works or journals
in question is anti-religious or anti-Catholic, as appears from the
space given to hostile attack, their frequency or bitterness of spirit,
then, according to the law of the Code just mentioned, one should avoid
such reading matter. Examples of this kind of literature are papers
devoted to atheistic or bolshevistic propaganda, anti-Catholic sheets,
etc. (c) If there is no danger to the individual, and the editorial
policy is not hostile, one may use such matter as is good and useful,
while passing over any elaborate or systematic attack on truth or
defense of error.

860. Individual books are forbidden by name to all Catholics by the
Holy See and to their own subjects by Ordinaries and other local or
particular councils (Canon 1395). Books condemned by the Apostolic See
must be considered as forbidden everywhere and in whatsoever language
they may be translated into (Canon 1396).

(a) If a book is forbidden, one may not read even the harmless parts of
it, for there is the danger that, if one part is read, the other parts
will also be read. But, if the part that occasioned the prohibition be
removed, the prohibition ceases as regards the remainder of the book.

(b) If a work is forbidden, one may not read any volume, if all the
volumes deal with the same subject. But, if the volumes treat of
different subjects or of one subject that is divisible (e.g., universal
history), one may read such volumes as do not contain the danger that
occasioned the prohibition.

(c) If all the works of an author are condemned, the prohibition is
understood to apply only to books (i.e., not to smaller works), and
only to books dealing with religion, unless it appears that the other
kinds of writings are also included; but the prohibition is to be
presumed to include works that appear after the condemnation, unless
the contrary is manifest.

861. Some outstanding works that have been condemned are the following:
(a) In English: _Decline and Fall of The Roman Empire_ (Gibbons);
_Myth, Ritual, and Religion_ (Andrew Lang); _History of England_
(Goldsmith); _The Roman Popes_ (Ranke); _The Life and Pontificate
of Leo X_ (Roscoe); _Constitutional History of England_ (Hallam);
_Political Economy_ (Mill); _Happiness in Hell_ (Mivart); _History
of English Literature_ (Taine); _Reign of Charles V_ (Robertson);
_Zoonomia_, or The Laws of Organic Life (Darwin).

(b) In French: _Notre Dame de Paris_ (Hugo); _Life of Jesus_ and
eighteen other works of Renan; all the works of Anatole France; _The
Social Contract_ and four works of Rousseau; nearly all the works
of Voltaire; _The Gospel and the Church, Gospel Studies, The Fourth
Gospel, Apropos of a Little Book, The Religion of Israel_ (Loisy); all
the works of Jean Paul Sartre; _La Deuxieme Sexe_ and _Les Mandarins_
by Simone de Beauvoir.

862. What is meant by “use” of forbidden writings? (a) In the first
place, those “use” a writing who read it--that is, who go over it
with their eyes, understanding the meaning therein contained. Hence,
a person does not violate the church law against forbidden books if
he merely listens to another read; although he might sin against the
natural law, and even against the church law, if he induced the other
to read to him; neither does a person violate the church law, if he
merely glances at the characters, without understanding the sense
expressed. Example: Titus, a professor of theology, has permission to
read forbidden books, and he sometimes reads to his class doctrinal
passages from works on the Index in order to explain and refute errors.
Balbus examines very carefully the pages of a beautifully printed copy
of a forbidden work, but he understands hardly a word of it, since it
is in a foreign language. Neither Titus’ class nor Balbus are guilty of
reading as forbidden by the Church, for strict interpretation is given
to penal laws (see 485).

(b) In the second place, those “use” a forbidden writing who retain
it--that is, who keep it in their home as belonging to themselves or
borrowed from another, or who give it for safekeeping to another,
even though they are not able to read it. Hence, a librarian who has
forbidden books on his shelves does not break the law, since the books
are not his property, nor are they kept in his home. A bookbinder
also who receives forbidden books is considered as excused through
_epieikeia_ for the time the books are in his shop, especially if his
customer has the permission to read those books. Example: Sempronius
bought an expensive work and then discovered that it is on the Index.
Is he obliged to destroy it? No, if he does not wish to destroy it, he
may, if he does not delay beyond a month, either give it to someone who
has permission to keep it, or obtain that permission for himself.

(c) In the third place, those “use” a forbidden writing who communicate
it to others--for example, those who make presents of works that are on
the Index, who lend such books to others, or place them where others
will read them, who read to others passages or write out excerpts for
them. It is lawful, however, for professors in theological and other
classes of sacred science to read from forbidden works to their student
body, if a suitable explanation and refutation exclude all danger.

(d) Lastly, those fall under the law as violators who co-operate in
the production or distribution of forbidden literature--for example,
publishers, owners, authors, translators, booksellers, printers, etc.
(cfr. 976 sqq., on cooperation in Worship).

863. The church law on forbidden literature affects all Catholics not
excepted by law, no matter how learned they may be, what position they
may hold, or how immune from danger they may seem, unless they obtain
permission to read such literature from the Holy See, the Ordinary,
or their regular Superior (Canon 1402). Those excepted by law and
who do not need to seek such permission are certain prelates and
students. (a) Cardinals, Bishops, and other Ordinaries (Canon 1401),
and likewise major superiors in exempt clerical orders (Canon 198,
Sec. 1) are not bound by the church prohibition of books dangerous to
faith; (b) those who are pursuing theological or biblical studies may
use forbidden editions of scripture, provided these are correct and
complete as to the text, and contain no attacks on Catholic teaching in
the introductions and annotations (Canon 1400). This permission extends
not only to seminarians, but also to lay students; not only to those
who are at school, but also to those who are really studying outside
of school, such as professors, writers and those who are preparing
lectures or dissertations.

864. When the necessity of reading a forbidden book is urgent, and
the opportunity of asking permission from the Holy See or Ordinary
is lacking, a person whose duties call for acquaintance with such a
book may consider that the law does not bind in his particular case
(see 411-417 on _epieikeia_). (a) A professor, editor, critic, etc.,
who had not yet received permission might read a forbidden book, if,
being called upon to criticize it, he could not await the permission;
(b) a confessor, pastor, etc., in similar circumstances could read a
forbidden book in order to be able to refute it.

865. Those who have received permission to read books forbidden as
generally dangerous to faith, may also read papers and periodicals
of the same character, and they may use the permission given them
anywhere, since it is a personal indult (see 446). The following
restrictions, however, are understood in the grant of permission:

(a) Permission to read, no matter by whom granted, does not make it
lawful to read what is really a danger to one’s faith, for this (as
explained above in 849-850) is contrary to natural law. Moreover, those
who have received an apostolic indult may not read or retain books
proscribed by their Ordinaries, unless the indult extends even to this.

(b) Permission to retain does not make it lawful to keep forbidden
books in such a way that they will fall into the hands of those
who have no right to read them. On the contrary, there is a grave
obligation arising from the natural law to prevent such a thing from
happening. Hence, those who have permission to keep writings dangerous
to faith should not place them on shelves to which there is general
access, or else they should label them as dangerous and forbidden (see
Canons 1405, Sec.1, and 1403, Sec.2).

866. According to Canon 2318, the following censures are incurred
through the use of forbidden books:

(a) Excommunication specially reserved to the Apostolic See is incurred
_ipso facto_ by those who offer to the public books, even of a
non-religious character, written by apostates, schismatics, or heretics
in systematic defense of heresy or schism. This censure applies, first,
to the chief causes of publicity of the work--i.e., to the author who
offers it for publication, and to the publisher and printer (owner or
manager of the press) who accept it for that purpose--not, however,
to remote cooperators or helpers; secondly, to such chief causes as
understand the character of the book, either from the word of the
author or from the contents. It is not incurred, if the work is not
published (i.e., if it remains in manuscript, or is circulated only
privately), or if it is published in other than book form (e.g., as a
pamphlet, leaflet or article). Ignorance, if not crass or supine (see
27), excuses from this censure (Canon 2229, Sec.3, n. 1).

(b) The same censure is incurred by those who defend the aforementioned
books, either materially (e.g., by saving them from destruction) or
morally (e.g., by defending, praising, or recommending them). Ignorance
excuses here as in the case of publishers.

(c) The same censure is incurred by those who defend books of any
author condemned by name through Apostolic letters. Hence, the censure
does not apply to books condemned by a pontifical congregation nor to
books condemned in a Papal Letter, if their title is not mentioned.
Ignorance excuses here as in the previous case.

(d) The same censure is incurred by those who knowingly keep or read
any of the forbidden books mentioned so far in this paragraph. The
sense to be attached to the words “keep or read” has been given above
(see 862). Even crass and supine ignorance of law or penalty, provided
it be not affected, as well as other causes that lessen imputability
(see 40), excuse from this censure (Canon 2229, Sec.Sec.1, 2).

(e) Excommunication not reserved is incurred _ipso facto_ by authors
and publishers who are responsible for the printing without due
authorization of books of Holy Writ, or of notes or commentaries on the
Bible, even though the text be correct and the explanation orthodox.
This censure is not incurred by those who are not responsible for the
printing done, such as typesetters and readers. Ignorance, if not crass
and supine, excuses here (Canon 2229, Sec.3).

867. Dangerous Schools.--With reference to their danger to faith,
schools are of three kinds:

(a) sectarian schools, in which heresy or infidelity is prescribed
as part of the curriculum, and assistance at non-Catholic rites
is required. Examples are colleges and universities supported by
Protestant denominations, sectarian Sunday schools, Bible classes;

(b) neutral schools (i.e., schools in which all religious teaching
is forbidden and no recognition given to any denomination) whose
spirit and teaching in secular branches is anti-religious or
anti-Catholic. Examples are non-sectarian colleges or universities in
which materialism is incidentally taught, or in which the faculty are
freethinkers or bigots;

(c) neutral schools in which no positive offense is given to religion
or the Church. Examples are public schools in which only the profane
sciences are taught, and care is exercised that neither the text-books
nor the teachers shall be irreligious or interfere with the religious
beliefs of others. Reducible to this category are mixed schools, that
is, those which are open also to non-Catholics (Canon 1374).

868. The danger of the foregoing kinds of schools to the faith of
pupils is as follows:

(a) in the sectarian schools there is danger of heresy or infidelity,
since the pupils are obliged to hear the defense of false doctrine and
to join in the services of a false religion;

(b) in the neutral schools of an anti-religious spirit the danger
is the same, for the pupils must attend courses in which the
interpretations given to history, science, philosophy, letters, etc.,
are unfriendly to the faith;

(c) in the neutral schools whose spirit is not anti-religious, there
is a danger of Indifferentism that arises from the system itself; for
the very fact that religion is slighted tends to impress the students
with the idea that it is unimportant or unrelated to other matters of
life, and this prepares the way for doubt and scepticism. Moreover,
since example teaches more effectively than the printed or spoken word,
the neglect or contempt of religion by professors and fellow-pupils in
mixed schools is a danger to faith.

869. The lawfulness or unlawfulness of attending or patronizing schools
dangerous to faith must be decided according to the principles given
above on the occasions of sin (see 263 sqq.).

(a) If the danger to faith is voluntary, the use of such schools is not
lawful, for those who are able are bound to seek or provide religious
education both in elementary and higher schooling (see Canon 1373).
Example: In the town of X there are good parochial and Catholic high
schools. Sempronius could easily send his children to these schools,
but he thinks that certain select schools offer greater social and
financial advantages, and so he chooses them. His conduct is not lawful.

(b) If the danger to faith is necessary, the use of such schools is
lawful, provided the needed precautions are duly observed. Example: In
the country district of Y there is no school except the public school,
and therefore Balbus sends his children to that school. His conduct is
lawful, but he must see that his children receive religious instruction
outside of school.

870. The danger to faith is necessary when there is no Catholic school,
or none that is sufficient for the needs of individual students, and
their parents are unable to send them elsewhere. In such a case it
is lawful to attend a school that is neutral, but means must be used
to make the proximate danger remote. Such means are the following:
(a) religious instruction must be taken outside of school, as in
special week-day classes, Sunday school, home study, etc.; (b) special
attention must be given to the strengthening of faith on those points
that are attacked or slighted in the neutral school; (c) parents,
guardians, or others responsible must see that the reading and the
associates of their wards in the neutral schools are good, and that
they are faithful to their religious duties.

871. Is attendance at non-Catholic schools sometimes unlawful, even
when there are serious reasons in its favor?

(a) It is unlawful, if the schools are sectarian, and then no
excuse can justify such attendance; for, in addition to scandal and
cooperation in false worship, there is present a proximate danger to
faith that is not made remote. Parents or guardians who knowingly send
their children to schools for education in a non-Catholic religion are
suspected of heresy and incur excommunication _ipso facto_, reserved
to the Ordinary (see Canon 2319). Example: Titus sends his daughter to
a sectarian academy because it is nearer and cheaper than the Catholic
academy. He claims that she is old enough not to lose her religion,
that opposition will make her faith stronger, etc. Titus’ arguments are
fallacious and his conduct gravely sinful.

(b) Attendance at non-Catholic schools is unlawful, if the schools are
neutral in theory, but so dangerous in practice that loss of faith is
practically certain if one attends. Example: Balbus sends his son to an
undenominational university which is regarded as a hotbed of atheism,
and whose students practically to a man lose all religion.

872. Absolution should be denied in some cases to those who send their
children to non-Catholic schools, if they refuse to change.

(a) Absolution should be denied on account of lack of faith in the
parents themselves, if they send their children to non-Catholic schools
on account of their own ideas that are contrary to the teachings of the
Church. Example: Sempronius refuses to send his children to parochial
schools, because he thinks each one should judge about religion for
himself, and not receive it from instructors.

(b) Absolution should be denied on account of the danger caused to the
faith of the children, when the children are sent to sectarian schools,
or when they are sent to neutral schools and sufficient efforts are not
used to counteract the evil influence there felt.

(c) Absolution should be refused on account of scandal or cooperation
in evil, if, while the parents themselves are sound in faith and
prevent all danger of perversion of their children, they send them
to non-Catholic schools without sufficient reason, to the grave
disedification of others, or the great assistance of unchristian
education.

873. Absolution should not be denied in the following cases: (a) when
the parents have a sufficient reason for sending their children to
non-Catholic schools (i.e., a reason approved by the local Ordinary
as sufficient). It belongs only to the Ordinary to decide in what
circumstances and with what precautions attendance at such schools is
allowable (Canon 1374; for application to the United States, see Holy
Office, 24 Nov., 1875; Council of Baltimore, III, n. 199, in regard
to elementary and high schools. As to colleges and universities, see
_S.C.Prop.Fid_., 7 Apr., 1860; _Fontes_, n. 4649, Vol VII, p. 381;
n.4868, Vol. VII, p.405; also S.C.Prop.Fid., 6 Aug., 1867); (b) when
the parents have no sufficient reason, but there is no lack of faith on
their part, no danger of perversion of the children, no grave scandal
or sinful co-operation in evil.

874. The presence of Catholics as teachers in non-Catholic schools
is beneficial, since it lessens to some extent the evil influence of
such schools; but there is also the danger that it may cause scandal
or create the impression that attendance at Catholic schools is not
necessary. Hence, it has been permitted by the Church in certain cases
but only when danger of scandal or wrong impression is absent. (a)
The secular sciences may be taught by laymen in non-Catholic schools
of higher or lower education, if there is no scandal, no unlawful
cooperation, and no immediate danger of perversion. (b) Christian
doctrine may be taught by priests to Catholic students of neutral
schools, either in the school building or elsewhere (as in a church),
and certain priests may be appointed as chaplains for this work (Sacred
Congregation of the Holy Office to Bishops of Switzerland, March 26,
1866).

875. Dangerous Marriages.--The following kinds of marriage are
dangerous to the faith of Catholics: (a) marriage with non-Catholics,
unbaptized or bigoted persons (mixed marriages); (b) marriage with
fallen-away Catholics (that is, with those who have given up the
Catholic religion, although they have not joined another), or with
those who belong to societies forbidden by the Church.

876. The danger to faith in the aforesaid kinds of marriage are serious
and proximate, and hence such unions are forbidden by divine law, as
long as the danger is not removed or made remote through the use of
precautions. The dangers are for the Catholic party and the children.

(a) The Catholic party is in serious danger of losing the faith
(i.e., of joining the religion or sharing the ideas of the other
party), or of doubting the truth of the Church, or of taking refuge in
Indifferentism. For, if domestic life is peaceful, the Catholic may
easily be led in time to regard with favor the other party’s religion
or views; if it is not peaceful, the Catholic through fear or annoyance
may make compromises or sacrifices in matters of faith, or else suffer
temptations that could have been avoided.

(b) The children born are in serious danger of being deprived of the
faith (i.e., of not being brought up as Catholics), or of having their
faith weakened by the example of parents who do not agree in the matter
of religion. If the non-Catholic or fallen-away Catholic interferes
with the religion of the children, their baptism, religious education,
attendance at church, etc., will be forbidden or impeded; if that
party does not interfere, there will be at least the example during
impressionable years of one parent who does not accept the Catholic
faith or who disregards its requirements. Statistics indicate that one
of the chief sources of leakage in the Church today is mixed marriages.

877. Dangerous marriages are also forbidden by the law of the Church.
(a) Lack of baptism in the non-Catholic party causes the diriment
impediment of disparity of worship (Canon 1070); (b) membership of the
non-Catholic party in an heretical or schismatical sect causes the
prohibitive impediment of mixed religion (Canon 1060); (c) unworthiness
of one of the parties, on account of notorious apostasy or affiliation
with forbidden societies (see 945 sqq.), prevents the pastor from
assisting at the marriage without permission from the Ordinary (Canon
1065).

878. No one may enter into any of the dangerous marriages here
considered, unless the requirements of the natural and ecclesiastical
laws be complied with. (a) The natural law requires under pain of grave
sin that the danger of perversion be removed, that no non-Catholic
ceremony take place, and that the Catholic spouse work prudently for
the conversion of the other party. (b) The ecclesiastical law requires
under grave sin that guarantees be given that the requirements of the
natural law shall be fulfilled (Canons 1061, 1071); that there be grave
and urgent reasons for the marriage (ibid.); that dispensations from
the impediments be obtained, or permission, in the case of unworthiness
of one of the parties, to assist at the marriage be granted by the
Ordinary (Canons 1036, 1065).

879. The canonical consequences of dangerous marriages illegally
contracted are as follows: (a) Those who knowingly contract a mixed
marriage without dispensation are _ipso facto_ excluded from legitimate
ecclesiastical acts, (e.g., the office of godparent), and from the
use of sacramentals, until a dispensation has been obtained from the
Ordinary (Canon 2375). Marriage contracted with the impediment of
disparity of worship is invalid, whether the parties are in ignorance
or not (Canon 1070, Sec.16). (b) Catholics who enter into marriage
before a non-Catholic minister acting in a religious capacity or who
contract marriage with the implicit or explicit understanding that
any or all of the children will be educated outside the Church incur
excommunication _latae sententiae_ reserved to the Ordinary (Canon
2319).

880. The prenuptial guarantees required by church law in case of mixed
or other dangerous marriages are as follows: (a) According to the
Code, no dispensation for mixed marriages will be granted unless the
non-Catholic party gives a guarantee that the danger of perversion
for the Catholic party shall be removed, and both parties promise
that all the children shall be baptized and brought up only in the
Catholic faith. There must be moral certainty that the promises will be
kept, and as a rule they should be demanded in writing (Canons 1061,
1071). The permission for marriage with fallen-away Catholics is not
granted until the Ordinary has satisfied himself that the danger to the
Catholic and the children has been removed (Canon 1065, Sec.2). (b) The
pre-Code legislation further required that both parties promise that
there would be no non-Catholic ceremony and that the Catholic promise
to work for the conversion of the other party. Canons 1062-1063 speak
of these obligations, but do not exact promises.

881. Remedies against mixed and other dangerous marriages are the
following: (a) Before engagement Catholics should be instructed and
encouraged to marry those of their own faith. Thus, confessors can
discourage company-keeping with non-Catholics, parents can provide
their children with opportunities for meeting suitable Catholics, and,
above all, pastors should frequently speak and preach to old and young
on the evils of mixed marriages. (b) After engagement to a non-Catholic
has been made, the non-Catholic should be persuaded to accept the
Catholic religion, if he or she can do this with sincerity; otherwise,
the Catholic should be warned of the danger of the marriage, and the
pastor should refuse to seek a dispensation unless there is a really
serious cause (see Canon 1064; II Plenary Council of Baltimore, n. 336;
III Plenary Council of Baltimore, n. 133).

882. Dangerous Communication.--Mixed marriages are mentioned specially
among the communications with non-Catholic that are dangerous to faith,
because marriage is a lifelong and intimate association. But there
are other communications with unbelievers that can easily corrupt
faith, the less dangerous being communication in matters that are not
religious, and the more dangerous being communication in religious
matters. (a) Non-religious or civil communication is association with
non-Catholics in secular affairs, such as business, social life,
education, politics. (b) Religious communication is association with
non-Catholics in sacred services or divine worship.

883. Non-religious communication is sinful as follows: (a) It is sinful
according to natural law, when in a particular case it would be a
proximate danger of perversion freely chosen, or an involuntary danger
against which one does not employ sufficient precaution. Examples:
Titus chooses infidels and freethinkers for his friends and intimates,
understanding their character and bad influence. Balba on account of
her poverty is obliged to work in a place where all her companions are
unbelievers who scoff at religion and try in every way to win her over
to their errors; yet she is not concerned to arm herself more strongly
in faith.

(b) According to ecclesiastical law, civil communication is forbidden
with those who have been excommunicated as persons to be avoided (Canon
2267). Such persons are those who lay violent hands on the Roman
Pontiff (Canon 2343), or who have been excommunicated by individual
name and as persons to be avoided through public decree or sentence of
the Apostolic See (Canon 2258). Exception is made, however, for husband
and wife, children, servants, subjects, and for others in case of
necessity.

884. Religious communication is sinful on account of danger in the
following cases:

(a) If it is a proximate and voluntary occasion of sin against faith.
Examples: Sempronius goes to a non-Catholic church to hear a minister
who attacks the divinity of Christ and other articles of the Creed.
The purpose of Sempronius is to benefit himself as a public speaker,
but he knows that his faith suffers, because he admires the orator.
Balbus chooses to listen over the radio to attacks on religion and
Christianity, which cause serious temptations to him.

(b) If it is a necessary occasion of sin and one does not employ
sufficient precautions against it, religious communication becomes
sinful. Example: Titus, a prisoner, has to listen at times to a jail
chaplain, who teaches that there are errors in the Bible, that man
evolved from the ape, etc. Titus feels himself drawn sympathetically to
these teachings, but makes no effort to strengthen his faith.

885. Communication with unbelievers that is a remote occasion of sin,
is not sinful, for “otherwise one must needs go out of this world” (I
Cor., v. 9). On the contrary, reasons of justice or charity frequently
make it necessary and commendable to have friendly dealings with
those of other or no religious conviction. (a) Reasons of justice.
It is necessary to cooperate with non-Catholic fellow-citizens in
what pertains to the welfare of our common country, state, city, and
neighborhood; to be just and fair in business relations with those
outside the Church, etc. (b) Reasons of charity. Catholics should be
courteous and kind to all (Heb., xii. 14), and be willing to assist,
temporarily and spiritually, those outside the Church. Thus, St. Paul,
without sacrificing principle or doctrine, made himself all things to
all men, in order to gain all (I Cor., ix. 19). Indeed, the mission
of the Church would suffer, if Catholics today kept aloof from all
that goes on about them. The Church must teach, by example as well as
precept, must be a salt, a light, a leaven, an example of the Gospel in
practice; and surely this ministry will be weakened if her children aim
at complete isolation and exclusivism.

886. Societies that are purely civil or profane--e.g., social clubs,
charitable organizations, temperance societies, labor unions, that
are not identified with any church and are neutral in religion--may
be dangerous to faith. (a) There may be danger on account of the
membership, even when the nature of the society is purely indifferent
or good. Example: It would be dangerous to faith to join a convivial
society whose members were mostly aggressive infidels, even though
the purpose of the organization was only recreation. (b) There may be
danger to faith on account of certain methods or principles of the
society. Example: A Boys’ or Girls’ Club whose purpose is to train
young people for good citizenship is dangerous to faith, if it acts
as though the natural virtues were sufficient, or as though moral
education belonged to itself exclusively or principally.

887. The Sin of Blasphemy.--So far we have spoken of the sins of
unbelief that are contrary to the internal act of faith. We now come
to the sins that are contrary to the external act, or profession of
faith. These sins are of two kinds: (a) The less serious sin is that of
ordinary denial of the faith, that is, the assertion that some article
of faith is false, or that some contrary error is true. This sin will
be treated below in 913 sqq. on the commandments of faith. (b) The more
serious sin is blasphemy, that is, the denial to God of something that
is His; or the ascription to God of what does not belong to Him. Of
this sin we shall speak now.

888. Blasphemy etymologically is from the Greek, and signifies damage
done to reputation or character; theologically, it is applied only to
insults or calumnies offered to God, and is threefold according to
the three stages of sin described above (see 168). (a) Blasphemy of
the heart is internal, committed only in thought and will. So “the
wicked man said in his heart: There is no God” (Ps. xviii. 1), and the
demons and lost souls blasphemed God without words (Apoc., xvi. 9).
(b) Blasphemy of the mouth is external, committed in spoken words, or
in their written or printed representations. (c) Blasphemy of deeds is
also external, committed by acts or gestures. The action of Julian the
Apostate in casting his blood towards heaven was intended as a sign of
contempt for Christ.

889. Internal blasphemy does not differ from unbelief or disrespect for
God. We are concerned here, therefore, only with external blasphemy,
which is contrary to the external profession of faith. External
blasphemy is opposed to faith either directly (by denying what is of
faith) or indirectly (by showing disrespect to what is of faith), and
hence it is either heretical or non-heretical.

(a) Heretical blasphemy affirms about God something false, or denies
about Him something true. The false affirmation is made directly, when
some created imperfection is attributed to God, or indirectly, when
some divine perfection is attributed to a creature. Example: It is
heretical blasphemy to affirm that God is a tyrant or the cause of sin,
or that man is able to overcome God. It is also heretical blasphemy to
deny that God is able to perform miracles, that His testimony is true,
etc.

(b) Non-heretical blasphemy affirms or denies something about God
according to truth, but in a mocking or blaming way. This sin is
opposed, therefore, to reverence rather than to faith, and will be
treated later among the sins against the virtue of religion (see Vol.
II). Example: A person in anger at God says scornfully: “God is good!”

890. The nature of heretical blasphemy will better appear, if we
compare it with other kinds of speech disrespectful to God.

(a) It differs from maledictions or curses, (e.g., “May God destroy
you!”), because the one directly offended in blasphemy is God Himself,
while in a curse it is some creature of God.

(b) It differs from non-heretical blasphemy, from perjury and disregard
of vow, from vain use of the name of God, because none of these
necessarily proceeds from a lack of faith, as does heretical blasphemy.
Non-heretical blasphemy proceeds from hatred or contempt of God,
perjury from presumption, disregard of vow from disobedience, vain use
of the Divine Name from irreverence.

(c) Heretical blasphemy differs from temptation of God (e.g., “God
must help me now if He can,” said by one who exposes himself rashly to
danger), for, while temptation of God implies doubt, it is directly an
act of irreverence by which one presumes to put God Himself to proof,
whereas heretical blasphemy is directly an act of denial of truth.

891. Heretical blasphemy calumniates God, either in His own attributes
and perfections, or in those created persons or things that are
specially His by reason of friendship or consecration. Thus, we have:
(a) blasphemy that attacks the Divine Being Himself, as was explained
above; (b) blasphemy that attacks what is especially dear to God, which
consists in remarks or acts derogatory to the Blessed Virgin, the
Saints, the Sacraments, the crucifix, the Bible, etc.

892. Unlike God, creatures are subject to imperfections, moral or
physical, and thus it is not always erroneous or blasphemous to
attribute imperfections to the Saints or sacred things.

(a) If sacred persons or things are spoken ill of precisely on account
of their relation to God, or in such a way that the evil said of
them reverts on God Himself, blasphemy is committed. Example: It is
blasphemous to say that the Mother of God was not a Virgin, that St.
Peter was a reprobate, that St. Anthony and St. Simeon Stylites were
snobbish or eccentric, that the Sacraments are nonsense, that relics
are an imposture, etc.

(b) If sacred persons or things are criticized precisely on account
of their human or finite imperfections, real or alleged, the sin of
irreverence is committed, when the criticism is prompted by malice
or levity. No sin at all is committed, if one is stating facts with
due respect for the character of the persons or things spoken of.
Examples: To call a Doctor of the Church an ignoramus out of anger at a
theological opinion defended by him, would be of itself a serious sin
of disrespect. To speak of a Saint as a dirty tramp or idle visionary,
if the intention is to insult, is also a serious sin of disrespect.
But, if one were to say in joke that St. Peter was a baldhead, St.
Charles Borromeo a big nose, the sin of irreverence would be only
slight. No sin would be committed, if one, describing a religious
painting from the artistic standpoint, called it an abomination.

893. Heretical blasphemy is expressed not only by sentences that
are complete and in the indicative mood, but also by phrases or
interjections, by wishes, commands, or even signs.

(a) Blasphemy is expressed optatively, imperatively, or
interrogatively. Examples: “Away with God!” is equivalent to the
assertion that God is not eternal. “Come down from the cross, if Thou
be the Son of God” (Matt., xxvii. 40), is equivalent to the statement
that Christ is not the Son of God. The question put to the Psalmist,
“Where is thy God?” (Ps. xli. 4.), meant in the mouth of the Psalmist’s
enemies that Jehovah did not exist, or was powerless.

(b) Blasphemy is expressed even by short words, or by a grunt or snort
of contempt. Example: To utter the name of our Lord in a contumelious
way signifies that one regards Him as of no account. The word
“hocus-pocus” is sometimes used in derision of the Mass or other sacred
rites.

(c) Blasphemy is expressed by acts that signify disbelief and dishonor,
for example, to spit or shake one’s fist at heaven, to turn up the nose
or make a wry face at the mention of God, to trample in the dust a
crucifix, etc.

894. Rules for Interpreting Cases of Doubtful Blasphemy.--(a)
Custom or usage is a better guide than etymology or grammar in
discovering whether a blasphemous meaning is contained in certain
common expressions of an ambiguous character. Examples: According to
signification the phrase, “Sacred Name of God,” is harmless and might
be a pious ejaculation, but according to the sense in which it is taken
in French it curses God and is blasphemous. According to signification,
the expression “Ye gods” in English, “Thousand names of God” in French,
“Thousand Sacraments” in German, are blasphemous; but according to
the sense in which they are used by the people they merely express
surprise, and are at most a venial sin of irreverence. The English
language as a whole is singularly free from blasphemous expressions,
just as English classic literature as a whole is singularly free from
obscenity.

(b) The dispositions or feelings of the user are a better index of the
presence or absence of blasphemy than the mere words, if the latter
are capable of various senses. If doubt persists about the sense of an
ambiguous expression that could be blasphemous, it may be held that
no blasphemy was intended. Examples: Titus, a good man, is so annoyed
trying to correct his children that he exclaims: “Why did the Lord
ever send me such pests?” Balbus, who is a hater of religion, answers
him: “Who is to blame if they are pests?” Since Titus is habitually
religious and Balbus habitually irreligious, the question of the former
sounds like irritation, the question of the latter like blasphemy.
Claudius is a very religious-minded man, but he meets with a series
of calamities which so stun him that he exclaims: “I must be only a
step-child of God. Certainly, He cares little for me. Why did He ever
create me?” The sentiment seems to be one of grief and wonder rather
than of insult to God. Balbus is very devoted to his mother, and often
addresses her in hyperbolic language, saying that he adores her, that
she is the goddess at Whose shrine he worships, his supreme beatitude,
etc. Taken literally, these expressions are blasphemous, but as used by
Balbus they are harmless.

895. The Sinfulness of Blasphemy.--(a) From its very nature (i.e., from
the importance of the rights it attacks and the goods it injures),
blasphemy is a mortal sin, since it outrages the Majesty of God, and
destroys the virtues of religion, love of God, and frequently faith
itself. In the Old Testament it was punished with death (Lev., xxiv. 15
sqq.), and Canon 2323 of the Code prescribes that blasphemy be punished
as the Ordinary shall decide. It is also a crime at common law and
generally by statute, as tending to a breach of the peace and being a
public nuisance or destructive of the foundations of civil society;
when printed, it is a libel.

(b) Unbelief is the greatest of sins after hatred of God (see 820). But
blasphemy is the greatest of the sins against faith, since to inner
unbelief it adds external denial and insult.

(c) Blasphemy cannot become a venial sin on account of the smallness
of the matter involved, for even slight slander or scorn becomes great
when its object is God Himself. Example: It is blasphemous to say
that our Lord was not above small or venial imperfections, or to show
contempt for even one of the least of the Saints as such.

(d) Blasphemy cannot become a venial sin on account of unpremeditation,
if at the time it is committed one is aware of its character, just as
murder does not become a venial sin, because one killed another in a
sudden fit of anger. Example: Sempronius has the habit when driving his
refractory mules of shouting at them: “You creatures of the devil!” A
priest on hearing this admonishes Sempronius that the expression is
blasphemous. But Sempronius continues to use it whenever the mules
irritate him, making no effort to improve.

896. There are some cases in which blasphemy is only a venial sin or no
sin on account of the lack of deliberation.

(a) If there is no advertence or only semi-advertence to the act
itself, the blasphemy pronounced, unless it be voluntary in its cause
(see 102, 196), is not a mortal sin. In the former case, there is no
sin at all, for the act is not human (see 33); in the latter case
there cannot be mortal sin, for there is no full reflection on the
deed (see 175). Example: Balbus now and then catches himself humming
blasphemous songs that he heard years ago, but he always stops as soon
as he thinks of what he is saying. Titus, coming out of the ether after
an operation, makes a few blasphemous remarks, but he is so dazed
that he hardly knows who is speaking. Sempronius makes himself drunk,
foreseeing that he will blaspheme while out of his senses. Balbus
commits no sin, Titus may be guilty of venial sin, but Sempronius is
guilty of mortal sin in blaspheming.

(b) If there is no advertence or only semi-advertence to the malice of
the act, the blasphemy pronounced, if it is not voluntary in its cause,
is not a mortal sin; for one is not responsible for more than one
knows or should know (see 99-100, on imputability). Examples: Titus, a
foreigner, has been taught to repeat certain blasphemous phrases, whose
real meaning he does not suspect. Balbus has the habit when angry of
blaspheming at his mules, but he is doing his best to use more suitable
language. Sempronius unawares gets into a tipsy condition in which he
realizes his acts, but is confused about moral distinctions, and hence
uses blasphemous expressions which he would abhor if he were in his
normal state. Caius, a boy, blasphemes, thinking that he is committing
only a venial sin of “cussing.”

897. Different kinds of blasphemy must be noted with reference to the
duty of confession.

[a] There are three distinct species of blasphemy--non-heretical, which
is opposed to the virtue of religion; heretical, which is opposed to
religion and faith; diabolical, which is opposed to religion, faith
and the precept to love God. These species should be distinguished
in confession. Examples: Titus, angered because his Patron Saint did
not obtain a favor for him, ironically turns the Saint’s picture to
the wall, saying: “You have great influence with God!” (non-heretical
blasphemy). Balbus in similar circumstances said: “I have lost all
faith in Saints” (heretical blasphemy). Sempronia, Whose child has just
died, rebels against God and calls Him a cruel monster (diabolical
blasphemy).

(b) Circumstances may aggravate the malice of blasphemy. Blasphemy that
is directly against God Himself is worse than blasphemy against the
Saints; blasphemy against the Blessed Virgin is worse than blasphemy
against other friends of God; blasphemy that ascribes evil to God is
greater than blasphemy that denies Him some perfection; blasphemy
that excuses itself or boasts is worse than blasphemy that is more
concealed; blasphemy that expressly intends to dishonor God is graver
than blasphemy that only implicitly intends this. Some authors require
that aggravating circumstances be mentioned in confession, but others
say this is not necessary (see Vol. II).

898. According to the causes from which they proceed (see 250),
blasphemies are divided into three kinds: (a) blasphemy against the
Father, which is contumely spoken against God out of passion or
weakness, as when one being annoyed uses what he knows to be blasphemy;
(b) blasphemy against the Son, which is contumely against God spoken
out of ignorance. Thus, St. Paul said of himself that he had been a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and contumelious, but that he obtained
mercy, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief (I Tim., i. 12, 13);
(c) blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which is contumely against
God spoken out of sheer malice. Such was the sin of the Jews, who
attributed the divine works of Christ to the prince of demons (Matt,
xii. 31).

899. To the Holy Ghost are appropriated the supernatural gifts of
God that prevent or remove sin; and, as these can be reduced to six,
there are also six sins against the Holy Ghost (i.e., six kinds of
contemptuous disregard of spiritual life). The expression of this inner
contempt is a blasphemy.

(a) Man is kept from sin by the hope mingled with fear which the
thought of God, as both merciful and just, excites in him. Hence,
despair and presumption which remove these divine preventives of sin
are blasphemies against the Holy Ghost.

(b) Man is kept from sin, next, by the light God gives him to know the
truth and by the grace He diffuses that all may perform good. Hence,
resistance to the known truth and displeasure at the progress of God’s
kingdom are also sins against the Spirit of truth and holiness.

(c) Man is kept from sin by the shamefulness of sin itself and the
nothingness of the passing satisfaction it affords; for the former
inclines him to be ashamed of sin committed, or to repent, while the
latter tends to make him tire of sin and give it up. Hence, the resolve
not to grieve over sin and obstinate adherence to such a resolve are
also sins against the Holy Ghost.

900. There is no sin which, if repented of, cannot be forgiven in this
life. How then does our Lord say that the blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the world to
come (Matt., xii. 31)?

(a) The sins against the Holy Ghost are unpardonable according to
their nature, just as some diseases are incurable according to their
nature, because not only do they set up an evil condition, but they
also remove or resist those things that could lead to betterment. Thus,
if one despairs, or presumes, or resists truth or good, or determines
not to abandon error or evil, one shuts out the remedy of repentance,
which is necessary for pardon; whereas, if one sins through passion or
ignorance, faith and hope remain and help one to repentance.

(b) The sins against the Holy Ghost are not unpardonable, if we
consider the omnipotence of God. Just as God can cure miraculously
a disease that is humanly incurable, so can He pardon a sin which,
according to its nature, is unpardonable; for He is able to bring hope
and repentance to those who were in despair, for example. Hence, we
repeat, there is no sin which, if repented of, cannot be forgiven in
this life.

901. Does one arrive at the state of malicious sin or blasphemy
suddenly or gradually? (a) Malice in sin (i.e., the willing choice of
evil by one who is not weakened by ignorance or passion) is sometimes
due to a disorder in the will itself which has a strong inclination
towards wrong, as when long-continued habit has made sin attractive. It
is clear that in such cases one does not arrive at blasphemy suddenly,
Example: Titus blasphemes with readiness and without remorse. This
argues that he is an adept and not a beginner, for readiness and strong
attachment are signs of practice. (b) Malice in sin is sometimes due to
the fact that the will has lost certain protections against sin, and
hence chooses sin readily and gladly, as happens when a sin against the
Holy Ghost has been committed. Generally, the contempt of God’s gifts
contained in sins against the Holy Ghost does not come suddenly, but
follows as the climax of a progressive deterioration (Prov., xviii. 3);
but, since man is free and sin very alluring, it is not impossible that
one should suddenly become a blasphemer, especially if one had not been
careful before in other matters. It is next to impossible, however,
that a religious-minded man should all at once become a blasphemer or
malicious sinner.

902. Remedies Against Blasphemy.--(a) Those who blaspheme maliciously
should be admonished of the enormity of their sin, as well as the
absurdity of defying the Almighty (Ps. ii. 1, 4). Prayers and
ejaculations in praise of God are a suitable penance for them. (b)
Those who blaspheme through habit or out of sudden anger or passion
should be told that at least they cause great scandal, and make
themselves ridiculous. A good practice for overcoming habit or sudden
outbursts is that some mortification or almsdeed or litany should be
performed each time blasphemy is uttered.

903. Absolution of Blasphemers.--(a) If blasphemy is not heretical, no
censure or reservation is incurred under the general law, and every
confessor may absolve; (b) if blasphemy is heretical, excommunication
is incurred under the conditions given above in 834, and absolution may
be granted as explained there.

904. Sins of Ignorance, Blindness, Dullness.--After the sins against
faith itself come the sins against the Gifts of the Holy Ghost that
serve faith (see 808): (a) against the Gift of Knowledge is the sin
of ignorance; (b) against the Gift of Understanding are the sins of
blindness of heart and dullness of understanding.

905. Ignorance (as explained in 28 and 249) is a cause of sin--of
material sin, if the ignorance is antecedent, of formal sin, if the
ignorance is consequent. But ignorance is also a sin itself, in the
sense now to be explained.

(a) Ignorance may be considered in itself (i.e., precisely as it is the
absence of knowledge), and in this sense it is not called a sin, since
under this aspect it is not opposed to moral virtue, but to knowledge,
the perfection of the intellect.

(b) Ignorance may be considered in relation to the will (i.e.,
precisely as it is a voluntary defect), and in this sense it is a sin,
since under this aspect it is opposed to the moral virtue of studiosity
(i.e., the part of temperance which moderates the desire of learning
and keeps the golden mean between curiosity and negligence). This
sin of ignorance pertains to neglect, and is twofold; it is called
affected ignorance, if the will is strongly desirous of the lack of
due knowledge, and is called careless ignorance, if the will is remiss
in desiring due knowledge. Affected ignorance is a sin of commission,
careless ignorance a sin of omission.

(c) Ignorance may be considered in relation to obligatory acts (i.e.,
precisely as it makes one voluntarily incapable of fulfilling one’s
duties), and in this sense it partakes of various kinds of sinfulness,
inasmuch as he who is voluntarily ignorant of his duty is responsible
for the mistakes he will make. Thus, he who is sinfully ignorant in
matters of faith, will fail against the precepts of that virtue; he who
does not know what his state of life as judge, lawyer, physician, etc.,
requires, will fail against justice; he who does not know what charity
demands of him, will sin against charity.

906. The malice of the sin of ignorance in matters of faith is as
follows: (a) Vincible ignorance of the truths one is obliged to know,
whether the obligation be of means or of precept (see 360, 786 sqq.),
is a grave sin, for faith in these truths is commanded under pain of
losing salvation (Mark, xvi. 15, 16). (b) The sin committed is but
one sin, regardless of length of time, and is incurred at the time
one omits due diligence in acquiring knowledge, as is the case with
other sins of omission. Hence, he who remains in culpable ignorance of
Christian doctrine for a year commits one sin, but the length of time
is an aggravating circumstance.

907. Culpable ignorance regarding truths of faith, as a distinct sin,
is as follows:

(a) It is not distinct from its cause (i.e., negligence), for
ignorance is not a sin at all, except in so far as it proceeds from
negligence. Hence, one would not be obliged to accuse oneself of the
sins of omission in regard to instruction in Christian doctrine and of
ignorance in Christian doctrine, for these are but one sin.

(b) Culpable ignorance is not distinct from its effect (i.e., from
a sin committed on account of the ignorance), if the truth one is
ignorant of has to be known only on account of some passing duty that
must be performed here and now; for in such a case the knowledge is
required, not for its own sake, but for the sake of the duty. Hence,
ignorance of fact or of a particular law is not distinct as a sin from
the sin that results from it. Examples: Titus knows that he should not
take money that belongs to another; but through his own carelessness he
is ignorant of the fact that the money before him belongs to another,
and takes the money. Balbus knows that the precept of the Church on
fasting is obligatory; but through his own negligence he is unaware
that today is a fast day, and does not fast. Titus and Balbus committed
one sin apiece.

(c) Culpable ignorance is distinct from its effect, if the truth one
is ignorant of has to be known for its own sake; for in such a case
one sins against the virtue of studiosity (see 905) by not knowing
something which one should know habitually, and also against some other
virtue by violating its precepts as a result of one’s sinful ignorance.
Truths one is obliged to know for their own sake are the mysteries of
faith, the Commandments of the Decalogue, the Precepts of the Church,
and the duties of one’s own state. Examples: Sempronius through his own
carelessness does not know the mystery of the Incarnation, and as a
result blasphemes Christ. Titus does not know that stealing is a sin,
and therefore he steals. In both cases two sins are committed, the sin
of ignorance and the sin that resulted from ignorance.

908. Cases in which ignorance in matters of faith is not culpable are
the following: (a) if one has used sufficient diligence to acquire
knowledge, one is not responsible for one’s ignorance; (b) if one
has not used sufficient diligence to acquire knowledge, one is not
responsible for one’s ignorance, if the lack of diligence is not one’s
fault.

909. Sufficient diligence is a broad term and has to be understood with
relation to the mental ability of the person and the importance and
difficulty of the truth in question. What is sufficient diligence in
an illiterate person, or with regard to a matter of minor importance,
would be insufficient in a learned person, or in a matter of greater
importance. However, the following general rules can be given:

(a) To be sufficient, diligence need not be as a rule supreme (i.e.,
it is not necessary that one employ every possible means to acquire
instruction), for even the most conscientious persons feel they have
used sufficient diligence when they have employed the usual means for
obtaining religious instruction;

(b) To be sufficient, diligence should equal that which is employed by
good people in similar circumstances. Thus, the unlearned who consult
the learned or frequent the instructions provided for them, the learned
who devote themselves to study as ordered and who seek assistance in
doubts, are sufficiently diligent.

910. One who has not used sufficient diligence is sometimes
responsible, sometimes not responsible.

(a) A person is not responsible for his ignorance and lack of
sufficient diligence, if he conscientiously desires to have the proper
amount of instruction, and has not even a suspicion that his studies
and knowledge are not sufficient. Example: Titus, having gone through
a very small catechism, thought that he understood Christian doctrine
sufficiently and had done all that was required. But some years later
he discovered, when examined, that he was ignorant of many important
matters, and had entirely misunderstood others.

(b) A person is responsible for his lack of diligence and knowledge, if
at heart he does not care to know, even though no fears or doubts about
his ignorance disturb him. Examples: Balbus always felt religion a
bore. At Sunday school he was daydreaming; now during sermons on Sunday
he falls asleep. The result is that he has many infidel ideas, but
doesn’t know it, and is not much concerned. Caius secured for himself
an office, for which he is unfitted on account of his ignorance.
But he enjoys his position so much, and cares so little about its
responsibilities, that he does not even dream of his incompetence, and
would not try to change things if he did.

911. Similar to negligence about the truths of faith itself is
negligence about truths connected with faith. (a) An unbeliever is
guilty of negligence when against conscience he fails to pray for light
and to inquire or inform himself about the credentials of religion,
revelation, and the Church; (b) a believer is guilty of negligence if
he fails to seek answers to objections against faith, when thrown much
in the company of objectors.

912. Like to sins of ignorance are the two sins opposed to the Gift
of Understanding. (a) Dullness of understanding is a weakness of mind
as regards spiritual things which makes it very difficult for one to
consider or understand them. It is sinful inasmuch as it arises from
over-affection for carnal things, especially the delights of eating
and drinking. (b) Blindness of mind is a complete lack of knowledge of
divine things due to the fact that one refuses to consider them lest
one feel obligated to do good, or to the fact that one is so wedded to
passion that one gives it all one’s attention (Ps. xxv. 4). Blindness
is sometimes a punishment (Is., vi. 10; Wis., ii. 21); it is a sin when
it is voluntary--that is, when carnal delights, especially lust, make
one disgusted or negligent as to the things of faith. Abstinence and
chastity are two means that greatly aid spiritual understanding, as is
seen in the example of Daniel and his companions (Dan. i. 17).




Art. 3: THE COMMANDMENTS OF FAITH

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, q. 16.)

913. Unlike the commandments of justice, which are summed up in the
Decalogue, the commandments of faith are not given in any one place
of scripture; but they may be reduced to three: (a) one must acquire
knowledge and understanding of one’s faith according to one’s state in
life and duties; (b) one must believe internally the truths of faith;
(c) one must profess externally one’s belief.

914. The Commandment of Knowledge.--The first of the foregoing
commandments includes three things. (a) The doctrines of faith must be
taught and must be listened to--“These words thou shalt tell to thy
children” (Deut., vi. 6), “Teach ye all nations” (Matt, xxviii. 19),
“He that heareth you heareth Me, and he that despiseth you despiseth
Me” (Luke, x. 16). (b) One must apply oneself to understand what one
hears--“Thou shalt meditate on these words, sitting in thy house, and
walking on thy journey, sleeping and rising” (Deut., vi. 7), “Meditate
upon these things, be wholly in these things. Take heed to thyself
and doctrine” (I Tim., iv, 15, 16). (c) One must retain what one has
learned--“Thou shalt bind the words of the law as a sign on thy hand,
and they shall be and shall move between thy eyes. And thou shalt write
them in the entry and on the doors of thy house” (Deut., vi. 8, 9);
“Have in mind in what manner thou hast received and heard” (Apoc., iii.
3).

915. The means of communicating a knowledge of the faith to unbelievers
are as follows:

(a) The remote means is to get a hearing from those who have not the
true faith, and this supposes that one secure their good will through
edifying example and charity towards them: “Be without offense to the
Jews and the Gentiles, and to the church of God; as I also in all
things please all men, not seeking that which is profitable to myself,
but to many that they may be saved” (I Cor., x. 32, 33); “Let us work
good to all men” (Gal., vi. 10).

(b) The proximate means of communicating a knowledge of faith is the
declaration of the faith to non-Catholics who are willing to hear,
through missionaries sent to foreign countries, Catholic literature
given to those who are well-disposed, invitations to Catholic
instructions, public lectures on the faith, the question box at
missions, etc. (see Canons 1350, 1351). cooperation with Catholic
schools and publications, foreign and home missions, etc., makes one a
sharer in the work of the apostles who are bearing the burden of the
day.

916. The means appointed by the Church for communicating the doctrines
of faith to Catholics are as follows:

(a) For the Laity.--From childhood religious and moral training
should have the first place in education, and should not be confined
to elementary schools, but continued in secondary and higher schools
(Canons 1372, 1373). Pastors are obliged to give catechetical
instructions, and parents must see that their children attend them
(Canons 1329-1336).

(b) For the Clergy.--Aspirants to the priesthood must follow the
courses prescribed for preparatory and higher seminaries or houses
of studies (Canons 1352-1371, 587-592), and no one is admitted to
Orders who has not passed canonical examinations (Canons 996, 997,
389, Sec.2). The faculties for hearing confessions and preaching
also presuppose examinations (Canons 1340, 877), and no one is to be
promoted to ecclesiastical offices, such as that of parish priest,
unless he is judged competent in knowledge (Canons 459, 149). The
clergy are encouraged to take university studies and degrees (Canons
1380, 1378).

917. A person applies himself sufficiently to the understanding of
the teaching of faith when he takes care that, both extensively or in
quantity and intensively or in quality, his knowledge is all that is
required of him.

(a) Extensively, the knowledge should be such as to include at least
all those truths that have to be known, because explicit faith in
them is necessary; (b) intensively, the knowledge should be more or
less perfect according to the greater or less intelligence, rank or
responsibility of the person.

918. The truths that have to be known by all capable of the knowledge
are as follows:

(a) All must know, from the necessity of the case (necessity of means),
that they have a supernatural destiny and that Christ is the Way that
leads to it; for one cannot tend to a destination, if one is unaware
of its existence and of the road that will bring one there. Hence, all
must know the four basic truths: God our Last End, the Trinity, the
Incarnation, God the Remunerator (see 787).

(b) All must know, from the will of Christ (necessity of precept),
the other truths to which He wishes them expressly to assent, and the
duties, general or particular, that He wishes them to fulfill (Mark,
xvi. 16); that is, they must know the doctrine contained in the Creed,
the commandments and ordinances of Christ concerning the Sacraments and
prayer, and the special obligations of each one’s particular state or
office.

919. As to the degree of knowledge that one must possess intensively
(i.e., as to its quality and perfection), it is clear that knowledge
ought to be more perfect in those who are more intelligent or whose
duties call for a more excellent learning.

(a) Knowledge of the truths that should be known by all the faithful
ought to be of a more developed kind in those whose minds are more
mature. A scientific and theological understanding of religion is not
required in any lay person; nor should we expect the same knowledge
in a child as in an adult, or in a subnormal person as in one who is
normal mentally. Examples: No religious instruction is necessary for
an idiot (i.e., a grown-up person who has the mind of a two-year-old
child), for such a one cannot reason. A child of seven or an imbecile
(i.e., a grown-up person whose mentality is on a par with that of a
child of seven) may be received to Communion, after such a child or
imbecile has learned in a simple way that the God-Man is received in
the Eucharist and that it is not common food. A child who is between
ten and twelve and a moron (i.e., a grown-up who is not mentally such a
child’s superior) should receive more instruction than an imbecile.

(b) Knowledge of sacred doctrine naturally should be greater in priests
than in the laity; for in religious things priests are the teachers,
the people their pupils (Mal., ii. 7). A mediocre knowledge of theology
in a priest is not sufficient, especially in these days when the laity
are educated, when theological questions are debated on all sides, and
when so many outside the Church as well as in it are looking for help
and light. A profound knowledge of abstruse questions, however, is
not demanded of all priests in an equal degree: more is expected of a
bishop than of his parish priests, more of a parish priest than of one
who has not the care of souls or office of teaching, more of one who
has to speak to or write for the better educated than of one who has to
do these things for those who are less educated, etc. Knowledge should
include not only learning, but also prudence (i.e., good judgment and
practical ability to use learning well), for a priest learns, not for
his own sake alone, but also for the benefit of others.

920. Scientific or complete knowledge is not required of those who are
not theologians, as was said about the four basic truths (see 790). It
suffices for lay persons that they know in a simple way, according to
their age and capacity, the substance of the truths they must believe.
Thus, they should know:

(a) The Creed.--One should know about God, that He is but one and that
there are three divine Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; that God is
the maker of the world, and that He will reward everyone according to
his deeds. One should know about Christ, that He is the Son of God and
God Himself; that He was miraculously born of the Blessed Virgin Mary;
that He suffered and died for our salvation; that He rose from the dead
and by His own power ascended into glory and will come again after the
general resurrection to judge all. One should know about the Church,
that it is the one true Church founded by Christ, in which are found
the communication of spiritual goods and the forgiveness of sins.

(b) The Decalogue.--One should know the general meaning of the
Commandments so as to be able to regulate one’s own conduct by them.
It is not necessary that a child should know all the kinds of crimes
and vices that are forbidden by the Commandments. In fact, it is better
for such not to know much about evil. Nor is it required that a layman
should know how to make correct applications of the Commandments to
complicated situations that require much previous study.

(c) The Virtues.--One should know enough to be able to apply to one’s
own life, for ordinary cases, what a virtuous life demands. It is not
necessary that a child should know the requirements of prudence as well
as an experienced person, or that a layman should be able to settle
doubts of conscience as well as a priest. But each should know enough
to fulfill what is required of one of his age and condition. Both old
and young should know in substance the acts of faith, hope, charity and
contrition; for to these all are bound. The young should know the laws
of the Church that apply to them (e.g., the law of abstinence); the
older people should understand the law of fasting which they are bound
to observe, etc.

(d) The Sacraments.--One should know substantially the doctrine of
the Sacraments that are necessary for all, namely, Baptism, Penance
and the Eucharist. Since all the faithful have the duty of baptizing
in case of necessity, all should know how to administer lay Baptism
properly and fruitfully. When the time comes for receiving a Sacrament,
the recipient should know enough to receive it validly, licitly, and
devoutly, although less knowledge is required in children and in the
dying who cannot be fully instructed (see Canons 752, 854, 1330, 1331,
1020).

(e) Special Duties.--One should know the essentials of one’s
condition or state of life and the right way to perform its ordinary
duties. Children should understand the obligations of pupils and
of subjects; the married, religious and priests should know the
duties of their respective states; citizens, the loyalty owed to the
community; officials, judges, lawyers, physicians, teachers, etc., the
responsibilities to the public which their own professions imply.

(f) The Lord’s Prayer.--The substance of this form of prayer should be
known by all, namely, that God is to be glorified, and that we should
ask of Him with confidence goods of soul and body and deliverance from
evil. Though Christ is the only necessary Mediator (I Tim., ii. 5),
it is most suitable that all should know substantially the Hail Mary,
namely, that we should ask the intercession of her who is the Mother of
God and our Mother (John, xix, 27).

921. Is a person guilty of sin who does not know what to do in some
manner that pertains to his state of life? (a) If he is blamably
ignorant of the nature of a state he has undertaken or of the ordinary
duties that it imposes, he is guilty of sin; for he is, in a sense,
unjust to himself by obligating himself to what he does not understand,
and to others by promising what he cannot fulfill. Examples: A young
person who marries without understanding the meaning of the contract,
or becomes a religious without knowing the meaning of the vows, would
be ignorant of the nature of the state embraced. A priest occupied
in the ministry, who does not know how to administer the Sacraments
validly, how to explain the Gospels correctly, how to judge usual
cases in confession rightly, etc., would be ignorant of the ordinary
duties of his office. A ruler who habitually acts beyond his authority,
a lawyer who regularly gives wrong advice, and a teacher who makes
mistakes in the elements of his specialty, would also be ignorant of
their ordinary duties.

(b) If a person understands the nature of his state and his everyday
duties, but is ignorant of recondite points or extraordinary cases, he
is not guilty; otherwise, no one could undertake with a safe conscience
the office of pastor, physician, judge, etc.; for, even when a person
has devoted a lifetime to a calling, he has to admit that he finds
difficulties or problems that he cannot solve offhand. Example: Father
Titus gave an incorrect solution about a case of restitution, because
he had to express an opinion at once, and there were so many angles and
circumstances that some of them were overlooked.

922. The means appointed by the Church for the retention of knowledge
in matters of faith are:

(a) For the Laity.--The course of Christian doctrine should not be
discontinued with the parochial school or Sunday school, but should
be continued in the higher schools (Canon 1373). Moreover, for adults
catechetical instruction is given on Sundays and feast days (Canon
1332), and the people are exhorted to attend sermons on matters
of faith and morals that are preached at parochial Masses (Canons
1337-1348).

(b) For the Clergy.--The clergy are admonished not to give up study
after ordination (Canon 129), and the law requires that the junior
clergy should take examinations annually during the first three or five
years after ordination to the priesthood (Canons 130, 590), and that
all the clergy should take part in theological conferences several
times a year (Canon 131).

923. What has been learned by heart is more easily retained in the
memory, and hence the common practice of committing the Catechism to
memory is to be recommended. Some believe that it is obligatory to
memorize the Creed and other points mentioned above (see 920); but this
is unlikely, since even the form of the Decalogue and of the Lord’s
Prayer is not identical in different parts of scripture. In the early
centuries the catechumens were obliged to learn the Creed and the
Lord’s Prayer by heart before Baptism, but there is no general law that
requires this at the present time.

(a) According to positive law, one is not obliged to memorize the words
and order of the Creed and other formulas, and it may be considered an
indication that a person has retained sufficiently what was learned,
if he is able to reply correctly to questions put to him (e.g., to
explain the first article of the Creed by stating the direct and simple
signification of its terms, and so on with the rest).

(b) According to natural law, one is obliged to learn by rote ithe
formulas of faith, if this is possible and there is danger of spiritual
detriment when it is not done. There is hardly anyone who cannot by
practice commit to memory the Our Father, the Apostles’ Creed, and
short forms of acts of faith, hope, charity, and contrition; and, if
none of them is thus known, it is practically certain that the grave
duty of prayer will be neglected. Hence, it seems that there is a
serious obligation of memorizing at least the Our Father. Feebleminded
persons are not obliged to memorize, or even to know, the truths of
faith, if they are incapable.

924. Confessors should examine in religion penitents who show signs of
ignorance (e.g., in the manner of making their confession), and should
grant or deny absolution according to the case.

(a) If the ignorance is about the truths that are necessary as a means
of justification (see 790), the penitents should be dealt with as
explained in 792.

(b) If the ignorance is about the truths that are necessary because
commanded and there is urgent need of absolution (e.g., on account of
mortal sin committed), the penitent may be absolved, if he is truly
contrite and promises to repair his negligence by studying his
religion, attending Sunday school, instructions, etc.

(c) If the ignorance is about the truths necessary because commanded,
and there is no urgent necessity of absolution, the penitents may be
sent away without absolution. Thus, children who have no serious sins
to confess and who do not know how to say the act of contrition or
other prayers, or who cannot answer simple questions of the Catechism,
should be sent away with a blessing and told to study these things and
return when they know them better.

925. The Commandment of Internal Acts of Faith.--The second commandment
of faith mentioned above (see 913) is both negative and affirmative.
(a) As negative, it forbids at any time disbelief or doubt concerning
that which God proposes for faith. This aspect has been treated above
in discussing the sins against faith (see 813 sqq., 840 sqq.). (b) As
affirmative, it commands that one at certain times should give assent
to the truths revealed by God. This aspect of the commandment will be
considered now.

926. The existence of the command that one should elicit a positive act
of assent to divine truth is taught in both Testaments. (a) In the Old
Testament, implicit faith in all scripture was required; for lawgivers,
prophets, and inspired writers spoke as delivering a message from God.
Moreover, explicit faith in God and His Providence was commanded (see
788). (b) In the New Testament, implicit faith in all revealed doctrine
is required, whether delivered in writing or as tradition (II Thess.,
ii. 15). Moreover, there is a command of explicit faith in the Gospel:
“This is His commandment that we should believe in the name of His Son,
Jesus Christ, and love one another, as He hath given commandment unto
us” (I John, iii. 23).

927. This commandment obliges adults under grave sin as to all revealed
truths. (a) The primary truths of revelation, truths of faith and
morals to which all are commanded to give assent (i.e., to believe
explicitly), are so important that those who refuse to believe them
merit condemnation (Mark, xvi. 16). (b) The secondary truths of
revelation--i.e., those that were made known by God, not for their own
sake, but on account of their relation to the primary truths (e.g., the
names of the patriarchs, the size of Saul, the complexion of David and
thousands of similar facts)--need not be known by all, for that is
impossible. But all are seriously obliged to believe that everything
contained in the Word of God is true, and to be ready to give assent
even to the truths that are not known. Hence, the minor truths of
revelation must be believed under pain of grave sin--implicitly, if
they are not known, explicitly, when they become known.

928. The obligation of explicit faith in the primary truths or articles
of faith is not grave with reference to every detail contained in those
truths. (a) Some details, on account of their difficulty, oblige to
explicit faith only under venial sin. Such are (in the Creed) the
descent into Limbo, the procession of the Holy Ghost, the mode of the
Communion of Saints. (b) Other details, on account of less importance,
do not oblige to explicit faith under any sin. Such are the facts that
it was Pilate under whom Christ suffered, that it was the third day
when Christ rose from the dead.

929. An affirmative commandment “obliges at all times, but not for all
times” (see 371). Hence, the question: How often or when must one give
internal assent to the teachings of faith, in order to fulfill the law?
Before answering this question, let us distinguish three kinds of laws
that may oblige one to an act of faith: (a) the divine law expressly
prescribing an act of faith; (b) the divine law prescribing an act of
some other virtue, which presupposes an act of faith; (e) human law
prescribing something that at least presupposes or includes an act of
faith.

930. The divine law expressly prescribing an act of faith (about which
we spoke in 925), obliges in the following cases: (a) at the time when
the commandment is first presented to one, and one recognizes its
obligation: “Preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and
is baptized shall be saved; he that believeth not shall be condemned”
(Mark, xvi. 16); (b) it also obliges at other times during life; for
“the just man liveth by faith” (Rom, i. 17). The Church has rejected
the Jansenistic teaching that an act of faith once in a lifetime
suffices (see Denzinger-Banwart, nn. 1101, 1167, 1215).

931. The commandment of internal belief is brought before one for the
first time, either of one’s whole life or for the first time after loss
of faith, as follows:

(a) It is brought before a person for the first time in his life, when
he first hears the truths of faith, or first realizes his duty of
accepting them. Examples: A Catholic child who has just reached the age
of reason and has been told in Sunday school that he must believe the
Creed and other truths he has been taught; an adult Catholic who hears
for the first time of transubstantiation, or of some other dogma just
defined by the Church; a non-Catholic who has just perceived the truth
of the Catholic Church.

(b) The commandment of internal belief is brought before one for the
first time after loss of faith, as soon as the duty of returning to
belief occurs to the mind.

932. Does this commandment require that, as soon as the obligation of
faith dawns on one, one is obliged without an instant’s delay to make a
formal and explicit act of faith?

(a) As regards children, on account of the imperfection of their
understanding, it can easily happen that they do not perceive that the
obligation binds them there and then, or that it binds under sin, and
thus some time may elapse after the use of reason, or after knowledge
of the command of faith, before the omission of the act of belief would
become a sin. Practically every child of Catholic education complies
with the command when, having learned the truths that must be known, he
says devoutly the act of faith, either in his own words or according to
the form given in the Catechism.

(b) As regards adults, while the entrance of converts into the Church
admits of some delay for necessary preparation, the act of faith itself
should not be postponed for an instant, once the necessity of making it
is perceived as certain.

933. As to its frequency or the times when the act of faith should be
renewed, there are various opinions, but in actual life the question
presents no difficulty.

(a) As to theory, the theologians are divided, some holding that the
act of faith should be made at least once a year, others holding for
once a month, still others for all Sundays and holydays. There is no
solid support for any of these opinions, and it seems that the time and
frequency of acts of faith are not determined by divine law.

(b) As to practice, the theologians agree that one who fulfills the
usual religious duties of a Catholic, has also fulfilled the command to
renew the act of faith. Thus, those who attend Mass and receive the
Sacraments, as the law of the Church prescribes, make acts of faith in
doing so, which satisfy the divine law of faith.

934. Those who omit to make an act of faith in time of temptation
against faith, are also guilty of sin, if the omission is through
sinful neglect.

(a) If the act of faith is the only means by which the temptation can
be overcome (a rare contingency, outside the danger of death), one is
of course gravely bound to elicit the act. The sin committed by one who
would neglect the act of faith in such a circumstance is by some
considered as opposed to the negative command, that one do not dissent;
by others as opposed to the affirmative command, that one assent to
faith. Example: Caius is very much tempted to blasphemy, and finds that
the best remedy is an act of faith in the Majesty of God.

(b) If the act of faith would be harmful, as prolonging or intensifying
the temptation (a thing that is not infrequent), it is better to
struggle against the temptation indirectly by turning the attention to
other matters (see 257, 844).

935. Other cases in which one is obliged to make an internal act of
faith are as follows:

(a) By reason of a divine commandment of some virtue other than faith,
it is sometimes necessary to make an act of faith also. Examples: When
a sinner is preparing himself for the state of grace, of which faith is
the prerequisite; when one is tempted against hope, justice, etc., and
needs to call on faith to resist the tempter; when one is near to death
and must make an act of charity in preparing to meet God. In these
cases there are divine precepts of repentance, hope, justice, charity,
and virtually of faith, which is presupposed.

(b) One must at times make an internal act of faith by reason of a
human commandment enjoining some external act or virtue which supposes
faith. Examples: The command to swear on the Bible, or by some mystery
of religion, supposes an act of faith. The commands to receive
Communion at Easter (Canon 859), to make meditation and spiritual
retreats (Canons 125, 126, 595, 1001), to apply the intention of Mass
(Canons 339, Sec. 1, 466, Sec. 1), all include virtually the command
of an act of faith, for the things required (Communion, retreat, Mass)
cannot be rightly performed without such an act.

936. The act of faith is either formal or virtual, according as it is
made in itself, or in the act of another virtue that supposes it.

(a) The act of faith is formal, when one mentally accepts the truths
of revelation on account of divine authority, even though one does
not express the assent in words or according to any set formula. This
kind of act of faith is necessary when one passes from non-belief
or unbelief to belief, for none of the acts prior to faith contains
supernatural assent to revelation. Hence, the commandment of faith
requires in children or in converts from unbelief a formal act.

(b) The act of faith is virtual, when one elicits the act of some other
supernatural virtue without thinking expressly about faith; for faith
is presupposed by all other supernatural virtues, since one cannot
wish what one does not believe. Thus, the acts of hope, charity, and
contrition are virtually acts of faith. It seems that commandments of
other virtues and of the renewal of faith itself do not require that
one make a formal act of faith, although of course this would be the
better thing to do. Thus, to fulfill the Easter precept of yearly
Confession and Communion well, it is not required that one make a
formal act of faith before Confession, since faith is included in the
act of contrition. It is not necessary, then, that the penitent should
say: “I believe in the forgiveness of sins, etc.,” for in his purpose
to receive forgiveness he makes a virtual act of faith in the tenth
article of the Creed and in the Sacrament of Penance, as well as in the
other mysteries of faith.

937. Practically, there is no difficulty for confessors about the
violation of the commandment regarding internal acts of faith.

(a) If penitents are instructed and practical Catholics, they have made
at some time a formal act of faith, even though they do not remember
the time, for the act of faith precedes the acts of other virtues they
are exercising. True, this act of faith may not have been made as soon
as the age of reason was attained or the duty of faith perceived, but
invincible ignorance excuses those who were in good faith about the
matter. Regularity in prayer and other duties is an index that the act
of faith is being renewed in such a way as to comply with the
commandment. Hence, there is no necessity of questioning this class of
penitents about the act of faith.

(b) If penitents are very ignorant Catholics (e.g., young children), it
is clear that they have not made an act of faith as they should, for no
one believes what he does not know. They should, therefore, be
instructed that it is their duty to acquire more knowledge, and to make
an act of faith along with their other prayers. Regarding absolution,
see 924.

(c) If penitents are instructed but not practical, the confession that
they have neglected prayer, Mass, and the Sacraments, means that they
have also neglected the command of making acts of faith. It is not
necessary, therefore, that the confessor interrogate or instruct them
about this command, and he may absolve them, if they are resolved to
amend. It is well, however, to recommend daily acts of faith, hope,
charity and contrition to careless Catholics, especially to those who
cannot attend Mass or receive the Sacraments often.

938. The Commandment of External Profession of Faith.--The third
commandment of faith given above (see 913) is both negative and
affirmative: (a) as negative, it forbids denial of the faith or
profession of error opposed to faith; (b) as affirmative, it commands
that one make open profession of one’s faith.

939. The existence of a prohibition against denial of the faith or
profession of error is taught in scripture and the sinfulness of such
denial is clear from its nature. (a) “He that shall deny Me before men,
I will also deny him before My Father who is in Heaven” (Matt., x. 33).
Denial of Christ is a grievous sin, for it entails denial by Christ.
(b) He who denies the faith is a heretic or infidel, if he means what
he says; he lies, if he does not mean what he says, and his lie is a
grave injury to God, whose truth is called into question, and against
the neighbor, who is scandalized.

940. With reference to its voluntariness, denial of faith is either
direct or indirect. (a) It is direct, when one intends to deny the
faith; (b) it is indirect, when one does not intend to deny the faith,
but wills to use words, acts, etc., which either from their
signification or use, or from the meaning that will or may be given
them by others, will in the circumstances express a denial of the
faith. Examples: A convert from paganism conceals a crucifix in the
idol of a temple and then joins the pagans in their customary bows of
reverence, while intending only adoration to Christ crucified and
detesting the idol. Titus takes off his hat when passing any church, as
a mark of respect for the good they do. Balbus, a convert from
Nestorianism, recites the names of Nestorius and Dioscurus at Mass,
intending only to honor the patron Saints of those two heresiarchs.

941. There are three ways of denying the faith: (a) by words, spoken or
written, as when one says: “I am not a Catholic,” “I do not believe in
miracles”; (b) by acts, as when one dissuades persons of good faith
from entering the Church, or moves them to abandon it, or refuses to
genuflect before the Blessed Sacrament, or studiously excludes
scapulars, pictures and all religious symbols; (c) by omission, as when
one fails to answer calumnies against faith, which one could profitably
answer, or fails to protest when another speaks of oneself as a
non-Catholic.

942. There are various ways in which error opposed to faith is
professed: (a) by words, as when one says that one is a freethinker or
Christian Scientist; (b) by acts, as when one offers incense to an
idol, or receives the Lord’s Supper in a Lutheran church, or cheers an
anti-religious address; (c) by signs, as when one uses the Masonic
grip, wears the robes of a Buddhist bonze, takes a Mohammedan or pagan
name, etc., in order to pass oneself off as a non-Catholic; (d) by
omission, as when one is silent when introduced as a Rationalist, or
makes no protest when Indifferentism is being advocated by one’s
companions.

943. The following are not a denial of faith or profession of error:

(a) Words that deny, not one’s allegiance to religion, but one’s
acceptance of it as qualified by some calumnious designation. Examples:
Titus denies that he is a “Papist,” because he wishes his questioner to
use a term that is not intended to be an insult. Balbus, entering a
pagan region where the name Christian has the meaning of criminal or
enemy on account of crimes committed there by white men in past times,
says to the tribesmen that he is not a Christian, but a follower of
Jesus and a Catholic.

(b) Words that conceal one’s rank or state in the Church, are not
against faith, because one can hold the faith without being in a
certain rank or state in the Church, Thus, St. Peter’s denial that he
was a follower of Jesus, that he had ever known Him, etc., was,
according to some authorities, not a denial of the Divinity of Jesus or
of the truth of His teaching. Example: A Catholic who hides or denies
his character of priest or religious, his membership in a Catholic
family, organization, race, does not thereby necessarily deny his faith.

(c) Deeds that are contrary to practices of religion, but not to the
profession of faith, are not denial of belief; for one may be very much
attached to one’s religion, even ready to fight for it, but not willing
to follow its requirements. Example: Caius is careless about church
duties, misses Mass, eats meat on Fridays, and never goes to the
Sacraments; but he always calls himself a Catholic and wishes to be
considered one.

(d) Signs that have some association with non-Catholic religion, but do
not necessarily represent it (since they are indifferent in themselves
and have other and legitimate uses), do not deny the faith, when not
used as symbols of false religion. Similarly, the omission of signs
that are associated with Catholicity, but which are optional, is not a
denial of the faith. Examples: Titus, when travelling in the Orient,
makes use of the national salutation of the pagan peoples among whom he
lives. Balbus builds a church with architectural features borrowed from
pagan temples. Caius wears a fez or turban in Mohammedan regions where
it is not looked on as a religious headgear. Sempronius practises
circumcision as a hygienic measure. Claudius does not say grace at
meals when dining in public, and does not wear scapulars when bathing
at the seashore.

(e) Omission of profession of faith, when it is not obligatory, is not
a denial of faith; for no one is bound to make known his affairs and
convictions to every acquaintance. Example: Titus works in an office
where most of the clerks are non-Catholics. But no one ever speaks
about religion, and hence it is not known that he is a Catholic.

944. Dangers of Profession of Unbelief.--The principal dangers of
making external profession of false religion, if not of losing faith
itself, are the following: (a) membership in forbidden societies; (b)
communication in sectarian services; (c) cooperation in activities
whose tendency or principles are erroneous.

945. Forbidden Societies.--Societies are forbidden by the Church when
they are intrinsically or extrinsically evil. (a) A society is
intrinsically evil, when it has an evil purpose, or uses evil means to
obtain even an honest end. Thus, societies or parties that conspire
against Church or State, or that seek to undermine Christian doctrines
or morals, have an evil purpose; while those that demand absolute
secrecy or oaths of blind obedience to unknown persons, that favor
cremation, use a sectarian ritual, promote evil literature, etc., are
employing evil means, no matter what may be the end in view. (b) A
society is extrinsically evil, when its end and means are good, but
membership in it is dangerous to faith or morals on account of
circumstances (e.g., on account of the bad type of individuals who make
up the society or control it).

946. The Code (Canon 684) mentions the following kinds of societies as
banned for Catholics:

(a) secret societies, that is, those which demand of members that
certain things which the society considers secrets be told absolutely
to no one outside the society, or certain degrees of the society, not
even to those who may legitimately inquire about them, such as the
bishop or civil superior in the external forum, parents with regard to
their children not emancipated, pastors and confessors in the internal
forum. Those societies are also secret which demand blind and absolute
obedience to unknown leaders;

(b) condemned societies, that is, such as have been censured by the
Church, or simply forbidden. Canon 2335 decrees _ipso facto_
excommunication reserved to the Holy See against all those who join
Masonic or similar associations which plot against the Church or lawful
civil authority. Among the societies forbidden without censure are:
various Biblical societies, societies for the promotion of cremation,
the Knights of Pythias, the Odd Fellows, the Sons of Temperance, the
Independent Order of Good Templars, Theosophical societies, the
Y.M.C.A. Female societies affiliated with these are also condemned,
since they are branches of the main society--for example, the Rebeccas,
the Eastern Star, the Pythian Sisters.

Worthy of detailed consideration is the condemnation of the Communist
Party and the penalties attached to membership in, or defense, or
propagation of the Party. The following questions were asked of the
Holy Office:

1. Whether it is licit to join the Communist Party or to favor it.

Reply: In the negative; for Communism is materialistic and
anti-Christian; and the leaders of the Communists, although they
sometimes verbally profess that they are not attacking religion, in
fact, nevertheless, by doctrine and action show themselves to be
enemies of God and of the true religion and the Church of Christ.

2. Whether it is licit to publish, propagate, or read books,
periodicals, daily papers, or sheets which promote the doctrine or
action of Communists, or to write in them.

Reply: In the negative: for they are forbidden _ipso iure_ (see Canon
1399).

3. Whether the faithful who knowingly and freely do the acts mentioned
in 1 and 2 can be admitted to the sacraments.

Reply: In the negative, according to the ordinary principles governing
the refusal of the sacraments to those who are not properly disposed.

4. Whether the faithful who profess the materialistic and
anti-Christian doctrine of Communists, and especially those who defend
or propagate it, incur _ipso facto_ as apostates from the Catholic
faith the excommunication specially reserved to the Holy See.

Reply: In the affirmative (Decree of the Holy Office, July 1, 1949).

The sanction of excommunication specially reserved to the Holy See was
imposed also upon those who teach boys and girls in associations set up
by the Communists to imbue youth with principles and training which are
materialistic and contrary to Christian morality and faith. The
associations themselves are subject to the sanctions of the decree of
July 1, 1949. Moreover parents or guardians who send their children to
such associations, and the children themselves, as long as they have
part in these associations, cannot be admitted to the reception of the
sacraments (Monitum of the Holy Office, July 28, 1950).

(c) seditious societies, that is, those organizations, even though not
secret, which aim at the overthrow of family and property rights;

(d) suspect societies, that is, those whose principles or methods have
the appearance of being unsound. On January 11, 1951 the Holy Office in
response to the question: “Whether Catholics may join the ‘Rotary
Club’?” issued the following decree: “It is not licit for clerics to
join the Association ‘Rotary Club’ or to be present at its meetings;
the laypeople are to be urged to preserve the prescript of Canon 684.”
The decree seems to have taken many English-speaking people by
surprise, one paper describing it as “a bewildering document.” The
surprise flowed from personal experience of Rotary Clubs as social
clubs dedicated to bonhomie and community improvement. Nevertheless,
the decree was in accord with the general trend of Church policy in
regard to undenominational societies. They are not approved; they are
not condemned as Masonry has been condemned. What is their position?
The response that layfolk are to be exhorted to observe Canon 684 is
indicative of the attitude of the Church in regard to such societies.
The canon instructs them to “beware of secret, condemned, seditious and
suspect societies.” Since Rotary Clubs are seldom considered to be
secret and never as condemned nor as seditious, the implication is that
they are suspect. Such was the interpretation of the decree given in
the _Osservatore Romano_ of Jan. 27, 1951.

In regard to clerics, the effect of the decree was to make illicit what
was formerly simply inexpedient; for the Sacred Consistory had replied
on February 4th, 1929, that it was not expedient for Ordinaries to
permit clerics to join Rotary Clubs, or to take part in their meetings.
Moreover, as the _Osservatore_ article indicates, the prohibition is
limited to meetings of members only and does not extend to meetings at
which non-members may be present, provided the purpose of such meetings
befits priestly activity.

The exhortation to layfolk in regard to “Rotary” simply reaffirms the
Church’s general attitude to all secular associations. As early as
November 5, 1920 the Holy Office, referring specifically to Y.M.C.A.,
warned the Ordinaries that the note of “suspicion” attaches to all
secular societies. Their efforts to promote good works and good moral
standards independent of religious authority tend to foster the spirit
of religious indifferentism and moral naturalism. Both the Spanish
hierarchy (1929) and the Dutch hierarchy (1930) have so judged Rotary.
However, the degree of suspicion to be attached to each Rotary Club is
a question of fact to be determined in specific instances by the proper
local Ordinary. Where evidence of suspicion is available, exhortatious
not to join the clubs must be made; in the lack of such evidence, the
ordinaries may maintain discreet silence.

(e) societies that aim to elude the lawful vigilance of religious
authority.

947. The following organizations fall under the censure against Masonic
societies:

(a) all varieties and degrees of Freemasonry, for all the Masonic sects
are included in the Canon. The fact that American, English and Irish
Masons have many excellent individuals in their ranks, and lack the
irreligious and revolutionary character of the Masonry of Continental
Europe or Latin countries, does not exempt them from the censure.

(b) all organizations similar to Masonry, that is, secret societies
that conspire against lawful authority. Such are societies like the
Carbonari, the Fenians, anarchists and nihilists.

948. The sin committed by membership in forbidden societies is grave,
since the purpose of the law--viz., the safeguarding of faith against
serious danger--is itself grave. Such membership is interpreted also as
a profession of false religion, when one joins oneself to a body which
in its branches or degrees has a false creed of its own. (a) Even
though the branch or degree to which one belongs does not require
assent to such a creed, membership expresses a fellowship with those
who do accept it; (b) similarly, participation in the ritual of the
lodges is a communication in ceremonies expressive of false religion;
for, though their externals may appear good or even Christian, the
internal meaning known to the adepts is anti-Catholic or anti-Christian.

949. Absolution of Those Who Belong to Forbidden Societies.--(a) The
sin cannot be absolved unless there is repentance, and hence absolution
cannot be granted those who without sufficient reason refuse to
withdraw from membership, or who refuse to discontinue participation in
false rites.

(b) The excommunication is not incurred by those who joined forbidden
societies in ignorance of the law or of the penalty, provided the
ignorance was not crass or supine. If the censure was actually
incurred, the mode of absolution will depend on the nature of the case:
if the case is occult (i.e., if it is not known and not likely to
become known that the penitent belonged to a society forbidden under
pain of excommunication), the Ordinary may absolve or grant faculties
to absolve (Canon 2237); if the case is a public one, and it would be
very inconvenient to await faculties from Rome, absolution is given
under the condition of recourse to the proper authority within a month
(Canon 2254). Many Ordinaries have by Indult faculties to absolve
members of secret societies.

950. Nominal membership and temporary attendance at meetings may be
permitted as an exception when there are sufficient reasons.

(a) Nominal membership means that one leaves one’s name on the roster
of the society and continues to pay its assessments, but does not
communicate with the society or attend its meetings. In 1896 the Holy
Office replied to the American Bishops that this kind of membership in
the Odd Fellows, Sons of Temperance and Knights of Pythias might be
permitted under certain conditions, if there was a sufficient reason
(viz., that grave material loss would be incurred by withdrawal). (b)
Temporary attendance at meetings means that for a short time, and not
for longer than absolutely necessary, one is present at gatherings of
the society, but takes no active part in its false cult.

951. The following conditions were laid down for permission of nominal
membership in the Odd Fellows, Sons of Temperance, etc.: (a) that the
penitent joined the society in good faith, before knowing that it was
condemned; (b) that there be no danger of scandal, or that it be
removed by the declaration that membership is only nominal and only for
the purpose of avoiding temporal losses; (c) that there be no danger of
perversion of the party himself or of his family, in case of sickness
or of death, and no danger of a non-Catholic funeral.

952. Procedure of the confessor with a penitent who has incurred
excommunication on account of membership in the Masons or other like
society should be as follows: (a) the faculty to absolve must be
obtained (see 949), (b) the following promises must be exacted from the
penitent--that he will withdraw entirely from the sect and that he will
repair, as well as he can, the scandal he may have caused; (c) the
penitent must be required to renounce the sect, at least in the
presence of the confessor, and to deliver over to him the books,
manuscripts, insignia, and other objects that are distinctive of it
(the confessor should give these objects to the Ordinary as soon as he
prudently can, but, if grave reasons prevent this, he should burn
them); (d) a salutary penance should be given and frequent confession
urged.

953. Procedure of the confessor with a penitent who belongs to the Odd
Fellows or other society forbidden by name, but without censure, should
be as follows: (a) if the penitent is contrite and promises to leave
the society, he can be absolved without special faculties; (b) if the
penitent is contrite but wishes to retain nominal membership, the case
must be referred to the Archbishop of the Province or to the Apostolic
Delegate; (c) if the penitent wishes to retain full membership, he is
not repentant and cannot be absolved.

954. Procedure of the confessor with a penitent who belongs to a
society not condemned by name, but which the confessor himself regards
as evil should be as follows: (a) if the confessor is certain that the
society is one of those condemned implicitly by the Church, because it
exacts inviolable secrecy or blind obedience to its leaders, or has
Masonic characteristics, etc., he should treat it in the same way as
the societies condemned by name; (b) if the confessor is certain that
the society is condemned by natural law for the penitent before him
(e.g., on account of the evil associates and moral dangers it
contains), he should treat it as any other occasion of sin, but it
should be noted that no priest or local Ordinary has authority to
condemn publicly and by name any society not condemned by the Church;
(c) if the confessor is in doubt, he should proceed according to the
rules for an uncertain conscience (see 678, 679, 742), and for the
prudent administration of the Sacraments (see Vol. II).

955. As one of the chief remedies against evil societies is the
formation of Catholic societies, the Code (Canon 684) praises those of
the faithful who enroll as members in associations established or
recommended by the Church. Catholic societies distinct from religious
Orders or Congregations are of two kinds.

(a) Distinctly religious societies are those instituted for the purpose
of promoting a more Christian life among their members, or of fostering
works of piety and charity, or of contributing to the solemnity of
public worship. Such are the Secular Third Orders, Confraternities of
the Blessed Sacrament and of Christian Doctrine, and other pious unions.

(b) Societies that are not distinctly religious, but whose membership
and spirit are Catholic, are of many kinds. Such are the Knights of
Columbus, Ancient Order of Hibernians, Catholic Daughters of America,
Volksverein, Young Men’s Institute, etc.

956. Communication in Worship.--Communication with non-Catholics (as
was said above in 882) is either religious or non-religious. It is
clear that communication in non-religious matters does not contain a
profession of error, but the same cannot be said of communication in
religious services, since these are not only acts of worship, but also
expressions of faith in the creed of a certain religion. We must
distinguish, however, between private and public communication.

(a) Communication is private, when a Catholic and non-Catholic offer
together the Lord’s Prayer or other similar prayer as a private
devotion, not as an act of official worship. Private devotion is not
the expression of a sectarian creed, and, if there is nothing false in
it and no danger of scandal or perversion from communication between
Catholic and non-Catholic in such devotion, this kind of communication
is not unlawful. In the following paragraphs there will be question of
public communication.

(b) Communication is public, when the rites performed are the official
services of the Catholic Church or of some non-Catholic sect (e.g., the
Mass, the Lord’s Supper of the Lutherans, the Evensong of the
Anglicans, the prayer-meeting of other sects). Thus, public
communication takes place either when non-Catholics take part in
Catholic worship, or Catholics take part in non-Catholic worship.

957. Participation of non-Catholics in Catholic services is either by
mere presence, or by reception or performance of Catholic rites.

(a) Mere presence consists in a purely material attendance at a
service, as when non-Catholics assist at Mass and sit, rise and kneel
with the congregation or remain seated throughout. There is no
objection whatever to this kind of participation; on the contrary,
non-Catholics should be invited to Catholic sermons and services, and
made to feel welcome, for in what better way can the divine command of
working for their conversion be complied with? Only excommunicated
persons are excluded from the offices of the Church (Canon 2269, Sec.1).
It is also allowed that Catholic bishops and clergy accompany a
non-Catholic ruler to the church, and assign him and his escort an
honorable place therein.

(b) Reception of Catholic rites is had when non-Catholics, without
performing any liturgical function, receive some spiritual favor
through the rites of the Church, as when a non-Catholic receives a
priest’s blessing.

(c) Performance of Catholic rites exists when a non-Catholic exercises
some office in a liturgical function of the Catholic Church, as when a
Protestant acts as sponsor at a Catholic Baptism.

958. Cases of reception of Catholic rites by non-Catholics permitted by
law are the following:

(a) Reception of Sacramentals.--Since the purpose of these rites and
objects is to implore graces and temporal favors with a view to the
illumination and salvation of the recipient, and since our Lord Himself
blessed and cured even the pagans, the Church permits blessings and
exorcisms to be conferred on non-Catholics (Canons 1149, 1152).
Similarly, blessed candles, palms, ashes and other real sacramentals
may be given to them. Examples: The Church has permitted priests to
visit the homes of Mohammedans to bless and pray over the sick, and
also to bless the houses of schismatics, provided they were summoned
and avoided all communication in prayer.

(b) Reception of Sacraments.-Since it is possible that the salvation of
a dying person may depend on absolution, good moralists, relying on
decisions of Roman Congregations, hold that conditional absolution may
be given to a heretic or schismatic who is dying and unconscious, or
even to one such who is dying and conscious, provided he is in good
faith and contrite, and danger of scandal has been removed.

(c) Reception of Fruits of the Mass.--Since Christ died for all, there
is nothing in the nature of things to prevent the application of Mass
to any persons who are living or in Purgatory; and from Canon 809 it
appears that Mass may be offered for any living person, and also for
any deceased person about whose salvation we may entertain hope. Hence,
neither the divine nor the ecclesiastical law forbids the application
of Mass for heretics, schismatics, or infidels. The Church also permits
Mass to be said privately, all scandal removed, for excommunicated
persons. Under these same conditions, then, Mass may be said for
non-Catholics, both living and dead (Canon 2262, Sec.2, n. 2).

(d) Reception of the Suffrages of the Church.--Since God wishes all to
be saved and public peace to be maintained (I Tim., ii), and since the
Church desires that Ordinaries and pastors should have at heart the
conversion of non-Catholics (Canon 1350), public prayers for the
prosperity of non-Catholic rulers and officials--likewise sermons,
missions and other works for the conversion of unbelievers--are not
only allowed, but recommended and required.

959. Non-Catholics have not the same right as Catholics to receive the
rites of the Church, and hence when they are admitted to them, there
are certain restrictions to be observed.

(a) Restrictions as to Sacred Things.--As admission of non-Catholics to
sacramentals, etc., is a favor, not a right, it should be confined to
cases allowed by the Church. Thus, it is forbidden to grant indulgences
or to give the nuptial blessing to non-Catholics, and only in very
exceptional cases may any ceremonies be permitted at mixed marriages
(Canons 1102, 1109). Non-Catholics may not receive the Pax; may not be
invited to take part in the solemn services of receiving ashes on Ash
Wednesday, palms on Palm Sunday and candles on Candlemas Day; may not
receive ecclesiastical burial (Holy Office, June 8, 1859). Children
sent by their parents to non-Catholic services may not be confirmed
(Holy Office, August 28, 1780); a Catholic priest is not allowed to
supply for a non-Catholic minister, by accompanying the body of a
non-Catholic from the home to the graveyard, even though the body be
not brought to Church, nor the bell tolled (Holy Office, January 26,
1886). It is not permissible to lend a Catholic church to non-Catholics
for their services.

(b) Restrictions as to Persons.--As superstition and irreverence have
to be avoided, the sacramentals may not be administered or given at all
to non-Catholics about whose good faith and purpose there is doubt.

(c) Restrictions as to Mode.--The Church, while she wishes to help and
benefit non-Catholics, must avoid anything that would cause scandal or
have the appearance of equal recognition of believers and unbelievers.
Thus, when Mass is offered for outsiders, the same publicity and pomp
is not permitted as when there is question of Catholics.

960. As regards the performance of Catholic rites by non-Catholics, the
Church disapproves of every kind of such participation, but does not
refuse to tolerate the more remote kind, when there is grave necessity
and no scandal is caused.

(a) By more remote participation we understand such as scarcely differs
from passive assistance (e.g., to act as witness at a marriage), or
such as carries with it no recognition as an official of the Church
(e.g., to act as substitute or temporary organist). Hence, the Church
has permitted this kind of participation in particular cases, when the
authorities decided that there was urgent necessity and no scandal.
Examples: Moralists hold that, when a heretic or schismatic has been
designated as sponsor at Baptism and cannot be refused without grave
offense, he may be allowed to act as witness. The Holy Office has also
declared that heretics should not be used as witnesses at marriage, but
may be tolerated as such by the Ordinary, when there is a grave reason
and no scandal (August 18, 1891); that a non-Catholic organist may be
employed temporarily, if it is impossible to secure one who is a
Catholic, and no scandal is caused (February 23, 1820); that in certain
special circumstances girls belonging to a schismatical sect might be
allowed to sing with the Catholics at church functions, especially at
Exposition and Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament (January 25, 1906).

(b) Proximate participation is the exercise of functions connected with
a sacred rite (e.g., to act as server at Mass), or that imply a
recognition of the religion of the one who participates (e.g., to act
as representative of some sect at a funeral and receive liturgical
honors). The Church has always refused to tolerate this kind of
participation. Examples: Non-Catholics may not act as sponsors at
Baptism or Confirmation under pain of invalidity of sponsorship (Canons
765, 795), nor chant the Office in choir (Holy Office, June 8, 1859),
nor be employed as singers of the liturgical music (Holy Office, May 1,
1889), nor carry torches or lights in church ceremonies (Holy Office,
November 20, 1850). Likewise, non-Catholics may not become members of
Catholic confraternities, nor assist at Catholic services as official
representatives of some sect or sectarian society.

961. Participation of Catholics in non-Catholic services may happen
today in so many ways, and it is so difficult at times to draw the line
between lawful and unlawful communication, that it is well before
considering these cases to state the general rules that apply here.

(a) It is lawful to perform an act from which two effects follow, one
good and the other bad, if the act in itself is good or indifferent, if
there is a sufficiently grave reason for performing it, if the evil
effect is not intended, and if the evil effect be not prior to the good
effect (see 104).

(b) Circumstances vary in different localities and countries, and
communication that would signify unity of belief in a place where
Catholics and non-Catholics are very unequal numerically might be very
harmless in a place where there is no great numerical difference.
Offense to non-Catholics should not be given needlessly.

(c) In doubtful cases the decision whether or not a particular kind of
communication is lawful or unlawful pertains to the Ordinary (Canon
1258).

962. Participation of Catholics in non-Catholic services is either
active or passive. (a) Participation is active when one takes a part or
fulfills some function in an act that is an official expression of the
worship and belief of a sect, even though this takes place outside a
church, or is not open to the general public.

(b) Participation is passive, if one merely assists as a spectator, and
not as a worshipper, at something pertaining to non-Catholic worship.

963. Sacred things in which communication is possible are of three
classes:

(a) the chief acts of divine worship (i.e., Sacrifices, Sacraments,
sacramentals);

(b) the secondary acts of divine worship (such as prayers, processions,
vows, oaths, the Divine Office, hymn singing, scripture reading, etc.).
In the Protestant denominations some one or other of these is, as a
rule, the central or distinctive service, although some have other
proper features of their own, such as the silent meeting of the
Quakers, the seance of the Spiritualists, the march of the Salvation
Army, the charity kiss of the Dunkards;

(c) places (e.g., churches, lodge rooms, cemeteries), times (e.g., days
of feast or fast), and objects (e.g., images, badges, aprons, banners,
robes), pertaining to divine worship.

964. It is unlawful for Catholics in any way to assist actively at or
take part in the worship of non-Catholics (Canon 1258). Such assistance
is intrinsically and gravely evil; for (a) if the worship is
non-Catholic in its form (e.g., Mohammedan ablutions, the Jewish
paschal meal, revivalistic “hitting the trail,” the right hand of
fellowship, etc.), it expresses a belief in the false creed symbolized;
(b) if the worship is Catholic in form, but is under the auspices of a
non-Catholic body (e.g., Baptism as administered by a Protestant
minister, or Mass as celebrated by a schismatical priest), it expresses
either faith in a false religious body or rebellion against the true
Church.

965. It is unlawful for Catholics to simulate active assistance in the
worship of non-Catholics, for, while the non-Catholic rite would be
avoided, something which appeared to be that rite would be done, and
thus profession of faith in it would be given.

(a) Hence, it is not lawful to do an indifferent act which bystanders
from the circumstances will have to conclude is an act of false
worship. Thus, Eleazar would not eat lawful meat which was put before
him in order that he might pretend to eat the meat of sacrifice after
the manner of the heathen (II Mach., vi).

(b) It is not lawful to accept a false certificate of participation in
false worship. Hence, the early Church condemned as apostates the
Libellatics (i.e., those Christians, who, to protect themselves in time
of persecution, obtained by bribery or otherwise a forged or genuine
magistrate’s certificate that they had sacrificed to the heathen gods).

966. It is unlawful for Catholics to assist passively at non-Catholic
worship, unless there are present the conditions requisite for
performing an act that has two results, one good and the other evil
(see 104); for even passive assistance frequently involves sin.

(a) Hence, the assistance itself must be really indifferent, that is,
it must be a merely passive presence without any active participation
in the service. Examples: A person who stands in the rear of a Quaker
meeting house as an onlooker assists passively; but one who sits
quietly among the others present, as if in meditation, assists
actively. A person who sits in a pew during a revival in order to see
what is going on, assists passively; but, if he joins with the
congregation in bowing, groaning, etc., he assists actively.

(b) The evil effect that may result from assistance (such as scandal
and danger of perversion) must not be prior to the good effect;
otherwise, evil would be done for the sake of good. Examples: Titus, a
non-Catholic, goes to Mass as a spectator, with his Catholic friend
Balbus. He then asks Balbus to assist as a spectator at the services of
his denomination, and thus see for himself that the latter is better.
Balbus, in order to be courteous, consents. Here Balbus aims to show
politeness, which is good, but the means he uses--namely, the
impression he gives that he is not convinced of the superiority of his
own religion--is bad.

(c) The evil effect (i.e., remote danger of perversion, unavoidable
scandal) must not be intended or approved, but only permitted. Example:
Caius, a Catholic public official, has to attend funerals and weddings
in Protestant churches as a mark of the public respect for notable
persons. He knows that a few will take scandal at his action, but he
wishes only to do his duty as an official, and not to offend anyone
(see on Scandal).

(d) The cause of assistance must be in proportion to the kind of
assistance. Hence, a greater reason is required for assistance on
several occasions than on one, for assistance at infidel than at
heretical services, for assistance at the primary than at the secondary
act of worship, for assistance by a priest than for assistance by a
layman, etc. Example: Graver reason would be necessary to justify
assistance at a non-Catholic funeral, if there were signs of
anti-Catholicism manifested (e.g., flower designs and regalia of a
hostile sect placed on the coffin), than if the service contained
nothing offensive.

967. Cases of communication in false sacrificial rites are as follows:
(a) Active participation is had in such acts as the slaying and
offering of victims, the burning of incense before idols, the eating of
sacrificial banquets; (b) Passive participation is had when one merely
watches the rite of sacrifice without taking any part therein.

968. Cases of communication in the Sacrifice of the Mass are as
follows: (a) Active participation is had in such acts as taking the
part of deacon in a schismatical Mass, assisting at a schismatical Mass
with the intention of hearing Mass formally (i.e., of offering it with
the priest). If on Sunday, one is where there is only a schismatical
church, one is excused from the obligation of hearing Mass, and may not
hear Mass in that church (Holy Office, December 5, 1608; August 7,
1704). (b) Passive participation is had when one is present merely as a
spectator, kneeling before the Blessed Sacrament, but giving no other
signs of religious devotion. This is permissible under the conditions
mentioned above (see 966), if there is no scandal, or danger of
perversion (Holy Office, April 24, 1894).

969. Cases of participation in the Sacraments or sacramentals, real or
reputed, are as follows: (a) Active participation takes place when one
receives a Sacrament from a non-Catholic minister, or offers one’s
child to receive a Sacrament from such a minister, or contracts
marriage in the presence of such a minister, or acts as sponsor at a
non-Catholic baptism or confirmation or as the religious witness at a
non-Catholic marriage, or answers in public non-Catholic prayers, or
takes ashes blessed by schismatics. (b) Passive participation is had
when one merely looks on at the administration of a Sacrament or
sacramental by a non-Catholic minister, without signs of approval or
union in what is being done.

970. There are certain cases that seem to be active participations in
Sacraments with non-Catholics, and yet are permitted by the Code. In
reality, however, there is no active communication in those cases.

(a) Canons 886 and 905 allow the faithful to receive communion and
absolution according to a Rite different from their own, so that one
who belongs to the Latin Rite may lawfully receive in Communion a Host
consecrated according to the Greek Rite, or go to confession to an
Oriental priest. But in these Canons there is question of different
Rites within the Catholic Church, not of those of non-Catholics.

(b) Canons 742 and 882 allow those who are in danger of death to
receive Baptism and absolution from an heretical or schismatical
minister, and theologians apply the same principle to Extreme Unction
and the Viaticum. But there is no communication in non-Catholic
ceremonies in these cases, for the Sacraments belong to the Catholic
Church, and for the sake of the dying she authorizes non-Catholic
ministers to act as her representatives, provided there is no scandal
or danger of perversion.

971. Cases of participation in non-sacramental rites are as follows:

(a) Oaths and Vows.--Participation is active when one swears in words
or by other signs which, according to local usage, manifest belief in
the creed of some sect; it is not active, when the manner of the oath
does not signify adherence to a false creed; Example: If one is
required to swear, by touching or kissing the non-Catholic Bible, as a
sign of approval of Protestantism or Masonry, one may not consent. But,
if the Government presents a non-Catholic Bible with no thought of
Protestantism, there is no approval of Protestantism in the one who
swears on that Bible, although, if the custom is not general, there
might be scandal if no protest were made. A Catholic may bring his own
Bible with him, or ask for a copy of the Catholic Bible.

(b) Services--Participation is active when one marches in an Anglican
procession, plays the organ or sings at Y.M.C.A. services, joins in the
prayers or responses offered in a Protestant church, etc. (Holy Office,
July 6, 1889). Participation is passive if one looks on during a rare
visit, or listens by radio to the musical program broadcast from
Protestant services, or if one is obliged to attend non-Catholic
services habitually, not as a profession of faith, but as a matter of
civil duty or of domestic discipline, as happens with soldiers or with
inmates of public institutions. Participation is not active if one
adores the Blessed Sacrament carried in a schismatical procession which
one meets by chance and unavoidably. Examples: Titus belongs to the
honorary guard of a state ruler, and has to accompany the latter to
non-Catholic services on certain state occasions. Balbus is tutor in a
non-Catholic family, and is expected to take his charges to their
church and back home on Sundays. Claudia is a maid in a non-Catholic
family, and is ordered to hold one of the children while it is being
baptized by the non-Catholic minister. In all these cases the presence
at the services is purely passive, since the intention of the Catholic
present is not to perform any religious duty, but only some civil or
domestic service (see IV Kings, v. 18). But, on the other hand, the
martyrs during the reigns of Elizabeth and her successors refused to
attend the Anglican services, because this was required by law as a
sign of conformity to the Established Church--that is, an active
presence was prescribed.

972. Cases of participation in religious places, times and objects are
as follows:

(a) Places.--Participation is active when one orders one’s body to be
buried in a sectarian graveyard, when one enters a schismatical or
heretical church privately in order to visit the Blessed Sacrament or
pray, when one offers up Catholic services in a non-Catholic temple, if
these things are looked upon by the public as indications of identity
of belief between Catholics and non-Catholics. Participation is merely
passive, if one visits non-Catholic places of worship out of curiosity
in order to look at the pictures, hear the music or listen to or take
part in a political lecture or debate. In case of necessity, the Church
permits Catholic services to be performed in the same building as that
wherein non-Catholic rites are held, e.g., the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre at Jerusalem which is used by various denominations (Holy
Office, 12 April, 1704).

(b) Times.--Participation is active if one observes new moons,
sabbaths, and days of fast as prescribed in the Old Law.

(c) Objects.--Participation is active if one wears the uniform of a
condemned society, the ring or other emblem of Freemasonry, etc., or
makes use of other insignia whose sole purpose is to indicate
membership in some sect, unless it be evident that these are used for
some other purpose (e.g., in order to act a certain part in a play).

973. Cases of participation through attendance at non-Catholic
religious instructions are as follows:

(a) Active participation in worship is had when one listens to a
preacher, Sunday school teacher, etc., and signifies approval by
joining in “Amens” or other acclamations.

(b) Participation is merely passive, if at church or over the radio,
one listens out of curiosity, or in order to be able to refute errors,
or for the sake of perfecting oneself in diction or eloquence, or of
showing respect to a person whose funeral oration is being delivered,
etc. But, even though there be no active participation, it will usually
be unlawful to listen to these sectarian discourses on account of the
danger of perversion to the listener or of scandal to others. Catholics
who are scientifically trained and staunch in faith may for good
reasons hear sectarian sermons, but the greater number would be
disturbed or unsettled (see the principles given above on dangerous
books and schools, 854-857, 868). Moreover, even those who have a right
to listen to non-Catholic religious talks have to be on their guard
against scandal, for outsiders may regard their attention as approval
of doctrine or participation in cult, and Catholics not sufficiently
instructed may regard their example as an encouragement to imitate
(cfr. 979, 981).

974. Participation in non-Catholic assemblages or occasions whose
character is of a mixed kind (partly religious and partly
non-religious) are permitted by the Church, when due regard is had for
avoidance of scandal, perversion, denial of faith, etc.

(a) Some of these occasions are chiefly religious, but are also looked
on as family or civic solemnities, such as christenings, weddings,
funerals. Hence, it is allowed to assist at the religious part of the
occasion in a passive way for the sake of courtesy, or to exercise some
function which is looked upon as belonging to the non-religious part
of the occasion. Caution must be taken to ensure that the particular
sect involved does not consider the exercise of the particular function
as participating in the religious aspect of the ceremony. Likewise,
on condition that the possibility of scandal, perversion, etc., has
been removed, the following functions may be performed. One may act
as a witness at the christening of a near relative who is not a
Catholic; however, it is forbidden to be a sponsor, even by proxy,
at baptisms performed by a heretical minister (Holy Office, decr.,
May 10, 1770). To be pallbearer or undertaker at a funeral, to be an
usher at a wedding, to be an extra bridesmaid, etc., may be permitted.
(If the function of best man or maid of honor be considered as merely
attendants to the bride or groom, such participation in itself would
not be illicit; but since the danger of scandal might often be present,
such participation is dangerous. It is lawful for a Catholic pastor
to attend the funeral of a non-Catholic friend or relative, provided
he does not wear his sacred garb and takes no part in the ceremonies.
Canon 1258, Sec.2 establishes the general norm regulative of these
cases: a passive or merely material presence may be, for a serious
reason, tolerated as a mark of esteem or social courtesy at funerals,
weddings, and similar functions, provided there is involved no danger
of perversion or scandal; in a doubtful case, the serious reason for
this presence must be approved by the local Ordinary.

(b) Other occasions are chiefly non-religious in character, but are
also partly religious, or have the appearance of being religious. Such
are, for example, the coronation, birthday, wedding, or funeral of a
ruler, school commencements, political conventions, patriotic meetings,
civil marriage before a magistrate who is also a non-Catholic minister.
When these exercises are chiefly non-religious or entirely civil, even
though conducted in non-Catholic churches or by non-Catholic ministers,
the Church grants permission to participate in them to some extent, if
there is sufficient reason.

975. Among the mixed occasions just mentioned are not included such
as have an anti-Catholic or anti-religious spirit, such as funerals
from which all manifestations of religion are excluded on account of
hatred of religion, entertainments held by forbidden societies in which
the members are present in regalia, picnics under the auspices of the
Orangemen, etc.

976. Cooperation in Religious Activities.--A third danger of making
external profession of a false religion is cooperation in activities
whose tendency or principles are erroneous (see 944). Cooperation in a
false religion is of two kinds, immediate and mediate. (a) Cooperation
is immediate, when one takes a part in an act of a false religion
itself (e.g., by worshipping an idol). This kind of cooperation was
discussed above, as participation or communication (see 956-975). (b)
Cooperation is mediate, when one takes part, not in an act of a false
religion, but in some other act which is a preparation for a help to
the act of a false religion. This is the kind of cooperation we are now
considering.

977. Mediate cooperation is of various kinds. (a) It is proximate
or remote, according as the preparation or help afforded to false
religion is near to or far from the religious act. Thus, to make ready
the lights, incense, flowers, etc. in front of an idol is proximate
cooperation; to give money to an idolatrous priest or bonze is remote
cooperation. (b) Mediate cooperation is material or formal, according
as the intention of the cooperator is to share in or help error itself,
or merely to help those who are in error, while disapproving of their
error. Thus, if one prepares a pagan temple for worship or contributes
money towards its maintenance because one’s sympathies are with its
idolatry, one’s cooperation is formal; if one does these things only in
order to make a living or to show friendship to an individual pagan,
one’s cooperation is material. It is clear that formal cooperation is a
grave sin against faith, and hence we shall speak now only of material
cooperation.

978. The principles governing the lawfulness of material cooperation
will be treated at length below in their proper place among the sins
opposed to charity. But since, on account of the mixed conditions of
society today, there are innumerable cases of material cooperation
in religion, it will be useful to state in advance in this place the
principles bearing on material cooperation and their application to
cases on religion and worship. The principles are the same as those
given for an act that has two effects, one good and the other bad.
Hence, material cooperation is not lawful, except when the following
conditions are present:

(a) The action of him who cooperates must be good in itself or at least
indifferent, for of course, if it is evil, it is not lawful. Thus, if
a person were to give to one pagan temple objects he had stolen from
another temple, his action would be intrinsically sinful on account of
the theft. Similarly, if a person were to contribute to a collection
list as “sympathizer” with a school for the propagation of atheism
or as “beneficiary” from the sacrifices to be offered an idol, his
act would be intrinsically sinful as being a promotion of error or
superstition, even though he were not really a sympathizer with atheism
or a believer in idols.

(b) The intention of him who cooperates must be good; for, if he wills
to help a false religion, he is guilty of formal cooperation; if he
wills some other wrong end, he is guilty of some other species of
sin. Thus, if one who does not believe in idolatry contributes to it
on account of sympathy with anti-Christian movements, he is guilty of
enmity to the truth.

(c) There must be a reason for the cooperation proportionate to the
gravity of the sin which will be committed by others, to the proximity
and necessity of the cooperation, and to the obligation which one has
of preventing the sin of others. Examples: To contribute to a sect
which plots the downfall of legitimate authority is never lawful,
for there is no reason of temporal or private good that can be a
compensation for the destruction of the public good. To contribute
to the building of a Mohammedan mosque does not require so serious a
reason as to contribute to the building of a pagan temple, for mosques
are not used for idolatry. A graver reason is needed to justify ringing
the bell or ushering the people to their seats for a service of false
worship than to justify sweeping and dusting the temple the day before
the service, for in the former case the cooperation is closer. A
greater reason is required to build a house of false worship, when
there is no one else to build it, than when there are many others who
will gladly build it if one refuses, for in the former case one’s
cooperation is so necessary that without it the false worship cannot
take place, but not so in the latter case. A much more serious reason
would be required to justify parents conducting their children to a
place of false worship than would be required to justify a public
chauffeur in taking passengers thither; for the parents have a special
duty to guard the religion of their children.

979. The above principles on mediate cooperation are clear enough, but
it is frequently very difficult to apply them on account of the
uncertainty as to whether or not a particular act of cooperation is
indifferent in itself, or whether a particular reason for cooperation
is sufficient. But the following rules will help:

(a) An act is indifferent or good, when it does not tend to evil from
its very nature or the circumstances, but has purposes that are not
bad. It is bad when either intrinsically (i.e., from its nature) or
extrinsically (i.e., from circumstances) it tends necessarily to evil.
Examples: A derisory image of Christ and the manual of an obscene cult
are intrinsically evil, inasmuch as they necessarily convey error or
immorality. To draw up plans for a temple of idolaters in a Christian
country would have the appearance of favoring the propagation of
idolatry; to work on the construction of a temple in a pagan country
where the lending of one’s labor is regarded as a sign of acceptance of
paganism, to help build a meeting house for a sect that plots the
overthrow of government or religion--all these acts are indifferent in
themselves (for one may also draw plans and put up walls for good or
indifferent purposes), but from the circumstances they are evil in the
cases given.

(b) Reasons for cooperation may be ranked as great, greater and
greatest according to the kinds of goods that are at stake, and their
sufficiency or insufficiency may be determined by measuring them with
the gravity of the cooperation that is given. Great reasons are: fear
of serious suffering, or of the wrath of husband or other superior, or
of loss of an opportunity to make a considerable profit. Greater
reasons are: fear of loss of position, or of notable detriment to
reputation or fortune, or of severe imprisonment. Among the greatest
reasons for cooperation in the worship of a false religion are the
following: danger of loss of life or limb, of perpetual imprisonment,
of great dishonor, of loss of all one’s earthly possessions, of
disturbance of the public peace.

980. Cases of cooperation in false religion that occur most frequently
are: (a) contributions made to schools, churches, institutions; (b)
labor given to buildings and objects of worship or instruction; (c)
labor given to acts of worship or instruction.

981. Contributions to false worship are unlawful, even apart from
scandal, danger of perversion, and the bad intention of the cooperator
in the following cases:

(a) When on account of circumstances the contributions are signs of
sympathy with religious errors. Examples: Titus gives many stipends for
Masses to a schismatical priest. Balbus, when asked, contributes
liberally to a fund for the building of a hall under the auspices of
atheists. Caius, without being asked, gives a small donation towards
the erection of a pagan temple. Claudius sends in a subscription to the
treasury of a political organization whose purpose is anti-religious,
and promises to support their ticket.

(b) Contributions, even though they manifest no sympathy with religious
error, are unlawful, when there is no reason for the cooperation, or
only an insufficient reason. Examples: Caius contributes to a pagan
temple for no other reason than that he has not the heart to refuse
anyone. Titus advertises constantly in an antireligious paper in order
to help his business (cfr. 1530).

982. If there is no bad intention on the part of the contributor, and
if the danger of scandal or perversion is excluded, contributions are
permitted under the following conditions, of which both must be present:

(a) The contribution must not be a mark of sympathy with religious
error. This condition will be fulfilled more readily in countries of
mixed religion, where Catholics and non-Catholics have been long
associated together, and where non-Catholic denominations are engaged
in many things other than the preaching of their doctrines, such as
works of benevolence. Example: Balbus contributes at times to the
building or maintenance of Protestant orphan asylums, hospitals, and
schools, in a locality where these institutions are open to all and a
contribution is not regarded as a sign of agreement with sectarian
purposes.

(b) There must be a sufficient reason for making the contribution, such
as the common good or great private necessity. Examples: Claudius
contributes to the building of a non-Catholic church, in order that
Catholics may thus obtain exclusive use of a church till then used by
Catholics and non-Catholics alike. Titus buys tickets for bazaars, lawn
fetes, oyster suppers, dances, picnics and other entertainments held
for the benefit of non-Catholic churches, since, if he does not do
this, he will lose trade and his business will be injured.

983. The building of houses of false worship, the production and sale
of articles used in false worship, are unlawful also in two cases:

(a) when, on account of circumstances, they are a mark of approval of
the false worship. Examples: Christians of Japan were forbidden by the
Church to cooperate in the erection of altars or temples to idols, even
if threatened with death or exile, and the reason of the prohibition
seems to have been in each instance that such work was looked on and
demanded as a profession of faith in paganism. Similarly, the
construction of non-Catholic edifices in a Catholic country, of a pagan
temple in a Christian country, or of an atheistic hall, would be signs
of approbation of error. It is difficult to see how one who sells idols
to those who request them for purposes of idolatry does not show favor
to false worship, although he might be excused if, under threat of
great harm, he delivered them with a protest that he was acting under
compulsion;

(b) when there is no reason, or no sufficient reason, for cooperation
with false worship. Example: Balbus helps to build non-Catholic places
of worship for no other reason than that he is asked to do so, or that
he receives good pay.

984. Building non-Catholic temples or furnishing the appurtenances of
worship, scandal and other evil being avoided, are lawful under two
conditions as above:

(a) the work must not be regarded as a sign of approval of false
worship. Examples: The Church has permitted Christians to assist in the
construction of Mohammedan mosques, when this was done unwillingly by
them and under compulsion. The manufacture of statues of Buddha or of
other idols is not a sign that one approves of idolatry, because these
objects have legitimate uses, such as adornment of palaces or art
galleries. Similarly, the production and distribution of emblems of a
non-Catholic sect or secret society is regarded as being in itself an
indifferent sect, on account of the various uses to which such objects
may be put;

(b) there must be a reason sufficiently grave for doing this kind of
work. Hence, a greater reason is needed to build a pagan temple than a
Mohammedan mosque, and graver reason to build a mosque than an
heretical place of worship; likewise, greater reason is required to
cooperate as architect than as hirer and supervisor of labor, greater
reason to cooperate as supervisor of labor than as stonecutter,
bricklayer, etc.; greater reason is required to justify selling than
making idols; greater reason to justify selling altar cloths and breads
for the Lord’s Supper than for selling pews and stained glass windows.
Examples: Since lights, benches, bells, tables, cloths, etc., are not
necessarily intended for direct use in acts of worship, a sufficient
reason for selling them to non-Catholic churches is the profit that
will be made. But, since vestments and chalices pertain directly to
worship, a more serious reason is required for selling them than
business gains.

985. Making the preparations for non-Catholic services is unlawful
in the two cases given above, that is, when there is approval or
insufficient reason. (a) If the work manifests an approval of the
services, it is unlawful. Such positions as sexton, sacristan, usher,
beadle, church-warden, and trustee, imply recognition of the worship
or membership in the congregation, although the same does not seem to
be true of membership in the civil corporation of a church, nor of
external offices such as janitor, caretaker, and attorney. Examples:
Balba, an Anglican who is sick, wishes her minister to bring her
communion. She asks her nurse, Titia, who is a Catholic, to telephone
the minister to bring communion, and also directs Titia to prepare an
altar and assist the minister on his arrival by lighting the candles,
making responses, etc. Titia may not consent, for such immediate
cooperation would mean approval of and participation in Anglican rites.
Claudius, a Catholic, is hired by the minister of a Protestant church
to take care of the yard and garden about the church and parsonage.
Sometimes the minister asks Claudius to play the chimes in his church
tower which call the people to the services. The gardening work is
indifferent, but the playing of the chimes seems at least an unlawful
cooperation, since it is an invitation to non-Catholic worship.

(b) If there is no sufficient reason for the work, it is unlawful.
Examples: Gaia, a Catholic, acts as scrubwoman and cleaner in a
schismatical church for no other reason than friendship for members
of the altar society. On certain feast days her husband, Caius, a
Catholic, takes pilgrims to the schismatical church in a bus, only
because he makes considerable profit.

986. Making preparations for non-Catholic services, scandal and other
danger being avoided, is lawful when the two conditions given above
are present. (a) Hence, the preparations must contain no indication
of approval of the services. Examples: If Titia, the nurse mentioned
in the previous paragraph, called in an Anglican nurse to receive and
fulfill the orders of Balba, she would show that she did not herself
approve of the rites, and her act would be indifferent in itself.
If she could not avoid telephoning the minister without serious
consequences, it would not be unlawful for her to tell him that Balba
wished him to call. She might even in great necessity prepare the
table herself, but could take no part in the rite. The acts of telling
the minister that a visit from him was desired and of preparing the
table would not be, in the circumstances, approving of the rite that
followed. If Claudius mentioned in the foregoing paragraph wound up
the clock in the church tower, or rang the bell at certain times to
indicate the hour of the day, his acts would be indifferent, since they
have no necessary reference to worship.

(b) There must be a reason sufficiently grave for engaging in the
work that prepares for the services. Examples: If Caia mentioned in
the preceding paragraph were in great poverty and could find no other
employment, this would be a sufficient reason for her cooperation.
Likewise, if her husband drove a bus that carried passengers to
whatever destination they desired, and he could not refuse to let
them off at the church without being dismissed or causing other like
inconveniences, he would have sufficient reason for his cooperation.

987. The Commandment of External Profession of Faith.--The third
commandment of faith (mentioned in 918) has been considered so far in
its negative aspect--that is, as a prohibition against the denial of
truth or the profession of error. It remains to consider it in its
affirmative aspect--that is, as a precept of profession of faith or of
denial of error.

988. The ways of making profession of faith are various: (a) It is made
implicitly, if one performs acts that suppose faith; explicitly, if one
declares in words one’s internal belief. Thus, a Catholic professes his
faith implicitly by observing the precepts of the Church; explicitly,
by reciting before others an act of faith or the Creed.

(b) The declaration of one’s faith in words is made in ordinary ways,
if one affirms it to others, privately or publicly, or if one teaches
it or defends it in debate; it is made solemnly, if it is recited
according to a prescribed form as a ceremony. Thus, a Catholic who
answers to a questioner that he is a Catholic, or who explains the
truths of faith to an inquirer, or who replies to the objections of
an unbeliever, makes an ordinary profession of faith; one who reads
before the bishop or other designated authority a formula prescribed by
the Church, makes solemn profession of faith. The solemn profession of
faith is usually made before the altar, on which candles are lighted;
and he who makes profession of faith kneels before the authority who
receives it. Sometimes witnesses are present and the profession is
signed.

(c) The solemn profession of faith is sometimes an abjuration (i.e.,
a declaration of one’s adherence to the faith of the Church and a
recantation of previous errors); sometimes it is a declaration or
oath that one rejects errors or accepts truths. Thus, converts before
reception into the Church abjure the errors they formerly held;
officials in the Church before assuming authority make a profession of
faith in which they reprobate Modernism and express their belief in the
Creed and the teachings of the Church.

989. The existence of a divine precept of profession of faith is proved
from revelation and intrinsic reasons, as follows:

(a) “If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in
thy heart that God hath raised Him up from the dead, thou shalt be
saved. For with the heart we believe unto justice, but with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation” (Rom., x. 9, 10). This precept
obliges under grave sin, since it is required for salvation.

(b) The first reason for external profession of faith is the honor of
God; for it is a mark of disrespect to God to be ashamed or afraid
to acknowledge oneself as a believer in His Word or a witness to its
truth, on account of what others may think or say or do.

(c) A second reason for the external profession of faith is one’s own
good. It is well known that faith is strengthened by external acts, and
that it grows weak and decays among Catholics who have no priests or
churches or means of practising their faith.

(d) A third reason for profession of faith is the good of others, for
the confession of faith is an encouragement to those who are strong in
faith, an example to those whose faith is weak, and a light to those
who have not the faith.

990. The divine precept of profession of faith, since it is
affirmative, does not call for fulfillment at every moment. It obliges
only at those times when the honor of God, the Revealer of Truth, or
the needs of our neighbor, who is called to the truth, demand that one
declare externally one’s internal belief. (a) The honor of God demands
a confession of faith, when a refusal to give it signifies that one
does not accept the truths revealed by God, that revelation contains
error, etc. (b) The needs of our neighbor demand a confession of faith,
when a refusal to give it will prevent another from embracing the
faith, or will cause him to lose it or give up its practices, etc.

991. The honor of God or the good of the neighbor calls for an external
profession of faith at the following times: (a) when a person is
joining the Church or returning to it, for the Church is a visible
society and membership in it should be visible; (b) when a Catholic is
interrogated about his faith, for here the honor of God and the good of
others require that he be not ashamed of Christ or His Words (Luke, ix.
26), and that he should cause his light to shine before men (Matt., v.
16); (c) when a Catholic is in the company of others who are ridiculing
or calumniating the faith, and a protest is looked for from him on
account of his authority, knowledge, etc.

992. The profession of faith made by one who is joining the Church must
be external, but the same publicity is not necessary for every case.

(a) Secret profession of faith is made when the reception of a convert
is known only to himself and the priest who received him. This is
permitted only in grave necessity, when the spiritual good of the
convert requires it, and no injury is done to the honor of God or the
Welfare of the neighbor. Example: Titus is dying and wishes to be
baptized, but for an important reason he is unwilling to have the fact
of his conversion disclosed. Father Balbus, therefore, baptizes without
witnesses.

(b) Private profession of faith is made when the reception of a convert
is made before the priest and two witnesses, but the fact of the
conversion is not made known to others on account of circumstances.
This is permitted only for a short time and for serious reasons (see
932, 993), as the task of concealing one’s faith for a long time is
most difficult and is dangerous to faith itself. Example: Caius is a
pagan who wishes to become a Catholic, but is kept back on account of
dangers from his fellow-pagans, who will persecute him as an apostate.
He, therefore, asks to be received as a secret Christian, with liberty
to profess no religion externally. This may be permitted for a time,
until Caius can move to some other place, but it cannot be permitted
permanently.

(c) Public profession of faith is made when the reception of a convert
is made before the priest and two witnesses, and the convert thereafter
makes it known that he is a Catholic by attending Mass, receiving
the Sacraments, etc. This kind of profession of faith is ordinarily
required, but there is no law making it necessary for a convert to
publish the news of his conversion.

993. A difficult case occurs when one who wishes to become a convert
is unable to make public profession of Catholicity without suffering
very great detriment, and is unable to make private profession without
continuing in external practices of the non-Catholic religion. An
example of this would be a non-Catholic girl who is threatened with
destitution by her parents if she becomes a Catholic openly, and who
knows that she will be forced to go to church with them if she becomes
a Catholic privately. There are three courses in such a case: (a)
public profession of Catholicism at once could be advised if the party
showed signs of a special divine call and of a heroism equal to the
difficulties the public profession would entail; (b) private profession
of Catholicism could be tolerated for a time, if the party was of such
age and circumstances as to appear able to cope successfully with the
temptations and perplexities that beset this course; (c) delay of
Baptism until things take a better turn would be the most prudent plan,
if the deprivation of spiritual advantages would in the long run prove
a lesser evil than the inconveniences of public or private profession
of Catholicism.

994. Examination about one’s religious status refers either to one’s
faith, or to something not necessarily connected with faith. (a) When
a person is examined about his faith (e.g., whether he is a Catholic,
whether he believes in the doctrine of the Real Presence, or in Papal
Infallibility), profession of faith is obligatory, if its omission
is equivalent to denial. (b) When he is examined about something
not necessarily connected with faith, denial or concealment of the
truth would not be denial of faith, and concealment might be lawful,
if the question were unfair. Evasion would be sinful, if the denial
or concealment contained a lie or caused scandal. Examples: If a
missionary in England or Ireland in the sixteenth century had refused
to admit that he was a priest or religious, or a layman had refused to
confess that he had harbored a priest in his house or had assisted at
Mass, these denials would not necessarily contain a denial of the faith.

995. Examination about one’s faith is made either by a private person
or by public authority.

(a) When a person is questioned about his religious belief by a private
person, he is not bound by reason of the question itself to make a
profession of his faith, for a private person has no authority to
call upon one in the capacity of a solemn and public witness; but he
is bound to make a profession of faith by reason of circumstances, if
the honor of God or the good of his neighbor requires that he declare
his belief. Examples: Titius is known as a very iniquisitive and
meddlesome character, who is continually asking others about their
personal affairs and putting silly questions. Wherefore, those who know
him are accustomed to pay no attention to his questions, or to tell
him to mind his business, or to give him some humorous reply. One day
Titius asked Balbus, whom he knew very well to be a Catholic: “What
is your religion?” Balbus retorted: “What is yours?” and left him.
Caius is studying Christianity with a view to embracing it, and asks
Sempronius’ opinion on miracles. Sempronius, fearing the ridicule of
some others present if he admits belief in miracles, says that he knows
nothing about that subject. Balbus had a right to deny an answer to his
questioner; but Sempronius should have replied for the edification of
Caius and the honor of God.

(b) When a person is questioned about his religious belief by public
authority, his obligation to make a profession of faith is certain, if
the questioner has the right according to law to ask the question, and
if it is made to one individually and out of hatred of the faith; for
to this case apply the words of Christ: “You shall be brought before
governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony to them and to the
Gentiles” (Matt., x. 18).

996. In the following cases, one is not bound to confession of faith on
account of the public authority that puts the question, although one
may be bound on account of the circumstances:

(a) When the question is not put to an individual, but to a whole
community, by a law which requires them in time of persecution
to deliver themselves up as Christians or Catholics, there is no
obligation to comply with this law, since it is unjust, and neither the
honor of God nor the good of others requires one to make the profession
of faith it demands (see 377, 552).

(b) When the question is put to an individual by one in authority but
contrary to the law of the land, there is no obligation to answer.
Thus, if according to civil law the magistrates have no right to
examine about matters of conscience and one of them should nevertheless
do so, the party questioned could treat the question as out of order
and deny any answer.

(c) When the question is made according to law, but does not proceed
from hatred of the faith, one is not obliged positively to profess
one’s faith, unless the omission would seem to those present to be a
denial of faith. Thus, a person might remain silent, or say that he
did not wish to answer, that he did not wish to say what his belief
was, etc., and in the circumstances it would seem that he would not be
denying his faith, but merely for some reason refusing to discuss it
when he thought there was no necessity.

997. The third case mentioned above (see 991), in which one is obliged
to profess one’s faith publicly, is when the faith is. being attacked
in one’s presence. The honor of God and the good of the neighbor then
require one to speak out. (a) Thus, if the doctrines of the faith are
being blasphemed or ridiculed, one should defend them, if one is able.
Otherwise, one should protest or leave the company, if this will be
advantageous to religion. (b) If sacred things are being profaned, one
should resist physically, if one is able to prevent what is going on.

998. Debates on religion between Catholics and non-Catholics are not in
themselves wrong, but as a rule they are useless and inexpedient.

(a) That such debates are not essentially wrong, is clear from the
fact that a suitable defender of the faith is able by argumentation
to show the misconceptions that are entertained about the faith and
the fallacious objections that are made against it. This is honorable
to God and profitable to the neighbor: “Saul confounded the Jews that
dwelt at Damascus, affirming that this is the Christ .... He spoke also
to the Gentiles and disputed with the Greeks” (Acts, ix. 22, 29).

(b) That controversy is generally unprofitable is a matter of
experience. Religious debates often lead to bitterness, and seldom
effect conversions. There is, moreover, an ever-present danger that the
sophistry or eloquence of an adversary may give him the appearance of
victory to the discredit of the faith, for even a foolish person can
raise difficulties which only a wise man can answer.

999. Consequently the rule governing religious disputations is that
they should be avoided, unless ecclesiastical authority deems them
useful at times. (a) If no provocation is offered, or if no good seems
likely to result from a debate, it should be avoided. (b) If one is
attacked and it seems that the honor of God and the good of souls will
be served by a debate, then capable and prudent speakers are permitted
by the Church to defend the faith, provided permission is secured from
the Holy See, or, in case of urgency, from the local Ordinary (Canon
1325, Sec.3). The prescriptions of this Canon were reaffirmed recently
by the Holy Office and applied especially to “ecumenical” conventions
convoked to promote church unity. Catholics, both lay and clerical, may
in no way be present at such meetings without the previous consent of
the Holy See (Holy Office, Monitum, June 5, 1948). See Appendix II.

1000. The divine precept of profession of faith so far considered
obliges on account of the virtue of faith itself, that is, on account
of the external honor or service due to the Word of God. There is
also a divine precept of profession of faith which obliges on account
of other virtues that may require such a profession of faith to be
made (e.g., on account of charity or justice). The omission of the
profession of faith in these cases, however, is not a sin against
faith, but against the other virtues, and should be confessed as such.

(a) Justice requires a profession of faith when, by reason of his
office, a person has the duty of teaching others in the faith, for to
teach the faith is to manifest one’s own belief in it. Hence, bishops
and other pastors are obliged to preach: “Woe is unto me, if I preach
not the Gospel” (I Cor., ix. 16); and their teaching is a manifestation
of faith: “Having the same spirit of faith, as it is written: I
believed, for which cause I have spoken; we also believe, and therefore
we speak also” (II Cor., iv., 13).

(b) Charity requires a profession of faith when a person has not the
office of teacher, but has a suitable opportunity to impart instruction
to one who is in great ignorance about religion. For, as charity
requires one to perform corporal works of mercy for the suffering and
destitute, so it requires one to perform spiritual works of mercy
for the spiritually indigent, such as to instruct the ignorant, to
counsel the doubtful. Thus, a lay person who can prudently do so (the
circumstances of time, place, person, etc., being duly considered),
ought in charity to instruct in faith and morals the neglected children
around him.

1001. One is not bound to give instruction about matters of
faith or morals when this would lead to more harm than good; but
misrepresentation must be avoided.

(a) The purpose of instruction is to fulfill the will of God and
to benefit others; therefore, if these ends are not obtained but
rather defeated by an instruction, it should be omitted. The truth
is always good in itself, but its communication may not be expedient
on account of the recipient, who, being immature, may be harmed by
the wrong impression he will receive, or who, being badly disposed,
may use knowledge as a means to wrongdoing. Strong meat should not be
given to infants (Heb., vi. 11-14); pearls should not be cast before
swine (Matt., vii. 6). Examples: The mysteries of the faith (e.g.,
transubstantiation), should be explained with caution to those who are
not well instructed, lest they be overwhelmed with the brightness and
misunderstand. Difficult matters (such as predestination) or dangerous
subjects (such as sex duties) should not be discussed indiscriminately
with all kinds of persons. It is not right to instruct those who are in
ignorance of their duty, if this is not absolutely necessary and one
foresees that instruction will not prevent them from continuing in evil
ways but will only add to their guilt. It is wrong to put the Bible
into the hands of those who will use it for bad purposes.

(b) Misrepresentation or suppression is a lie, and in matters of
doctrine a denial of faith; hence, it is never lawful. The rule to be
followed, therefore, in teaching the faith is that one communicate the
same doctrine to all, but according to the capacity of his hearers--to
some in outline and to others more fully. This was the method of
Christ, who “with many parables spoke to them the word, according as
they were able to hear” (Mark, iv. 33).

1002. The Church has the duty not only of keeping the faith untarnished
among Catholics, but also of spreading it among non-Catholics,
Protestants, Jews and infidels, as far as circumstances will allow.
For God “Will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth” (I Tim., ii. 4). Those, therefore, who assist missionary
work for unbelievers at home or abroad, do a work thrice blest, for
(a) it is a thanksgiving offering to God, testifying our appreciation
of the gift of faith which we have received from Him, (b) it is a work
of charity to ourselves, for by helping others to receive the faith
we strengthen our own faith, and (c) it is an act of supreme mercy to
those who are sitting in darkness and the shadow of death.

1003, In addition to the divine precepts, there are also ecclesiastical
laws prescribing profession of faith.

(a) Ecclesiastical precepts of profession of faith for various
officials are contained in Canon 1406 and in the _Sacrorum Antistitum_
of Pius X (September 1, 1910), and Canon 2403 decrees that those who
contumaciously refuse to make the profession of faith of Canon 1406 may
be deprived of their office. Converts to the faith who are received
without absolute Baptism make an abjuration (Holy Office, July 20,
1859), and persons who have incurred excommunication on account of
apostasy, heresy or schism are absolved in the external forum after
juridical abjuration (Canon 2314).

(b) The purpose of these ecclesiastical laws is to prevent the
acceptance of spiritual or temporal jurisdiction or authority in the
Church, or the commission of teaching or the benefits of membership by
those who are unbelievers. Hence, the purpose is grave, and the laws
themselves are held to bind under grave sin.

(c) The persons bound by these ecclesiastical laws are both
ecclesiastics and laymen, namely, those who are about to be received
into or reconciled with the Church, and those who are about to be
admitted to some dignity, order, office or function (such as candidates
for the ranks of Cardinal, bishop, canon, parish priest, religious
superior, professor, preacher, confessor, doctor, etc).

(d) The form of the profession of faith is the Tridentine or Pian given
in the Bull of Pius IV, _Injunctum Nobis_, of November 13, 1564, with
additions referring to the Vatican Council. The oath against Modernism
prescribed in the _Sacrorum Antistitum_ of Pius X, of September 1,
1910, is also obligatory.

(e) The times when these professions of faith must be made are at
admission into the Church and at the reception or renewal of an office.

1004. The affirmative precepts of profession of faith, divine and
ecclesiastical, oblige only at the proper time and place, and therefore
on other occasions one is not obliged to make profession of faith. (a)
Hence, one may avoid a profession of faith by evading interrogation in
time of persecution--for example, through the payment of money to be
exempted from examination, or through flight. As these acts indicate
that the person is unwilling to deny his faith, but has reasons for
wishing to preserve his life or to avoid the danger of apostasy, they
are not of themselves unlawful, and may be a duty. (b) One may omit a
profession of faith by concealing one’s religion, when prudence calls
for concealment rather than publication.

1005. Flight in time of persecution is lawful or unlawful according
to circumstances, since in itself it is something indifferent, being
simply the act of moving from one place to another.

(a) Flight is unlawful, if one’s circumstances are such that one will
do an injury to justice or charity by departure. Hence, a pastor would
sin against justice if he fled in time of persecution, leaving his
flock who stood in need of his presence: “The good shepherd giveth his
life for his sheep. But the hireling and he that is not the shepherd,
seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep and flieth” (John, x. 11,
12). Hence also, one who has no care of souls but whose presence is
necessary to a persecuted community should prefer out of charity their
spiritual good to his own bodily safety: “We ought to lay down our
lives for the brethren” (I John, iii. 16).

(b) Flight is necessary, if one’s circumstances are such that one will
do an injury to justice or charity by remaining. Hence, if a pastor’s
life is necessary for his flock, while his absence can be supplied by
others who will take his place, justice to his subjects requires that
he save his life for their sake. Thus, for the good of souls St. Peter
escaped from prison (Acts, xii. 17 sqq.); St. Paul fled from Damascus
(Acts, ix. 24, 25); our Lord Himself hid when the Jews took up stones
to cast at Him (John, viii. 59). Similarly, if a person is very fearful
lest his courage may fail him if he is brought before the persecutors,
charity to self requires that he take flight so as to escape the danger
of apostasy.

(c) Flight is permissible, if there is no duty to remain and no duty to
depart: “When they shall persecute you in this city, flee into another”
(Matt., x. 23). Hence, if one’s presence is useful but not necessary
in time of persecution, it is lawful for one to flee. Some authorities
hold that the desertion of Jesus by the disciples during the Passion
was not sinful flight.

1006. To refuse to flee when flight is permissible, is usually not
advisable, for this is dangerous for most persons. It would be
advisable, however, if a person had strong and prudent confidence of
his victory, had the right intention, and used the means to prepare
himself for the struggle.

1007. Concealment of one’s faith is lawful, if the requisite conditions
are present.

(a) Thus, it is not lawful to conceal one’s faith at times when a
profession of it is called for by divine or ecclesiastical law (see
991, 1003); at other times it is lawful. Example: Titus is travelling
in a country where there are no Catholic churches, and where no one
ever asks him about his religion. He never tells anyone what he is.

(b) It is not lawful to conceal one’s faith from a dishonest motive.
Example: If Titus conceals his religion in order not to be unjustly
discriminated against, his motive is good; but if he wishes to be taken
for a non-Catholic, his motive is evil.

(c) It is not lawful to conceal one’s faith in a sinful way. Example:
If the means of concealment employed by Titus imply deception or denial
of the faith (such as lying about his origin and active participation
in non-Catholic worship), he is guilty of sinful concealment. But, if
the means employed are permissible (such as silence about himself,
omission of grace before and after meals, eating meat on Fridays in
virtue of dispensation, etc.), his method of concealment is not sinful.

1008. Generally speaking, concealment of one’s religion is not
advisable. (a) The reasons for concealment are often imaginary, rather
than real. We see that Catholics who are not ashamed of their religion,
or afraid to have it known that they practise it, are respected for
their sincerity and conscientiousness even in bigoted regions, while on
the contrary those who are apologetic or who do not live up to their
religion are looked down on as cowards or hypocrites. (b) The means
employed for concealment will cause endless doubts and scruples, for it
is often difficult to decide what means are lawful and what unlawful.




Art. 4: THE VIRTUE OF HOPE

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 17-22.)

1009. Definition.--The word “hope” is variously used. (a) In a wide and
improper sense, it signifies the expectation of some wished-for evil,
or desire without expectation. Hence, colloquially one hopes for
misfortune to another (hope of a future evil), or that another has
succeeded or is in good health (hope of past or present good), or that
some unlooked-for fortune will turn up (hope without expectation). (b)
In its strict and proper sense, hope signifies the expectation of some
desired good in the future. Thus, one hopes to pass an examination, or
to recover from illness.

1010. Hope, strictly understood, is of various kinds. (a) It is an
emotion or an affection, according as it proceeds from the sensitive or
the rational appetite. The emotion of hope is an inclination of the
irascible appetite to possess some object known through the senses and
apprehended as good and attainable, and is found both in man and in the
brutes. The affection of hope is a spiritual inclination, tending to
good as known through the reason.

(b) Hope is either natural or supernatural, according as it tends
either to goods that are temporal and within the power of man to
acquire, or to goods that are eternal and above the unaided powers of
creatures. It is in this latter sense that hope is now taken.

1011. Supernatural hope is understood, sometimes in a wide sense,
sometimes in a strict sense. (a) In a wide sense, it is used
objectively to designate the object, material or formal, of hope. Thus,
St. Paul is speaking of the material object of hope (i.e., of the
things hoped for), when he says: “Hope that is seen is not hope” (Rom.,
viii. 24), “Looking for the blessed hope” (Tit., ii. 13); while the
Psalmist is speaking of the formal object of hope (i.e., the motive of
hope), when he says: “Thou hast been my hope, a tower of strength
against the face of the enemy” (Ps. lx. 4). (b) In a strict sense, hope
is used subjectively to designate the act or habit of hope. The act of
hope is spoken of in the following texts: “We are saved by hope” (Rom.,
viii. 24); “Rejoicing in hope” (Rom., vii. 12). The habit of hope is
indicated in these verses from Job and St. Paul: “This my hope is laid
up in my bosom” (Job, xix. 27); “There remain faith, hope, charity,
these three” (I Cor., xiii. 13). Hope is now taken in the strict sense,
as a virtue or infused habit, from which proceed supernatural acts.

1012. The virtue of hope is defined: “An infused habit, by which we
confidently expect to obtain, through the help of God, the reward of
everlasting life.”

(a) It is “an infused habit.” These words express the genus to which
hope belongs, and they set it apart from the emotion and the affection
of hope, as well as from any acquired habit of hoping for purely
natural goods. A natural virtue of hope, strengthening the will with
reference to natural happiness, is not necessary in any state of man,
fallen or unfallen, for the will does not stand in need of a superadded
virtue with respect to those things that fall within its proper sphere
of action.

(b) Hope is a habit “by which we expect, etc.” These words express the
specific subjective elements of hope, that is, the powers of the soul
in which it resides and the kinds of acts it performs.

(c) “Through the help of God.” These words express the formal object or
motive of hope.

(d) “The rewards of eternal life.” These words express the material
object of hope, that is, the thing that is hoped for.

1013. There is a general similarity between the virtue of hope and
natural hope as regards their objects and acts.

(a) Natural hope is the result of a love of some good, and so differs
from fear, which is the dread of some evil. Similarly, the virtue of
hope springs from a love of heavenly goods (Rom., viii. 24, 25).

(b) Natural hope has to do with a good that is absent, and it is
therefore desire, not enjoyment. Similarly, the virtue of hope looks
forward to goods not as yet attained: “We hope for that which we see
not, we wait for it with patience” (Rom, viii. 25).

(c) Natural hope, unlike mere desire, seeks a good whose attainment is
not certain or easy, and hence it presupposes courage. Similarly, the
virtue of hope demands strength of soul: “Do ye manfully and let your
heart be strengthened, all ye that hope in the Lord” (Ps. xxx. 25).

(d) Natural hope tends towards an objective, which, while difficult, is
not impossible; hence, it expects with confidence, for, when an object
of desire is impossible, one does not hope for it, but despairs. The
virtue of hope also is confident: “Hold fast the glory and confidence
of hope unto the end” (Heb. iii. 6).

1014. Christian hope is superior to natural hope, because it is a
supernatural virtue.

(a) It is a virtue, since its acts are commanded by God, and through it
the will is directed to its beatitude and the secure means of realizing
its lofty aspirations: “I have inclined my heart to do Thy
justifications for ever, for the reward” (Ps. cxviii. 112); “Trust in
the Lord, and do good” (Ps, xxxvi. 3).

(b) Christian hope is a supernatural virtue, since through it man is
sanctified and saved: “I (Wisdom) am the mother of holy hope” (Ecclus.,
xxiv. 24); God “hath regenerated us into a lively hope” (I Pet., i. 3);
“We are saved by hope” (Rom., viii. 24); “Everyone that hath this hope
in Him sanctifieth himself” (I John, iii. 3).

1015. Though hope seeks its own reward, it is not therefore mercenary
or egotistic. Experience shows that hope produces idealism and
self-sacrifice, while the lack of it leads to engrossment in the things
of time and sense and to selfishness. (a) Thus, the hope of the just
man is not separated from charity, and hence he loves God above all,
and his neighbor as himself: “I have inclined my heart to do Thy
justifications forever, for the reward” (Ps. cxviii. 112). (b) The hope
of the sinner is a preparation for charity, since he must desire
charity as a means to the beatitude he wishes: “He that hopeth in the
Lord shall be healed” (Prov., xxviii. 25).

1016. Just as faith is divided into living and dead faith, so hope is
divided into animated and inanimated hope. (a) Animated hope is that to
which is joined the state of grace and charity, and which is thereby
perfect as a virtue and meritorious. This hope is stronger, because we
hope more confidently from friends. An act of animated hope is more
perfect when commanded by the virtue of charity, less perfect when not
so commanded--that is, he who makes an act of hope out of love of God
performs a better work than he who makes an act of hope out of some
other motive (such as self-encouragement). (b) Inanimated hope is that
to which the state of grace and charity is not joined, and which
therefore is an imperfect virtue and not meritorious.

1017. The following divisions of hope made by the Quietists are not
admissible:

(a) The division of hope into natural hope (which seeks its own good,
and which is permitted to the ordinary faithful) and supernatural hope
(which is entirely disinterested, and which is necessary for the
perfect) contains Rigorism; for since natural hope is of no avail
towards justification or for merit, it would follow that without
disinterested love of God one could not obtain forgiveness, nor could
an act be meritorious.

(b) The division of hope into two supernatural species, the one
disinterested (which desires heavenly goods for the glory of God alone)
and the other interested (which desires heavenly goods for the
advantage of self), is useless; for acts of disinterested love belong
to charity, not to hope (Denz., 1327-1349).

1018. The Object of Hope.--By the object of hope we mean three things:
(a) the good that is hoped for (material object, the end which is
intended); (b) the person for whom that good is hoped (the end for
whom); (c) the ground or foundation of hope (formal object).

1019. The material object of hope is twofold, namely, the primary
object, which is desired for its own sake, and the secondary, which is
desired on account of the primary object.

(a) The primary object of hope is God Himself, the infinite good,
considered as our Last End and Beatitude (Ps. lxxii. 25). Connoted in
this object is the beatific vision, the finite act by means of which
the creature attains to the possession of God. The primary object of
our hope is the imperishable crown (I Cor., ix. 25), glory (Col., i.
27), the glory of the children of God (Rom., v. 2), salvation (I
Thess., v. 8), eternal life (Tit., i. 2), entrance into the holy of
holies (Heli, x. 19, 23), the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled
that cannot fade, reserved in heaven (I Pet., i. 4), the vision of God
(I John, iii. 3). It is this object especially that distinguishes
supernatural from natural hope (I Cor., xv. 19). “From God,” says St.
Thomas (II-II, q. 17, a. 2), “we should expect nothing less than God
Himself.”

(b) The secondary object of hope embraces all those created things that
assist one to attain one’s Last End. We may hope for all those things
for which we may pray, as St. Augustine remarks.

1020. The primary object of hope includes: (a) essential beatitude,
that is, the beatific vision; (b) accessory beatitude, that is, all
resultant joys, such as glory of soul and body, the companionship of
the Saints, security from harm, and the like.

1021. The secondary object of hope includes: (a) spiritual goods, such
as graces; (b) temporal goods, such as health and the means that will
enable us, at least indirectly, to work for the life to come and
acquire merit; (c) deliverance from evils that would hinder spiritual
goods; (d) all that promotes one’s salvation, such as labors for God.

1022. The person for whom eternal life is hoped may be either oneself
or one’s neighbor. (a) Absolutely speaking (i.e., apart from the
supposition of friendship towards a neighbor), a person can hope only
for himself; for the salvation of others is not attained by him, but by
them; and thus, if there is no bond of affection, it cannot arouse in
him that feeling of courageous confidence which belongs to hope. (b)
Accidentally (i.e., on the supposition of friendship or charity towards
others), one can hope for them; for love makes a person regard the good
of others as his own. Thus, St. Paul is hopeful for the perseverance of
the Philippians (Phil., i. 6), and he labors for the Corinthians that
his hope for them may be steadfast (II Cor., i. 7).

1023. The formal object of hope is twofold, namely, the primary object,
which is the principal cause that effects our salvation, and the
secondary object, which is a secondary or instrumental cause of
salvation. (a) The primary motive of hope is God Himself, the Author of
salvation, and hence it is said: “Cursed be the man that trusteth in
man” (Jer, xvii. 5). (b) The secondary motive of hope are creatures by
whom one is assisted in obtaining the means for salvation (such as the
Saints, who aid us by their intercessions). Thus, in the _Salve
Regina_, our Lady is addressed as “our hope.” The merits of Christ and
our own merits, since they are instruments used by God, are motives of
hope.

1024. On what divine attribute is the virtue of hope based?

(a) Essentially, hope is based on God’s character of omnipotent helper;
for the specific and differentiating note of this virtue is its
courageous confidence, and this, in view of the surpassing height one
expects to attain and the feebleness of all created efforts, must rely
on the assistance of One who is equal to the task: “The Lord is my rock
and my strength. God is my strong One, in Him will I trust” (II Kings,
xxii. 2, 3); “You have hoped in the Lord Mighty forever” (Is., xxvi.
4); “The name of the Lord is a strong tower; the just runneth to it and
shall be exalted” (Prov. xviii. 10).

(b) Secondary (i.e., as regards acts that it presupposes, or that are
connected with it), hope is concerned with other divine attributes.
Thus, a person does not hope unless he first believes that God has
promised beatitude and that He is true to His promises, unless he
regards beatitude as something desirable; and so he who hopes has
placed his dependence on the loyalty of God to His given word, and on
the desirability of God as the prize of life’s efforts: “Let us hold
fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for He is faithful
that hath promised” (Heb., x. 23); “Unto the hope of life everlasting,
which God, who lieth not, hath promised before the times of the world”
(Tit., i. 2); “The Lord is my portion, therefore will I wait for Him”
(Lam., iii. 24); “Fear not, I am thy reward, exceeding great” (Gen.,
xv. 1). Just as faith presupposes a beginning of belief and a pious
inclination towards it, so does hope presuppose faith and the love of
God, as He is our beatitude.

1025. Omnipotent divine help as the foundation of hope can be
understood in two senses:

(a) It may be taken for some created help, that is, for some gift of
God possessed by us (such as habitual or actual grace, merits, virtues,
etc). It is not in this sense that divine help is called the motive of
hope; for even a sinner can and should hope, and the just man’s merits,
while they are dispositions for beatitude, are not a principal cause
that will conduct him to it.

(b) This divine help may be taken for uncreated help, that is, for the
act by which God confers His gifts upon us. In this sense only is
divine aid the basis of hope. For if a person is asked why he is
confident of salvation, he will not answer, “Because I am in the state
of grace and do good works,” but “Because I know that God will help me.”

1026. The divine perfections included in the title of helper now given
to God are:

(a) essentially, the almighty power of God; for this is the immediate
and sufficient reason for the confident expectation that one will at
last possess the same object of felicity as God Himself. The higher and
more difficult the goal one sets before oneself, the greater must be
the resources on which one counts for success;

(b) secondarily, these perfections include the infinite kindness of
God; for it is the goodness of God that prompts Him to employ His
omnipotence in assisting creatures to attain their Last End. Man has
hope, therefore, of attaining supreme felicity, because he relies on
supreme power to aid him, while this supreme power aids him, because it
is directed by infinite goodness and mercy. Thus, the Psalmist says: “I
have trusted in Thy mercy” (Ps. xii. 6). Just as faith rests
proximately on the reliability of God and remotely on His perfection of
being, so hope rests proximately on God’s almighty power and radically
on His goodness and perfection.

1027. The Excellence of Hope.--Hope is a theological virtue, and is
therefore superior to the moral virtues.

(a) It is a theological virtue, inasmuch as it tends immediately to God
Himself. As was said above (see 1019, 1023), we hope for God and we
hope in God: “In God is my salvation and my glory. He is the God of my
help, and my hope is in God” (Ps. lxi. 8); “What is my hope? Is it not
the Lord?” (Ps. xxxviii. 8); “In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped” (Ps. xxx.
1). Hence, the Apostle numbers hope along with the other theological
virtues (I Cor., xiii. 13). “By faith the house of God receives its
foundations, by hope it is reared, by charity it is completed” (St.
Augustine, Serm. xxvii., 1).

(b) The two moral virtues that most resemble hope are longsuffering and
magnanimity, for the former is the expectation of good that is distant,
while the latter is the readiness to encounter difficulties in the
quest of high ideals. But these two virtues belong to courage, rather
than to hope; for the goods they seek are finite, and the difficulty
they encounter is external struggle, whereas the good which hope seeks
is infinite, and the difficulty lies in the very greatness of that good.

1028. There are various points of view from which virtues may be
compared one with another.

(a) One virtue is prior to another in duration, when it precedes the
latter in time. Thus, the natural virtues that pagans have before their
conversion are prior in duration to the supernatural virtues that are
received in Baptism.

(b) One virtue is prior to another by nature, or in the order of
generation, when it is the necessary preparation or disposition for
that other, which essentially presupposes it. Thus, the intellectual
virtues are naturally prior to justice, for a man cannot will to give
others their due, unless he first knows that this is his duty.

(c) One virtue is prior to another virtue in excellence as a habit,
when it has an object that is more elevated and comprehensive, and when
it is fitted to be the guide of the other virtue. For the standard of
comparison of habits must be taken from the objects to which they tend,
and from which they derive their specific character (see 134). Thus,
the habit of philosophizing is in itself more noble than the habit of
accumulating wealth, for truth is better than money.

(d) One virtue is prior to another in excellence according to the
general concept of virtue, when it does more to set the will right. For
the standard of comparison then is to be taken from the influence
exercised on one’s acts (as the word “virtue” or “power” intimates),
and the will is the motor power that sets the other faculties in
motion. Thus, for one who has debts to pay, it is better that he give
his time to earning money than to storing his mind with the lore of
scientists; justice has more of a claim on him than knowledge.

1029. Comparison of Hope with Faith.--(a) These virtues are not the
same, for, while faith makes us cling to God as the giver of truth and
assent to what is obscure to us, hope makes up turn to Him as the
author of beatitude and strive for that which is difficult for us.

(b) Faith and hope are normally equal in duration, since as a rule they
are infused at the same time (as in Baptism). Accidentally, however,
faith may precede hope, as when one who preserves his faith loses hope
on account of despair, and later recovers it.

(c) They are unequal as to natural precedence, faith being prior to
hope, since both glory and grace--the objects of hope--must be known
through faith (Heb., xi. 6).

(d) They are unequal in their excellence as habits, faith being
superior to hope, as the intellectual habits are superior to the moral;
for faith is regulative and directive of hope, and has an object more
abstract and universal.

(e) They are unequal in their excellence according to the general
concept of virtue, hope being superior to faith, as the moral virtues
are superior to the intellectual (see 156). For hope includes a
rightness of the will towards God that is not included in the concept
of faith, which is chiefly intellectual, and it is the will that moves
the other powers to action.

1030. Comparison of Hope with Charity.--(a) These virtues are not the
same, for, while faith and hope adhere to God as the principle from
which one derives truth or goodness, charity adheres to God for His own
sake. Hope tends towards God as our good, from whom beatitude and the
means thereto are to be expected; but charity unites us to God so that
we live for God rather than for self.

(b) Hope and charity are normally equal as to duration, but
accidentally hope may precede charity, as when one commits a mortal
sin, but retains his hope of salvation, and later recovers charity.
There is question now only of the habits, because the acts of the
sinner leading up to charity--faith, fear, hope, contrition, etc.--are
for the most part successive, although in a sudden conversion hope may
be virtually included in charity.

(c) They are unequal as to natural precedence, hope being prior to
charity, for, just as fear naturally leads to interested love such as
is contained in hope, so does this interested love prepare one for a
higher love that is disinterested: “The end of the commandment is
charity from a pure heart” (I Tim., i. 5). We speak here of hope
unanimated by charity; for animated or living hope trusts in God as a
friend, and hence presupposes charity.

(d) They are unequal in excellence, for hope proceeds from imperfect
love, which desires God for the sake of the one who loves, while
charity is perfect love and desires God for His sake.

1031. Hope, as said above (see 1015-1017), is good and virtuous even
when separated from charity, or when exercised without the actual
motive of charity. But imperfect or less perfect hope must not be
confused with the following acts, which have only the appearance of
hope: (a) acts that remove the material object of hope, which are such
as look for all beatitude in something different from God (e.g., in
secondary joys of heaven); (b) acts that do injury to the objects of
hope, such as those that subordinate them to lesser goods (e.g., hope
which puts self above God or delight above virtue).

1082. Three types of the latter kind of pseudo-hope may be
distinguished:

(a) Egotistical hope is that which places the end for which beatitude
is hoped (i.e., self, as was said in 1022) above the end which is
beatitude (i.e., God the Last End, as was said in 1019 sqq.), or which
places subjective beatitude (i.e., the act of intuitive vision by which
beatitude is attained) above objective beatitude (i.e., God as the
object in which beatitude consists). Just as the intellect is in error
when it mistakes the conclusion for the premise, so is the will in
disorder when it takes a means for the end. Hence, while there is
nothing inordinate in a man’s hoping for food on account of eating and
in his eating on account of health (since in reality health is the
purpose of eating, and eating the purpose of food), it is extremely
inordinate to hope for God on account of the beatific vision or on
account of self, since God is the End of all, and the beatific vision
is only the condition for attaining to this Last End, and self merely
the subject to whom God and the beatific vision are to be given for its
perfection through them.

(b) Epicurean hope is that which places pleasure above the other
elements that pertain to subjective beatitude. The subjective happiness
of man consists essentially in the act that is highest and distinctly
human--namely, in the act of the intellect seeing God intuitively;
hence, pleasure--even the chief spiritual pleasures-should be esteemed
as something secondary and consequent.

(c) Utilitarian hope is that which places reward above virtue, as if
the latter were merely a means, as when one says: “If there were no
heaven, I would practise no virtue.” There are three kinds of good: (i)
useful good, or that which is desirable only because it serves as a
means to something else (e.g., bitter medicine, which is wished, not
for its own sake, but for the sake of health); (ii) moral good, or that
which is desired for its own sake, as being agreeable to the rational
nature of man (such as virtue); (iii) delightful good, that is, the
repose or satisfaction of the will in possession of that which is
desirable for its own sake. It is a mistake, therefore, to regard
virtue as merely a useful good, something that is disagreeable in
itself and cannot be practised on account of its inherent goodness. It
is also a mistake to consider heaven as something above and apart from
virtue; for eternal life is the perfect flowering and fruitage of the
moral life that has been planted and developed here on earth. The
things of this world are only means to virtue, and virtue reaches its
climax in the beatific vision. The delights of heaven are results of
that vision, not its end.

1033. Hope, therefore, must seek God as the chief good; it must not
prefer the lesser to the greater, and it must not hold virtue as good
only in view of the reward. But, on the other hand, hope seeks God as
its own good, and it need not be joined to disinterested love, in order
to be a true virtue.

(a) Hence, it is not necessary that one hope with the proviso that, in
the impossible hypothesis that God were unwilling to reward virtue, the
reward would not be expected; for it is not necessary to consider
chimerical cases.

(b) It is not necessary that hope be elicited by the act of charity
(i.e., that one always direct one’s desire of salvation to the end that
God may be glorified), for thus the motive of hope would cease to be
active, and the lesser virtue would be absorbed in charity.

(c) It is not necessary that hope be commanded by the act of charity
(i.e., that one hope for salvation as one’s own good, only when a
previous act of charity has bidden that this be done as a mark of love
towards God), for to desire that which God wishes one to desire is in
itself good and laudable, and stands in need of no other act to justify
it.

1034. Discouragement and aridity occur even in the lives of great
Saints, and at such times, when pure love of God seems almost
impossible, hope comes to the rescue by offering encouragement and
spurring on to activity. Hence, the importance of this virtue in the
spiritual life; for (a) hope is an anchor of the soul in times of
tempest, since it offers reasons for patience and good cheer (Heb, vi.
19; Ecclus., iii. 9; Rom., xii. 12, viii 25; I Thess., v. 8); (b) hope
gives wings to the soul in times of weariness, since the motives it
presents are inducements to courage and good works (Is., xl. 31, xxx.
15; Ps. cxviii. 32; Heb., X. xi).

1035. The following means are recommended for growth in hope: (a) to
ask this from God: “Grant us, O Lord, an increase of faith, hope, and
charity” (Missal, 13th Sunday after Pentecost); (b) to meditate on the
rewards of heaven and the motives of hope, and to make corresponding
acts (II Cor., iv. 18; Ecclus., ii. 11-13); (c) to have recourse to God
in all our needs, casting all our care on Him (I Pet., v. 7); (d) to
work courageously for salvation and to preserve purity of conscience
(Ps. xxvi. 14; I John, iii. 21, 22).

1036. The Subject of Hope.--By the subject of hope we mean the power of
the soul to which this virtue belongs and also the persons who are
capable of hope. (a) The faculty of the soul in which hope resides is
the will, for this virtue seeks the good, not the true. (b) The persons
capable of hope are all those who have not yet received their final
reward or punishment.

1037. The virtue of hope does not remain in the blessed. (a) They
cannot hope for the principal object of bliss, since they already enjoy
it: “Hope that is seen is not hope. For what a man seeth, why doth he
hope for?” (Rom., viii. 24). (b) The blessed can desire secondary
objects, such as the continuance of their state, the glorification of
their bodies, the salvation of those who are still on earth, etc.; but
this desire belongs to the virtue of charity, since with the blessed
there is no longer the struggle and expectation of the future that is
contained in the desire of hope. Moreover, the desire of objects other
than God does not constitute the theological virtue of hope, which
tends directly to God.

1038. As to the departed who are not in heaven, we must distinguish
between those in hell and those in purgatory.

(a) Those who are in hell, whether demons or men, cannot hope; for it
is part of their punishment that they know their loss is eternal (Matt.,
xxv. 41; Prov., xi. 7). Dante expresses this truth when he says that on
the gates of hell it is written: “Hope abandon ye that enter here.”
Only in an improper sense can the lost be said to hope, inasmuch as
they desire evils, or things other than heaven. Unbaptized infants
either do not know their loss, or else are not tormented by the thought
that heaven is for them unattainable, realizing that its privation has
resulted from no personal fault of their own.

(b) Those who are in purgatory have hope; for, although they are
certain of their salvation, it still remains true that they must ascend
through difficulties to their reward. Hence, in the Mass the Church
prays for the departed “who sleep the sleep of peace”--that is, who are
secure about their salvation. The Fathers in limbo also had hope before
their introduction into heaven: “All these died according to faith,
not having received the promises, but beholding them afar off and
saluting them, and confessing that they are pilgrims and strangers on
the earth.... They desire a better, that is to say a heavenly country”
( Heb., xi. 13, 16).

1039. As to those who have not yet passed from this mortal life, some
have hope, others have it not.

(a) Those who have no hope are unbelievers and those believers who have
rejected hope. Unbelievers have no theological hope, since faith is
“the substance (i.e., basis) of things to be hoped for” (Heb., xi. 1).
Hence, even though one accepts the Article of the Creed, “I look for
the resurrection of the dead and the life of the world to come,” one’s
hope is not real, if one culpably rejects some other Article; for then
one expects the end without the necessary means (Heb. xi. 6). Believers
who despair of salvation, or who do not look to God for it, have not
the virtue of hope; for, just as faith is lost if its object or motive
is not accepted, so also hope perishes if its object is not expected or
its motive is not relied on.

(b) Those who have hope are all believers not guilty of a sin contrary
to hope. Sinners cannot expect to be saved if they continue in sin, but
they can expect through the grace of God to be freed from sin and to
merit eternal life; indeed, they are bound to believe that God wishes
their salvation and to hope for it.

1040. The certainty of hope does not exclude the uncertainty of fear;
on the contrary, man must both hope and fear, as regards his salvation.

(a) If a person looks to the motives of hope (i.e., God’s power and
mercy), he has the assurance of faith that God can and will help him to
attain salvation; and thus there arises in him a firm and unshaken
hope: “I know whom I have believed, and I am certain that He is able to
keep that which I have committed unto Him, against that day” (II Tim.,
i. 12; cfr. Heb., vi. 18; Ps. xxiv. 2; Ps. xxx. 2.; Rom., xiv. 4)

(b) But, if a person looks to his own frailty and remembers that others
have hoped and yet have been lost, he is not certain that he will
cooperate with God and be saved, and hence he must fear (Eccles., ix. 1
sqq.; I Cor., iv. 4, ix. 27). The Council of Trent declares that no one
can promise himself with absolute certainty that he will persevere
(Sess. VI, Cap. 13). Therefore, it is written: “He that thinketh
himself to stand, let him take heed lest he fall” (I Cor., x. 12);
“With fear and trembling, work out your salvation” (Phil., ii. 12).

1041. The Gift of Fear of the Lord.--The Gift of the Holy Ghost that
perfects the virtue of hope is Fear of the Lord (see 159 sqq.); for (a)
hope is the root from which the Gift of Fear is derived, since hope
joins the affections to God, and fear acts upon the soul that is thus
tending towards its beatitude--we fear to lose what we hope for; (b)
fear assists hope, since it makes us dread, not the loss of beatitude
or of divine help, but the lack of cooperation on our own part with the
assistance given by God.

1042. Not every kind of fear pertains to the Gift called Fear of
the Lord. In the first place, we must distinguish between physical
and moral fear. (a) Fear, physically considered, is the emotion
treated above (see 41 sqq., 120), which manifests itself in aversion,
bashfulness, shame, dismay, alarm, horror, etc. This kind of fear, like
the other passions (see 121), is morally indifferent in itself. (b)
Fear, morally considered, is a dread of imminent evil as leading one to
God or away from Him. In this sense fear is now discussed.

1043. The object of fear is always some evil, for the good does not
repel, but attracts. The motive of fear, however, is something good;
for one dreads evil on account of some good one wishes to obtain or
retain. By reason of the motive, then, fear may be divided into two
moral species, namely, fear of the world and fear of God.

(a) Fear of the world is that which dreads creatures more than God,
because it sets more store by the things of time than by those of
eternity. Thus, St. Peter’s denial of Christ was prompted by fear of
the world. When the object of this fear is loss of the esteem of men,
it is called human respect.

(b) Fear of God is that which dreads the Creator more than creatures,
because it prizes Him above all. Thus, St. Peter’s death for Christ
proceeded from his fear of God.

1044. Fear of the world is always sinful, because it makes one offend,
or be willing to offend, God for the sake of escaping some temporal
evil. It is forbidden by our Lord: “Fear ye not them that kill the body
and are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear Him that can destroy
both body and soul in hell” (Matt, x. 28). Elias (or Eliseus) is
praised because of his freedom from fear of the world: “In his days he
feared not the prince” (Ecclus., xlviii. 13). We should note, however,
the distinction between habitual fear, on the one hand, and actual or
virtual fear, on the other hand.

(a) Habitual worldly fear is a state, not an act--that is, the
condition of those who are in mortal sin, and have therefore preferred
self to God as the supreme end of life. It is a matter of faith that
not all the acts of sinners or unbelievers are bad, for they are able
to seek certain particular or natural goods.

(b) Actual fear of the world is a deliberate choice of sin out of fear
of some temporal evil; virtual fear is a deliberate act proceeding from
such a choice though without advertence to the choice or fear. In both
these kinds of fear there is sin, for actual fear commands evil,
virtual fear executes it. Examples: Sempronius internally resolves to
be guided by his fear of imprisonment rather than by the law of God
against perjury (actual fear). He then proceeds to perjure himself,
adverting to what he says, but not thinking about his previous fear
(virtual fear).

1045. The species of sin to which worldly fear belongs are as follows:

(a) The theological species of this sin depends on the disposition of
the person. He sins mortally, if on account of fear he is ready to
offend God seriously; he sins venially, if on account of fear he is
prepared to commit only a venial sin. Examples: Titus, in order to
escape imprisonment or exile, swears falsely. Balbus, having been
absent from his office without leave, tells a little lie to escape
reproof for this misdemeanor. Titus’ fear is a grave sin, that of
Balbus a venial sin.

(b) The moral species of worldly fear is, as a rule, the same as the
species of the sin to which it leads, so that but one sin is committed
and need be confessed. The reason is that generally the object of fear
is something that deserves to be dreaded, and that the aversion from it
is not wrong except in so far as it is carried to the extreme of using
sin as a means of escape. Example: Caius is wrongly suspected of theft.
To free his reputation he swears falsely about a circumstance that
appears incriminating. His fear of losing his good name is not a sin in
itself, and hence he is guilty of the one sin of perjury.

1046. There are exceptional cases when fear is a distinct sin from the
sin to which it leads.

(a) If the fear of losing some temporal good is so great that one is
prepared to commit any sin to escape the loss, and if later by reason
of this fear one swears falsely, two sins are committed--one against
charity, because a temporal good was preferred to God, and the other
against religion, because God was called on to witness to falsehood.

(b) If the fear is that one will not be able to commit one kind of sin,
and this induces one to commit another kind of sin, evidently two sins
are committed. Example: Balbus wishes to calumniate Caius, but is not
able to do so himself. Fearing that Caius will escape his vengeance, he
steals money and offers it to Sempronius as an inducement to calumniate
Caius. The two sins, calumny and theft, are committed.

1047. Not every fear of man or of temporal evil falls under worldly and
sinful fear. (a) To fear or reverence man in those things in which he
represents the authority of God is a duty: “Render to all men their
dues ... fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor” (Rom., xiii. 7). (b)
To fear temporal evils (such as loss of life, reputation, liberty,
property) in a moderate and reasonable manner, is good. Hence, our Lord
bids us pray for deliverance from evil.

1048. Fear of God is of two specifically distinct kinds, according as
the object one dreads is offense of God or punishments from God. (a)
Servile fear, that of a servant with regard to his master, dreads sin
because of the punishment it entails; (b) filial fear, that of a son
with regard to his father, dreads sin because of the offense to God
that is contained in it.

1049. Servile fear may be considered either as to its substance or as
to its accidents. (a) The substance or essence of servile fear is
derived from its object (see 71), that is, from the evil of penalty
which it entails; (b) the accidents of servile fear are its
circumstances (see 72), such as the state of the person who has the
fear, the manner in which he fears, etc.

1050. Servile fear in itself is good and supernatural.

(a) That servile fear is good, is a dogma of faith defined in the
Council of Trent (Sess. VI, Can. 8; Sess. XXIV, Can. 5). Our Lord
recommends this fear when he says: “I will show you whom ye shall fear.
Fear ye Him who after He hath killed, hath power to cast into hell.
Yea, I say to you, fear Him” (Luke, xii. 5). the object of this fear is
penalty, which is an evil, and consequently something that ought to be
dreaded.

(b) That servile fear is supernatural, follows from the fact that its
acts are supernatural. It comes from the Holy Ghost that man may
prepare himself for grace; it is “the beginning of wisdom” (Ps. cx.
10), because through it the wisdom of faith first becomes effective as
a rule of action, causing man to depart from sin on account of the
justice of God which it makes known to him. Servile fear is thus far
superior to that natural fear of pain and suffering which all have.

1051. Though servile fear is good, useful and praiseworthy, it is not
perfect. (a) It is inferior to filial fear; for, while servile fear
looks upon God as a powerful master who cannot be offended with
impunity, filial fear regards Him as a loving Father whom one does not
wish to offend. Hence, the Old Law, given amid the thunder of Sinai and
with many threats against transgressions, is less perfect than the New
Law, which relies more on love than on fear (Rom., viii. 15; Heb., xii.
18-25; Gal., iv. 22 sqq.). (b) Servile fear, although it is regarded by
some theologians as an infused habit, is not a Gift of the Holy Ghost,
since it may coexist with mortal sin. It seems that it is not even a
virtue, since it turns man away, not from moral, but from physical
evil; but a number of authorities consider it as a secondary act of the
virtue of hope.

1052. Servile fear, as to its circumstances, may be evil. (a) The
circumstance of the state of the person who has servile fear is good,
when the person is a friend of God; it is evil, when that person is an
enemy of God. (b) The circumstance of the manner in which servile fear
is elic[i]ted is good, if punishment is not feared as the greatest evil;
it is bad, if punishment is feared as the greatest evil, for then one
makes self the principal end of life, and would be disposed to sin
without restraint, were there no punishment.

1053. The effect of evil circumstances on servile fear itself is as
follows:

(a) Servile fear is not rendered evil because of the evil state of the
person who fears. Just as a person who is habitually foolish may
actually say or do something wise, so a person who is habitually wicked
may perform virtuous acts. Mortal sin is no more a defect of servile
fear in a sinner than it is a defect of faith or hope in one who has
faith or hope without works; neither faith nor hope nor fear is to be
blamed for the state of mortal sin, but the person who has those gifts
of God is at fault. True, the sinner, by reason of his lack of love of
God, does not put fear of sin above fear of punishment. But from this
it does not follow that he puts fear of punishment above fear of sin,
for he may fear punishment absolutely (i.e., without making any
comparison between the evil of sin and the evil of punishment). The
fear which makes no comparisons is good, or else we must say that only
filial fear avails, which, as said above, is not true.

(b) Servile fear is rendered evil as to the manner in which it is
performed, when one compares sin and punishment, dislikes only the
latter, and avoids sin only to escape punishment. This kind of fear is
slavish, for it makes one do something good unwillingly, like a slave
forced to labor against his wishes, whereas God is pleased only with
service that comes from a willing spirit (I Par., xxviii. 9).

1054. Hence, we must distinguish the following cases of servile fear:

(a) Fear of punishment is purely servile when it makes a person avoid
sin, but does not make him put away his love of God.

(b) Fear of punishment is not purely servile, when it causes a sinner
not only to cease from sin, but to give up his affection for sin; this
fear is distinct from charity, but prepares for it: “The fear of the
Lord driveth out sin” (Ecclus., i. 27).

(c) Still less is the fear of punishment purely servile, when it leads
a just man, who already detests sin as an offense against God, to
detest it as involving punishment from God. This fear exists along with
charity, for the love of God and the right love of self are not
exclusive. But, as charity increases, servile fear must decrease; the
more a person loves God, the less is he concerned about his own good,
the more confidently does he hope in God, and hence the less does he
fear penalty.

1055. There are two degrees of filial fear to be distinguished:

(a) Initial fear is that of beginners in charity. On account of past
sins, they fear punishments from God; on account of their present love
of God, they fear they may be again separated from Him. The second fear
is stronger with them, and it commands that the first fear be aroused
to hold the will more firmly against whatever might separate from love.
Of this fear it is said: “The fear of God is the beginning of His love”
(Ecclus., xxv. 16).

(b) Perfected fear is that of those who are established in charity. The
more the love of God sways the heart, the more is every other love,
that of self included, subjugated to the love of God, and the less is
one troubled by the thoughts of evils that may befall self. Even in
this present life some souls are so strong in the love of God that all
servile fear disappears: “I am sure that neither death nor life ...
shall be able to separate us from the love of God” (Rom., viii. 38,
39); “Perfect charity casteth out fear, because fear hath pain, and he
that feareth is not perfected in charity” (I John, iv. 18).

1056. The perfected fear of God has two acts:

(a) In the present life, where it is possible that one may offend God
and lose His friendship, one dreads the commission of offense and the
loss of friendship. This fear should be always with us: “Keep His fear
and grow old therein” (Ecclus., ii. 6). With the growth of charity
there is a corresponding growth in the fear of separation from God,
because the more ardently God is loved, the more one realizes the
greatness of the loss sustained through sin.

(b) In eternal life, where sin and separation from God are impossible,
the blessed do not fear these evils: “He that shall hear Me, shall rest
without terror, and shall enjoy abundance without fear of evils”
(Prov., i. 33). But in the presence of the Divine Majesty the Angels
and Saints are filled with awe and reverence: “I saw them that had
overcome the beast, singing: Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and
magnify Thy name?” (Apoc., xv. 3, 4); “The pillars of heaven tremble
and dread at His beck” (Job, xxvi. 11); “Through whom (Christ) the
Angels praise Thy majesty, the Dominations worship it, the Powers are
in awe” (Preface of the Mass). This holy fear is unending, for the
infinite distance between God and His creatures, His
incomprehensibility to them, will never cease: “The fear of the Lord is
holy, enduring forever and ever” (Ps. xviii. 10).

1057. The filial fear of God is identical with the Gift of fear of the
Lord, spoken of in scripture: “He shall be filled with the spirit of
the fear of the Lord” (Is., xi. 3). The function of the Gifts is to
make the soul docile to the inspirations of the Holy Spirit, and to
supplement or serve the habits of virtue, and both these benefits are
conferred by filial fear.

(a) This fear makes the soul ready to follow impulses prompted by God,
for through it we subject ourselves to God as our Father, revering His
wondrous majesty and fearing to stray from Him. Indeed, this is the
first of the Gifts, for the realization of one’s nothingness before God
is the starting-point of promptitude in receiving His teaching and
guidance.

(b) Filial fear is a principle from which proceed acts of all the moral
virtues, inasmuch as the reverence for God’s surpassing majesty and
respect for His almighty power and justice incline one to lay aside
pride, intemperance, and every vice, and exercise good works that are
pleasing to Him: “The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and the
branches thereof are long-lived” (Ecclus., i. 27).

(c) Filial fear is especially and primarily related to the virtue of
hope, for these two complement each other, as do the emotions of hope
and fear. Hope aspires to conquer the heights of heaven, and feels that
God is on its side; fear reminds one of the greatness of God and of the
dangers of over-confidence. Each then is necessary to balance the
other: “The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear Him, and in them
that hope in His mercy” (Ps. cxlvi. 11).

1058. To the Gift of Fear correspond the first Beatitude and the fruits
of modesty, continency and chastity. (a) Filial fear makes one realize
that all but God is as nothing, and hence that true greatness must be
sought, not in the self-esteem of pride, nor in the external pomp of
riches and honors, but in God alone: “Some trust in chariots, and some
in horses; but we will call upon the name of the Lord our God” (Ps.
xix. 8). This is the disposition of soul to which is promised the First
Beatitude: “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven” (Matt, v. 3). To the first of the Gifts, in the order of
preparation, corresponds the first of the Beatitudes. (b) Filial fear
makes one dread the thought of separation from God, and hence it leads
one to use temporal things with moderation, or to abstain from them
entirely, To it, then, pertain the Fruits of the Spirit, which St. Paul
names “modesty, continency, chastity” (Gal, v. 23).

1059. The Sins Against Hope.--There are two sins contrary to hope: (a)
despair, which is the opposite of hope by defect; (b) presumption,
which is the opposite of hope by excess.

1060. Since hope has many elements of which it is composed, despair--or
the falling short of hope--may happen in various ways. (a) Hope is a
turning of the soul towards beatitude, and so the omission of the act
of hope may be called despair (negative despair). (b) Hope regards
beatitude as its good, and so aversion from divine things may be called
despair (despair improperly so-called). (c) Hope pursues a good that is
difficult of attainment, and so he who is dejected by the difficulty is
said to despair. (d) Hope firmly believes that its goal may be reached,
and hence one who doubts the possibility of success in the quest of
heaven is in despair. (e) Hope has the expectation of one day entering
into eternal life, and hence he is guilty of despair who admits that
salvation will be secured by others, but denies that he himself should
expect it.

1061. Definition of Despair.--Leaving out of consideration negative
despair and despair improperly so-called, the sin we are now
considering may be defined as follows: “Despair is an act of the will
by which one turns away from the beatitude one desires, not under the
aspect in which it appears as good, but because one apprehends it as
impossible, or too difficult, or never to be realized, and under this
aspect as evil.”

(a) Despair is an “act of the will,” and as such it differs from the
intellectual sin of unbelief. The Novatians, who rejected the
forgiveness of sins, and a heretic who denies the future life, are
guilty by these acts of sin against faith, though of course one who
disbelieves must also despair (see 1029, 751).

(b) Despair is a positive “turning away from beatitude.” It differs,
therefore, from the mere omission of the act of hope or from an act of
feeble hope, as well as from the sins against the moral virtues, which
consist primarily in a turning towards some created good.

(c) Despair turns away “from God,” and thus it differs from despondency
about other things.

(d) Despair turns away from God “apprehended as good and desired as the
beatitude of man,” for no one is said to despair of what he considers
evil or undesirable. Hence, despair differs from aversions and fears;
such as hatred of God (which regards Him as evil) or fear of God (which
thinks of Him, not as a rewarder, but as the author of chastisement).

(e) Despair, however, does not reject God, because He is good and
desirable, but because He is apprehended as a “beatitude that is
impossible,” or too difficult for one, or as a good that one will never
attain to. For a person does not turn away from that which he regards
as the object of his happiness, unless he considers that there is some
inconvenience in seeking after it.

1062. Is despondency about things other than God a sin? (a) It is the
sin of pusillanimity, when it makes a person abandon hope of something
which he is capable of attaining and which he should aim at, as when
students, on account of the labor required, give up hope of learning a
certain subject which they have been assigned. This sin will be treated
in the section on Fortitude.

(b) It is no sin, if a person gives up the expectation of something
about which he has no reason to hope, or which he is not obliged to
hope for. Examples: Caius gives up the hope of getting an education,
because he lacks money to pay the expenses. Balbus ceases to pray for
health, because he thinks it is not God’s will to grant that request.
Titus abandons the expectation of a long life, and even at times wishes
for death.

1063. To wish for death may include despair of salvation or other sin.

(a) If this wish means that one has no desire for any kind of existence
(as when one desires extinction), manifestly eternal life is not looked
for, and hence there is despair. It should be noted, however, that such
expressions as, “Would that I had never been born!” “Would that I were
out of existence!” often signify nothing more than weariness of life on
earth, or disgust with conditions.

(b)If the wish is not for annihilation, but only that God send death,
it is not a sin of despair; but if the wish is inordinate, some other
species of sin is committed--for example, if the person wishing to die
is not resigned or submissive to God’s will in the matter, he is guilty
of rebellion against Providence, and his sin is grave, if there is
sufficient reflection and consent.

(c) If the wish is merely for death and is not inordinate, it may be an
act of virtue, as when, out of a longing for heaven, one deliberately
desires to be taken from this world, if this be pleasing to God. Thus,
St. Paul said that he desired “to be dissolved and to be with Christ”
(Philip., i. 23).

1064. Certain acts of fear or sadness must not be mistaken for despair:
(a) acts that are praiseworthy, like servile and filial fear spoken of
above (see 1048 sqq.), grief over sin, etc.; (b) acts that are a trial
from God, such as spiritual desolations in holy persons, scruples about
forgiveness of sins, anxieties about predestination, perseverance, or
the Judgment; (c) acts that are sinful, such as worldly fear, fear of
God that is purely servile, timidity (i.e., an excessive dread of death
or other evils). Those who fear that, on account of their frailty, they
may not acquire a good habit or overcome an evil one, are guilty of
pusillanimity. Those who, on account of sadness, neglect prayer are
guilty of spiritual sloth.

1065. There are two species of despair, namely, the despair of unbelief
and the despair that is found even in those that have faith.

(a) The despair of unbelief arises from a judgment contrary to faith,
as when one holds as general principles that salvation is impossible,
that God is not merciful to sinners, that all sins or certain sins
cannot be forgiven. Thus, St. Paul designates the pagans who do not
accept the Final Resurrection as those “who have no hope” (I Thess.,
iv. 12).

(b) The despair of believers arises from a judgment formed by them
which is not directly opposed to faith, but which is erroneous, and is
induced by some wicked habit or passion. Example: Titus lives a very
disorderly life, and so thinks that he is predestined to hell, or that
he is too weak to repent and persevere. Since his predestination and
perseverance are not matters of faith, he is not guilty of unbelief by
his judgment about them, but the judgment itself is wrong, and one
which he has no right to form or act on.

1066. Signs which indicate that a penitent suffering depression has not
been guilty of despair are: (a) if he retains the faith and has not
abandoned the usual practices of religion and piety; (b) if he retains
the faith, but has given up some of its practices through
discouragement or weakness, but intends to repent. His sin is sloth or
cowardice or attachment to some vice.

1067. Hence, the erroneous judgment that precedes despair is similar to
that which precedes every act of sin, namely, it is always practically
erroneous, though not always speculatively so.

(a) Judgment is speculatively erroneous with regard to duty, when one
decides that in general something is lawful which is unlawful; or vice
versa, as when one thinks that lying is pleasing to God. It is clear
that this kind of error need not precede sin, or else all sinners would
err against the faith.

(b) Judgment is practically erroneous about duty, when a person decides
that here and now he should do something which in fact he should not
do, as when he knows well that lying is displeasing to God, and yet
makes up his mind that, all things considered, he ought to tell a lie.
It is clear that this kind of error precedes every sin, for no one
wills something unless his judgment has first told him that he ought to
will it. The sinner first judges in a particular case that he should
prefer the good of pleasure or of utility to the good of virtue, or he
first neglects to consider the right manner in which he should act:
“They err that work evil” (Prov., xiv. 22).

1068. The Malice of Despair.--(a) Despair is a sin, for Holy Scripture
declares woe to the fainthearted, who trust not God and lose patience
(Ecclus., ii. 15, 16), and it holds up the despair of Cain and Judas
for reprehension. The malice of despair appears in this, that it is
based on a perverse judgment that one ought not to labor for salvation
in confident expectation, despite God’s promise and command to the
contrary. (b) It is a mortal sin according to its nature, for it
destroys the theological virtue of hope, turns man away from God his
Last End, and leads to irreparable loss.

1069. In the following cases despair is not a mortal sin, nor at times
even a venial sin. (a) When there is not sufficient reflection, despair
is not a grave sin. Examples: Those who are ignorant of the sinfulness
of despair, those who on account of great discouragement or fear do not
fully advert to their despair of amendment, do not sin gravely. Despair
is often a result of insanity. (b) When there is not full consent of
the will, despair is not a grave sin. Examples: Those who, on account
of a melancholy disposition, inclination to pessimism, past sins, etc.,
are tempted to give up the hope of salvation, are not guilty of sin,
provided they fight against these suggestions of the mind or
imagination.

1070. The gravity of despair as compared with other sins is as follows:

(a) Despair is a greater sin than offenses against the moral virtues,
for the chief inclination of despair is aversion from God, whereas the
chief inclination of the latter kind of sins is conversion towards
creatures. Thus, a person who drinks excessively does not primarily
intend offense against God, but his own enjoyment or escape from
certain worries.

(b) Despair in itself is less serious than the sins of unbelief and
hatred of God; for, while despair is opposed to God as He is our good,
the other two sins are opposed to God’s own truth and goodness.

(c) Despair is more serious than the sins of unbelief and hatred of God
with reference to the danger it contains for the sinner; for it
paralyzes effort and resists remedies: “Why is my sorrow become
perpetual and my wound desperate, so as to refuse to be healed?” (Jer.,
xv. 18) “If thou lose hope, being weary in the day of distress, thy
strength shall be diminished” (Prov., xxiv. 10). Despair is, therefore,
a sin against the Holy Ghost, a sort of attempt at spiritual suicide.
But (see 900) it is not unpardonable and may be overcome by divine
grace.

1071. It is important to know the causes of despair, for this knowledge
enables us to distinguish it from the mystical state known as “the dark
night of the soul,” and to prescribe suitable remedies. Despair comes
from one’s own fault, whereas mystical purgation from God is a
preparation for a higher state of divine union. The causes of despair
can be reduced to two, luxury and sloth.

(a) The secondary characteristic of a hopeful pursuit of heaven is
courage, the adventurous spirit which foregoes ease and comfort for the
sake of higher things, despising the danger and difficulty. Hence, the
vice of lust, since it makes one love bodily delights and disregard or
underestimate those that are spiritual, is a cause of despair, as well
as of other sins opposed to the spiritual life (Gal., v. 17).

(b) The chief and most distinctive characteristic of hope is its
cheerful confidence of success. Hence, the vice of sloth, since it is
sadness weighing down the soul and making it unwilling to think rightly
or to exert itself, is the principal cause of despair (Prov., xvii. 22).

1072. The apparent despair that is a trial to holy persons can be
distinguished, therefore, from the sin of despair, especially by two
signs: (a) though they are spiritually desolate and find no joy in
religious practices, these persons do not turn to unlawful delights for
consolation, but retain their dislike for lower pleasures; (b) though
overcome with dismay at the thought of their own imperfection and of
God’s holiness, they do not so lose heart as to give over their
exercises of piety (cf. St. John of the Cross, _The Dark Night_, Bk. I,
e. 9 ff.).

1073. Spiritual writers make the following recommendations for cases of
spiritual desolation: (a) the afflicted persons should understand that
the deprivation of former sensible devotion is a sign of God’s love and
has been experienced by the Saints, and should, therefore, possess
their souls in peace, leaving to God the time and manner of His
heavenly visitation; (b) they should not burden themselves with new and
heavier mortifications, lest they be overcome by too great sorrow, but
should go on with their accustomed good works, and realize that, though
bitter to them, these works are now all the more pleasing to God
(Ibid., c. 10).

1074. Some Remedies for the Sin of Despair.--(a) If the cause is lust,
one should learn that spiritual joys are nobler and more enduring than
the joys of the flesh, and should take the means to sacrifice the lower
in favor of the higher.

(b) If the cause of despair is spiritual sloth, one should meditate on
the greatness of God’s power, mercy and love, and should avoid whatever
fosters undue sadness, “lest he be swallowed up with over-much sorrow”
(II Cor., ii. 7). Thus, those who are tormented by the thoughts of past
sins or future temptations must subject their scruples to direction,
and remember the mercy shown to the good thief, to Magdalene, and other
penitents; those who have lost courage because they read spiritual
books of a rigorous or terrifying nature, or have been advised to
attempt that for which they were unsuited, should seek more prudent
instruction and counsel; those who are naturally nervous or melancholy,
should employ such therapeutical or preventive measures as are useful
or necessary. All should follow the direction of St. Peter to labor the
more, that by good works they may make sure their calling and election
(II Pet., i. 10).

1075. Presumption is the name given to certain acts of the intellect.
(a) Sometimes it signifies an arrogant self-esteem, as when an ignorant
person thinks he is able to dispute with a learned scholar. (b)
Sometimes it is a judgment about the affairs of others made rashly or
out of fear: “A troubled conscience always presumeth grievous things”
(Wis., xvii. 10). (c) Sometimes it is a conclusion based on probable
evidence, and which by jurists is called violent, strong, or weak
presumption according to the evidence (see 658).

1076. Presumption is also a name given to various acts of the will. (a)
It is used, in a good sense, to signify an excellent confidence or
hope, which seems rash according to human standards, but is really well
founded, since it rests on the immensity of the divine goodness. Thus,
Judith prayed: “O God of the heavens, Creator of the waters and Lord of
the whole creation, hear me a poor wretch, making supplication to Thee,
and presuming on Thy mercy” (Jud., ix. 17). Thus, too, Abraham hoped
against hope (Rom., iv. 18). (b) Generally, however, the word
“presumption” is applied to acts of the will in a bad sense, and
indicates the purpose to do what exceeds one’s powers.

1077. Here we are concerned only with presumption as it is an act of
the will choosing to do what exceeds one’s power. “Power” may he
understood in three ways, and thus there are three kinds of sins all
bearing the name of presumption.

(a) If a person chooses to overstep his moral power (i.e., his right of
action), he is guilty of the general sin of presumption, which is not a
special category of sin, but a circumstance common to any kind of sin
in which one acts with full knowledge, and without subjection to any
fear or coercion. Hence, in Canon Law it is said in various places: “If
anyone shall presume to transgress” (i.e., if anyone shall
coldbloodedly transgress).

(b) If a person wishes to accomplish by his own efforts something so
great and difficult that it surpasses his physical powers, he is guilty
of the special sin of presumption that is opposed to the moral virtue
of magnanimity or greatness of soul, which attempts great things for
which it is suited. Thus, he is presumptuous who undertakes a
profession, when he has no sufficient knowledge of its duties (cf.
Luke, xiv. 28 sqq.). This may be called the moral sin of presumption.

(c) If one wishes to obtain through divine aid something that surpasses
even the divine power to confer, one is guilty of the special sin of
presumption that is opposed to the theological virtue of hope, which
expects from God only such things as are worthy of God and as God has
promised. Thus, he who looks forward to a free admission into eternal
bliss, without repentance or obedience, does injury both to the
character of God and to the virtue of hope. It is this special sin of
presumption that we are now considering. It may be called the
theological sin of presumption.

1078. Definition of Presumption.--The theological sin of presumption
may be defined as follows: “An act of the will by which one rashly
expects to obtain eternal happiness or the means thereto.” (a) It is an
act of the will, and hence is distinct from intellectual sins, such as
disbelief in the justice of God or the necessity of repentance. (b) It
is an act of pleasing expectation, and so differs generically from
fear, which is an act of dreadful expectation. (c) It is a rash
expectation, and so is specifically opposed to hope, which is
well-founded expectation.

1079. The objects of presumption are material and formal.

(a) The material object is eternal happiness and the means thereto,
such as forgiveness of sin, observance of the Commandments, etc. This
object by extension would include also such extraordinary supernatural
gifts as the hypostatic union, equality in glory with the Mother of
God, etc.; for it would be rash to expect against His will what God has
made unique privileges.

(b) The formal object, or motive, of presumption is divine mercy not
joined with justice, or divine power not regulated by wisdom, as when
one hopes for heaven because one reasons that God is too merciful to be
a just judge of sinners. The motive by extension would include also the
unaided power of human nature relied on as equal to the task of working
out salvation, as when a man feels so confident of his own virtue and
his security against temptation that he thinks he can dispense with
prayer and all appointed means of grace and yet save his soul.
Similarly, a person is presumptuous if he feels that it is absolutely
impossible for him to be lost, because he has received Baptism or other
Sacraments.

1080. Presumption is rash, therefore, for the following reasons: (a)
because it leads one to expect what is impossible according to the
absolute or ordinary power of God (e.g., to share in some divine
attribute, to sit at the right hand of Christ in glory), or (b) because
it makes one expect to obtain supernatural goods in ways other than
those ordained by God (e.g., to obtain forgiveness without repentance,
to obtain glory without merits or grace).

1081. The nature of presumption as compared with temptation of God and
blasphemous hope is as follows: (a) they are alike, inasmuch as all
three wrongly expect something from God; (b) they differ, for
presumption looks towards salvation and one’s own happiness, whereas
temptation of God seeks rashly some sign from God as a proof that He is
wise, good, powerful, etc., or that the person is innocent, holy, etc.,
and blasphemous hope expects that God will help one in working revenge
or committing other sin.

1082. The Malice of Presumption.-(a) It is a sin, because it is an act
of the will agreeable to false intellectual judgments, namely, that God
will pardon the impenitent or grant eternal life to those who have not
labored for it. (b) It is a mortal sin, since it does grave injury to
the divine attributes. We cannot hope too much in God, but we can
expect what a perfect God cannot grant; in this latter respect--that
is, in its contempt of God’s majesty and justice--consists the offense
of presumption. (c) It is a sin against the Holy Ghost, because it
makes one despise the grace of God, repentance, etc., as if they were
not necessary.

1083. The gravity of presumption as compared with other sins, is as
follows:

(a) It is graver than sins against the moral virtues, because it is
directly against God. Thus, theological presumption, being injurious to
the power of God, is a more serious offense than moral presumption,
which is an exaggeration of the power of man.

(b) It is less grave than despair, for, while presumption is a
disregard of God’s vindictive justice, despair is a disregard of His
mercy, and God’s vindictive justice is due to the sins of man, His
mercy to His own goodness.

(c) Presumption is less grave, therefore, than unbelief and hatred of
God, which, as said above, are more wicked than despair (see 1070).

1084. Presumption and Unbelief.--(a) Presumption is joined with
unbelief whenever it proceeds from a speculatively false judgment about
matters of faith. Persons, however, who are in error (e.g., Pelagians,
Lutherans, Calvinists, etc.), may be in good faith, and hence guiltless
of the formal sin of presumption. Examples: Caius expects to win heaven
by his own unaided efforts (Pelagian presumption). Balbus expects to be
equal in glory to the greatest Saints, and to be saved by the merits of
Christ without repentance or observance of the Commandments (Lutheran
presumption). Titus expects to be saved on the strength of wearing
scapulars, practising certain devotions, or giving alms, while he
wholly disregards church duties and important Commandments (Pharisaic
presumption). Sempronius thinks that all members of his sect are
predestined, and hence concerns himself little about the Commandments,
being persuaded that all must end well with the elect (Calvinistic
presumption).

(b) Presumption is committed without unbelief, when it proceeds from a
practical judgment that one should act as if salvation were obtainable
without merits or repentance, or as if natural efforts were alone
sufficient, although speculatively one does not accept such errors (see
1067). The same is true when presumption springs from a failure to
consider the divine justice or the established means of obtaining
salvation.

1085. Presumption and Loss of the Virtue of Hope.--(a) Presumption
properly so-called (i.e., hope of the impossible) takes away the virtue
of hope, for it removes the motive and reasonableness of the virtue;
now, the essence of true hope is a reasonable expectation, just as the
essence of faith is assent to divine authority. Hence, he who expects
future blessedness unreasonably (i.e., through his own efforts alone or
through exaggerated mercy exercised by God), is not hopeful, but
presumptuous.

(b) Presumption improperly so-called (i.e., hope of the uncertain) does
not take away the virtue of hope, since it does not remove the motive
of hope. Thus, one who commits sin, trusting to go to confession and to
make restitution after he has enjoyed the benefits of wrongdoing, is
presumptuous in the sense that he puts himself in a state of sin, for
it is uncertain whether the time to repent will be granted him.
However, he is relying on the mercy of God, which never abandons man
during life, and not on his own efforts, or on pardon given freely. He
is guilty of a want of charity towards self, and of injustice to his
neighbor, rather than of a want of hope.

1086. Presumption properly so-called is a sin rarely committed by
Catholics. For (a) the presumption of unbelief is excluded by their
faith in the justice of God and in the necessity of repentance and good
works; (b) the presumption that is not the offspring of erroneous
doctrines is also unusual, because even those who go on sinning with
the expectation of being saved in the end, generally have the purpose
of repenting at some future date.

1087. Is a sin worse because committed with the hope that later it will
be pardoned? (a) If, at the moment of sin, a person has the intention
to continue in sin, though he hopes for pardon, he is guilty of
presumption, and his sin is made worse. (b) If he has the intention of
sinning, but hopes for pardon, and is resolved to repent later on as a
means to pardon, he is not guilty of presumption. The intention not to
continue in sin diminishes the sin, for it shows that one is not so
strongly attached to evil.

1088. The intention to sin now and repent later varies in malice
according to circumstances.

(a) If the hope of obtaining forgiveness is concomitant as regards the
sin now committed--that is, if one sins with the hope, but not because
of the hope of pardon-one is less guilty. Example: Titus while on a
tour indulges in much drunkenness, because he has the opportunity and
is not known; but he intends to repent on his return home.

(b) If the hope of obtaining forgiveness is antecedent as regards the
sin--that is, if one sins because of the hope of pardon--one is more
guilty. Example: Balbus stays away from Mass most Sundays, because he
reasons with himself that God is kind and it will be easy to obtain
pardon. Caius, when urged to repent, always replies that it will be a
simple matter to turn over a new leaf at the hour of death. Sempronius
goes on multiplying sins from day to day, because he argues that it is
just as easy to be pardoned late as early, just as easy to repent of a
hundred sins as of ten.

1089. In the following cases presumption is not a grave sin: (a) no
mortal sin is committed, if there is not sufficient reflection; for
example, a person who is invincibly ignorant of the seriousness of
presumption, or who on account of immaturity has exaggerated ideas of
his own strength, does not sin gravely if he presumes on God’s mercy or
his own power; (b) no mortal sin is committed, if there is not full
consent of the will. For example, Titus is a self-made man, and hence
is inclined at times to feel that he can work out even his salvation
without any assistance, but he rids his mind of this presumptuous
thought as soon as he takes notice of it.

1090. Are there cases in which presumption and despair are transformed
into venial sin, not on account of the imperfect knowledge or consent
of the subject, but on account of the slightness of the matter
involved? (a) If there is question of presumption and despair properly
so-called, they are never venial on account of the lightness of the
matter, for the matter, man’s eternal destiny, must always be an affair
of the utmost moment. (b) If there is question of presumption and
despair in a wider sense, these sins may be venial on account of
smallness of matter; for they may be understood with reference to
things other than salvation. Examples: Titus despairs of his success in
overcoming a habit of arriving late for his meals or of talking too
much. Balbus imprudently trusts to his own efforts to get up promptly
in the morning, or to fight against some slight distraction in prayer.

1091. The causes of presumption are as follows: (a) the presumption
which depends too much on one’s own powers arises from vainglory, for,
the more one desires glory, the more is one inclined to attempt things
that are above one, especially such as are new and will attract
applause; (b) the presumption that depends rashly on divine assistance
seems to result from pride, for a person who desires and expects pardon
without repentance, or heaven without merits, must have a very
exaggerated opinion of his own importance.

1092. The Commandments of Hope and of Fear.--Since hope is a necessary
preparation for justification, and since man should tend towards the
supernatural beatitude prepared for him by God, we cannot be surprised
that scripture in many places inculcates the duty of hope.

(a) In the first legislation, given in the Decalogue, neither faith nor
hope are enjoined by distinct Commandments, for, unless man already
believed and hoped in God, it would be useless to give him commandments
from God. Hence, in the Decalogue faith and hope are presupposed, faith
being enjoined only in so far as it is taught, as when the law begins
with the words: “I am the Lord thy God” (Exod., xx. 2), and hope being
prescribed only in so far as promises are added to the precepts, as in
the First and Fourth Commandments.

(b) In the later laws there are given distinct commandments about hope,
in order to remind man that he must observe not only the law, but also
that which the law presupposes. Thus, we read: “Hope in Him, all ye
congregation of people” (Ps. lxi. 9); “Charge the rich of this world
not to be high-minded, nor to hope in the uncertainty of riches, but in
the living God” (I Tim., vi. 17).

1093. Since acts of hope are obligatory for all adults in this life,
the Quietists were in error when they defended disinterested love and
absolute holy indifference (Denzinger, 1221 ff., 1327-1349). (a) Hence,
man can at times make acts of pure love of God, in which self is not
thought about, or even acts of renunciation of beatitude on condition
that that were possible and necessary; but the habitual state of pure
love, in which self-interest is entirely lost sight of, cannot be
admitted (Philip., iii. 14; II Tim., iv, 8). (b) Indifference to the
happenings of life, sin excluded, is good; but it is not lawful to be
indifferent about one’s own salvation, or the means thereto.
Indifference about salvation is not holy, but unholy.

1094. Is it lawful to desire to surrender beatitude for the sake of
another’s spiritual good? (a) If there is question of beatitude itself,
this is not lawful. The prayer of Moses that he be stricken from God’s
book (Exod., xxxiii. 31, 32), and of St. Paul that he suffer loss of
Messianic benefits (Rom., ix. 3), were only velleities or hyperbolical
expressions of their great love for their race. (b) If there is
question, not of beatitude itself, but of something that refers to it
(such as the time of receiving it, present certainty about its
possession), one may be willing to sacrifice this good for the benefit
of his neighbor. Thus, St. Martin of Tours was willing to have his
entrance into heaven delayed for the sake of his flock (cfr. Philip.,
i. 22 sqq.), and St. Ignatius Loyola would have preferred to remain
uncertain of salvation and labor for souls, rather than to be certain
of salvation and die at once.

1095. At what times does the commandment of hope oblige? (a) In its
negative, or prohibitory aspect, this commandment obliges for all times
and at all times (see 371). Hence, it is not lawful to despair, even
when things are darkest, nor to presume, even when they are brightest.
(b) In its affirmative, or preceptive aspect, this commandment obliges
for all times, but not at all times. Hence, the law of hope remains
always in force, but one is not obliged at every instant to make acts
of hope.

1096. By reason of the virtue of hope itself (i.e., on account of the
response one should make to the promises of God concerning eternal
life), an act of hope is obligatory on the following occasions:

(a) Such an act is obligatory at the beginning of the moral life, that
is, at the time when one first realizes that one must choose between
God and creatures as the object of one’s happiness. This moment occurs
for all when the age of reason is attained, and to it we may apply in
this connection the words of Christ: “Seek ye first the kingdom of God
and His justice” (Matt, vi. 33). This moment occurs for those who are
in the state of sin as soon as they perceive the necessity of turning
from creatures towards God: “Delay not to be converted to the Lord, and
defer it not from day to day” (Ecclus, v. 8).

(b) During the course of the moral life, one is also bound to renew the
act of hope: “The grace of God our Saviour hath appeared to all men,
instructing us that we should live soberly, and justly, and godly in
this world, looking for the blessed hope” (Titus, ii. 11, 12), “Serving
the Lord, rejoicing in hope” (Rom., xii. 11, 12); “He that plougheth,
should plough in hope” (I Cor., ix. 10). Even those who are more
perfect must have on “the helmet of hope” (I Thess., v. 8), for by hope
all are saved (Rom, viii. 25).

(c) It seems that at the end of life one is especially bound to elicit
an act of hope, as on that moment eternity depends (Heb., iii. vi).
But, if one has received the Last Sacraments or is otherwise well
prepared for death and undisturbed by temptations to despair, there is
no manifest need of making an express act of hope (cfr. 930).

1097. How frequently should acts of hope be made during life? (a) About
the theoretical question, there is the same diversity of opinion as
with regard to the act of faith (see 933). (b) But, practically, there
is agreement among theologians that the commandment is fulfilled by all
those who make an act of hope when this is necessary to preserve the
virtue on account of danger of presumption or despair, and who comply
with the duties of a Christian life, such as attendance at Mass and the
reception of the Sacraments.

1098. How should the act of hope be made? (a) The act is made
explicitly, when one expresses one’s confident expectation, the objects
expected and the basis of the expectation, as when one prays according
to the formulas of the Catechism or prayer books: “O my God, relying on
Thy all-powerful assistance and merciful promises, I firmly hope to
obtain pardon for my sins, obedience to Thy commandments, and life
everlasting.” This form of the act of hope is recommended, since it
expresses the essential elements of the virtue. (b) The act of hope is
made implicitly, when one offers petitions to God as one ought; for the
confidence that accompanies every good prayer makes it an expression of
hope of God and of hope in God. Thus, the words, “Thy Kingdom come,”
utter the soul’s expectation of bliss and its reliance on God. The
implicit act of hope satisfies the commandment, and hence those who
comply with the duty of prayer, comply also with the duty of hope.

1099. By reason of some virtue other than hope (cfr. 935), there also
arises at times an obligation of making an act of hope. (a) If another
virtue will be lost or endangered without the assistance of hope, one
is bound to make an act of hope. Examples: Titus is so discouraged by
the difficulties of his duties that he will not perform them, unless he
stirs up his will by thinking of the reward. Balba, on account of
aridity, finds prayer so hard that she will give it up, unless the
motive of future blessedness is before her mind. (b) If another
commandment presupposes an act of hope, one is bound to the act of
hope, although it may be made virtually or implicitly, as being
contained in another virtue. Example: Sempronius is in the state of
sin, and therefore obliged to repentance. Since repentance presupposes
hope of pardon as a means to salvation, Sempronius must not only grieve
over his sins, but must also have confidence in the divine mercy.

1100. Do those persons sin against hope by omission who wish they could
remain in the enjoyment of the present life forever?

(a) If those persons are so disposed that they would willingly forego
heaven for earth, they are guilty of a neglect of the precept of hope
(I Tim., vi. 17). Hope requires that God be the chief object of our
desires, but these persons give the first place to creatures (see 1019,
1031).

(b) If such persons are not willing to relinquish heaven, and their
wish to remain here forever merely denotes an over-fondness for life or
its goods or an exceeding dread of death, hope is not excluded, but
they are guilty, slightly or seriously according to the case, of
inordinate love of creatures.

(c) If such persons mean by their wish only that they are very much
attached to something of earth and wish to retain it as long as God
will allow, there is no sin committed. Thus, man and wife happily mated
or other friends sometimes express the wish that both might live
forever, meaning only that the thought of any separation is unpleasant.

1101. So far we have spoken of the necessity of precept of the act of
hope. But there is also a necessity of means, as was said above about
faith (see 785, 918), as regards both the act and the habit of hope.

(a) The act of hope is an indispensable condition of salvation for all
adults. The unjustified man cannot prepare himself for pardon unless he
hopes in God’s mercy; he cannot resolve on amendment of life unless he
relies on the necessary divine help. The justified man must earn heaven
by his works and must pray to God in his necessities--things that are
impossible without the firm confidence of hope (Rom., vi. 23).

(b) The habit of hope is an indispensable condition of salvation for
all, infants included. For it is by justification, in which the soul
and its various powers are sanctified (Rom., v. 6), that one is
elevated to the supernatural sphere and made ready for the beatific
vision.

1102. The habit of hope is not lost by every sin against hope.

(a) It is not lost by sins of omission, for it depends on divine
infusion, not on human acts (see 745).

(b) It is not lost by sins of commission that do not remove its formal
object or motive, such as sins against charity and the moral virtues.
For it is possible for one to expect external happiness and at the same
time not love God for His own sake, or not regulate one’s conduct
conformably to the happiness desired, just as it is possible for one to
believe and yet not practise one’s belief (see 1016, 1030).

(c) Hope is lost by sins of commission that remove its foundation or
its formal object. Hence, sins of unbelief (since they remove the
foundation of hope) and sins of desperation and despair (since they
take away the formal object of hope) are destructive of this virtue. It
should be noted, however, that sins which only in a wider sense are
named presumption and despair, do not remove the object, nor
consequently the virtue of hope. Examples: Titus does not believe in a
future life, and hence does not expect it. Claudius believes in a
future life, but he is so weak in virtue that he has given up all
expectation of its rewards for himself. Balbus, on the contrary, is
living on stolen property and intends to continue to do so, but he
hopes that somehow all will turn out well in the end. Sempronius, who
is associated with Balbus, intends to make a deathbed repentance and
restitution. The sins of the first three are ruinous to hope, since by
reason of them there is no expectation of salvation, or only an
expectation that is not based on divine power. The sin of Sempronius is
presumptuous, since it risks a most grave danger imprudently; but it is
not theological presumption, since it expects forgiveness through
divine power and in a way that does not exceed divine power. It is not
contrary to, but beyond theological hope.

1103. Divine Commandments Concerning Fear.--(a) Servile fear was not
commanded in the Decalogue by any distinct precept, for fear of
punishment is supposed in those who received the law; it was, however,
commanded there implicitly, inasmuch as penalties were attached to
transgressions. Later, in order to keep man more strictly to the law
already given, instructions or commandments about the necessity of fear
were given. Thus, Job says: “I feared all my works, knowing that Thou
didst not spare the offender” (Job, ix. 28), and the Psalmist prays:
“Pierce Thou my flesh with Thy fear, for I am afraid of Thy judgments”
(Ps. cxviii. 120); our Lord commands: “Fear Him that can destroy both
soul and body in hell” (Matt, x. 28).

(b) Filial fear, on the contrary (i.e., reverential love of God), since
it is the principle from which proceed the external acts of respect and
homage enjoined in the Decalogue, was inculcated at the time the first
law was given. “What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but that
thou fear the Lord thy God, and walk in His ways, and love Him, and
serve the Lord thy God?” (Deut., x. 12).

1104. As to the times and frequency of obligation, the principles and
conclusions given above for hope can be applied also to fear.




Art. 5: THE VIRTUE OF CHARITY

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 23-27.)

1105. Definition.--The word “charity” (_carum_, what is held dear,
highly esteemed) is used either in a more general, or in a particular
sense.

(a) In its more general sense, it is applied to acts or feelings of
a kindly nature towards others, whether or not God be concerned in
them as the object or motive. Thus, it is applied to kindly judgments
about others, to a benevolent disposition towards their welfare, to
gratuitous relief of the needy or suffering, to the bestowal of gifts
for public benefit, and the like. In scripture the word is sometimes
applied to friendship: “It is better to be invited to herbs with
charity than to a fatted calf with hatred” (Prov., xv. 17).

(b) In its particular sense, charity refers to divine love, that is, to
the love of God for man or the love of man for God. Here we are
considering charity as the virtue by which the creature loves God for
His own sake, and others on account of God.

1106. Love in general is the inclination towards a suitable good, or
what is considered as one’s good. It is the root of all appetites of
the soul, and hence the importance that the object of love be a true
good.

(a) Every attraction is based on the recognition of some suitability in
a certain good that attracts, and so is based on love. Example: Love
may result from desire, as when from a desire of money springs love of
the giver of money; but in the last analysis it will be found that the
desire itself came from a previous love, for a person would not wish
for money, unless he saw in it some advantage which inclined him
towards its possession.

(b) Every repulsion is based on the fact that a certain thing is
opposed to that which is suitable for self, and hence results from
love. Example: Love sometimes is an effect of hate, as when one loves A
because he hates A’s enemies; nevertheless, hate is basically always
the result of some love, for one hates only those things that impede or
destroy what one loves.

(c) Every satisfaction is due to the possession or presence of
something helpful or congenial, and so it presupposes love. Example: A
particular satisfaction may cause love, as when one loves a person
because his company is entertaining; but the satisfaction is due to the
love one has of being entertained.

1107. The effects of love are two; (a) union of affection, for the
lover regards the object of love as another self and desires its
presence; he delights to think of it and wishes what it wishes; (b)
separation from other things, for the lover’s thoughts are on the
object of his love, and he is jealous of anything that might take it
from him.

1108. Several degrees of love may be distinguished:

(a) Natural love is the tendency of things to their ends which results,
not from knowledge, but from nature, and which is found in the
irrational and inanimate as well as in higher forms of being. Thus, we
may say that fire loves to burn, that every being loves its own
existence;

(b) Sense love (_amor_) is the attraction that follows on knowledge
obtained through the senses, and that exists in the brutes as well as
in man. Thus, a dog loves bones, a cat loves fish. Sex-attraction is a
species of sense love;

(c) Rational love (_dilectio_) arises from the reflection of the mind,
and is a choice based on the judgment of the reason concerning the
worth of the beloved object.

1109. Rational love is of two kinds: (a) love of desire (_amor
concupiscentiae_), which is affection for an object which one desires
for oneself or for another, in such a way that good is not wished for
the object, but the goodness of the object is wished for something else
(thus, one loves food or money with the love of desire, because one
does not wish good for them, but from them); (b) love of benevolence
(_amor benevolentiae_), which is had for an object to which one wishes
good (thus, one loves a poor person with the love of benevolence when
one wishes to give him food or money).

1110. The love of benevolence is called friendship when the following
conditions exist: (a) when the love is mutual, for, if one party who
is loved does not reciprocate the other party’s affection, they are
not considered friends; (b) when the love is based on some similarity
which is a bond of union, for friendship supposes that the parties
have common interests and that they delight in each other’s company,
which is impossible without congeniality (see Ecclus., xiii. 19). Thus,
there is friendship of relative for relative, of citizen for citizen,
of soldier for soldier, of scholar for scholar. True, those who belong
to the same state in life are often enemies; but this is due, not to
the similarity of their life, but to some individual dissimilarity, as
when one is successful and the other unsuccessful, one rich and the
other poor. Aristotle remarked that potters never got along together,
and Proverbs, xiii. 10, says that between the proud there are always
quarrels; for each potter saw in the other potter one who took away
profits, and each proud man sees in another proud man an obstacle to
personal glory. Unfriendly feeling may exist, then, among those who
are alike, but friendship is impossible when the parties have nothing
special in common.

1111. Two kinds of friendship must be distinguished. (a) The friendship
of utility or of pleasure is that by which one desires good for one’s
friend, not for the friend’s sake, but for one’s own advantage or
gratification. Hence, friendships of this kind contain some love of
benevolence, but they are prompted by love of desire. On account of
this admixture of selfishness, they fall short of friendship in the
truest sense. Examples: Titus cultivates the friendship of Balbus,
because the latter is wealthy and will patronize his business; Balbus,
on his part, returns the friendship of Titus, because he finds his
prices cheaper (a friendship of convenience or utility). Caius and
Claudius associate together much and help each other gladly, but the
only thing that draws them together is the amusement they get out of
each other’s companionship (a friendship of pleasure).

(b) The friendship of virtue is that by which one desires good for
another, and by which the cause of attraction is the virtue of the
friends. This is true friendship, because it is unselfish and has the
highest motive; it is naturally lasting, since it is built on moral
goodness, the real good of an intelligent being (Ecclus., vi. 14-16).
Example: David and Jonathan became friends because each recognized the
other’s virtue.

1112. Charity is a true friendship between God and His intellectual
creature, for in scripture the just are called the friends of God
(John, xv. 15; James, ii. 23; Ps. cxxxviii. 17), and the conditions of
true friendship are affirmed about their relation to God. (a) There is
a mutual love of benevolence between God and the just: “I love them
that love Me” (Prov., viii. 20); “He that loveth Me shall be loved
of My Father, and I will love him” (John, xiv. 21). (b) There is a
common bond; for, while according to nature God and man are infinitely
distant, according to grace man is an adopted son of God and the heir
to glory in which he will share happiness with God.

1113. Charity is twofold, namely, uncreated and created. (a) Uncreated
charity is God Himself. The entire Trinity is called charity, just as
It is also called truth, wisdom, etc.: “God is charity, and he that
abideth in charity, abideth in God” (I John, iv. 8). The Holy Ghost
especially is called charity, because he proceeds in the Trinity as
love. Hence, in the _Veni Creator_ He is addressed as “Fount of life,
fire, charity, and spiritual anointing.” (b) Created charity is a
supernatural habit added to the will, inclining it to the exercise of
love of God and enabling it to act with promptness and delight: “The
charity of God is poured out in our hearts by the Holy Ghost who is
given to us” (Rom., v. 5). We are concerned here only with created
charity.

1114. Created charity is defined: “A supernatural virtue infused by
God, through which we love with friendship God, the author of our
beatitude, on account of His own goodness, and our neighbor, on account
of God.” Charity is given with sanctifying grace, but differs from it,
inasmuch as grace is a principle of being and makes man himself holy,
whereas charity is a principle of acting and makes acts holy.

1115. The Excellence of Charity.--Human friendship of the lower kind
is not a virtue, while that which is higher is rather the extension
or result of virtue than a virtue in itself. The divine friendship,
however, constitutes the theological virtue of charity.

(a) Thus, charity is a virtue, since through it our acts are regulated
by their supreme standard and our affections united to the divine
goodness.

(b) Charity, although it exercises a sway over the other virtues, is
distinct from them; for it has its own proper object, namely, the
divine goodness, all-perfect in itself: “These three: faith, hope and
charity” (I Cor., xiii. 13).

(c) Charity, although it includes our neighbor as well as God among the
objects of love, is but one virtue, since it has but one end (i.e.,
the goodness of God), and it is based on but one fellowship (i.e., the
beatific vision to be bestowed by God).

1116. Charity is less perfect than the act of the intellect by which
God is seen intuitively in the beatific vision, but it is preeminent
among the virtues of this life. (a) Thus, it is superior to the
normal virtues, for while they regulate actions by the inferior rule
of reason, charity regulates them by the supreme rule, which is God
Himself. (b) It is superior to the other theological virtues, since it
tends to God in Himself, whereas faith and hope tend to God as He is
the principle whence we derive truth and blessedness: “The greatest of
these is charity” (I Cor., xiii. 13).

1117. The other virtues require charity for their perfection.

(a) Without charity the other virtues are either false virtues, or true
but imperfect virtues; for they are then directed, not to the universal
and last End, but at most to some particular and proximate good end.
Nor are they meritorious without charity, for “if I should distribute
all my goods to feed the poor, and if I should deliver my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing” (I Cor., xiii.
3).

(b) With charity the other virtues become true and perfect virtues.
Examples: Titus gives alms to the poor in order to win them to
infidelity (false charity). Caius avoids drunkenness, not because he
dislikes it, but because he is a miser and dislikes to spend money
(false temperance). Balbus has no religion, but is very faithful to his
family duties (imperfect justice). Claudius discharges his duties to
his family and neighbors out of love for God (perfect justice).

1118. The influence of charity on the other virtues is expressed by
various titles.

(a) Charity is called the informing principle of the other virtues.
This does not mean that charity is the type on which the other virtues
are modelled, or the internal character that makes them what they are;
otherwise, all the virtues would be absorbed in the one virtue of
charity. It means, then, that the other virtues derive the quality of
perfect virtue from charity, through which they are directed to the
Last End.

(b) Charity is called the foundation and root of virtues (Eph., iii.
17), not in the sense that it is a material part of them, but in the
sense that it supports and nourishes them.

(c) It is also spoken of as the end and the mother of the other
virtues, because it directs the other virtues to the Last End, and
produces their acts by commanding their exercise: “The end of the
commandment is charity” (I Tim., i. 5).

1119. Charity causes the other virtues, negatively by forbidding evil,
affirmatively by commanding good (I Cor., xiii, 4-7).

(a) It forbids that evil be done the neighbor, either in desire or in
deed: “Charity envieth not, dealeth not perversely.”

(b) It forbids evil passions by which one is injured in oneself, such
as pride, ambition, greed, anger: “Charity is not puffed up, is not
ambitious, seeketh not her own, is not provoked to anger.”

(c) It forbids that one harm one’s own soul by thoughts or desires of
wrong: “Charity thinketh no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity.”

(d) It commands that good be done the neighbor, bears with his defects,
rejoices over his good and bestows benefits upon him: “Charity is
patient, is kind; rejoiceth with the truth, beareth all things.”

(e) It commands that good be done towards God by the practice of the
theological virtues of faith and hope, and by continuance in them:
“Charity believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.”

1120. Direction is given by charity to the other virtues that makes
them perfect and meritorious.

(a) Actual direction--that is, the intention here and now to believe,
or hope, etc., out of love for God--though more perfect, is not
required for merit in faith, hope and other virtues: otherwise, merit
would become extremely difficult and rare.

(b) Habitual direction--that is, the mere fact that one has the habit
of charity, though it in no way influences an act of faith, or of hope,
etc, now made--does not suffice; otherwise, it would follow that an act
of faith recited by a person in the state of charity, but here and now
unconscious, is meritorious, which would make merit too easy.

(c) Virtual direction--that is, the influence of an intention, once
made and never retracted, of acting out of love for God, which
continues, though it is not adverted to, while one believes, hopes,
etc.--at least is necessary; otherwise, one would make oneself
deserving of the Last End, without ever having desired it, for the
other virtues do not tend to the Last End in itself. In practice,
however, there is no person in the state of grace who does not perform
all his acts that are human and virtuous under the direction of
charity, actual or virtual.

1121. Production of Charity.--The virtue of charity belongs to the
appetitive part of the soul, but supposes a judgment by which its
exercise is regulated. (a) Thus, the power of the soul in which
charity dwells is the will, for its object is good apprehended by the
intellect; but (b) the judgment by which it is regulated is not human
reason, as is the case with the moral virtues, but divine wisdom (Eph.,
iii. 19).

1122. The Origin of Charity.--(a) Charity is not caused by nature,
nor acquired by the powers of nature. Natural love of God, indeed,
is possible without grace; but charity is a supernatural friendship
based on a fellowship in the beatitude of God. (b) It is introduced
or begotten by other virtues, in the sense that they prepare one to
receive it from God (I Tim., i. 5).

1123. The cause of charity, then, is God, who infuses it into the soul:
“The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost,
who is given to us” (Rom., v. 5). The measure according to which God
infuses the gift of charity depends on His will and bounty.

(a) The Angels received charity at their creation, according to their
natural rank, so that those who were higher excelled those who were
lower, both in nature and in grace.

(b) Those who receive charity through infant baptism have it according
“to the measure of the giving of Christ” (Eph., iv. 7; cfr. John, iii.
8; I Cor., xii. 2).

(c) Those who receive charity through repentance, have it, “everyone
according to his proper ability” (Matt., xxv. 15), that is, according
to the disposition with which he has prepared himself. But the
preparation itself depends on the grace of God (Col., i. 12).

1124. Charity may be increased: “I pray that your charity may more and
more abound” (Philip., i. 9). It must, however, be noted that: (a) the
increase is not in the motive of charity, for the goodness of God is
supreme and incapable of increase, nor is it in the objects of charity,
for even the lowest degree of this virtue extends to all those things
that must be loved on account of God; (b) the increase, then, is in the
manner in which charity exists in the soul, in that it becomes more
deeply rooted and takes stronger hold of the will, whose acts of love
become correspondingly more intense and fervent. Just as knowledge
grows as it becomes clearer and more certain, so does charity progress
to higher degrees as it exists more firmly in its subject.

1125. With reference to the increase of charity, acts of love are of
two kinds: (a) the less fervent are those that do not surpass the
degree of charity one already possesses; (b) the more fervent are those
that surpass the degree of charity one has. Example: If one has ten
degrees of habitual charity, an act of five degrees is less fervent, an
act of fifteen degrees is more fervent.

1126. Every act of charity, even the less fervent, contributes to an
increase of the charity one already possesses. This is true whether the
act be elicited by charity (i.e., an act of love of God), or commanded
by charity (i.e., an act of some other virtue performed out of love for
God). Every act of charity merits from God an increase of the habit of
charity (see Council of Trent, Sess. VI, Can. 32). Even a cup of cold
water given in the name of a disciple shall not go without its reward
(Matt., X. 42).

1127. As to the manner and time in which the increase takes place,
there are various opinions, but the following points sum up what seems
more probable:

(a) The increase of the habit of charity merited by a more fervent act
is conferred at once, for God confers His gifts when one is disposed
for their reception. Example: Titus, who has habitually ten degrees of
charity, makes an act of charity whose degree is fifteen; he thereby
merits the increase of the habit, and it is conferred at once.

(b) The increase of the habit of charity merited by less fervent acts
is not conferred until the moment one enters into heaven or purgatory,
for there is no time during life on earth when one has a disposition
equal to the added quantity contained in less fervent acts, since, as
just said, more fervent acts are rewarded at once by the increase that
corresponds to them, while less fervent acts do not dispose one for an
increase then and there. But the increase must be conferred when one
enters into glory; otherwise, one would lose the degree of beatitude
one merited during life. Hence, those who make many--even though less
fervent--acts of charity during life, will receive a very high degree
of reward for them hereafter.

1128. The increase of charity will come to an end in the future life,
when one has attained the degree of perfection to which one was
predestined by God (Philip, iii. 12). But, as long as a person lives
here below, he may continually grow in charity, for each increase makes
him capable of receiving from the infinite power of God a further
participation in the infinite charity, which is the Holy Ghost (II
Cor., vi. 11).

1129. Charity is absolutely perfect, when it loves God in the same
degree in which He is lovable--that is, infinitely; but it is clear
that so great charity is possible only to God. Charity is relatively
perfect, when one loves God as much as one can. This relatively perfect
charity is possible to man (Matt, v. 48; I John, ii. 5, iv. 12, 17);
but it has three degrees:

(a) The perfect charity of heaven, which is not possible in this life,
consists in this, that one is constantly occupied in thinking of God
and loving Him.

(b) The perfect charity of earth, which is special to some of the just,
consists in this, that one gives all one’s time to divine things, as
far as the necessities of mortal existence allow.

(c) The perfect charity of earth that is common to all the just,
consists in this, that habitually one gives one’s whole heart to God,
permitting no thought or desire opposed to the divine love.

1130. Those who are growing in charity are divided into three classes:
(a) the beginners, or those whose chief care is freedom from sin and
resistance to what is contrary to divine love; (b) the proficients, or
those who must still fight against temptation, but whose chief
attention is given to progress along the way of virtue; (c) the
perfect, or those who are progressing in holiness, but whose chief
desire is to reach the end of the journey and be with the object of
their love (Philip., i. 13).

1131. The Decline of Charity.--(a) Actual charity can decline, in the
sense that subsequent acts can be less fervent than those that preceded
(Apoc., ii. 4). (b) Habitual charity cannot grow less in itself. The
only causes that can be supposed for a decline in habitual charity are
omission of the act of charity and commission of venial sin; the
former, however, cannot lessen charity, since this habit, being
infused, does not depend on human acts; the latter, which is a disorder
about the means to the end, does not contradict charity, which is the
right order of man with reference to his Last End itself. Thus, charity
differs from human friendships, which grow cold through neglect or
slights. (c) Habitual charity can be lessened, first, with reference to
the disposition that makes for its preservation and increase (as when
one commits numerous and dangerous venial sins), and secondly, with
reference to itself (as when one rising from sin has less charity than
he had before). But in neither of these cases does the same numerical
habit decrease.

1132. The Loss of Charity.--(a) The charity of the blessed cannot be
lost, because they see God as He is, and are constantly occupied in
loving Him. But the charity of earth, since it proceeds from a less
perfect knowledge and is not always in use, may be surrendered by man’s
free will (see Council of Trent, Sess. VI, Cap. 12, 13, 14, Can. 23).
(b) The habit of charity is lost, not only by any sin against the love
of God, but by any other mortal sin opposed to other virtues (see
Council of Trent, Sess. VI, Cap. 15). Every mortal sin is a turning
away from the Last End, and so is incompatible with charity, which is a
turning to God, the Last End: “He that hath My commandments and keepeth
them, he it is that loveth Me” (John, xiv. 21). Venial sin diminishes
the fervor of charity, but does not remove charity itself.

1133. The Object of Charity.--There is a threefold object of charity:
(a) the formal object, that is, the reason for love, which is the
infinite amiability of God in Himself, as known from the supernatural
illumination of faith; (b) the primary material object, that is, the
chief thing which charity loves, which is God (i.e., the divine
Essence, the divine Persons, the divine attributes): “Thou shalt love
the Lord, Thy God. This is the greatest and the first commandment”
(Matt, xxii. 37, 38); (c) the secondary material object, that is, the
thing loved because of God, which is self and the neighbor: “And the
second is like to this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” (ibid,
39).

1134. The love of creatures is not always an act of the virtue of
charity. (a) Sinful love of creatures, by which one loves them more
than God or inordinately, destroys or deviates from charity. Hence, St.
John says: “Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world”
(I John, ii. 15). (b) Natural love of creatures, by which one loves
them on account of reasons apart from love of God (such as the benefits
one derives from them or the excellences they possess), is not charity,
even though good. Thus, gratitude which sees in another only a
benefactor, friendship which sees in another only a congenial spirit,
and philanthropy which sees in another only a fellow-man, differ from
charity, although they are good in themselves. (c) Supernatural love of
creatures, by which one loves them on account of the divine that is in
them, inasmuch as they are friends of God or made for the glory of
one’s divine Friend, does not differ specifically from love of God, for
in both loves there is the same motive (viz, the amiability of God
Himself).

1135. Since charity is friendship, it does not include among its
objects those things that are loved with the love of desire (see 1109),
that is, those things whose good is desired, but for another.

(a) Hence, charity itself is not an object of charity, for it is loved
not as a friend, but as a good that one wishes for one’s friends. The
same applies to other virtues and to beatitudes.

(b) Irrational creatures are not objects of charity, for a fellowship
with them in friendship, and especially in the beatific vision, is
impossible. We can love them out of charity, however, inasmuch as we
desire their preservation for the sake of those whom we love with
charity (e.g., desiring that they be preserved for the glory of God or
the use of man).

1136. Love of self is of various kinds.

(a) Sinful self-love is that by which a person loves himself according
to his lower and corrupt nature, and not according to his higher or
rational nature, or loves himself egotistically to the hurt of others.
Of those who indulge their passions it is said: “In the last days shall
come dangerous times. Men shall be lovers of themselves” (II Tim., iii.
1, 2); of those who love themselves selfishly it is said: “All seek the
things that are their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ’s”
(Philip., ii. 21); whereas charity seeketh not her own (I Cor., xiii.)
to the exclusion of others, but desires what is for the advantage of
the neighbor (I Cor., x. 33).

(b) Natural self-love is that necessary desire which each one has for
his own good, happiness, existence, etc. (II Cor., v. 4), or any desire
for reasonable self-improvement that is not prompted by a supernatural
love of God. This love is stronger than love for another, for it
implies not merely union, but unity. It is not friendship, but the root
of friendship, for one is said to be friendly towards another when one
holds him as another self.

(c) Supernatural self-love is that love which one has for God, and
consequently for self as a friend of God.

1137. If by “self” we understand the substance and nature of man, as
composed of soul and body, then both good and bad understand aright the
meaning of self and desire its preservation. But if by “self” we mean
principally the inward man and secondarily the outward man (II Cor.,
iv. 16), then only the good understand what self is, and have a true
love for it, whereas the wicked hate their own souls (Ps. x. 6). For
the five marks of true friendship are shown to the inner man by the
good, to the outward man by the sinner: (a) the good are solicitous for
the life of the soul, the wicked for that of the body; (b) the good
desire spiritual treasures for the soul, the wicked carnal delights for
the body; (c) the good labor to provide for the needs of the soul, the
wicked work only for the needs of the body; (d) the good are pleased to
converse with their souls, finding there thoughts of past, present and
future good things to delight them, while the wicked seek to distract
themselves from wholesome thought by pleasure; (e) the good are at
peace with their souls, whereas the wicked are troubled by conscience.

1138. Supernatural love of self, which pertains to charity, extends not
only to the soul, but also to the body; for (a) according to its
nature, the body is good, since it is from God and may be employed for
His service (Rom., vi. 13), and hence it may be loved out of charity
with the love of desire on account of the honor it may give to God and
the service it may render in good works; (b) according to grace, the
body is capable of sharing in secondary beatitude, through
glorification with the soul, and hence it may be loved with charity and
with the love of benevolence, inasmuch as we desire for it a share in
beatitude: “We would not be unclothed, but clothed over, that that
which is mortal may be swallowed up by life” (II Cor., v. 4); (e)
according to the consequences of sin that are in it, the body is a drag
on the soul, or a hindrance to it, and one should not love but rather
desire the removal of its imperfections. Hence, St. Paul desired to be
freed from the body (Rom., vii. 24; Philip,, i. 23), and the Saints
have shown their hatred of the body’s corruption by the mortifications
to which they subjected it (John, xii. 25).

1139. Love of neighbor is of three kinds: (a) sinful love, which is all
love that is excessive, irregulated, or directed to what is evil in
others; (b) natural love, which is all love that is attracted by some
excellence of a human or created kind, such as knowledge or skill; (c)
supernatural love, which is that by which one is drawn towards another
on account of the divine in him, such as his gifts of grace and of
heavenly calling.

1140. Hence, it seems that there is no such thing as a special and
distinct virtue of human friendship. (a) Thus, friendships of utility
or of pleasure are clearly not virtues, since they are not caused by
attraction towards moral good. (b) Virtuous friendships are the
consequences of virtues rather than virtues, for the attraction one has
for one’s friend arises from the attraction for the virtue one sees in
him. Thus, friendship for another because he is not the slave of
passion, is an exercise of the virtue of temperance. (c) Supernatural
friendships are not distinct from the virtue of charity, for the gifts
and graces which evoke them are participations of God’s goodness, which
is the object of charity.

1141. The neighbors whom we are to love according to charity are all
those who can have with us the relation of supernatural friendship,
that is, all rational creatures. (a) Hence, the Angels are objects of
this love, and in the resurrection men will be fellow-citizens with
them (Heb., xii, 22); (b) our fellow-men are objects of this love, for
they also are called to the heavenly companionship (ibid., 23).

1142. Charity for Sinners.--Should we love with charity those who are
sinners and enemies of God? (a) If we consider sinners precisely as
enemies of God, we may not love them, for their sin is an evil, an
offense to God and a hurt to themselves. On the contrary, we should
hate even in those who are nearest to us whatever is opposed to love of
God (Luke, xiv. 26). (b) If we consider sinners precisely as creatures
of God, we may not love them with charity or as friends, if they are
demons or lost souls; for in their case fellowship with us in beatitude
is out of the question. We may, however, love their nature out of
charity towards God, desiring that it be preserved by Him for His
glory. (c) If we consider sinners precisely as creatures of God, we may
love them with charity or as friends, if they are still in the present
life; for we should wish that God may be glorified in them by their
conversion and salvation. The commandment of love of neighbor was not
restricted to loving the just.

1143. If sinners be considered precisely as they are enemies of God, is
it lawful to hate them and wish evil to them? (a) It is lawful to hate
the evil that is in sinners, but not their persons. He who hates their
sin, loves themselves, for their sin is against their own interests. In
this way the Psalmist hated sinners (Ps. cxviii. 113, cxxxviii. 32).
(b) It is lawful to wish that punishment overtake sinners, if one is
actuated, not by a spirit of malevolence, but by love of justice (Ps.
lvii. 11; Wis., i. 13; Ps. x. 8). It is also lawful to wish that the
sinfulness that is in them may be destroyed, that they themselves may
be saved. In this sense we may understand some of the imprecations that
are met in scripture (Ps. ciii. 35). Thus, a judge sentences a
criminal, not because he hates the man before him, but because he
wishes to reform him, or to protect society, or to do an act of justice.

1144. The evils of punishment or of destruction of sin are in a broader
view not evils, but goods. But the following punishments may not be
desired: (a) that anyone living lose his soul and be condemned to hell,
for charity requires that we desire the salvation of sinners; (b) that
a sinner be punished by blindness of heart and go from bad to worse. He
who wishes sin approves of the offense to God; but it does not seem
unlawful to wish that God permit a person to fall into sin, as a means
to a spiritual awakening.

1145. Association with Sinners.--(a) It is never lawful to associate
with sinners in their sins, for thus one becomes a sharer in their
guilt. Hence, St. Paul says: “Go out from among them and be ye
separate” (II Cor., vi. 17). (b) It is not lawful to associate with
sinners even in matters indifferent or good, if one is weak and apt to
be led away by them into sin (see 258 sqq.). (c) It is lawful to
associate with sinners in things not forbidden, if one is not
endangered, and if one aims to convert them to better ways. Thus, our
Lord ate with sinners, because He came to call them to repentance
(Matt., ix. 10-13).

1146. Friendship with Sinners.-(a) If this means that we like and
dislike the same things as the sinners, it is an evil friendship, and
it should be discontinued; (b) if it means that we seek to bring the
sinner to imitate our good likes and dislikes, the friendship pertains
to charity (Jer, xv. 19).

1147. Should one continue to show signs of special regard to a friend
who has taken to ways of sin? (a) As long as there is hope of
betterment, one should not deny the other the benefits of friendship.
If it would be wrong to desert a friend because he was perishing from
starvation, much more would it be wrong to desert him because he was
perishing morally. (b) But if all hope of betterment has gone, one
should give up a companionship which is not profitable to either party,
and may prove harmful.

1148. Charity towards Enemies.--Enemies can be considered in two
senses: precisely as enemies, or precisely as human beings destined for
beatitude. (a) If considered as enemies, they are not to be loved with
charity--that is, it should be displeasing to us that they are enemies
and opposed to us, for it would be contrary to charity to love in a
neighbor that which is evil in him. (b) If considered as human beings,
enemies should be loved with charity--that is, their nature created by
God and capable of receiving grace and glory should be pleasing to us,
for love of God should make us love all that belongs to Him, even that
which is not well disposed towards ourselves.

1149. The precept of love of enemies did not originate with the law of
Christ. (a) It pertains to the natural law, for (i) it follows from the
natural principle: “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you,”
and (ii) it was known by natural reason (e.g., Plato and Cicero knew
it). (b) Love of enemies was commanded in the Old Law, being the second
great commandment of that law (Matt., xxii. 39), and was taught in
various Old Testament books (Lev., xix. 17, 18; Exod., xxiii 4, 5;
Prov., xxi. 21, 22). (c) It was renewed by Christ, who corrected the
false interpretation of Leviticus, xix. 18, given by the scribes and
Pharisees, who taught: “Thou shalt love thy friend and hate thy enemy.”
In the Sermon on the Mount our Lord declares: “I say to you: Love your
enemies: do good to them that hate you: that you may be the children of
your Father who is in heaven” (Matt., v. 44, 45).

1150. The following examples of love of one’s enemies are found in the
Bible: (a) in the Old Testament, Joseph forgave his brethren who had
sold him into Egypt, David spared the life of his persecutor Saul and
wept over the ungrateful Absalom, and Moses prayed for the people who
had rebelled against him; (b) in the New Testament our Lord mourned
over Jerusalem which had rejected Him, and on the Cross prayed for His
enemies.

1151. What kind of love must we entertain for enemies?

(a) A general love of enemies is that which extends to all neighbors
for the love of God, no exception being made as regards enemies. This
kind of love is required. Example: Caius makes an act of love in which
he declares his love for his neighbor, but mentions no names. Titus
makes this act of love: “I love all except Caius.” The act of love made
by Caius is sufficient, that of Titus is insufficient.

(b) A special love of enemies is that which extends to them in
particular, not as included in the human race or the community, but as
individuals, as when one expressly mentions the name of an enemy in his
act of love. This kind of love of enemies is not required at all times.

1152. Is there an obligation of special love of enemies? (a) In cases
of necessity (e.g., when the omission of a special love would bring on
hate), one is bound to special love. (b) Outside of cases of necessity,
one is bound to be willing to love an enemy in particular, if the
necessity should arise. (c) Outside of necessity, one is not bound to
love an enemy in particular, for it is impossible to give such
attention even to all those who are not enemies. But to give an enemy
more love than is required is a sign of perfect charity.

1153. The principles just given as to internal love of enemies apply
also to external love, or to the signs by which internal love is
manifested. For St. John says: “Let us not love in word, nor in tongue,
but in deed, and in truth” (I John, iii. 18).

(a) Hence, it is not lawful to deny to an enemy the common signs of
charity (i.e., such benefits as are bestowed on his community or class
as a whole), for to do so would be to signify a desire for revenge
(Lev., xix. 18). Consequently, he who excludes his enemies from prayers
offered for his neighbor sins against charity.

(b) In cases of necessity, as when an enemy is in great need as to
life, fame, fortune or salvation, one is bound to show special signs of
charity, such as salutation, conversation, assistance, etc. Thus, we
are told: “If thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat; if he be thirsty,
give him to drink” (Prov., xxv. 21).

(c) Outside of cases of necessity, one is bound to be ready to assist
an enemy, should there be need.

(d) Outside of necessity, one is not bound actually to manifest
particular love for an enemy, by speaking to him, trading with him,
visiting him, etc. Hence, David, although he had pardoned Absalom,
would not meet him (II Kings, xiv. 24). To confer special benefits on
an enemy when there is no obligation is a counsel of perfection: “Do
good to those that hate you” (Matt., v. 24). This heaps coals of fire
upon the head of the enemy, curing him by the salutary pain of
repentance, and so overcomes evil by good (Rom., xii. 20, 21).

1154. The common signs of charity are not limited to those that are
shown to all mankind, but include also such as are usually shown by one
Christian to another Christian, by one citizen to a fellow-citizen, by
a relative to a relative, etc. Thus, to make a social call, though it
would be a sign of special regard in the case of one not a relative,
might be only a common sign of charity in the case of a relative.

(a) Hence, it is against charity to deny an enemy signs of charity that
are customarily shown to all men. Example: Titus dislikes Balbus, and
therefore refuses to sell to him, does not return his salutations,
speaks to all others in company, while ignoring Balbus, and will not
even answer if Balbus addresses him.

(b) It is against charity to deny an enemy signs of charity that are
commonly shown to all those to whom one is similarly related. Examples:
Claudia calls on her other children frequently and makes them presents,
but she keeps away from one daughter, even when the latter is sick and
poor and she is calling next door. Sempronius habitually invites to his
house for family festivities all his relatives except his brother.

(c) It is against charity to deny to an enemy some benefit not commonly
shown, but which one has bestowed out of liberality on the group to
which the latter belongs. In such a case a special sign of charity
becomes common. Example: Titus prepares a banquet for a neighboring
institution, and purposely sends no invitation to two members whom he
dislikes.

1155. The rule that common signs of charity must be shown does not
apply, if some higher or more urgent duty requires that they be
omitted: however, internal charity must persist all the while.

(a) Thus, by reason of charity owed to self or to the better interests
of an offender, one should at times omit the common signs of charity.
Examples: Caius avoids Balbus, with whom he has had a quarrel, because
he knows well that Balbus is seeking some pretext to get revenge. Titus
has a surly way of speaking, and his mother, in order to cure him, does
not answer until he has spoken civilly.

(b) By reason of justice, the signs of charity should sometimes be
denied as a punishment. Examples: Claudia punishes her children, when
they are disobedient, by refusing them for a time privileges given the
other children. For the same reason she refuses to call on a daughter
who ran away from home and married a worthless fellow.

(c) By reason of justice, the signs of charity should be refused, when
this is required for the protection of one’s own rights. Example: Titus
goes about defaming Sempronius and his family, but appears very affable
when he meets Sempronius; the latter knows all this, and hence is very
cool with Titus, to show that the injuries are not held as light.

1156. The following are the rules for judging whether (apart from
scandal to others) sin has been committed through refusal of the signs
of charity:

(a) If internally there is hatred (i.e., a contempt for one’s neighbor,
as if he were unworthy of common charity), or malevolence (i.e., a will
to exercise spite), then one is guilty of grave uncharitableness,
unless the smallness of the matter makes it only a venial sin.

(b) If externally the denial of charity is such that in the judgment of
a prudent man it indicates real hatred, and the injured party perceives
this and is scandalized or hurt thereby, the sin of uncharitableness is
committed, even though there be no internal hatred. The gravity depends
on the scandal or offense caused the other party. Example: Claudius and
Balbus, once very friendly, have had a disagreement. Now, when Claudius
sees Balbus coming in his direction, he turns off by a side street, not
to show hatred, but to avoid a meeting. If Balbus does not know this,
or does not care, no sin--or at most only a venial sin--is committed;
but if Balbus is deeply wounded or scandalized by this conduct,
Claudius sins seriously against charity.

1157. Refusal of Greetings.--(a) To refuse to exchange a bow or
salutation (such as “Good morning”) indicates a want of charity, when
such mutual courtesy is expected according to custom; not, however,
when custom does not require it, Example: In Balba’s office the girls
employed usually salute one another on arrival and departure, but Balba
never salutes Titia, and hence is regarded as her enemy. On Caius’
street the neighbors are of a very mixed kind, and it is not customary
to speak to everybody. Hence, the fact that Caius never salutes certain
neighbors, whom he dislikes, does not signify any uncharitableness on
his part.

(b) To refuse to salute another first, where custom expects this, is a
mark of uncharity, unless one has a sufficient excuse. Examples:
Claudius has a grudge against Sempronius, an elderly man who is much
his senior, and says he will never salute him as others do. Titus
refuses to greet Balbus, his acquaintance, when they meet, because in
the past Balbus has treated his greetings with contempt, and shows that
he does not care to notice Titus.

(c) To refuse to return a salutation sincerely given indicates a want
of charity.

1158. The Order of Charity.--Charity not only requires that we love
God, ourselves, and our neighbors, but it also obliges us to love these
objects according to a certain order, some being preferred to others.

(a) God must be loved above all, more than self (Matt, xvi. 24), more
than father and mother (Matt., x. 37; Luke, xiv. 26), for He is the
common good of all, and the source of all good.

(b) Other things being equal, one should love self more than one’s
neighbor, for the love of self is the model for the love of neighbor
(Matt., xxii. 39), and nature itself inclines to this in accordance
with the saying: “Charity begins at home.”

(c) Among neighbors those should be loved more who have more of a claim
on account of their greater nearness to God or to ourselves.

1159. Love can become greater in two ways: (a) objectively, when the
person loved is esteemed as of greater worth, or has more titles to
affection, or has a more enduring right to be loved; (b) subjectively,
when the person loving is more touched and moved in his feelings, even
though the object be not more amiable in itself.

1160. The Character of our Love of God.--(a) It must be supreme
objectively, since He is infinite perfection and has the highest of all
claims on our love. Hence, one should be disposed to suffer any loss
rather than abandon God. (b) It must be supreme subjectively, in our
desire, that is, realizing that God is the highest good, we should at
least wish to give Him the utmost of our fervor and ardor. (c) It need
not be supreme subjectively, in fact; for we are not always masters of
our feelings, and things that are nearer to us affect us more than
those that are more important, but remote from sense. Hence, it is not
against charity that one should be more moved sensibly at the thought
of a dear human friend than at the thought of God, provided the will
places God above all.

1161. Regarding the love of God for the sake of reward, we must note:
(a) If there is question of the eternal reward, one may love and serve
God for the sake of reward, provided one makes the reward the end of
one’s service, but not the end of God; for salvation is really the end
of our faith (I Pet., i. 9), but God is the end of all, and He is to be
preferred to all. This love of God for the sake of reward coexists with
charity, for one may love a friend for his own sake, and at the same
time expect benefits from the friendship, provided the love of
benevolence is uppermost. (b) If there is question of a temporal
reward, one may love and serve God for the sake of the reward, not in
the sense that spiritual things are made a means and temporal things
their end, but in the sense that one hopes one’s service of God will be
so blessed that one will have health, strength and opportunity, so as
to be enabled to continue and progress in that service.

1162. Regarding the love of self (i.e., of the inner man, or our
spiritual nature), we should note: (a) Objectively, one esteems others
who are higher in sanctity than oneself (e.g., the Blessed Virgin), as
more worthy of love. But one may desire for self according to charity
such progress in virtue that one will pass some others who are now
better than oneself; for the virtue of charity is given us that we may
perfect ourselves. (b) Subjectively, one holds self as being nearer
than other persons, and thus loves oneself with a greater intensity.

1163. Is it lawful to sacrifice one’s own spiritual goods for the
benefit of a neighbor?

(a) One may not sacrifice necessary spiritual goods for the benefit,
spiritual or temporal, of any one, not even of the whole world; for in
so doing one inflicts a wound on one’s own soul and prefers the good of
others to one’s own spiritual welfare. Hence, it is not lawful to wish
to be damned in place of another; to commit sin, mortal or venial, to
prevent another from sinning; or to expose oneself to the certain and
proximate danger of sin for the sake of another’s spiritual progress.

(b) One may, however, sacrifice unnecessary or less necessary spiritual
goods for the benefit, spiritual or temporal, of a neighbor; for, by
doing this, one chooses the course which God wishes, and does not
lessen but rather increases one’s own profit. Thus, a priest should
interrupt his devotions to hear the confession of a penitent; a
daughter should give up the idea of becoming a nun as long as her
parents need her; a lay person should stay away from Mass on Sunday, if
an invalid has to be cared for, or a dying person must be baptized; it
is laudable to make the heroic act of charity, by which one transfers
the satisfactory value of one’s good works to the souls in purgatory;
one may expose oneself to a remote danger of sin in order to perform a
great service of charity, as in waiting on a sick person who on account
of irritability is a great temptation to anger; one may wish that one’s
entrance into heaven be delayed, so that one may labor longer for souls
(Philip., i. 23, 24).

1164. The Love of the Body.--(a) One should prefer the spiritual
welfare of one’s neighbor to one’s own bodily welfare, for our neighbor
is called to be a partaker with us in the beatific vision, while the
body will share only in accidental glory. (b) One should prefer one’s
own bodily welfare to that of another, all other things being equal,
for it has more of a claim on one.

1165. There are three kinds of spiritual necessity in which a neighbor
may be placed, and in which one might be called on to sacrifice one’s
bodily welfare for the other’s good (cfr. 1236), Thus, there is: (a)
extreme spiritual need, or that in which a neighbor will perish
eternally unless help is given him, as when an infant is about to die
without baptism; (b) grave spiritual need, or that in which a neighbor
runs grave danger of losing his soul unless help is given, as when a
dying person, who is in mortal sin, asks for a confessor, because he is
scarcely able to make an act of perfect contrition; (c) ordinary
spiritual need, or that in which a neighbor is in remote danger of
damnation, or in proximate danger of sin, but can easily help himself,
as is the case with those who from choice live in occasions of sin.

1166. For a neighbor who is in extreme spiritual need, one should risk
death (I John, iii. 16) or lesser evils, if the following conditions
are present: (a) if there is a good prospect of success in helping the
needy one (e.g., a mother is not obliged to undergo an operation
dangerous to her life, in order to secure the baptism of her child, if
it is uncertain that the baptism can be administered); (b) if there is
no one else who can and will give the needed help; (c) if there is no
reason of public good that stands in the way; thus, if by helping one
in extreme need a person would lose his life, and so deprive of his aid
a large number who are also in extreme need, he should prefer to help
the many rather than the one.

1167. For a neighbor who is in grave spiritual necessity, the same risk
is not required of all. (a) The risk of death itself is required of
pastors of souls (John, x. 11), since they have bound themselves to
this. Hence, a pastor who would refuse to go to a parishioner dying of
pestilence and needing absolution and Extreme Unction, would offend
against justice, while another priest who would go to such a dying
person would practise the perfection of charity; for the dying person
can help himself by an act of contrition, and the strange priest is not
bound by office to care for him. (b) The risk of some great corporal
evil (such as a sickness or impairment of health) should be taken even
by those who are not pastors of the person in need, if there is no one
else to help. Thus, if a pastor were sick, another priest ought to
visit a dying person, even at the risk of catching a severe cold.

1168. For a neighbor who is in ordinary spiritual necessity charity
requires that something be done (Ecclus, xvii. 12). (a) But it does not
require the risk of life or of serious bodily loss, for the person in
danger can easily and better help himself. Thus, it is not necessary
that one should penetrate into the haunts of criminals and endanger
one’s life, in order to drag away one who chooses to go to such places.
(b) It does require that one be willing to undergo a slight bodily
inconvenience or deprivation. Thus, an ordinary headache or the loss of
a meal ought not to stop one from counselling another in order to keep
him away from bad company.

1169. If only corporal good (life, health, liberty, etc.) is compared
with corporal good of the same kind, then, as said above, one should
prefer one’s own good to that of another. Thus, it is not lawful to
offer oneself as substitute for a condemned criminal, or to put one’s
family into bankruptcy to save another family from bankruptcy. But, if
a neighbor’s corporal good is of a more important kind or is connected
with higher goods, then one may sacrifice one’s own good for that of
another.

(a) Thus, one may prefer a greater corporal good of a neighbor to a
lesser corporal good of one’s own. Examples: One may weaken one’s
health to save another’s life. One may give of one’s blood for a
transfusion to assist another who is in danger of death.

(b) One may prefer an equal corporal good of a neighbor to an equal
corporal good of one’s own, if the common good requires this; for the
good of all is preferable to that of an individual. Thus, one may
expose oneself to the peril of death in order to protect a public
person whose life is very important to the nation. Thus, policemen and
firemen, soldiers and sailors, are daily imperilling their own safety
for the safety of the public.

(c) One may prefer an equal corporal good of another, who is only a
private individual, to one’s own equal good, if the intention is to
practise virtue, to assist a person in need, or to give edification. At
least, it is more probable that this is lawful, for the good of virtue
is a higher good than the good of the body, and the Fathers praise holy
men who sold themselves into slavery, or who gave themselves as
hostages to barbarians, for the liberation of captives; and they hold
up for admiration Damon and Pythias, each of whom was ready to die for
the other. Hence, it is not against the charity owed to self to jump
into a river and risk one’s life in order to rescue a drowning person,
for heroic charity is a hotter adornment to self than mere, ordinary
charity. Similarly, if two explorers in a wilderness have only enough
provisions for one to reach civilization, one of them may surrender his
rations to the other, that both may not be lost.

1170. There are two exceptions to the rules just given: (a) A person
should not risk his life for another’s life, if he thereby endangers
his own salvation (e.g., if he is in a state of sin and cannot
reconcile himself to God). But this case is theoretical, for it is
admitted that one who makes the supreme sacrifice of giving his life
with a virtuous intention, has not only charity, but the perfection of
charity (John, xv. 13), which will certainly purify him even from a
multitude of sins. (b) One should not risk one’s life for the life of
another, if a third party has a higher claim on him. Thus, a married
man, who has a dependent wife and children, may not throw away his life
for the sake of a friend.

1171. The order of charity between different neighbors is as follows:
(a) as to good in general (e.g., the attainment of salvation), we
should love all neighbors alike, for we should desire salvation for
all; (b) as to good in particular (e.g., the degree of beatitude), we
should love some more than others. Thus, we should desire a higher
degree of glory for the Blessed Virgin than for the Saints.

1172. The reasons for loving one neighbor more than another can be
reduced to two. (a) One neighbor may be nearer to God than another, and
hence more deserving of love--for example, a saintly acquaintance may
be nearer to God than a sinful relative. (b) One neighbor may be nearer
to ourselves on account of relationship by blood or marriage,
friendship, civil or professional ties, etc. Thus, a cousin is nearer
by nature to his cousin than another person who is not a relative.

1173. The order of charity as between those nearer to God and those
nearer to self is as follows:

(a) Objectively, we should esteem more those who are better, and desire
for them that higher degree of God’s favor which belongs to their
merits. But we may desire for those nearer to ourselves that they will
finally surpass in holiness those now better than they are, and thus
attain to a greater beatitude. Moreover, while we prefer in one respect
(i.e., that of holiness) a saintly person, who is a stranger, we prefer
in many respects (e.g., on account of relationship, friendship,
gratitude) another who is less holy.

(b) Subjectively, the love for those nearer to self is greater, that
is, more intense, more vividly felt. The preferences for those nearer
to self, therefore, far from being wrong or the expression of mere
natural love, are expressions of charity itself. For it is God’s will
that more love should be shown to those who are nearer to us: “If any
man have not care of his own, and especially of those of his house, he
hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel” (I Tim., v. 8).
Hence, charity itself inclines one to have more love for one’s own, and
it supernaturalizes filial piety, patriotism, and friendship.

1174. The order to be followed in the manifestation of charity will
correspond with the order of charity itself. (a) To those to whom
greater objective love is due, on account of their holiness, more
respect due to their excellence should be shown. (b) To those to whom
greater return of love is due on account of the benefits they have
shown (as parents, friends, etc.), more assistance should be given
spiritually and temporally. That is, if one had to choose between
helping either a relative or a stranger who was more virtuous, one
would have to decide in favor of the relative. (c) To those to whom
greater subjective love is due, more signs of affection (such as
visits) should be given.

1175. Exceptions to the above are the following cases, in which the
good of the better person should be preferred:

(a) if the common good requires such a preference. Thus, public
interest demands that in conferring positions, making appointments, or
voting for candidates, one should not be guided by family affections or
private friendships, but only by the common welfare; and one should
decide in favor of the better man;

(b) if the person nearer to self has forfeited his claims to
preference. Thus, a son who has treated his father with contempt and is
a wastrel, may be deprived of his share of the family goods in favor of
strangers who are self-sacrificing and who promote some holy cause.

1176. The order of charity between various kinds of natural
relationships is as follows: (a) the relationship that arises from
consanguinity is prior and more stable, since it arises from nature
itself and cannot be removed; (b) the relationship of friendship, since
it arises from one’s own choice, may be more congenial and may be
preferred even to kinship, when there is question of society and
companionship (Prov., xviii. 24).

1177. In practice, other things being equal, one should manifest more
love to a relative in those things that belong to the relationship.

(a) To those who are related by blood, corporal or temporal assistance
is more due. If one has to choose between helping one’s indigent
parents or an indigent friend, one should rather help one’s parents.

(b) To those who are spiritually related (e.g., pastor and parishioner,
director and penitent, god-parent and god-child), more spiritual
assistance in instruction, advice and prayer is due. Thus, a pastor is
supposed to be more solicitous about instructing his congregation than
his relatives who belong to another congregation.

(c) To those who are related by some special tie, political, military,
religious, etc., more is due in things political, military, religious,
etc., than to others. Thus, a soldier owes obedience to his officer,
and not to his father, in matters that pertain to army life; a priest
owes deference to an ecclesiastical superior in clerical matters, not
to his parents.

1178. Kinship, as being an older and more fundamental relationship,
should have precedence in assistance over any other kind of private
relationship in case of conflict and extreme necessity. (a) Thus, as
regards spiritual matters (e.g., calling a priest to give absolution),
if a parent and a spiritual father were both in extreme necessity,
one’s first duty would be to one’s parent. (b) As regards temporal
matters, if one has to choose between assisting one’s needy parents and
remaining in some relationship in which one cannot help them, one
should give up the relationship, if possible. Thus, a Religious is
allowed to return to the world, if his parents require his support.

1179. The order of charity as between kinsfolk gives preference of
course to the nearer relatives-parents, children, wife. Between these
nearer relatives there is also an order of preference, as follows: (a)
objectively (or with reference to the greater or less claim to respect
and honor), the order is: father, mother, wife, children; (b)
subjectively (or with reference to the greater or less intensity of
affection), the order is the reverse, namely: children, wife, parents.

1180. The following should be noted about this order of preference
between the members of one’s family: (a) the basis of preference given
is only kinship, and hence there may be other considerations to change
the order given (e.g., a pious mother is rightly more respected and
honored by her children than a worthless father); (b) there is no
notable excess in the claim of one member of the family over that of
another, and hence those whose affections do not follow the order given
are not guilty of serious sin.

1181. The order in which relatives have a claim on assistance when
several are in equal need is as follows: (a) in cases of ordinary need
the order is, first, the wife, for a man leaves his parents for his
wife (Gen., ii. 24), second, the children, for ordinarily parents must
provide for children, and not children for parents (II Cor., xii. 14),
third, parents; after these come in order, brothers and sisters, other
relatives, friends, fellow-citizens of the same locality or country,
all others; (b) in case of extreme need, however, parents are to be
preferred to all others, even to wife, children or creditors, since one
receives life from parents.

1182. The order of charity is also observed in heaven. (a) Thus, God is
loved above all, not only objectively, but also subjectively, for His
amiability is better understood and is not for a moment neglected. (b)
Self is loved less, objectively, than those who are higher, and more,
objectively, than those who are lower in glory: for the state of the
blessed is fixed, and each of them desires that which God wills. But,
subjectively, each loves self with a more intense love, since charity
itself inclines that one first direct self towards God, and then wish
the same for others. (c) Among neighbors, since love of them will be
entirely divine, the reason of earthly preferences (such as dependence
of one on another) having ceased, those who are more perfect in
holiness will be loved with deeper appreciation and affection than
those who are nearer by kinship or friendship.

1183. The Acts of Charity.--The principal act of the virtue of charity
is love. It is sometimes spoken of as benevolence, but in reality the
love of charity includes more than mere benevolence. (a) Thus,
benevolence wishes well to another according to a right judgment, and
so it pertains to charity, which rejoices in the perfections of God and
wishes beatitude to man; but (b) love is a union of affection with
another, which makes one regard him as another self, and so it pertains
to charity, which, as said above, is a supernatural friendship, One can
be benevolent towards a stranger and for a passing moment, but love is
intimate and lasting, from its nature.

1184. Exercise of the Act of Love.--(a) From benevolence proceed
gladness at the perfections of God (I Pet., i. 8), zeal for His
external glory (I Pet., iv. 11), grief over sin committed against Him
(Ps. lxxii. 3), obedience to His commandments (John, xiv. 15, 21, 23).
(b) From the union of affection proceed a warmth of inclination and a
personal interest in the things of God, so that one rejoices over the
divine perfections, not merely because one knows that this is a duty,
but because one feels the attachment of a friend for all that pertains
to God.

1185. Charity loves God: (a) for His own sake; (b) immediately; (c)
entirely; (d) without measure.

1186. We love God for His own sake, in the sense that there is nothing
distinct from God that causes Him to be loved. (a) Thus, there is no
ulterior end on account of which He is loved, for He is the Last End of
all; (b) there is no perfection different from His nature that makes
Him lovable, since He is perfection itself; (c) there is no source of
His goodness on account of which He is loved, since He is the Primal
Source.

1187. We may love God for the sake of reward (see 1161), on account of
benefits, and for fear of punishment, in the following senses: (a) the
eternal reward is the proximate end of our love of God: “Receiving the
end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls” (I Pet., i. 9);
but the end of salvation itself, and the Last End of love of God, is
God Himself; (b) temporal rewards, benefits received, and the wish to
avoid punishment, are dispositions that lead up to love of God, or to
progress in His love; but they are not the end of the act of love.

1188. Charity loves God immediately, and so differs from natural love
of God. (a) Thus, natural love of God rises from love of neighbor whom
we see to love of God whom we do not see, just as natural knowledge
rises from the creature to the Creator. (b) Charity, on the contrary,
tends to God first, and by reason of Him includes the neighbor in its
love.

1189. Charity loves God entirely. (a) But this does not mean that the
creature’s love is adequate to the amiability of God, for God is
infinite, whereas love in the most perfect creature must be finite. (b)
It means, with reference to the object of love, that charity loves
everything that pertains to God--each of the Divine Persons, all of the
divine perfections. (e) It means, with reference to the person who
loves, that he loves God to the best of his ability, by subordinating
all else to God and preferring His love to other loves. On earth,
charity gives to God the greatest objective love; in heaven, it also
gives Him the greatest subjective love (see 1129): “Thou shalt love the
Lord, thy God, with thy whole heart” (Deut., vi. 5).

1190. Charity loves God without measure, as St. Bernard says (_De
diligendo Deo_, cap. 1). God has fixed a degree of perfection in
charity beyond which a soul will not progress, but no one should set a
limit for himself, for love has to do with God, who is not measured,
but is the measure of all things.

(a) Hence, in the internal act of love, there is no possibility of
excess, since the Object is infinitely amiable and the End of all, and
so the greater the charity, the better it is.

(b) In external acts proceeding from charity, however, there is a
possibility of excess, since these acts are a means to an end, and have
to be measured by charity and reason. Thus, it would be excessive to
give more to strangers than to one’s needy parents, for this act would
not be according to the rule of charity. It would also be excessive to
perform works of charity, when one ought to be attending to household
duties, for reason requires that everything be done at its proper time
and place.

1191. The love of an enemy may be a better act than the love of a
friend, when there are special excellencies in the former love that are
not found in the latter. (a) Thus, if the enemy, all things considered,
is a better person than the friend, and if he is for that reason
objectively preferred, this is as it should be (see 1173). (b) If the
parties are of equal merit, an act of love towards the enemy on account
of supernatural charity is better than an act of love towards the
friend on account of natural affection: “If you love them that love
you, what reward shall you have? do not even the publicans this?”
(Matt, v. 46).

1192. If all other things are equal, the love of the friend is
essentially better, while the love of the enemy is better in some minor
respects. (a) Thus, the love of the friend has a better object, for the
friend who loves us is better than the enemy who hates us; it has also
an object that has a greater claim on charity, as being nearer to self.
Hence, it is essentially a better and more meritorious act. (b) The
love of the enemy is more difficult, and may thus be a more convincing
sign that one really loves God. But the fact that an act is more
difficult does not suffice to make it more meritorious, or else we
should have to say that the love of neighbor is more meritorious than
the love of God.




Art. 6: THE EFFECTS OF CHARITY

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 28-33.)

1193. Internal Effects of Charity.--There are three acts of the soul
that result from love, viz., joy, peace, mercy. (a) The joy of charity
is a repose or delight of the soul in the perfections of God and in the
union of self and the neighbor with Him: “The fruit of the Spirit is
charity, joy” (Gal., v. 22). (b) The peace of charity is the harmony of
man with God, self and the neighbor: “There is much peace to those that
love Thy law” (Ps. cxviii. 165). (c) Mercy is an inclination of the
will to relieve the misery of another; it follows from charity, for
love of the brotherhood “weeps with them that weep” (Rom., xii. 10, 15).

1194. Joy.--The precept of charity includes a precept of joy, and hence
the Apostle says: “Rejoice in the Lord always; again, I say, rejoice”
(Philip., iv. 4, 5). This joy of charity has the following properties:
(a) it is about good, not about iniquity, and it is not unrestrained;
it rejoices “in the Lord”; (b) it should not be discontinued or
interrupted by sin, but should rejoice “always.” It may, however, be
mixed with sorrow over sin or the delay of entrance into the presence
of God ( Rom., xii. 15; Ps. cxix. 5), for only in heaven will joy be
filled (John, xv. 11). St. Paul spoke of himself as “sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing” (II Cor., vi. 10).

1195. Peace.--The precept of charity also includes a precept of peace,
and our Lord commands: “Have peace among yourselves” (Mark, ix. 49).
Peace, like joy, has two properties: (a) it should be genuine (i.e., it
should be a contentment and agreement based on right), for there is a
false peace, of which Christ says: “I am not come to bring peace”
(Matt, x. 34), which rests in a good that is only apparent, and which
does not exclude great evil and anxiety (Wis., xiv. 22), (b) peace is
constant, for, as long as charity remains, there are friendly relations
with God and man, and order in the interior of the soul. Perfect
tranquility, it is true, is found only in heaven. On earth,
disturbances may arise in the lower part of the soul, or from without,
but the will continues in the peace of God (II Cor., i. 4).

1196. Reconciliation of a sinner to God is effected through an act of
perfect charity: “He who loves Me, will be loved by My Father and I
will love him” (John, xiv. 21). (a) Thus, sin is washed away, even
before Baptism or absolution, when the sinner makes an act of love of
God joined with a desire, at least implicit, of receiving the Sacrament
of Baptism or Penance. The act of love is not the cause, but the final
disposition introducing justification. (b) The punishment of sin is
forgiven, when one makes an act of love, or performs a good deed out of
love of God; but the degree of remission corresponds to the fervor of
the charity.

1197. Does the precept of peace demand unanimity of judgments?

(a) In matters of greater importance, there should be agreement in
judgments; else, there will not be that harmony of wills, desiring the
same things and disliking the same things, which constitute peace. In
necessary things, therefore, there should be unity of judgments: “I
beseech of you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you all speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms among you,
but that you be perfect in the same mind and in the same judgment” (I
Cor., i. 10).

(b) In matters of slight importance, difference of opinion does not
remove friendship, for each one thinks that his judgment will better
serve the good that is sought alike by all. We find that even very holy
men have disagreed on matters of opinion--for example, Paul and
Barnabas on the question whether or not Mark should be taken on the
second missionary journey (Acts, xv. 37), Jerome and Augustine on the
status of Mosaic observances after the death of Christ. Disputes may
offend against charity, however, if they become too personal or too
heated, as sometimes happens even to minds occupied with heavenly
things (e.g., theologians, spiritual writers).

1198. Reconciliation with enemies is necessary, in order that peace may
be maintained. It includes: (a) internally, the putting away of
thoughts and feelings contrary to concord; (b) externally, signs of
renewed charity, if there has been an open breach.

1199. The duty of reconciliation does not necessitate the forgiveness
of every kind of wrong suffered from an enemy--that is, it does not
always oblige one freely to remit the consequences of an enemy’s acts.
There are three kinds of wrong: (a) offenses, which are such
contradictions offered to the will of another as do not trespass on any
strict right or occasion any damage. Example: Balbus, who is in great
distress, asks his friend Titus to secure employment for him. Titus
could easily do this favor, but he refuses; (b) injuries, which are
violations of the strict right of another, but without damage. Example:
Claudia addresses Caia in very disrespectful language when no witnesses
are present; (c) damages, which are the taking from another of what is
his, or harm done to him as regards his soul, his life, his fame, or
his fortune. Examples are theft, scandal, assault and slander.

1200. Whether an offender asks pardon or not, one is obliged to forgive
the offense--that is, to put aside all aversion, indignation and
hatred: “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us” (Matt., vi. 12). But, granting that one desires salvation
for the offender as for others, shows the common signs of charity, and
is not prompted by hatred, the following are not required: (a) that one
so pardon the offense as to take the offender back to the same special
friendship as may have existed before; (b) that one overlook an injury
so as not to require satisfaction (and hence, without acting against
charity, Gaia may insist on an apology from Claudia for the
disrespectful language used by the latter); and (c) that one renounce
restitution or reparation for damage done one. No one is obliged to
give to another what is one’s own, and, if there is no other way of
securing one’s rights, one may have recourse to court. If the result of
prosecution will be punishment of the offender rather than restitution
(as in case of libel or slander), it is not uncharitable to prosecute
the offender, if one’s motive is the fulfillment of justice, the
prevention of the same wrong to others, or the honor of one’s family
(Lev., xix. 17).

1201. There are cases, however, in which charity requires one to
forgive a debt of satisfaction or restitution, namely, when this would
impose too heavy a burden on the offender, compared with the benefit
that would be derived therefrom. (a) Thus, restitution should not be
insisted on, when the offender is repentant and can ill afford to pay
the debt, and the party offended can easily get along without the
payment. (b) Punishment should not be insisted on, if the harm done the
offender or his family will be out of proportion to any good that may
result. (c) Prosecution should not be used, if a wrong can be amicably
adjusted out of court (I Cor., vi. 1).

1202. Who should make the advances towards reconciliation after a
rupture of charitable relations? (a) If only one party was the
offender, he should normally make the first move towards
reconciliation. It is of counsel, but not of precept, that the innocent
party ask for reconciliation, unless the circumstances require that he
should do so, as when the offended party can much more easily make the
advances, or when great scandal will arise, or when the offender will
become hardened in hate and lose his soul, if the party offended does
not make efforts for peace. (b) If both parties were offenders, he who
offended more seriously should make the advances. (c) If both offended
equally, he who was first to disturb the peace should also be first to
work for its restoration. (d) If it does not appear which of the
parties was more to blame in any of the foregoing ways, both are
equally bound.

1203. The manner of seeking reconciliation is as follows: (a)
Reconciliation can be sought either in person, or through an
intermediary who is a friend to both parties. (b) It can be sought
either explicitly (by expressing regret and asking pardon), or
implicitly (by a friendly conversation or favors shown). Generally
speaking, an inferior (e.g., a child) should explicitly request
reconciliation with a superior (e.g., a parent); but it will suffice
for a superior to seek forgiveness from an inferior implicitly.

1204. The time for seeking reconciliation is the earliest possible
moment: “If thou offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou remember
that thy brother hath anything against thee, leave there thy offering
before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and
then coming thou shalt offer thy gift” (Matt, v. 23, 24). (a) Thus,
internal reconciliation (i.e., repentance on the part of the offender
and forgiveness on the part of the one offended) should not be delayed,
and should precede any sacred action, such as offering a gift to God,
if this latter is to be acceptable and meritorious. (b) External
reconciliation (i.e., asking pardon and making satisfaction) and the
manifestation of forgiveness should be attended to as soon as the
circumstances of time and place permit. The resolve to be reconciled
externally is included in internal reconciliation, but prudence
dictates that one wait for the suitable occasion, lest precipitation
make matters worse.

1205. Mercy.--From charity results mercy, for he who loves his neighbor
as a friend in God, must grieve over the latter’s sorrows as if they
were his own. Our Lord commands: “Be ye merciful, as your Heavenly
Father is also merciful” (Luke, vi. 36). But not all compassion is true
mercy or supernatural.

(a) Thus, as regards the object that causes sorrow, true mercy grieves
over the evils that befall another against his will, such as sickness,
failure in an enterprise, or undeserved misfortune. But wilful evil,
such as sin, provokes not mercy, but rather indignation, although one
may compassionate sinners on account of the ills their sins bring on
them (Matt., ix. 36).

(b) As regards the internal cause of sorrow or sympathy, supernatural
mercy arises from the love of charity for the one suffering; natural
mercy, from the fear one has that a similar evil may overtake oneself,
or that oneself may suffer loss on account of another’s misfortune.

(c) As regards the act of mercy, it is to be noted that it proceeds
from the will, regulates the emotions, and is itself regulated by
reason. Thus, mercy differs from the sensible distress a refined person
experiences at the sight of suffering, which, though good in itself,
may never lead to a wish to alleviate sorrow. Thus, also, it differs
from unregulated sympathy, which bestows help or forgiveness
indiscriminately, without thought of the greater evils that may result;
it differs from sentimentality, which does not restrain tears and other
emotional expressions within due bounds. The virtue of mercy has a care
for the interests of justice, but mere pity, like prejudice, blinds the
mind to what is true and right.

1206. The causes of an unmerciful spirit are: (a) lack of charity
towards one who is in misery; (b) pride or too much prosperity, which
makes one feel that others suffer justly, or that one is above their
condition (Prov., xxviii. 4); (c) great misfortunes or fears that have
hardened one’s disposition, or made one self-centered.

1207. Mercy Compared with the Other Moral Virtues.--(a) Mercy, if taken
for the emotion of sympathy as regulated by reason, is inferior to
prudence and justice, which are perfections of the higher powers of the
soul (i.e., of the intellect and will). (b) Mercy, if taken for an act
of the will disliking the misery of another and moving one to remove
that misery, surpasses the other moral virtues; indeed, it may be said
to be something divine, and hence more than a virtue. Certainly, it is
the greatest of the virtues that have to do with the neighbor, for of
its nature it implies freedom from some defect and the relief of that
defect in others, which is not the case with other virtues. Thus, while
prudence directs acts and justice renders to others their due, these do
not of themselves remove ignorance or destitution in a neighbor.

1208. Mercy Compared with Charity.--(a) In itself (i.e., considered
precisely as to its essential notes of freedom from misery and relief
given to the miserable), mercy is the greatest of the virtues. For,
carried to its highest development, freedom from defect means infinite
perfection; while relief of defect in others means that, out of
infinite love for the Supreme Good, relief is poured out by God on His
creatures. Thus, in God mercy is an extension of the love God has
towards His own goodness, for the benefit of creatures, and is greater
than charity: “The mercy of God is above all His works” (Ps. cxliv. 9).

(b) In its subject (i.e., considered precisely as to the perfection it
brings to its possessor), mercy is inferior in creatures to charity.
For it is better to be united by love to the Supreme Good than to
remove evil in a creature: “Above all these things have charity” (Col,
iii. 14). Mercy is the sum of the Christian religion as far as external
works are concerned, but charity is the sum of Christianity as regards
internal acts.

1209. The Obligation of Mercy.-(a) The natural law itself inculcates
mercy, but those not influenced by divine revelation have not highly
esteemed it or practised it. Thus, Plato wished that all the poor might
be sent into exile. Virgil thought that freedom from pity was a sign of
wisdom; Seneca called mercy a vice of the soul; Nietzsche taught that
compassion has no place in the morality of the superman.

(b) The divine law commands mercy, especially in the New Testament.
Assistance of the poor, the widows, the orphans, the sick, the
captives, the slaves and other unfortunates is everywhere insisted on:
“I will show thee what the Lord requireth of thee: verily to do
justice, and to love mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy God”
(Mich., vi. 8).

1210. External Effects of Charity.--Three external effects of charity
will now be considered-beneficence, almsgiving and fraternal
correction. These are not distinct virtues, but only separate acts
pertaining to the virtue of charity and proceeding--like love, joy and
peace--from the same motive of love of God. (a) Thus, beneficence
naturally results from charity, since one of the acts of friendship is
to do good to one’s friend; (b) almsgiving is one of the special ways
in which beneficence is exercised; (c) fraternal correction is a
species of spiritual almsgiving.

1211. Beneficence.--Not every act of helping others is virtuous, nor is
all virtuous assistance called beneficence. (a) Thus, to assist others
in evil is maleficence, nor is it virtuous to help them with an evil
purpose. Examples: To give money to criminals to help them defeat the
law is participation in crime. To give presents to others in order to
receive a return of favor from them is cupidity (Luke, xiv. 12). (b) To
assist others or to give to them out of compassion for misery, is
mercy; to do so out of a sense of obligation, is justice; to do so out
of love of God, is beneficence.

1212. Beneficence is a duty, and like charity should be universal:
“While we have time, let us work good to all men” (Gal., vi. 10); “Do
good to them that hate you” (Matt., v. 44). But this does not mean that
no discrimination is to be used in beneficence, or that impossibilities
are required.

(a) Not every kind of activity in which others are engaged is deserving
of assistance, not every kind of suffering of others may be removed.
Examples: Criminals or enemies of the State are not to be assisted in
their wrongdoing, but one may attempt to bring them to better conduct;
one who has been justly sentenced to prison may not be aided to escape,
but he may be visited and consoled and given religious assistance.

(b) Not all can be helped individually; even the richest and most
generous person can benefit only a small percentage of those who are
deserving. Charity requires, however, that one be so disposed that one
would help all individually, if it were possible, and that one does
help all generally, by praying for both Catholics and non-Catholics.

1213. Since it is impossible to help all individually, beneficence
should be regulated by the order of charity (see 1174 sqq.), and
particular good should be done to those with whom on account of
conditions of time or place one is more closely associated. Hence, the
following general rules are given:

(a) In benefits that pertain to a particular kind of relationship; one
should give the preference, other things being equal, to those with
whom one has that relationship. Examples: To make a banquet for another
is a benefit pertaining to friendship, and hence should be shown to one
who is a friend, rather than to one who is a business associate, but
not an intimate. To support another person is a benefit pertaining to
kinship, and hence should be shown to a parent, rather than to a
stranger.

(b) In benefits given to those with whom one has the same kind of
relationship, one should give the preference, other things being equal,
to those nearer in relationship. Example: In dispensing alms, one
should help one’s own family rather than distant relatives.

1214. If other things are not equal, the foregoing rules must sometimes
be reversed.

(a) When the common good is involved, preference should be given those
who represent it, even though others are nearer to one as regards
private good. Hence, a citizen should help the fortunes of his adopted
country rather than those of his mother country; in a civil war one
should aid rather one’s comrades than one’s kinsmen who are on the
opposite side.

(b) When a supreme good of a private person is at stake, one should
prefer to help him, even if a stranger, rather than another who is a
friend, or relative, but who is not in the same distress. Example: One
should give one’s loaf to a man dying of starvation rather than to
one’s own father, who is hungry but not starving.

(c) When the means with which a benefit is bestowable belong to
another, one must prefer to give back what belongs to the other, even
if this person is a stranger, rather than use it for the good of a
friend or relative. Thus, if a person has stolen money or has borrowed
money from a stranger, he must return it to the owner, rather than make
a present of it to his own wife. An exception would be the case in
which the wife was in dire necessity, whereas the owner was not; but
the duty of restitution would remain for the future.

1215. No general rule can be laid down for all cases in which one party
is nearer to self and the other party more in need, and many such cases
have to be decided according to prudent judgment in view of all the
circumstances. It should be noted that, though wife and children are
nearer to one than parents, the latter have a greater claim on charity
when they are in equally extreme necessity, on account of the supreme
benefit of life received from them. But ordinarily one is bound rather
to provide for one’s children (II Cor., xii. 14).

1216. Almsgiving.--Almsgiving is defined: “Assistance to one who is in
need, given out of compassion and for the love of God.” Hence, this act
pertains to various virtues. (a) It is elicited by the virtue of mercy,
which means that compassion for misery is the immediate principle which
produces almsgiving. (b) It is commanded by the virtue of charity,
which means that love of God is the remote principle or end of an alms,
for, as said above (see 1205), mercy itself is an effect of charity (I
John, iii. 17). (c) Secondarily, it may also be commanded by other
virtues. Thus, if a person gives an alms to satisfy for his sins, he
performs an act of justice; if he gives in order to honor God, he
performs an act of religion; if he gives without undue grief over the
loss of what he gives, he practises liberality.

1217. Qualities Recommended for Almsgiving.--(a) Alms should not be
given ostentatiously (Matt, vi. 2 sqq.), though it is often edifying
that they receive publicity (Matt., v. 16); (b) they should be given
cheerfully (II Cor., ix. 7).

1218. Forms of Almsgiving.--(a) In the strict sense, an alms is a gift
made without any obligation of payment or return; (b) in a wide sense,
almsgiving includes selling on credit as a favor to a poor customer, a
loan granted at a low rate of interest or without interest, help in
securing employment, etc. Thus, if a poor man is sufficiently helped by
the use of an article, there is no need of making him a present of it.

1219. Almsgiving is to be distinguished, also, from mere giving. (a)
Thus, assistance given the poor out of a bad motive (e.g., to lead them
away from their religion, to induce them to crime) is sinful; (b)
assistance given the poor out of a merely natural good motive (e.g.,
pity for their sufferings) is philanthropy, but not charity (I Cor.,
xiii. 3), and may coexist with the state of hatred of God.

1220. Corporal alms, in the form of bodily necessaries given freely in
themselves or in their money equivalent, are of as many kinds as there
are bodily needs. (a) Hence, the common necessities of food, drink,
clothing and shelter should be provided as alms to the starving and to
those who lack sufficient clothing, or who are without a home. (b)
Special necessities, whether internal (such as sickness) or external
(such as persecution or imprisonment), should be relieved or assuaged
by remedies, visits, protection or relief. (c) The necessity of the
body after death is that it be cared for with the honor which the
memory of the deceased deserves, and hence burial of the dead is
numbered among the corporal alms.

1221. Thus, there are seven corporal works of mercy. (a) Those that
pertain to the needs of the body during life are mentioned by our Lord
in Matt., xxv. 35, 36. (b) The burial of the dead is praised in
scripture as a good work, as we see in the cases of Tobias (Tob., i,
ii, xii), and of those who buried our Lord (Matt, xxvi. 12, xxvii. 57
sqq.).

1222. Spiritual alms, consisting of assistance given those who suffer
want in mind or spirit, are either prayers, by which divine aid is
asked for them, or various acts by which human aid is conferred. These
acts are also of two kinds, and constitute seven spiritual works of
mercy.

(a) The defects from which a soul suffers, and which are not moral,
include ignorance in the intellect, doubt in the practical judgment,
and sadness in the affections; and hence the acts of almsgiving for
such cases are instruction, counsel, and comfort.

(b) The defects of soul which are moral are the guilt of sin and its
consequences--that is, the offense given and the burdens that result
for the sinner or others. The corresponding spiritual alms are
admonition against sin, pardon of the offense done to self, patience in
bearing with the difficult ways of others, especially if they err
through infirmity, or willingness in helping them to bear the
consequences of their errors (Rom., xv. 1).

1223. The giving of spiritual alms may suppose superiority or authority
in the giver over the receiver, or a certain procedure to be followed;
hence, in the administration of spiritual benefits, the due order of
time, place and persons has to be remembered. (a) Thus, in the
instruction of the ignorant, it is not every kind of ignorance that is
a defect, but only the ignorance of things one must know; and it is not
every person who is to give the needed instruction. (b) In the
correction of sinners, it is not every kind of reproof that is to be
used, but gentleness and secret admonition should be employed where
possible (Prov., xxvii. 6).

1224. Comparison of Corporal and Spiritual Alms.--(a) Spiritual alms
are better, because their nature is higher and they are of greater
benefit to the recipient, even though he appreciates them less. Thus,
it is better to enjoy peace of mind than to feast sumptuously. (h)
Corporal alms are sometimes more necessary in a particular case, and
hence they should be attended to first. Thus, for one suffering from
hunger food is more necessary than words of comfort (James, ii. 15, 16).

1225. Though corporal alms are not spiritual in the assistance they
give, they are spiritual in their effects. (a) Thus, they bless the
recipient corporally, by relieving his hunger or other need; (b) they
bless the giver spiritually, since God will reward his charity
(Ecclus., xxiv, 13, 14), and the person helped will pray for his
benefactor (ibid., 15).

1226. The Duty of Giving Alms.--(a) The natural law requires that we do
to others as we would be done by, and there is no one who does not wish
that help be rendered him if he falls into need. Moreover, the common
welfare requires that the rich assist the poor, for otherwise there
will be discontent and disorder. Hence, even unbelievers are not exempt
from the obligation of almsgiving. (b) The divine law, in both Old and
New Testaments, commands almsgiving: “Give alms out of thy substance,
and turn not away thy face from any poor person” (Tob., iv. 7); “Depart
from Me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, for I was hungry, and you
gave Me not to eat” (Matt., xxv. 41-42); “Let us love, not in word, nor
in tongue, but in deed and in truth” (I John, iii. 18). Tobias, Dorcas,
Cornelius, and Zacheus are praised for their charitable gifts.

1227. Almsgiving, being an affirmative commandment, does not oblige for
every moment of time, but only when right reason calls for it on
account of the state of the giver or of the receiver.

(a) The state of the giver requires him to give alms only when he has a
superfluity of goods, for no one is bound to deprive himself of what is
necessary for his own use (see 1164, 1169). John the Baptist said to
the people: “He that hath two coats, let him give to him that hath
none; and he that hath meat, let him do in like manner” (Luke, iii.
11). “That which remaineth,” says our Lord, “give as alms” (Luke, xi.
41).

(b) The state of the receiver gives him a claim on charity, when he is
in necessity and unable to help himself. Temporal goods, according to
the will of God, are for the benefit of the whole human race; and,
while the ownership of particular goods belongs to the rightful
possessor, he should not withhold the use of them from those who are in
need, when he has more than he needs for his own use. Neither is it
necessary that one be asked for an alms; one is obliged to give it when
one knows that one’s neighbor is in want, though unable or ashamed to
beg for help.

1228. It is not a precept, therefore, but only a counsel, that one give
alms in other cases. (a) Thus, when one is in equal need oneself and
has no superfluous goods, one may give to another; (b) when one’s
neighbor is not in need, or is able to help himself, one may still give
to him out of charity, if he is deserving (see 1169).

1229. Superfluities are those goods that remain over and above what are
necessary for life, or the maintenance of one’s state of life justly
acquired and socially useful.

(a) Necessaries of life are the goods one must have to provide food,
clothing and home for oneself and one’s family. Among necessaries of
life we may include what one has to set aside for old age, sickness,
increase of family, and the future sustenance of dependents who will
need it (II Cor., xii. 14). But they should not be extended to include
imaginary cases, or all the possible cases of personal need that may
arise in the future; otherwise, one is guilty of that exaggerated
solicitude for the morrow which our Lord forbids (Matt, vi. 34).

(b) Necessaries of state are the goods a person must have to keep up
his position and that of his family according to the standard of living
of his class. This includes provision for the education and advancement
of one’s children, for hospitality, adornment of home, and the care and
improvement of one’s business; but it does not include provision for
excessive pleasures or luxuries, or improbable future opportunities of
bettering one’s condition; otherwise, even the wealthiest person might
say that all his money was tied up and that he had no superfluous goods.

1230. What is necessary for the decency of particular stations in life?
(a) This does not consist in any fixed amount, for, even when
considerable additions to or subtractions from a person’s wealth have
been made, he may retain and support the same social rank. (b) It
consists, therefore, in the amount sufficient for him to maintain,
according to the opinion of prudent men, what is becoming in one of his
class. Thus, one’s position may require that one do much entertaining
or keep up an expensive household, or it may require only that one live
moderately.

1231. The giving in alms of goods for which the giver himself has need
is governed by the following rules:

(a) Necessaries of life should be given away to another, as a matter of
precept, if the common good is bound up with the life of that other,
but not with one’s own life; they may be given away to another, as a
matter of counsel, when the common good does not require it, but the
higher good of virtue invites one to sacrifice one’s life for one’s
neighbor (probable opinion). Examples: One should give away one’s last
loaf to save the life of a leader on whom the salvation of his people
depends. One may make the same sacrifice, if one is single and without
dependents, and another is married and has a dependent family. But one
may not give away what is necessary for the life of one’s family (I
Tim., v. 8).

(b) Necessaries of state, at least in part (see 1251), should be given
away to another, as a matter of precept, if the public good or the life
of a private individual are at stake, or if that which is given in alms
can be easily recovered and will now prevent a very grave calamity;
they may be given away, as a matter of counsel, if the higher good of
virtue invites one to embrace voluntary poverty: “If thou wouldst be
perfect, go sell all that thou hast and give to the poor” (Matt., xix.
21). Examples: One should offer one’s fortunes in support of one’s
government, if in some crisis the nation cannot otherwise be saved. One
may give up riches and become poor in order to follow Christ in the
religious life.

1232. Superfluities of one’s state are the goods from which the precept
of almsgiving requires that assistance ordinarily be given. But the
mere fact that one has a superfluity does not oblige one to give alms.
As in every virtuous act, so also in almsgiving there must be not only
an object according to reason, but also circumstances according to
reason. Hence, one who has a superfluity is bound to give alms only
when the proper conditions of time, place, person, etc., are present.
(a) As regards time, a person is not obliged to devote to almsgiving
the time that is needed for other duties. (b) As to persons, a person
is not obliged to give alms, if there is no needy person known to him.

1233. As to need, we may distinguish three classes of persons:

(a) Those in apparent need are such as pretend poverty, sickness, or
misfortune, in order to get sympathy and financial aid (e.g.,
professional beggars). Alms should not be given persons of this kind,
since they take what would be given to the really poor and needy.
Rather they should be exposed and punished.

(b) Those in real need through choice should not be helped, if they
take to begging because they are too lazy to work, or find it
profitable to live off others; for they have no right to beg, being
able to help themselves, and it would be wrong to encourage them in
idleness and an imposition on others (II Thess., iii. 10). But those
who are voluntarily poor for Christ’s sake, whether they belong to a
religious order or not, are worthy of respect and it is meritorious to
assist them.

(c) Those who are in real need against their will, should be assisted;
for, even though they became destitute through their own fault, they
are in fact unable to help themselves now.

1234. Regarding money obtained under the false pretense of poverty and
the duty of restitution, the following rules may be given: (a) If a
person obtains considerable alms by pretending to be blind, disabled,
in great want, etc., and he is not afflicted or in need, he should give
back the money to the donors or, if this is impossible, to the poor,
since the donors wished to help the poor, not to encourage idlers. (b)
If one obtains only a small amount under a false pretense of poverty,
some moralists say there is no duty of restitution, since the donor may
be presumed to give unconditionally in the case of minute sums;
likewise, if a beggar is really poor but exaggerates his need, it does
not seem that he is bound to restitution, for those who give alms expect
a certain amount of romancing from tramps and other professional
beggars.

1235. What is one’s duty in cases of doubtful need? (a) Minute
inquiries are inexpedient, since the really deserving are often
unwilling to publish their needs; (b) refusal of alms except in cases
where one is certain of the need, is not a good general rule to follow,
since it is a less evil that an unworthy person be helped than that a
worthy one be refused.

1236. There are three degrees of corporal need (cfr. 1165). (a) A
person is said to be in extreme need, when he is in manifest danger of
losing his life, if help is not given him at once. This does not mean,
however, that a person is not in extreme need until he is breathing his
last breath; for at that moment he is beyond the reach of human aid.
(b) A person is in grave need, when he is in probable danger of death,
or is in manifest danger of some very serious misfortune, such as
severe sickness, amputation of some member, long and bitter
imprisonment, insanity, loss of good name, reduction from wealth to
poverty, destruction of home by fire, etc. (c) A person is in common
need, when he suffers the inconvenience of poverty, such as being
obliged to beg, to deprive himself of many things, to wear poor clothes
or to eat ordinary victuals, but is not in danger of any serious loss.

1237. Rules on Giving Alms from the Superfluities of One’s State.--(a)
To those who are in extreme or grave necessity alms must be given in
each individual case, for these cases are rare, and the persons in need
have a personal claim on one’s charity when this is the sole means of
saving them from death or other great evil. Example: Last year Titus
saved a mother from death and her child from disease by giving his
money and services free of charge. This would not exempt him from the
duty of doing a like charity, if a like necessity presents itself now.

(b) To those who are in common necessity alms must be given from time
to time--now to one, now to another, as prudence dictates--but there is
no obligation for an individual case. Even the richest man could not
give to all who are in common need, and their want is not so pressing
that any one of them can be said to have an individual claim.

1238. Gravity of the Obligations to Give Alms.--(a) For cases of
extreme and grave necessity, the obligation of almsgiving is grave.
There is general agreement among theologians on this point, since the
loss suffered by the neighbor is serious and the withholding of help
indicates a lack of charity (I John, iii. 17). Example: The priest and
the levite who passed by the wounded man on the road to Jericho were
guilty, from the nature of their act, of mortal sin.

(b) For cases of common necessity, the obligation of almsgiving, as it
appears, is also grave; for it seldom happens that one is called on to
assist those who are in extreme or grave necessity, whereas almsgiving
is inculcated as an ordinary duty, and the reasons given by our Lord in
Matt., xxv. 41-46, for exclusion from heaven seem to be neglect of alms
in common necessity. But some theologians hold that the obligation is
only light, since the need is light; and, since these authorities are
numerous and of repute, a confessor could not refuse absolution to a
rich man who refused on principle to give anything to those in common
necessity. Such a one should be advised, rather than reproved, on this
point.

1239. From what was said above, the following conclusions may be drawn
about the gravity of the sin of refusing alms: (a) It is certainly a
mortal sin to refuse alms to one in extreme or grave need, and probably
also a grave sin to refuse ever to give alms to those in common need,
(b) It is not a mortal sin to refuse an alms in a particular case, if
one is not sure of the obligation (e.g., if there is doubt about one’s
ability to give the alms or the other’s need), or if it seems that
others will give assistance, or that the need will disappear, or that
one will suffer some serious inconvenience by giving, etc.

1240. Refusal of Alms and Restitution.--(a) The mere refusal of an alms
does not oblige one to make restitution. For restitution is the giving
back to another of what strictly belongs to him, and it cannot be said
that a poor person has a strict right to a gift from another. A
violation of charity may be gravely sinful, and yet not oblige to
restitution. (b) The refusal of an alms, if joined with injustice, does
oblige one to make restitution. Thus, if by threats or force one
prevents a starving man from taking the food that has been denied him,
injustice is committed; for in extreme necessity one has the strict
right to take what is necessary, and reparation should be made if this
is prevented.

1241. Alms given from ill-gotten goods are sometimes lawful, sometimes
unlawful.

(a) If the acquisition of the goods was unjust, because they belong to
another and the present possessor has no right to keep them, it is not
lawful to give them as alms, for they must be returned to the owner. An
exception would have to be made, however, for the case of extreme
necessity, for in such a case the person in danger of death would have
a right prior to that of the owner not in need. Example: It is unlawful
to give stolen money as an alms to the poor, when one is able to
restore it to the rightful owner.

(b) If the acquisition of the goods was unjust, because both giver and
receiver acted against law and forfeited their rights to possession,
the former has no claim to restitution, nor the latter to retention,
and the goods ought to be devoted to alms. Example: If a simoniacal
transaction is forbidden under pain of loss of the price paid and
received, the receiver is obliged to give the money to the poor.

(c) If the acquisition was not unlawful, but the manner through which
it was made was unlawful, the gain is shameful, but still it belongs to
the one who has earned it, and may be devoted to alms. Example: Titus
hired Balbus to work on Sundays. The violation of the Sunday law was a
sin, but the labor given was serviceable to Titus and difficult to
Balbus. Hence, the latter is not bound to give back the money, but may
keep it and use it for a good purpose.

1242. Though shameful gain may be used for almsgiving, it should not be
devoted to sacred purposes, when this will cause scandal or be
irreverent to religion. Thus, the chief priests would not accept the
“blood money” of Judas for the use of the temple (Matt., xxvii. 6),
because the law forbade the offering of gifts that were an abomination
to the Lord (Deut., xxiii. 18; Ecclus., xxxiv. 23).

1243. The Proceeds of Gambling and Almsgiving.--(a) Profits made from
gambling may not be used for alms, when one is bound to restore them to
the loser. Thus, according to natural law he who wins money at cards or
similar games from a minor or other person who has not the right to
dispose of money, or who wins through fraud, must give back the
winnings. Likewise, restitution is due according to some, if the civil
law makes such aleatory contracts null and void; but others deny this.
(b) Profits made from gambling may be devoted to alms, when according
to law one has a right to them, as when one has played for recreation,
with moderation and with fairness to the loser.

1244. Persons who may give alms are all those who have a right to
dispose of goods as gifts. Others who have no such general right (e.g.,
religious, wives, children and servants), may also give alms as
follows: (a) They may give alms from any goods that belong to them, and
of which they have the control. Thus, a wife may give alms from money
which is her own, by inheritance, earnings, etc. (b) They may give alms
from such goods as are placed in their charge and dispensation. Thus,
the procurator of a religious house has the right to give alms with
permission of his superior and according to his Constitution (Canon
537). A religious who is a parish priest may administer and dispense
parish alms (Canon 630, Sec.4). (c) They may give alms with express or
implied permission. Thus, children may give articles of food to the
poor, when their parents consent. (d) They may give alms without
permission in a case of extreme need. Thus, a wife could make use of
her husband’s money without his consent, if this should be necessary to
save a life.

1245. The right of a wife to give alms from her husband’s earnings is
as follows: (a) from the money given her for the support of herself and
the family, the wife may give reasonable alms; (b) from the common
money of the family she may give alms with her husband’s express or
presumed consent. But, if he is miserly and unwilling to give alms, she
may nevertheless use what is reasonable according to the family
resources for almsgiving (e.g., in helping her impoverished parents).

1246. The right of servants to give alms from the goods of their
employer is as follows: (a) the rule is that servants have no right to
give away anything that belongs to their employer without his express
permission, for, if permission could be presumed, the property of
employers would not be safe; (b) an exception to the rule is made for
such things as are to be thrown away (e.g., leavings of the table),
since if they are given in alms the proprietor suffers no loss.

1247. Since charity should be universal, no class of persons, such as
strangers, unbelievers or sinners, may be excluded from the benefit of
almsgiving (Matt, v. 45). However, charity is also well ordered, and
hence there is a preference to be observed, as follows:

(a) Other things being equal, one should favor those who are nearer to
oneself by bonds of kinship, friendship, etc., since their claim on
one’s charity is greater. Charity begins at home.

(b) If other things (such as worthiness, need or public utility) are on
the side of those not related by kinship, friendship, etc., the order
of preference may be reversed. Thus, if a person had to choose between
helping a distant relative for whom he was not specially responsible,
and who was a worthless fellow, or who was not in great need or who was
not of great value to the community, and helping a stranger, who was
most deserving, or in dire distress, or of great value to the
community, the latter should be assisted rather than the former.

(c) In case of two strangers in equal poverty, one should help first
the one who is more worthy or who feels his distress more. Thus, a
person who is poor through misfortune is more deserving than one who
gambled his money away; those who were once wealthy feel the sufferings
of poverty more than those who are inured to a life of privation.

1248. Is it permissible for one appointed to distribute alms to keep
some himself, if he is really poor? (a) If the persons are designated
to whom the alms are to be given, the distributor must give only to
them; (b) if it is left to the discretion of the distributor, he may
keep a reasonable alms for himself.

1249. The amount that should be given in alms has to be measured
according to the income of the giver and the need of the receiver.

(a) As to the income of the giver, he should give in proportion to his
income: “According to thy ability be merciful. If thou have much, give
abundantly; if thou have little, take care even so to bestow willingly
a little” (Tob., iv. 9). A rich man who spends more in the barber shop
on cosmetics, etc., than he gives to the poor, and a poor man who gives
more towards alms than to the feeding of his own family, are not giving
according to their means.

(b) As to the need of the receiver, a person should give his share
towards providing for the case before him. Thus, if there is no one
else who can or will give, and a neighbor is in grave necessity, a
charitable person will bear the whole expense, as was done by the good
Samaritan. But if the necessity is ordinary (as in the case of street
beggars), or there are others who will help, a smaller alms suffices.
Steady employment is a better charity than temporary doles, inasmuch as
it gives permanent assistance.

1250. Hence, in the following cases alms are excessive: (a) When,
outside the instances given in 1231, one gives away all the necessaries
of one’s life or station. The poor widow who gave all her living (Luke,
xxi. 1-4) is praised, but doubtless she was able somehow to obtain
enough to provide for her own life. (b) Alms are excessive when one
gives from one’s superfluities so much that the recipients are spoiled
and encouraged to do nothing for themselves, For the purpose of
almsgiving is not that those who have wealth be impoverished and others
enabled to live in luxury, but that the poor be relieved of suffering
and the rich gain the merit of charity (II Cor., viii. 13).

1251. Regarding the obligation of giving all the goods of one’s station
in life or of one’s superfluities, the following points should be noted:

(a) Some theologians hold that, in a case of extreme necessity, one is
bound to give all the goods necessary to one’s state of life, since a
neighbor’s life is a more important good than one’s own position in
life. Others deny this on the ground that one is not bound, even for
preserving one’s own life, to have recourse to extraordinary means and
so lose the rank and style of living one has. Thus, a self-supporting
workingman would not be obliged to reduce himself to beggary in order
to prolong the life of a dying person. A well-to-do person is not
obliged to sell his office, conveyance, books, and other things needed
for his business or profession, in order to rescue a captive held for
ransom by bandits.

(b) There are theologians who hold that one is bound to give away all
one’s superfluous wealth in alms, even apart from cases of extreme or
grave necessity; but others teach that, while this is of counsel, it is
not obligatory, since the needs of the poor will be sufficiently
relieved if all who have means give something from their superfluities.
Moreover, the retention of some superfluous goods is necessary for the
promotion of industrial and commercial enterprises, and, by increasing
national wealth, this policy indirectly benefits the poor.

1252. Ecclesiastical law, however, requires all clerics who enjoy a
benefice to give all that remains over and above from the returns of
the benefice, after they have provided for their own decent
maintenance, to the poor or to pious causes. This obligation is held as
grave. It will be treated below when we come to the special duties of
the clergy.

1253. Is there any definite amount or percentage, then, which should be
contributed to alms?

(a) For a case of extreme or grave necessity, one should contribute
enough, according to one’s ability, either in conjunction with others
or alone (if others will not help), to give relief. Thus, if a neighbor
is about to die of starvation, a charitable man will give food free of
charge. If a poor man is about to be treated unjustly, a charitable
lawyer will give him advice without charge. But it is not necessary
that one provide extraordinary remedies or helps--for example, that one
pay the expenses of a trip to Europe for a poor person whose health
would be benefitted by the travel.

(b) For cases of common necessity, St. Alphonsus held that one should
give two per cent of what remains from the yearly income after the
necessities of life and station have been taken care of. But other
moralists believe that today the amount cannot be fixed mathematically,
and that only the general direction can be given that one should be
generous according to one’s means, and regulate one’s yearly alms
according to the prevalence of poverty.

1254. Is it better to give a little to many, or much to one person in
need? (a) If the one person is in great need, and others are only in
slight need, it is better to give to the one in great need. Example: If
one has ten dollars to give in alms, it is better to buy an overcoat
for Titus who is shivering from the cold, than to give ten one-dollar
bills to ten men who need new collars and neckties. (b) If the need is
equal, it is better to divide the alms, for thus more distress is
alleviated and the danger of spoiling a recipient with overmuch bounty
is avoided. Example: Caius has $30,000 to give in charity and there are
three deserving institutions of charity known to him, all of which are
in great need--a hospital, an orphan asylum and a school. He ought to
divide his money between the three.

1255. The Time for Giving Alms.-(a) One should give at one time all the
amount of one’s alms for a certain period, if one is able to do this,
and there is a need that calls for it--“He gives twice who gives
quickly” (Prov., iii. 28)--for the poor may perish or may be driven to
acts of desperation or violence, if help is postponed. (b) One may
distribute one’s almsgiving if there is no urgent call for it--that is,
one may make partial contributions at various times, retaining
meanwhile money for almsdeeds in order to invest it for future
charities, or to await greater needs to which it may be applied, etc.

1256. The Manner of Giving Alms.--(a) One gives alms directly when one
ministers relief personally to the needy, giving food to the starving
and medicine to the sick, helping to put out a fire, etc. (b) One gives
alms indirectly when one pays taxes for the support of alms-houses,
public hospitals, orphan asylums, homes for the aged, the insane, etc.;
when one contributes to charitable collections or drives or to
organizations for relief (such as the St. Vincent de Paul Society);
when one assists or promotes movements for the free education of those
who cannot pay, for the betterment of living and working condition of
laborers, for security against loss of employment, pensions for the
aged, etc.

1257. Public charity done by the State is useful and necessary under
the conditions of modern life, but it does not and cannot take the
place of charity done by the Church or by private individuals.

(a) State-administered charity does not reach all, or even the most
deserving, cases of need. Hence, those who pay their taxes for the
support of state charities are not thereby exempted from the obligation
of contributing to cases they may meet, especially of extreme or grave
necessity. The payment of these taxes, however, diminishes need, and so
it also diminishes the amount one is bound to give in alms.

(b) State charity provides for the corporal needs of the recipient, and
it is imposed as compulsory on the giver. Hence, it cannot take the
place of alms given by the Church or by individuals that will care for
both soul and body, and that are given cheerfully and received
gratefully.

1258. Fraternal Correction.--Fraternal correction is defined: “An act
of charity and mercy by which one uses suitable words or other means in
order to convert one’s neighbor from sin to virtue.”

(a) Thus, it is an act of charity, for it is a love of our neighbor and
the desire of his spiritual welfare that prompts this correction.
Hence, the admonition of a sinner for his own good differs from a
correction administered to a wrongdoer for the good of another or of
the public; the former is fraternal correction and is an act of
charity, while the latter is judicial correction and is an act of
justice.

(b) Fraternal correction is an act of mercy, for, just as feeding the
hungry and other corporal alms remove bodily misery, so does admonition
of sinners remove spiritual misery.

(c) Fraternal correction uses suitable words or other means, for while
it proceeds from charity and mercy, it must be regulated by prudence.
It is not an easy matter to correct another successfully, and hence the
need of good judgment as to the means to be employed, whether they
shall be words or equivalent signs (e.g., sad looks, a gesture of
disapproval, a change of subject of a sinful conversation, or refusal
of help), and whether one shall use reproof, instruction, counsel, or
warning.

(d) Fraternal correction aims at turning a neighbor from sin to virtue.
It is the proper remedy for sins of negligence, as judicial correction
is for sins of malice. It is applied, also, chiefly to the cure of sin
that has already been committed; but it should be extended so as to
include the prevention of sin in the future, since there is no less an
obligation of preventing than of removing sin. Hence, those who are in
dangerous occasions receive fraternal correction when a charitable
warning is given.

(e) Fraternal correction is given to a neighbor (i.e., to an
individual), and so it differs from the general censure of vice that is
given by preachers, whose duty it is to correct sins that are
prevalent, provided this be done prudently, in such a way as to effect
good and not harm. Unpopularity or other such handicaps do not excuse a
preacher from the duty of correction.

1259. Fraternal correction is a grave duty, and more important than
that of almsgiving. (a) The natural law requires that a person should
do unto others as he would wish them to do unto himself, and everyone
ought to wish that, if he needs correction, it will be given him. Even
the pagans proclaimed the need of correction. Seneca desired to have a
monitor who, by advice and reproof, would guard him against the dangers
of evil examples and conversations; and Plautus said that a friend who
refuses to chide the faults of his friend is himself worthy of blame.

(b) The divine positive law also commands that one should correct one’s
brother in order to save him from another offense (Ecclus., xix. 13,
14), and to win him back to good (Matt. xviii. 15), that the spiritual
should instruct with mildness those who have committed some
transgression (Gal, vi. 1), that a sinner should not be treated as an
enemy, but admonished as a brother (II Thess., iii. 15).

1260. Does the duty of fraternal correction oblige one to go out and
seek a person who is living a life of sin? (a) If the sinner is under
one’s care, so that one is responsible for him, there is a duty to seek
him as long as there is hope of amendment; for the good shepherd goes
after the lost sheep (Matt., xviii. 12, 13). Hence, parents, pastors and
superiors must try to win back their subjects from the ways of sin. (b)
If the sinner is not under one’s care, there is no duty to seek him
out; for obligations that are owed to our neighbor in general, but not
to any determinate person, do not require that we go out to look for
the persons to be aided, but only that we aid those whom we meet.
Hence, a private person is not obliged to frequent the haunts of vice
and crime in order to reform those who are there; but the community at
large has duties regarding such cases.

1261. Since the precept of fraternal correction is affirmative, it does
not oblige for every time and place; acts of virtue must be so
performed that not only the object and the motive shall be good, but
the circumstances also should be suitable. But the object and motive of
correction (viz., the conversion of a sinner) are primary, and the
circumstances of time, place, etc., secondary considerations. (a)
Hence, correction is good and a duty when it will serve to convert or
improve a sinner, now or later, although it may be imperfect as to some
of the circumstances. (b) Correction is not good, nor a duty, when it
will not serve to convert the sinner, even though other circumstances
would seem to call for it (Ecclus., xxxii. 6). Consequently, a person
ought not to correct when either he or the other person is under the
influence of anger, lest matters be made worse. This, of course, is
said of fraternal, not of judicial correction; for a judge or other
superior must condemn even when the culprit will not be made better, in
order to restrain him from evil and to provide for the common good, the
protection of justice, and the avoidance of scandal.

1262. In the following cases fraternal correction defeats its own
purpose: (a) when the sinner will not be bettered by the correction,
for his continuance in sin will become graver by reason of his
rejection of the admonition; (b) when the sinner will become hardened
and embittered by correction, and as a result commit more numerous or
more serious sins. Thus, if one knows that a blasphemer is only made
worse by scolding or remonstrances, it is a sin to attempt to correct
him as to those ways: “Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate thee” (Prov.,
ix. 8).

1263. The duty of fraternal correction depends, therefore, on the
knowledge or opinion one has about the success it will have. Hence, the
following cases may occur: (a) If one is certain that the correction
will be beneficial, one should give it; if one is certain it will not
be beneficial, one should omit it. (b) If it is likely that the
admonition will be profitable, and certain that it will not be
positively harmful, it should be given, for a physician in order to
help a sick person should give a remedy that is harmless, even though
only probably beneficial, if there is nothing else that can be done.
(c) If it is doubtful whether the admonition will do any good, and also
doubtful whether it will do harm (e.g., when one is dealing with a
stranger, whose character one does not know), one should weigh the good
and the evil and decide accordingly, as will be explained in the next
paragraph.

1264. Cases of doubt concerning the advantage of a fraternal correction
may occur as follows: (a) If the good expected is superior to the evil
that is feared, one should give the correction. Example: If it seems
that a sinner, if admonished, may suffer great confusion or be for a
time estranged, but may also be finally converted, the good result of
conversion is to be preferred to prevention of confusion or
estrangement. If it seems doubtful whether correction will help or hurt
a dying man, the good of his salvation should be preferred to the good
of freedom from a new sin. (b) If the good expected and the evil feared
are about equal, the correction should be omitted, since the negative
precept of not injuring a neighbor outweighs the affirmative precept of
doing him a service.

1265. When is sin committed by omitting fraternal correction? (a) If
the correction is omitted out of charity, the omission is good and
meritorious. Example: Titus omits to correct Sempronius, because he
thinks the reproof would do harm to the latter or to others, or because
he awaits a more favorable occasion. (b) If the correction is omitted
contrary to charity (i.e., because a person hates his neighbor or
disregards his spiritual welfare), the omission is a mortal sin.
Example: Caius neglects to correct Sempronius, because he prefers to
see Sempronius go to ruin rather than lose his friendship or incur his
enmity. (c) If the correction is omitted in spite of charity, the
omission is a venial sin. Example: Balbus, who is not a superior, fails
to correct Sempronius, because through frailty he fears to give
offense, or to be considered over-bold, but he prefers the latter’s
spiritual welfare to his own human fears and interests, and would give
the correction, if he felt that it was absolutely necessary.

1266. The sin committed by delaying fraternal correction is to be
judged according to the rules just given about omission of correction.
But is it lawful to put off correction in the hope that the sinner,
through experience of the evil effects of sin, may become more
tractable? (a) If there is hope of present amendment through
correction, this should not be delayed; otherwise, one is careless
about the honor of God, the edification of others, and the possible
hardening of the sinner or his death in the midst of his sins. (b) If
there is no probability of present amendment through correction, one
can only wait in the hope that the experience of the evils of sin may
bring the prodigal back to God.

1267. It is not often necessary for one who is not a superior to make
fraternal correction, since there are many conditions that must exist
before one is obliged to it. These conditions include the purpose to be
attained, of which we have just spoken, and the proper circumstances,
which are as follows: (a) the fault to be corrected should be a known
and serious sin; (b) the person to give the correction should be one
who has the right and duty to correct; (c) the manner of giving the
correction should be such as will promote the end in view.

1268. One should not attempt to correct a fault, unless one is morally
sure that a fault has been committed, or is about to be committed. For
this reason the scrupulous, who are inclined to suspect or see evil
where there is none, are generally excused from the duty of making
corrections. Reasons why doubt, fear, suspicion or rumor do not
suffice, are: (a) correction is not pleasant to the one corrected, and,
if his guilt is not provable, he will be able to argue with the
corrector, and so quarrels and enmities will result; (b) charity bids
us to give the benefit of the doubt to a neighbor, and, if this is not
done, the one who is being corrected will be able to correct the
corrector on account of uncharitable suspicions.

1269. Is one obliged, therefore, to make inquiries into the conduct of
those whom one suspects of wrongdoing?

(a) If there is question of judicial correction, the public authority
is bound in justice to examine juridically into matters of doubt before
acting.

(b) If there is question of fraternal correction, a parent or other
superior is bound in charity to make paternal inquiries into the
conduct of his subjects; for, as a father does not wait until his
children ask for corporal goods but inquires about their needs, so
neither should he wait until their spiritual distress is brought to his
attention. The superior here should avoid the extremes of suspicion, on
the one hand, which will lead him to act rashly and win for him the
hatred of his subjects, and of over-trustfulness, on the other hand,
which will foster all kinds of secret irregularities. Likewise, he
should not betray a special watchfulness about one individual that will
be harmful to the latter’s reputation.

(c) If there is question of fraternal correction, private individuals
should not inquire into the affairs of others. Those who go about
spying on or shadowing others, even if their purpose is to reform, are
acting against charity to themselves and to the persons they wish to
improve; their own affairs will suffer, since the number who need
reformation is large, and the person who is being investigated will be
annoyed or otherwise injured: “Lie not in wait, nor seek after
wickedness in the house of the just, nor spoil his rest” (Prov., xxiv.
15).

1270. The kinds of faults that call for fraternal correction are as
follows: (a) grave sins should be corrected, for otherwise one allows a
soul to perish that might have been saved (Matt., xviii. 14, 15), (b)
slight sins or transgressions of rules should also be corrected, when
they are the occasion of grave scandal or disorder in a community, and
superiors who are negligent about this commit mortal sin; (c) slight
sins or transgressions should not be corrected in ordinary cases, for
these faults are so numerous that, if one had to correct them, an
intolerable burden would be laid on everyone, Persons who scold and
lecture over every trifling misdeed are regarded as pests and do more
harm than good.

1271. The purpose of fraternal correction is to save one who is in
danger of losing his soul. Hence, it should not be restricted to those
sins that are an offense to the corrector, but it should extend also to
sins that are against God, the neighbor, or the offender himself.

1272. Since fraternal correction is given for the purpose of converting
a sinner from the evil of his ways, it is not called for when one’s
neighbor is not a sinner, strictly speaking, or has already reformed.
Thus, there is no need of this correction in the following cases: (a)
when a person sins through ignorance and is not guilty of formal sin;
(b) when a person who was a sinner in the past has given up his old
ways.

1273. A person who sins from vincible ignorance should not be corrected
unless the two following conditions are present: (a) there must be hope
of amendment, otherwise the admonition would only aggravate the
sinner’s guilt; (b) there must be no greater evil that will result from
the admonition and correction.

1274. A person who sins from invincible ignorance is not guilty of
formal sin, and hence, as said above, he is not a subject for fraternal
correction. But charity often requires that he be instructed especially
by superiors, confessors, etc., with a view to the prevention of
various evils. These evils are of the following kinds: (a) injury to
God, as when a person unacquainted with the language uses expressions
that are blasphemous; (b) injury to self, as when a child not
understanding the power of liquor becomes intoxicated; (c) injury to
the neighbor, as when a person who does not know that it is a fast day
causes scandal by not keeping the fast.

1275. If there is hope that the instruction will have a good result,
one should instruct the invincibly ignorant in order to prevent injury
to God, themselves, or their neighbor; but, if it seems that an
instruction will do only harm or more harm than good, it should be
omitted. The duty of instruction rests especially on superiors, such as
parents, teachers, confessors. These principles are applied to various
cases as follows:

(a) A material sin may have been committed in the past. Titus through
inadvertence ate meat on a day of abstinence, but gave no scandal;
Balbus did the same thing, and this caused considerable scandal. Now,
there might be an obligation of telling Balbus what he did in order to
repair the scandal, but no such obligation would exist in the case of
Titus. Sempronius and Caius both married invalidly, but are in good
faith. If Sempronius is told about his marriage, matters can be easily
rectified; but if Caius is informed that his marriage is null, he will
abandon his putative wife and his family, and there will be serious
discords and scandals. Hence, Sempronius should be told, but not Caius.

(b) Material sin may be about to be committed against the natural or
divine law. Titus is about to destroy what he thinks is an abandoned
and useless picture, but which is in reality a very valuable work of
art belonging to Balbus. Caius is going to the altar to be married;
Claudius knows of a diriment impediment to the marriage, but cannot
make it known without causing a scene and giving great scandal. Titus
should be instructed, but it is a duty to say nothing to Caius.

(c) Material sin may be about to be committed against human law.
Sempronius sees Claudius and others eating meat on a day of abstinence,
which they have forgotten. He also sees Father Balbus, who has
forgotten to put on an alb or a chasuble, going to the altar to say
Mass. There is no obligation to call the attention of Claudius to the
day of abstinence, but for the sake of respect to divine worship the
attention of Father Balbus should be directed to the missing vestments.

1276. Certain past sins do not demand fraternal correction: (a) those
sins that have been repented of, especially if there is no danger of a
relapse (e.g., a wife should not be always reminding her now sober
husband that he was addicted to drink before he met her); (b) those
sins that will in all probability be remedied shortly without one’s
intervention. Hence, it is not necessary to reprove Titus because he
drank too much, if he is not careless about his salvation and will soon
approach the Sacraments, or if his parents or wife are better fitted to
make the correction and will not fail to do so.

1277. To what persons may correction be given? (a) Judicial correction
can be given only to one’s subjects, since it supposes authority; (b)
fraternal correction can be given, not only to inferiors and equals,
but also to superiors. For charity should be shown to all those who are
in need of assistance, and, the higher the office, the greater the
danger. Superiors who are giving scandal or doing harm to others should
be remonstrated with by their equals, or, if need be, by their
subjects. Fraternal correction among the clergy is especially
advantageous.

1278. When fraternal correction is given to a superior: (a) the
superior should take a proper correction with gratitude and humility,
imitating St. Peter when reproved by St. Paul (Gal., ii. 11); (b) the
inferior should give the correction without boldness or harshness, but
respectfully and mildly: “An elderly man rebuke not, but entreat him as
a father” (I Tim., v. 1). It is better that the person giving the
correction be himself of some standing, lest the act seem to proceed
from contempt, and so only embitter the superior who is at fault.
Example: Children should plead with parents who steal, get drunk or
neglect religion, to mend their ways.

1279. What persons may administer correction? (a) Judicial correction
as just said can be given only by a superior; (b) fraternal correction
may be given by any person who is not so unfitted that a correction
from him will necessarily be useless or harmful. It is not required,
however, that one be immaculate, for if immunity from all sin were
necessary in a corrector, who could reprove delinquents (I John, i. 8)?

1280. The fact that a person is known to be a sinner, or not in the
state of grace, or guilty of the same things he reproves, does not
unfit him for giving a fraternal correction; because, in spite of his
own sinfulness, he may retain a right judgment and so be able to
correct wrongdoing. In the following cases, however, correction made by
a sinner is reprehensible, on account of circumstances other than that
of the person: (a) the motive of the correction is sinful, when the
sinner corrects only in order to distract attention from himself, to
conceal bad deeds by good words, to practise revenge, etc.; (b) the
mode of the correction is sinful when the sinner corrects with pride,
as if he himself were above correction: “Wherein thou judgest another
thou condemnest thyself, for thou dost the same things which thou
judgest” (Rom, ii. 1); (c) the consequences of correction made by a
sinner are an evil circumstance, as when scandal results. Thus, if a
person who is guilty of far greater sins corrects his neighbor, this
has a demoralizing effect, when the impression is given that good words
rather than good deeds are important.

1281. One who prefers his neighbor’s conversion to his own deviates
from the right order of charity, since he should love himself more. But
a person may without any transgression against the precept of fraternal
correction seek to correct his neighbor before he has corrected himself.

(a) Thus, from the nature of correction itself or from the provisions
of the commandment, there does not seem to be any obligation of
correcting self before correcting others; for a humble correction made
by a sinner with acknowledgment of his unworthiness to censure others,
or by a sinner who is thought to be good or to have reformed, may be
just as efficacious as a correction made by a truly virtuous man. But
it is of counsel that one correct oneself as a means towards the better
correction of another.

(b) Because of special reasons, a person may be otherwise obliged to
correct himself before he attempts to correct another, as when
self-correction is the only means towards obtaining some necessary end.
Thus, a superior who cannot enforce discipline because he is
unobservant himself, the friend of a dying man who cannot convert the
latter unless he gives evidence of his own conversion, a person who
cannot repair the scandal he has given unless he manifests
repentance--all these should begin by correcting themselves. One should
take the beam out of one’s own eye, if otherwise one cannot remove the
mote from a neighbor’s eye (Matt, vii. 5).

1282. All suitable persons, then, are bound by the duty of fraternal
correction: “He gave to every one of them commandment concerning his
neighbor” (Ecclus., xvii. 12). But the duty rests more heavily on some
than on others. (a) Thus, bishops and other pastors are held out of
justice to fraternal correction, and even at the peril of life. (b)
Other prelates, confessors, parents, husbands, masters, teachers and
guardians, are held to fraternal correction from charity and by reason
of their office; but they are not held to this duty when there is grave
personal danger to themselves. (c) Private persons are held out of
charity, but their obligation is less than in the case of those whose
office requires them to make corrections.

1283. A person is not bound to make a correction for the sole reason
that he is able to make it successfully. For he is excused: (a) if
correction by him is not necessary, as when parents or others better
able than himself will attend to the matter; (b) if his correction will
bring on himself evils which he is not obliged to incur.

1284. An obligation of making a correction even when this will cause an
injury to the corrector, exists in the following cases: (a) If the
correction is necessary to avert extreme spiritual evil (i.e.,
damnation), one should be prepared to make a sacrifice, even of life
itself, to give the correction (see 1165). Example: Titus is dying of a
contagious disease, and will lose his soul, if Balbus does not come to
advise him. (b) If the correction is necessary to avert grave spiritual
evil, a pastor should be willing to risk his life, and another person
should be willing to risk the loss of money, and even some injury to
health. But a subject is not bound to correct his superior, when this
will bring on him persecutions; a scrupulous person is not bound to
correct, for this would cause him worries and suffering.

1285. The manner of making a correction is as follows:

(a) The internal dispositions should include charity towards the one
corrected and humility as regards one’s own fitness. For fraternal
correction is not opposed to the commands of bearing with the
weaknesses of others (Gal, vi. 2), and of not proudly preferring self
to others (Philip., ii. 3). One should correct inferiors paternally,
equals kindly, and superiors respectfully. In every correction there
should be seriousness mingled with mildness.

(b) The external order to be followed is that given by our Lord in
Matt., xviii. 15-18, namely, that, when possible, admonition should be
given privately, and that one should not proceed to accusation before
superiors until other means, such as the calling in of witnesses, have
proved unavailing. The order to be followed in fraternal correction is
not only of the positive divine law, but it is also of the natural law.
For the natural law requires that we do for others what we wish done
for ourselves, and there is no one who does not desire that correction
be given him in such a way that the least possible injury be done to
his feelings and to his good name.

1286. In what cases should secret admonition be used?

(a) For public sins (i.e., real sins known or soon to be known to the
larger part of the community), no secret admonition is required, since
the guilt is already publicly known; a public correction, on the
contrary, is necessary to remedy the scandal: “Them that sin reprove
before all, that the rest also may have fear” (I Tim., v. 20).

(b) For occult sins that are against the common good or the good of a
third person no secret admonition is required, but one should denounce
them immediately; for the spiritual or corporal welfare of the
multitude or of an innocent private individual is a greater good than
the reputation of the guilty person. Exception should be made, however,
for the case in which one is certain that by a secret admonition one
can correct the sinner and prevent the harm that threatens others.
Examples: If Titus knows that there is a plot to rob the house of
Balbus, and that any effort to dissuade the criminals would only bring
him into danger, he ought to warn Balbus or the authorities. If
Claudius knows that in his school a certain student is teaching the
other boys to steal and become drunk, he should make this known, and
hence cannot be absolved if he refuses. But the seal of the
confessional must be observed.

(c) For occult sins that are not against the common good or that of a
third person, one should have recourse to secret admonition before
making the sins known. This will save the sinner from loss of
reputation and from consequent hardness in sin; it will also save
others from a share in his infamy, or from the scandal caused by
publicity.

1287. What is the obligation of reporting an occult sin that is doing
harm in a community, when the person who reports will suffer for
telling what he knows? (a) If harm to the community will result from
silence, one is obliged even at the cost of great inconvenience to
speak (see 1284). Example: Claudius knows that a fellow-student has a
bad influence over his companions, and is leading more and more of them
into stealing, with the result that a large number will be corrupted
and the institution disgraced. But he cannot speak without serious harm
to himself, because he also has been implicated, or because informers
are regarded and treated as traitors. (b) If some private harm will
result from silence, one is not bound at the cost of great
inconvenience to speak. Example: If Claudius knows that only one or two
are being led astray, he is not bound to implicate himself or to incur
the ignominy of being regarded as a spy.

1288. There are exceptional cases in which occult faults, not injurious
to others, are reproved publicly, without previous private admonition.
(a) God as the supreme ruler has the right to publish hidden sins,
although He admonishes men secretly through the voice of conscience or
through external preaching or other means. St. Peter, in making known
the sin of Ananias and Saphira, acted as the instrument of God’s
justice and in virtue of a revelation given him (Acts, v. 3, 4, 9). (b)
Members of a society who are agreed to remind one another publicly of
transgressions of their regulations, do not violate the order of
fraternal correction given by Christ, if there is nothing defamatory in
these reminders. Example: The proclamations made in the chapter of
faults in religious orders.

1289. May a prelate (e.g., in a visitation) oblige his subjects to
carry to him, without a previous secret admonition of the person to be
accused, information about the secret sins of fellow-subjects that are
not harmful to others?

(a) If a sin is entirely secret, and the subjects have not renounced
their right to reputation in the sight of the prelate, the latter has
no right to give orders that he be informed at once, since the rule
given by Christ requires that a fraternal correction be first given. A
subject would be bound, therefore, if such orders were given, to obey
the divine injunction, rather than that of the prelate (Acts, v. 3, 4,
9).

(b) If a sin is entirely secret, but subjects have renounced their
right to receive first a private admonition, a prelate may require that
information be brought to him at once. This is the rule in certain
religious societies; but even in them a sin should not be reported to
the prelate if the sinner has already amended, nor should the higher
superior be informed if the immediate superior can take care of the
matter sufficiently. These religious have a right to their reputation.

(e) If a sin is not entirely secret, because there are some indications
(such as ill-repute or grounds for suspicion), a prelate may require
that information be brought to him immediately.

1290. If, after several private admonitions have been made, there is no
hope of success by this method, what should be done? (a) If it appears
that the other means prescribed by our Lord will be successful, they
should be tried, just as a physician has recourse to new remedies when
old ones have failed. (b) If it appears that any further efforts will
do harm rather than good, the attempt to correct a private sin that
harms only the sinner should be given up.

1291. The order to be followed in fraternal correction, after personal
reproof or remonstrance has failed, is as follows:

(a) One should enlist the services of one or two others to assist in
making the brotherly correction. The conversion of the culprit is more
important than his reputation with these others; whereas their
knowledge of the matter safeguards the corrector from the charge of
being a mischievous talebearer, should things go further, and it should
arouse the culprit to the need of correcting himself, before his case
is brought before the superior for correction.

(b) When other things have failed, recourse should be had to the
superior of the person at fault, if there is hope that this will prove
successful. If the superior is imprudent or given to wrath or is known
to dislike the person to be corrected, or if the latter would only be
enraged by a reproof from this superior, charity would urge one to say
nothing about the matter. Example: Titus makes himself intoxicated from
time to time. Balbus is the only one who knows this, and he tries to
correct Titus. But, as the latter denies the accusation, Balbus asks
Caius and Sempronius, friends of Titus, to be witnesses; and all three
of them make an effort to convert Titus. This correction also has no
effect, and so Balbus and the other two make the matter known to the
parents of Titus, that they may watch their son more carefully and keep
him away from occasions of drink.

1292. What are the duties of a superior to whom a subject has been
reported for fraternal correction? (a) He should try to discover the
truth of the matter. Means to this end are a consideration of the
character and motives of the accuser, the reply which the accused makes
in his own defense, and in case of necessity a confrontation of accuser
and accused, a cross-examination, etc. (I Cor., i. xi; Dan., xiii. 5).
Those who make a practice of gladly carrying tales to superiors are
disturbers of peace, and they should be given to understand that their
accusations are not wanted, and that they should mind their own
business.

(b) If the superior has reason to believe that the accusation in
question is true, he should use moderate remedial measures, while at
the same time preserving the good name of the person to be corrected.
For the information has been brought before him, not as judge, but as
father of the person accused, and hence public punishments or
corrections injurious to reputation must be avoided. Removal from an
office, a change of place and special vigilance may be used, when this
can be done prudently.

1293. Cases in which a subject may be reported to his superior for
fraternal correction without previous admonitions are not impossible;
for the law given by Christ concerning the order to be followed is
affirmative, and hence obliges only under the proper circumstances. (a)
Thus, if previous admonitions would be harmful, whereas an admonition
by the superior will be beneficial, recourse should be had at once to
the superior. (b) If an admonition by the superior will be more
advantageous, the other admonitions may be omitted. Thus, if the
superior is more revered by the person to be corrected and will be
listened to more readily, or if there is danger of delay in making
previous admonitions, it is better that the matter be brought before
the superior at once. What is said of the superior can be applied also
to some other pious and prudent person from whom a correction would be
better received.

1294. The obligation of fraternal correction by private individuals may
be summed up as follows: (a) One is bound to correct when one is
certain about a grave sin which will not be corrected except by
oneself, and when one has good reason to hope that the correction will
be profitable to the sinner and not unreasonably harmful to the
corrector. Those who interfere when these conditions are not present
are meddlesome or imprudent, rather than charitable. (b) One is bound
to report to a superior when one is certain about a grave sin which is
harmful to the community or which cannot be corrected so well by
private admonition, if one believes that it will not be reported except
by oneself, and that one’s report will be for the good of others and
not an undue detriment to oneself. Those who report of their own choice
when these conditions are not existent, are malicious tale-bearers or
rash news-carriers, rather than charitable accusers.




Art. 7: THE SINS AGAINST LOVE AND JOY

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 34-36.)

1295. The sins against charity and its subordinate virtues can be
reduced to the following: (a) hatred, which is opposed to love; (b)
sloth and envy, which are contrary to the joy of charity; (c) discord
and schism, which are opposed to the peace of charity; (d) scandal,
which is the opposite of beneficence and fraternal correction.

1296. Hate.--Hate is an aversion of the will to something which the
intellect judges evil, that is, contrary to self. As there are two
kinds of love, so there are also two kinds of hate. (a) Hatred of
dislike (_odium abominationis_) is the opposite of love of desire, for,
as this love inclines to something as suitable and advantageous for
self, so hatred of dislike turns away from something, as being
considered unsuitable and harmful to self. (b) Hatred of enmity (_odium
inimicitiae_) is the opposite of love of benevolence, for, as this love
wishes good to the object of its affection, so hatred of enmity wishes
evil to the object of its dislike.

1297. Hatred of God.-A thing cannot be hated unless it is looked upon
as evil, and hence God cannot be hated except by those who regard Him
as evil to themselves.

(a) Thus, those who see the Divine Essence (i.e., the blessed), cannot
hate God, for His Essence is goodness itself, and, therefore, the
blessed can see in God only reasons for love. (b) Those who see God
obscurely through the things made by Him (i.e., wayfarers on earth),
cannot hate God considered as the author of effects that are in no way
displeasing to the will, such as existence, life, intelligence; but
they can hate God as the author of effects displeasing to their will,
such as law and punishment. Thus, no one can hate God because God has
given him being, for existence of itself is something good and
desirable; but a depraved will can hate God for having forbidden sin,
or for inflicting chastisements, or for permitting some evils to
accompany the blessings of life. That hatred of God is not a mere
possibility, the scriptures in many places attest: “The pride of them
that hate Thee ascendeth forever” (Ps, lxiii. 23), “Now they have seen
and hated both Me and My Father” (John, xv. 24).

1298. It should not be inferred from what has just been said that it is
not God in Himself that is hated, but only His works; nor that it is a
sin against God to dislike evils or even divine punishments.

(a) Thus, God Himself is not the principle or motive cause of the
hatred directed against Him, for in God there is no evil that can
produce dislike; but God is the term or object of the hatred aroused in
the sinner by the divine effects that displease him, as the texts given
above from scripture indicate. For example, a man hates his neighbor on
account of certain defects he perceives or thinks he perceives; the
defects are the principle, but the neighbor is the term of the hatred.

(b) Dislike of the evils that are in the world, or of chastisements
sent by God, is not dislike of God Himself, since God does not ask us
to love evil, but only to endure such evils as cannot be cured. Even
murmurs against Providence are usually manifestations of impatience,
not of hatred of Providence. It is only the sinner that dislikes God
Himself for permitting or inflicting evils, who is guilty of hatred of
God.

1299. Hatred of God of various kinds. (a) As regards the intention, it
is either interpretative or formal. Interpretative hatred is aversion
that is not intended directly or for its own sake, but only indirectly
and by reason of something else whose love is preferred. Formal hatred
is an aversion that is intended directly and expressly in itself. Every
mortal sin is an act of interpretative hatred of God, since mortal sin
consists in placing one’s own pleasure or interest above the friendship
of God; but it is only the special sin which attacks God directly that
constitutes formal hate. Thus, he who murders his enemy does not
directly intend dislike of God, but revenge; whereas the condemned
murderer who blasphemes God, because he is to be executed, directly
dislikes God. (b) As regards the degree of malice it contains, formal
hatred of God is either dislike or enmity. Dislike of God is the sin of
those who do not like some attribute of God; enmity towards God is the
sin of those who wish some evil to God. Thus, one who deliberately
wishes that God would sanction injustice dislikes the divine attribute
of justice, while an unjust man who wishes he might be rid of God and
His judgment is guilty of enmity to God.

1300. Hatred of God as a Special Sin.--(a) Interpretative hatred of God
is not a special sin but a general circumstance of every mortal sin;
but formal hatred is a special sin, and indeed one that is
comparatively rare, and that must be specially mentioned in confession.
This is a sin which is distinct, not only from the sins against the
other theological virtues (e.g., unbelief, despair), but also from the
sins against the other objects of charity (e.g., hatred of the
neighbor).

(b) Formal hatred of God is not a special sin against the Holy Ghost
(see 899); but its malice pervades every such sin, and it is thus a
general sin against the Holy Ghost. For example, presumption is a
dislike of God’s law which requires that one must attain salvation
through the observance of the commandments; rejection of the known
truth is a dislike of God’s revelation.

1301. The Gravity of Hatred of God.-(a) It is a mortal sin from its
nature, and can never be venial on account of the smallness of the
injury, but only on account of lack of deliberation or consent. Dislike
of even one attribute of God is a grave injury, for everything
pertaining to God is perfect and infinitely lovable. (b) Hatred of God
is the worst of all mortal sins; for it is directly opposed to God (the
supreme good) and to charity (the most excellent virtue in a creature),
whereas other mortal sins offend against these goods only indirectly.

1302. The comparison just made between hatred of God and other sins
supposes that the other sins do not include hatred of God, for it is
clear that simple hatred of God existing in the will is less serious
than a composite sin, such as external blasphemy uttered to manifest
internal hatred of God. (a) Thus, hatred of God without unbelief is
worse than unbelief without hatred of God; (b) hatred of God without
hatred of the neighbor is worse than hatred of the neighbor without
hatred of God.

1303. Degrees of Malice in Hatred of God.--(a) A new species of sin is
added to hatred of God, when out of hatred one proceeds to sin against
creatures, or to commit other offenses against God Himself. Example:
Titus hates God, and therefore persecutes those who believe in God, and
also blasphemes God. (b) A new degree of malice is added to hatred of
God when one proceeds from dislike to enmity, or when the circumstances
of person, place, manner, etc., aggravate the malice. Example: Hatred
of God outwardly manifested adds the evil of scandal; not so hatred of
God that is concealed.

1304. Hatred of Creatures.--All dislike of God is sinful, because there
is nothing in God that merits dislike. But in creatures imperfections
are found as well as perfections.

(a) Hence, dislike of the imperfections of our neighbor (i.e., of all
that is the work of the devil or of his own sinfulness), is not against
charity, but according to charity; for it is the same thing to dislike
another’s evil as to wish his good. Thus, God Himself is said to hate
detractors, that is, detraction (Rom., i. 30), and Christ bids His
followers hate their parents who would be an impediment to their
progress in holiness, that is, the sinful opposition of those parents
(Luke, xiv. 26). Only when dislike is carried beyond reason is it
sinful. Thus, a wife who dislikes her husband’s habit of drunkenness so
much that she will not give him a necessary medicine on account of the
alcohol it contains, carries her dislike to extremes.

(b) Dislike of the perfections of nature or of grace in our neighbor
(i.e., of anything that is the work of God in him), is contrary to
charity. Thus, God does not hate the detractor himself, nor should
children ever hate the person of a parent, or the natural relationship
he holds to themselves, no matter how bad the parent may be. As St.
Augustine says: “One should love the sinner, but hate his vices.”

1305. The same principles apply to dislike of self. (a) Thus, one
should dislike one’s own imperfections, for they are the enemies of
one’s soul. So, contrition is defined as a hatred and detestation of
one’s vices, and it is a virtue and an act of charity to self. (b) One
should not dislike the good one has, except in so far as it is
associated with evil. Thus, one should not regret one’s honesty, even
if by reason of it one loses an opportunity to make a large sum of
money; but one may regret having married, if one’s choice has been
unfortunate and has made one’s life miserable.

1306. Should a person dislike in others their opposition to himself?
(a) If their opposition is unjust, he should dislike it, for it is then
a sin in them and an injury to himself, and charity to them and to self
requires that he should dislike what is harmful to all concerned. (b)
If their opposition is just, he should like it, for it is virtuous in
them and beneficial to himself: “Better are the wounds of a friend than
the deceitful kisses of an enemy” (Prov., xxvii. 6).

1307. Direct enmity to self is not possible, for nature inclines each
one so strongly to love of self that it is impossible for anyone to
wish evil to himself as evil: “No one hateth his own flesh” (Ephes., v.
29). But indirectly a person may be at enmity with himself, inasmuch as
he wishes evil under the guise of good; and hence St. Augustine,
commenting on the words, “He that loveth his life shall lose it” (John,
xii, 25), says: “If you love self wrongly, you hate it; if you hate
self rightly, you love it.” This indirect enmity to self happens in two
ways. (a) A person sometimes wishes himself what is not a true, but
only an apparent good, as when he chooses the satisfaction of revenge
rather than that of pardon of injuries. (b) A person sometimes chooses
what is good, not for his true, but for his lower self, as when he
decides to gratify the body at the expense of the soul.

1308. Is it ever lawful to wish evil to self or to others? (a) It is
not lawful to wish anyone evil as evil, for even God in punishing the
lost does not will their punishment as it is evil to them, but as it
contains the good of justice. Hence, it is contrary to charity to wish
that a criminal be put to death, if one’s wish does not go beyond the
sufferings and loss of life the criminal will endure. (b) It is lawful
to wish evil as good, or, in other words, to wish misfortunes that are
blessings in disguise. Thus, one may wish that a neighbor lose his arm,
if this is necessary to save his life.

1309. One may easily be self-deceived in wishing evil to one’s neighbor
under the pretext that it is really good one desires, for the true
intention may be hatred or revenge. Hence, the following conditions
must be present when one wishes evil as good:

(a) On the part of the subject (i.e., of the person who wills the
evil), the intention must be sincerely charitable, proceeding from a
desire that the neighbor be benefitted. Thus, it is lawful to wish that
a gambler may meet with reverses, if what is intended is, not his loss,
but his awakening to the need of a new kind of amusement. St. Paul
rejoiced that he had made the Corinthians sorrowful, because their
sorrow worked repentance in them (II Cor., vii. 7-11). Of course, the
desire of a neighbor’s good does not confer the right to wrong him, for
the end does not justify the means.

(b) On the part of the object (i.e., of the evil which is wished to
another), it must be compensated for by the good which is intended. It
is not lawful to desire the death of another on account of the property
one expects to inherit, for the neighbor’s life is more important than
private gain; but it is lawful to wish, out of interest in the common
welfare, that a criminal be captured and punished, for it is only by
the vindication of law that public tranquillity can be secured (Gal.,
v. 12).

1310. Is it lawful to wish the death of self or of a neighbor for some
private good of the one whose death is wished? (a) If the good is a
spiritual one and more important than the spiritual good contained in
the desire to live, it is lawful to desire death. Thus, it is lawful to
wish to die in order to enter into a better life, or to be freed from
the temptations and sinfulness of life on earth. But it is not lawful
to wish to die in order to spare a few individuals the scandal they
take from one’s life, if that life is needed by others as a source of
edification (Philip., i. 21 sqq.). (b) If the good is a temporal one
but sufficiently important, it does not seem unlawful to desire death.
Thus, we should not blame a person suffering from a painful and
incurable disease, which makes him a burden to himself and to others,
if, with resignation to the divine will, he prays for the release of
death; for “death is better than a bitter life” (Ecclus., xxx, 17). But
lack of perfect health or a feeling of weariness is not a good reason
for wishing to die, especially if one has dependents, or is useful to
others.

1311. Is it ever lawful to wish spiritual evil to anyone? (a) Spiritual
evil of iniquity may never be desired, for the desire of sin, mortal or
venial, is a sin itself (see 242), and it cannot be charitable, for
charity rejoiceth not with iniquity (I Cor., xiii. 6). It is wrong,
therefore, to wish that our neighbor fall into sin, offend God,
diminish or forfeit his grace, or lose his soul. On the contrary, we
are commanded to pray that he be delivered from such evils. (b) The
good that God draws out of spiritual evil may be desired. Some are
permitted to fall into sin, or be tempted, that they may become more
humble, more charitable, more vigilant, more fervent. It seems that the
permission of sin in the case of the elect is one of the benefits of
God’s predestination, inasmuch as God intends it to be an occasion of
greater virtue and stronger perseverance. It is not lawful to wish that
God permit anyone to fall into sin, but it is lawful to wish that, if
God has permitted sin, good will follow after it.

1312. Gravity of the Sin of Hatred of Neighbor.--(a) Hatred, whether of
dislike or of enmity, is from its nature a mortal sin, since it is
directly opposed to the virtue of charity, which is the life of the
soul.

(b) Dislike, if enmity is not joined to it, is rarely in fact a mortal
sin. Aversions and antipathies for others usually are either
indeliberate, or have to do with what are real or fancied defects in
others. Dislike is a mortal sin only when one despises another so much
that one deliberately loathes even that which is of divine provenance
in the other, or dislikes a real imperfection so immoderately as to
inflict serious injury (e.g., by refusing pardon or the common signs of
charity, by giving grave scandal, etc.)

(c) Enmity in fact is often only a venial sin, either because one
wishes only a small harm (e.g., the loss of a small sum of money), or
because one wishes harm, even a great harm (e.g., the commission of
mortal sin), without full deliberation. Enmity is a mortal sin,
however, when one deliberately wishes a grave evil (e.g., mortal sin or
the loss of reputation) to one’s neighbor.

1313. Hatred Compared with Other Sins Against the Neighbor.--(a) Hatred
is a graver sin than other internal sins against the neighbor, such as
envy, anger; for, while each of these latter attacks some particular
kind of good of the neighbor or only to a limited degree, hatred may be
directed against any good and knows no measure. Thus, covetousness is
directed against the external goods or possessions of a neighbor, while
hate may extend to either internal or external goods. Envy is opposed
to the neighbor’s good relatively, in so far as it is considered an
obstacle to one’s own glory, but hate detests another’s good
absolutely. The hater finds his satisfaction, not in any profit derived
for self, but in his aversion for another’s good, and the harm that is
wished his neighbor. This comparison here made should be understood,
other things being equal, so that hatred of another’s life is
contrasted with envy of his life, etc.; for, if the goods are not the
same, hatred may be a lesser sin, as when hatred of a neighbor’s
temporal good is compared with envy of his spiritual good. (b) Hatred
of a neighbor is a more serious sin than external offenses done against
him, for hatred sets the will wrong, and it is in the will that sin
takes root: “He who hates his brother is a murderer” (I John, iii. 15).
The external act, on the contrary (e.g., killing an innocent man), is
not a formal sin when the will is guiltless. (c) Hatred is a less
harmful sin to the neighbor than external offenses; for example,
internal dislike and malevolence will not break any bones, as may
happen from a severe blow.

1314. Why is hatred not numbered among the capital vices? As was said
above (see 269), a capital vice is one from which naturally and usually
other species of sin take their origin. Now, hatred of God or the
neighbor, in the natural and usual course of sin, does not precede, but
rather follows other sins. Hence, hatred is not a capital sin. This
will appear more clearly if we distinguish two kinds of hatred:

(a) Hate of that which is truly evil and opposed to the true good of
man (e.g., hate of vice), is naturally prior to other disinclinations,
since rational nature first inclines one to love its good and hate its
evil (see 1106).

(b) Hate of that which is not evil (as hate of God or of the neighbor),
is naturally subsequent to other sins, for it is only a nature already
corrupt that detests true goodness. This does not mean, however, that
the whole catalogue of lesser sins must have been committed before
hatred is arrived at, nor that in individual cases a sinner has not the
freedom to hate before he has committed less grave sins.

1315. In a certain wide sense, however, it may be said that hatred of
the neighbor goes before all other sins against the neighbor, just as
was remarked above (1299) concerning sins against God.

(a) Hence, interpretative hate--i.e., a feeling against another that
makes one act in effect as if there were hatred--does precede the other
sins. Thus, if Titus, who bore no ill-will to Balbus, becomes enraged
against him and inflicts death, the murder is traced back to anger, but
this anger may be called hate, inasmuch as dislike of the life of
Balbus is included in the desire of revenge.

(b) Formal hate--i.e., dislike of another that is absolute, and not
modified by such considerations as desire of revenge or sorrow over
one’s own inferiority--does not precede, but rather follows the other
sins, as was explained in the previous paragraph. It is only this sin
of formal hate that is a special sin. Titus in the example murdered
Balbus, not because he had an absolute dislike for him, but because the
thirst for revenge made Balbus displeasing to him.

1316. The causes of the sin of hatred are as follows: (a) causes that
dispose one to hate are anger and envy, for to desire evil to another,
for revenge or on account of one’s own glory, prepares the way to
desire evil to him absolutely, which is hatred. Envy, however, disposes
to hate more than anger, since it is more akin to hatred: anger wishes
evil to another as something owed to justice, but both envy and hatred
look upon the neighbor’s good as a thing distasteful. (b) The cause
that induces sinful hatred of the neighbor is envy; for one cannot hate
that which is good unless one regards it as in some way disagreeable,
and it is the vice of envy that makes one regard one’s neighbor’s good
as one’s own evil. Hatred of God also indirectly results from envy,
for, while the creature does not envy God, his envy of his neighbor
breeds hatred of his fellow-man, and this in turn may produce hatred of
God.

1317. Various Species of the Sin of Hatred.--(a) Hatred of God and
hatred of the neighbor are sins specifically distinct, and hence to be
declared specifically in confession. They are opposed to the same
virtue of charity, but, on account of the generical difference of sin
against God and sin against the creature, they must be classed as
different species of sin.

(b) Hatred of the neighbor in itself is but one species of sin, since
all its acts have this one essential character in common, that evil is
wished to a neighbor as evil--that is, one wishes another evil in
general or every kind of evil, but does not specify particular evils,
such as damnation or death.

(c) Hatred of the neighbor on account of its circumstances or results
may be connected with sins of other species. Thus, he who hates his
neighbor because the latter is pious, adds irreligion to his hatred; he
who out of hatred wishes the death of his neighbor, adds the guilt of
murder to hatred; he who out of hatred wishes to destroy his neighbor’s
property, adds the guilt of injustice to his hatred: he who hates his
parents, adds impiety to uncharitableness; he who calls down a curse on
another, adds malediction to hate.

1318. Penitents who accuse themselves of hatred often have in mind a
sin specifically distinct from the sin of hatred, or an act not sinful
at all.

(a) Thus, “hatred of God” is sometimes used to signify a want of
resignation to the divine will.

(b) “Dislike of the neighbor” is sometimes used to signify
uncongeniality on account of difference of character, etc., or positive
disapproval of qualities or acts that deserve dislike or censure. Thus,
a penitent who always feels ill at ease in the company of a neighbor on
account of some natural incompatibility or of some fear which he
himself does not understand, or who dreads meeting an individual whose
manners are boorish or whose conversation is distasteful, may accuse
himself of sinful dislike.

(c) “Wishing evil to the neighbor” is sometimes used to signify one’s
desire that justice take its course or that the order of charity be
observed. Thus, a penitent who wished for the common good that a
criminal be punished, or according to charity that his friend would
defeat others in competition for a prize, may accuse himself that he
wished harm to the criminal or had luck to the competitors against his
friend.

1319. Circumstances of hatred should be mentioned in confession as
follows: (a) when they add a new species--thus, the person hated (e.g.,
one’s father) or the evil wished (e.g., a fall into mortal sin, loss of
reputation, death, etc.) may add a new sin to that of hate; (b) when
they multiply the number of sins within the species of hate, as when
one hates a large number of persons (see 219).

1320. The Sin of Sloth.--Sloth is a sadness or dejection of the will
about the divine good one possesses, and arises from a want of esteem
for one’s Last End and the means thereto.

(a) Sloth is a sadness of the will. Hence, the sin of sloth differs
from the passion of sadness, and also from bodily weariness. The
passions (as said in 121) are not evil in themselves, but become evil
when exercised immoderately, or turned to an evil object. Weakness or
weariness of body is not sinful, but it disposes one for the passion of
sadness, and this in turn may tempt the will to sloth, when duties owed
to God are to be attended to.

(b) Sloth is a sadness about good, and so it differs from sadness about
the smallness of one’s good. Humility demands that one be sensible of
one’s own shortcomings and of the greater merits of those who are
better. But it is not humility but ingratitude and sloth to depreciate
and grieve over the good which one has received from God, such as the
gift of faith, membership in the Church, etc.

(c) Sloth is sadness about the divine good, which is loved by charity.
Thus, the sin of sloth differs from the circumstance of sloth, which is
found in every sin. There is no sin that does not contain a sadness or
disgust about the act of the opposite virtue; the very thought of
moderation is depressing to the glutton, and religion is associated
with gloom by the irreligious. But what is special to the sin of sloth
is, that it grieves about that divine good itself over which charity
rejoices, and which is the end of all the other virtues.

(d) Sloth is a sadness about the divine good as shared by self, that
is, about the end offered oneself and the means thereto, such as
eternal beatitude, the friendship of God, the Sacraments, the
Commandments, good works and other divine gifts which should be
esteemed and received with gladness. Sloth thus differs from hatred of
God, which is a sadness over God’s own goodness; and from envy, which
is a sadness over the good of the neighbor.

(e) Sloth is a sadness over the divine good, which is considered by one
as an evil. The sin of sloth looks upon the joys of heaven or the
practice of virtue with contempt; it directly spurns them as unworthy
of love (cfr. Num., xxi. 4). Hence, sloth differs from laziness or
idleness, for this latter sin dislikes the exercise of virtue, not
because it considers virtue as evil, but because it has a dread of the
labor and exertion which virtue entails, and is overmuch in love with
repose and ease.

1321. Sloth is a sin. (a) It is forbidden by God: “Bow down thy
shoulder and bear wisdom, and be not grieved with her bands” (Ecclus.,
vi. 26). (b) It is an evil sorrow, for it grieves over good. (c) It has
evil effects, since it keeps man from his duty, swallowing him up with
overmuch sorrow (II Cor., ii. 7).

1322. Qualities of the Sin of Sloth.--(a) Sloth is a special sin,
since, as explained above, its individual objects differentiate it from
the general slothfulness that is found in every sin, as well as from
hatred, envy and laziness. But it is a sin, by comparison, rarely
committed. (b) It is a mortal sin, from its nature, since it is a
horror and detestation for the divine good. It is implicitly forbidden
in the Third Commandment, (c) It is a capital sin (i.e., a vice
naturally productive of others), for sadness inclines man to many evils
as means of escape from sorrow or of consolation in sorrow.

1323. In the following cases sloth is not a mortal sin. (a) It is not a
mortal sin if in the object there is not grave matter. When a person is
grieved at the thought that he will be forced to some spiritual good
which is not of precept but of counsel, he does not sin thereby, for
one does not sin by not choosing the counsels. Strictly speaking,
however, this grief is not the sin of sloth, which is a sorrow over the
divine good that one is bound to accept with joy. (b) Sloth is not a
mortal sin, if in the subject there is not sufficient reflection or
full consent. Hence, mere bodily weariness in serving God, is no sin at
all, and a feeling of disgust for spiritual things, not consented to,
is only a struggle of the flesh against the spirit, and at most a
venial sin.

1324. Sins that Spring from Sloth.--(a) To escape his sadness about
divine things, the slothful man avoids or flees the things that sadden
him--his last end (sin of despair) and the means thereto (sins of
cowardice and carelessness). He also attacks the causes of his
grief--the persons who would lead him to God (sin of rancor) or the
spiritual things themselves (sin of malice). (b) To console himself for
the want of joy in spiritual things, he seeks comfort in forbidden
things: his mind is unquiet and curious about that which does not
concern him, his talk is excessive, his bodily movements are restless,
and he must be continually moving from place to place.

1325. The Conquest of Sloth.--(a) Flight is a suitable form of
resistance to temptation, whenever the temptation grows stronger by
thinking over the matter, as is the case with temptations against
purity (I Cor., vi. 18). (b) Attack is a suitable form of resistance,
when the temptation becomes weaker as one thinks over the matter (see
257). This is the case with sloth, for, the more one gives oneself to
the consideration of spiritual things, the more pleasing do they become.

1326. Laziness, as distinct from the capital vice of sloth, is a
generic name given to a number of sins or circumstances of sin, and
hence it will be treated in several places.

(a) Thus, negligence is a want of prompt decision about duties to be
performed. It is opposed to the virtue of diligence or solicitude,
which pertains to prudence. Hence, negligence will be considered among
the sins against prudence.

(b) Sluggishness (_pigritia_) is a tardy performance of duty, and will
be considered among the sins opposed to diligence.

(c) Carelessness (_torpor_) is a perfunctory discharge of duties,
without thought or love. It is one of the consequences of sloth given
above (see 1324), and hence it is a sin against charity.

(d) Indolence is an excessive dislike of labor or exertion, caused by
an inordinate love of recreation or bodily rest. It will be considered
when we treat the sin of softness or delicacy, which is opposed to
fortitude.

(e) Idleness is the actual omission of one’s duty on account of
indolence, and hence it is considered among the sins against the
various precepts. Thus, under the precepts of charity and of justice
will be discussed the omission of labor to which one is bound.

1327. The sin of carelessness about the service of God is also known as
tepidity or lukewarmness. It consists in a want of fervor, and causes
one to live in spiritual languor, wishing on the one hand to live
holily and avoid sin, but fearing on the other hand the effort and
generosity required for the practice of virtue and the struggle against
evil. It is, therefore, most dangerous.

(a) Even if it is only internal, it may be more dangerous to the one
concerned than grave sin itself, since threats and promises that move a
sinner are often unavailing with one who is tepid and moving on to
grave sin. Thus, we read: “I know thy works, that thou art neither
cold, nor hot. I would that thou wert cold or hot. But because thou art
lukewarm, and neither cold, nor hot, I will begin to vomit thee out of
my mouth” (Apoc., iii. 15, 16).

(b) If it is external, this sin is a danger to others who witness the
disrespectful way in which one prays or exercises other duties owed to
God.

1328. The Sin of Envy.--Envy is a sadness at the good of a neighbor,
which one considers as a detriment to one’s own excellence or glory,
and therefore as an evil to self.

(a) Envy is a species of sadness, that is, it is a displeasure of the
will at the presence of what one regards as an evil. In this way envy
differs from the sin of rejoicing at the evils of others, which, as
will be said below (see 1342), is one of the consequences of envy,
although both are of the same species. Thus also, envy differs from
pride and vainglory (which are not aversions but inclinations), and
from covetousness (which is the desire of what belongs to another).

(b) Envy is about some good, especially about those goods from which
men obtain the esteem and honor of others, such as virtue, ability,
rank, success, prosperity. Thus, envy differs from sorrow about evil or
the evil effects of good, such as repentance for one’s sins, regret that
one is not as good as others, displeasure at the bad use that men make
of health or wealth.

(c) Envy is about the good of a neighbor, for only an insane person
would feel chagrin at the superiority of God, and self-envy is a
contradiction in terms. Thus, envy differs from sorrow at the good of
God (hatred of God), and from sorrow at the good of self (sloth). A
person may be said, however, to envy God in the sense that he is
mortified at the external glory of God, if he feels himself an
antagonist of that glory. In this way the devil is said to envy the
attributes of God, because they overcome his efforts to promote
impiety, and man is said to envy the Holy Ghost, when he is
discontented at the progress of holiness in the souls of men.

(d) The envious man considers his neighbor’s good as a detriment to his
own good. This is the distinctive trait of envy which sets it apart
from other forms of repining at another’s good fortune. Thus,
displeasure at the excellence or glory of another without reference to
detriment to self is not envy, but hatred; with reference to the
unworthiness of another, it is not envy, but indignation.

(e) Hence, envy looks on the neighbor’s prosperity as a calamity to
self, as a sort of punishment and the contradiction of one’s own
desires. Here envy stands in contrast with mercy, for, while the
merciful regard the misfortunes of neighbors as the misfortunes of
themselves, the envious regard the prosperity of others as their own
misfortune.

1329. The Objects of Envy.--(a) The material objects are many, but they
are reduced to excellence and glory. Excellence includes every kind of
desirable quality. Glory is the honor, fame and praise that follow on
public knowledge of one’s excellence. As a rule, envy is concerned with
the excellence of glory, but it may also be about internal or objective
excellence. Thus, if two disputants are alone, the less able will
perhaps envy the greater knowledge of the more able; but, if there is
an audience, the more able will perhaps envy the greater applause
received by his less able opponent.

(b) The formal object of envy is one, namely, the detriment to the
excellence or glory of self which the envious person sees in the
excellence or glory of another. Detriment must not be understood
absolutely here, as if the envious person lost something or failed to
obtain something on account of the other person. It must be understood
relatively, in the sense that the envious person feels that the
situation between himself and the other person is no longer the same,
that the latter has gained on him or passed him, and has thus lessened
his excellence.

1330. The Subjects of Envy.--(a) The persons most inclined to envy are
of two quite different types, namely, the ambitious and the
pusillanimous. The ambitious man ardently covets honors, and he is
correspondingly saddened when others surpass him, especially if he
already enjoys repute or is not far removed from the object of his
desires. The pusillanimous man, being petty, holds every small
advancement of others as great and as a blow to his own prestige. He
is, therefore, filled with intense envy, where a different person would
see little or no cause for such a feeling. On the contrary, those who
recognize their own unsuitability for what is above them, and those who
are great of soul, are not so much inclined to envy. There are few,
however, even among the most perfect, who are not tempted to envy in
some form.

(b) The persons who are most likely to be envied are those who in some
way or other are one’s likes or equals, for one does not feel that one
is thrown into the shade by a person who is always far above one, or by
those who are far removed in time, place, age, etc. Thus, a beggar will
envy a fellow-beggar who becomes a millionaire, but not those
acquaintances who were always rich, and still less the fortunate
persons whom he knows only from hearsay. The elder son envied his
brother, not his father (Luke, xv. 28). Many exceptions to this are
only apparent. Thus, persons sometimes are envious of those far above
them, but it is because these have advanced at their expense, as when a
poor person envies those who have the property he once owned. Persons
are sometimes envious of their equals who have not surpassed them, but
it is because these latter have obtained with little or no effort what
they themselves have gained only by hard work. Persons are sometimes
envious of their inferiors, but this is because they make a comparison
from some viewpoint in which there is equality, as when an old man
envies a youth the advantages that were not enjoyed in his own youth,
or the present promotion that surpasses his own.

1331. It was said above (see 1313) that hatred differs from other sins
against charity, inasmuch as it dislikes another’s good unqualifiedly,
whereas these other sins dislike his good with some qualification.
Hence, envy differs from hate, because envy is a qualified displeasure.
It differs from other kinds of displeasure over the prosperity of
others, because the qualification in each case is different.

(a) Thus, emulation is displeased at the thought of a neighbor’s
prosperity, not because it does not like his success, but because it
dislikes the unsuccess of self. Example: Titus is grieved when he
thinks of the virtue of Balbus, because he himself lacks virtue.

(b) Fear dislikes the prosperity or superiority of another, not on
account of the prosperity or superiority in itself, but on account of
the evil results it apprehends from that prosperity. Example: Caius is
displeased at the elevation of Claudius, because he knows the latter is
his enemy and will persecute him. He is also displeased that, in spite
of his own greater learning and soundness, he has not the influence
possessed by Balbus, who misleads many by long-winded sophistry.

(c) Indignation (_nemesis_) is displeased that a neighbor has a certain
good, of which he is unworthy. Example: Sempronius is angry because
Titus, who is dishonest, succeeds in business.

(d) Envy grieves over a neighbor’s prosperity, not because it thinks
this prosperity will actually bring about a lessening of the honor of
self, but because it regards the very fact of that prosperity, in
itself and apart from any consequences, as a change in one’s
relationship to the neighbor, and to that extent an obscuration of the
glory of self. Example: Balbus is grieved at the prosperity of
Claudius, because he knows Claudius will use his resources to defame
him. Caius is grieved at Claudius’ prosperity, because he regards it as
a reflection on his own fame, since he is less prosperous. Balbus
fears, Caius envies.

1332. Is emulation a sin? (a) If emulation is about spiritual things,
it is not sinful, but praiseworthy. St. Paul encourages a holy rivalry
among the Corinthians for the higher gifts of God (I Cor., xii. 31).
St. Jerome writes to Laeta that her daughter should be associated with
other girls as fellow-pupils, that the progress of the latter and the
praises they receive may act as a spur to the daughter not to be
outdone. One who equals or surpasses the virtue or knowledge of another
does not take away or lessen the other’s good, but improves his own
good; and thus emulation is not harmful, but beneficial in spiritual
matters. (b) If emulation is about temporal things, it is also lawful
to be sorry at their absence. But, if the desire is inordinate, then
emulation is sinful. Example: Sempronius is not inferior in ability to
Titus, and hence, while not desiring monopoly or disliking
competition, he is sorry that he has not attained an equal success in
business. Balbus is very deficient in education, in initiative and in
character, while Caius excels in all these qualities; and yet Balbus is
discontented that he does not hold the responsible position of Caius,
or one of equal importance. The emulation of Sempronius is reasonable,
that of Balbus is unreasonable.

1333. Rivalry is called jealousy, when it proceeds from a love so
ardent that it wishes to have exclusive possession of the object loved.
This jealousy is lawful or unlawful, according as the person who loves
has or has not exclusive rights.

(a) Jealousy is unlawful in a mother who is vexed because her child
loves his father as well as herself. The child ought to love both
parents, and it is an evil jealousy that makes the mother grieve when
the child does this.

(b) Jealousy is lawful in a wife who grieves because her husband gives
to others the affection he promised would be hers alone. Scripture
speaks of God Himself as jealous of the fidelity of His creatures, and
declares that He will suffer no rival, but must have sole dominion over
the heart (Josue, xxiv. 19 sqq.); and St. Paul tells the Corinthians
that he is jealous of them, with the jealousy of God, because they have
not been faithful to his preaching, but have been friendly to false
teachers (II Cor., xi).

1334. Is grief at the prosperity of another a sin, when it is caused by
fear of the harm he will do?

(a) If it is clear that the other will use his prosperity to act
against justice or charity or the like, it is not a sin to grieve over
the prosperity. For, since it is right to deprive a neighbor of the
means of sinning when one has the power to do so, it is not wrong to
wish that he lacked those means. Thus, it is not a sin to grieve over
the election of an official who will promote lawbreakers and persecute
the law-abiding: “When just men increase, the people shall rejoice;
when the wicked shall bear rule, the people shall mourn” (Prov., xxix.
2). St. Gregory the Great declares that, as it is not uncharitable to
rejoice at the downfall of an enemy, neither is it envious to be
saddened at his success; since his downfall is a blessing to the
oppressed, while his success means injustice to many.

(b) If it is clear that the other will use his power, wealth, or other
goods to inflict evils that are deserved or not unjust, it is wrong to
be sorry that he has the power, wealth, etc., just as it would be wrong
to deprive him of them. Thus, it is wrong to grieve over the election
of an honest official who will correct abuses and punish lawbreakers.
It is not unlawful, however, for a lawbreaker to be sorry for himself
at the prospect of the penalty he will receive.

(c) If it is uncertain whether the other will use his prosperity to do
injury to oneself or to others, it is lawful to fear and to be on one’s
guard, but it is not lawful to grieve unconditionally at the
prosperity, just as it is not lawful in the circumstances to deprive
the other of his prosperity.

1335. Is grief at the prosperity of another sinful, when it is caused
by his unworthiness of prosperity? (a) If the indignation could be
about spiritual things, of course it would be sinful; but this is not
possible, for it is precisely spiritual goods (such as virtues) that
make one deserving. Indignation, then, is about temporal goods, which
are enjoyed by the bad, as well as the good. (b) If the indignation is
about temporal things owned by the wicked, and one grieves that they
have prosperity, sin is committed. For it is God who distributes to the
undeserving the goods they have; His purpose is just, namely, that
these goods may be for the correction or the punishment of the wicked;
those who grieve over the prosperity of the unworthy overlook the fact
that eternal goods are a reward to man, temporal goods only a trust to
be administered. Hence, the Psalmist says: “Be not emulous of
evil-doers, nor envy them that work iniquity, for they shall shortly
wither away as grass” (Ps. xxxvi. 1).

1336. Two special cases of sorrow over the prosperity of the wicked
must be considered. (a) If one sorrows precisely because the prosperity
is had by an undeserving person, and is not thinking of the divine
cause and purpose in human affairs, it does not seem that one sins;
for, abstracting from Divine Providence, there does appear an
unsuitability in the prosperity enjoyed by the wicked, and hence it is
something to be sorry about. But such sorrow is at least a preparation
for the sin spoken of in the previous paragraph, and so it should be
shunned: “My feet were almost moved, my steps had well-nigh slipped, in
anger at the wicked, seeing the prosperity of sinners” (Ps. lxxii. 2,
3). (b) If one sorrows precisely because the sinner will use his
prosperity in such a way as to become more wicked and to incur
chastisement, the sorrow is not uncharitable, but charitable.

1337. Sorrow at being surpassed by another on account of the relative
loss of glory to self, with the wish that the other had not the good
that makes him superior, is envy, as explained above. This sorrow is a
sin. (a) Thus, it is condemned in scripture: “Let us not be made
desirous of vainglory, envying one another” (Gal, v. 26); “The
patriarchs through envy sold Joseph into Egypt” (Acts, vii. 9),
“Charity envieth not” (I Cor., xiii. 4). (b) It is not reasonable to be
grieved at the prosperity of others, since prosperity is something good
and an object of joy rather than of sorrow.

1338. From its nature envy is a mortal sin. (a) Thus, it is directly
opposed to the principal acts of charity, which are love of the
neighbor, desire of his good, and joy over his prosperity; and charity
is the life of the soul (I John, iii. 14). Secondary acts of charity,
such as kissing the sores of a leper, may be omitted without loss of
love, but envy destroys love itself. (b) Envy is directly contrary to
mercy; for, while mercy grieves at the evil of others, envy grieves at
their good. The envious are not merciful, neither are the merciful
envious.

1339. Envy is a greater sin than the other kinds of sorrow at a
neighbor’s good. (a) Thus, envy grieves over the neighbor’s good (even
if he is worthy), and is greater or less in proportion to that good;
(b) emulation grieves over one’s own deficiency, fear over the
consequences of the other’s good, indignation over the prosperity of
one who is unworthy.

1340. Envy is not a mortal sin in the following cases: (a) if the
object is not grave, as when one is envious about some trifle (such as
good looks); (b) if the subject does not give sufficient reflection or
full consent, as when infants are jealous of one another, or adults
feel the stirrings of envy. Even holy men are not above the first
movements or inclinations towards envy, and very many envious thoughts
are not mortal, because not fully adverted to.

1341. Degrees of Gravity in Sins of Envy.--(a) There are no different
species of envy of the neighbor, for all acts of envy have the one
essential trait that they are sorrow over the excellence of another,
viewed, not absolutely in itself, but relatively as a lessening of
one’s own excellence. We should distinguish, however, the envy which is
a sin against God (viz., envy at another’s spiritual good, or sorrow at
the diffusion of grace) from the envy which is a sin against the
neighbor.

(b) There are different degrees of envy within the species, according
to the greater or less excellence of the good which is envied. Thus, it
is a greater sin to be envious about spiritual things (e.g., another’s
influence for good) than about temporal things (e.g., another’s ability
to get money); it is a greater sin to be envious about the wellbeing of
the body than about dress, style, etc.

1342. Envy is one of the capital vices, that is, it is an evil tree
which from its very nature yields the evil fruits of other sins. The
fruits of envy are progressive in evil.

(a) Thus, in the beginning of envy, one tries to diminish the glory of
the person one envies, either secretly (sin of whispering) or openly
(sin of detraction).

(b) In its progress, envy rejoices at the adversity of the neighbor, if
its attempt to injure succeeds; or it sorrows over his continued
prosperity, if its effort at blackening has failed. Rejoicing at a
neighbor’s adversity is not different specifically from envy; but the
affliction over the neighbor’s prosperity now spoken of is of the same
species as the vice which sought to undermine the neighbor. Thus, if
the envious person resorted in vain to detraction, his grief at the
failure of his efforts is in guilt a sin of detraction.

(c) In its consummation, envy becomes hatred, as was said above on the
causes of hate (see 1316).

1343. Envy is not the first of the seven capital vices. (a) Thus, it is
caused by pride, for one who inordinately desires his own excellence
will easily grieve over what he regards as the lessening of that
excellence by the excellence of another. (b) It is caused by vainglory,
for one who inordinately longs for fame and honors, will easily be
grieved over the fame and honors enjoyed by others.

1344. In what way is envy preeminent among sins? (a) Envy is not the
most enormous vice, for, as said above (see 1301), hatred of God is
from its nature the worst of all sins. But there is one kind of
envy--namely, envy of a brother’s spiritual good--which has a place
among those gravest offenses called “sins against the Holy Ghost” (see
899).

(b) Envy is most like to the sin that brought all woe into the world,
for “by the envy of the devil death entered the world” (Wis., ii. 24).
It was sorrow at the gifts bestowed upon our first parents that moved
the demon to tempt them, and accordingly his envy led to their fall and
to the loss of original justice by the Whole race.

1345. Useful Considerations against Envy.--(a) Envy is useless, since
it does not obtain that on which one’s heart is set, or obtains it only
by the sacrifice of charity, which is something better. (b) Envy is
harmful, since it carries its own torment with it (Gen., iv. 5; Wis.,
vi. 25; Prov., xiv. 30), and brings on many sins against the neighbor.
Through envy the first murder was committed (Gen., iv. 8), and it was
envy that brought about the crucifixion of Christ (Matt, xxvii. 18).

1346. Useful practices against envy are: (a) the uprooting of its
causes, pride and vainglory; (b) the cultivation of an unselfish
charity and of emulation of what is best in others: “So that by all
means, whether by occasion, or by truth, Christ be preached, in this I
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice” (Philip., i. 18); “Let us consider one
another, to provoke unto charity and to good works” (Heb., x. 24).




Art. 8: THE SINS AGAINST PEACE

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 37-42.)

1347. The following sins are opposed to the peace of charity: (a)
discord, which is opposed to peace in wills; (b) contention or
quarreling, which is opposed to peace in words; (e) schism, war, fights
and sedition, which are opposed to peace in works.

1348. Discord.--As here understood, discord is a disagreement in the
wills of two or more persons in matters pertaining to the divine good,
or the good of the neighbor, and concerning which charity requires that
they be in agreement.

(a) Discord is a disagreement in wills, that is, in wishes and desires.
Hence, it is not the same as difference of opinion (see 1197), which is
a disagreement in judgments.

(b) It is about matters in which agreement is necessary, that is, in
which the law of God requires that all wish the same things, and have
but one heart and soul. Thus, discord differs from disagreement about
matters of supererogation. Examples: Titus and his wife are at
variance, because Titus is unwilling to give any alms. Balbus and his
wife are at variance, because she wishes him to give away in alms more
than is strictly necessary. In the first husband there is discord, but
not in the second.

(c) Discord is opposed to the divine good, or the good of the neighbor.
Thus, it differs from a disagreement with another who is attacking the
divine good or the good of the neighbor. The standard of concord is the
divine will, and he only of the persons at variance is discordant who
is not in harmony with the divine will.

(d) Discord is confined to those matters in which charity calls for
agreement. If it be some other virtue that demands unanimity (e.g.,
justice), the disagreement is not discord in the special sense now
employed, Thus, he whose will refuses consent to the command of a
superior is disobedient; he whose will refuses to pay the debt due a
creditor is dishonest.

1349. There are two kinds of discord: (a) intentional discord, which is
the act of one who knowingly and purposely contradicts in a matter
about which charity requires that he agree;

(b) unintentional discord, which is a disagreement between persons, who
both intend the divine good or the good of the neighbor, but who are
divided in opinion as to what that good here and now requires.

1350. Sinfulness of Intentional Discord.--(a) From its nature, this
species of discord is a mortal sin, since it directly excludes charity.
Hence, those who are guilty of discord shall not obtain the kingdom of
heaven (Gal, v. 21). (b) From the lack of sufficient reflection or
consent, the first impulses towards discord are not mortal sins.

1351. Sinfulness of Unintentional Discord.--(a) From its nature, this
kind of discord is not opposed to charity, nor is it sinful; for the
concord of charity consists in a union of wills, not in a union of
opinions. Thus, the disagreement between Paul and Barnabas about John
Mark (Acts, xv. 39) was not sinful, although the difference of judgment
indicated their human limitations. (b) From its circumstances, this
kind of discord may be sinful, as when it is caused by culpable
ignorance in matters of faith, or is carried on with obstinacy.

1352. By whom is the sin of discord committed? (a) It is committed
sometimes by one party only, as when one knowingly resists the will of
another who wishes to perform a necessary act of charity. (b) It is
committed at other times by both parties, as when each in defending his
own good infringes knowingly on the charity due the other.

1353. Is it lawful to promote divisions, when one’s purpose and the
result will be good? (a) To promote division that takes away the
concord of charity is never lawful, but a mortal sin: “There are six
things the Lord hates, and a seventh which His soul detests, a sower of
discord among brethren” (Prov., vi. 16, 19). (b) To promote division
that takes away a concord of malice is lawful and praiseworthy. Thus,
St. Paul introduced a dissension between the Pharisees and the
Sadducees, who had been in agreement against him (Acts, xxiii. 6, 7).
But the intention of the Apostle was to win the Pharisees to the
defense of the Resurrection and of himself, not to incite the Sadducees
to a denial of the Resurrection, and so there was no question of his
using evil means for a good end.

1354. The Origin of Discord.--(a) The disagreement with the will of a
neighbor arises from envy. For he who considers the excellence of his
neighbor as a lessening of his own excellence, is inclined to
contradict the wishes of the neighbor, even if he recognizes them as
good. (b) The preference of one’s own will and persistence in it are
due to pride and vainglory. For he who unduly desires his own
excellence or fame does not wish to yield to others or change his
purposes. He feels that, even though he is in the wrong, he must not
take what he regards as a position of inferiority.

1355. Contention.--Contention is discord carried into words or
equivalent signs, (i.e., a dispute or altercation), in which one denies
what the other affirms. It is divided as follows: (a) by reason of the
intention, it is either an investigation of the truth, a defense of the
truth, or an attack on the truth; (b) by reason of the manner in which
it is conducted, it is either suitable or unsuitable to the persons and
the matter in question.

1356. Contention whose aim is the discovery of the truth is lawful as
follows. (a) Such contention is lawful and useful in itself, for it is
a means of acquiring useful knowledge, of seeing both sides of a
question, and of sharpening the mind for the refutation of error.
Hence, a contest in a court of justice, a controversy in a scientific
journal, a public debate on some important matter, and a theological
disputation are according to their nature lawful, and may be necessary.
Even to argue against the truth, for the sake of practice in discussion
or to bring out the truth more clearly and forcibly, is, apart from
danger, scandal, or prohibition, not unuseful.

(b) Debate is unlawful in its manner when a disputant does not argue
according to the rules, appeals to prejudice or ignorance, uses an
insulting tone or unparliamentary language, etc.

1357. The Sin of Contention.--Contention is a sin when its aim is the
concealment or discomfiture of the truth. (a) From its nature this kind
of contention is a mortal sin, for it is the external expression of
internal discord in matters about which charity requires concord and
the same speech. Hence, the Apostle numbers contention among the works
of the flesh that exclude from the kingdom of God (Gal, v. 20). (b)
From the lightness of the matter or the imperfection of the consent,
this kind of contention is very often, if not usually, only a venial
sin, or no sin at all. Examples: A person argues against what he knows
is true, but the matter is trivial (e.g., his weight); or he is
distracted by the heat of dispute or the tactics of the other party.

1358. Mortal sin is not committed by contention, therefore, unless the
truths against which one contends are of a serious kind. Such truths
are: (a) truths of a religious or moral character, such as the
doctrines of faith and the commandments of God; (b) natural truths of a
universal character, the knowledge of which pertains to the perfection
of the intellect, such as first principles; (c) natural truths of a
particular character in which important rights are involved. Example:
An historian who writes against some deservedly revered person of the
past, or a lawyer who attempts to prove against an accused what he
knows is not a fact, are guilty of the sin of contention.

1359. Hence, one may be defending one kind of truth and contending
against another kind of truth at the same time. St. Paul, accordingly,
makes the distinction between announcement of the truth out of charity
and announcement of the truth out of contention (Philip, i, 15 sqq.).
(a) The truth is defended out of charity when one does not use truth as
a means for the defense of error; (b) it is defended out of contention
when one makes use of it as a means for the propagation of error. Thus,
while St. Paul was imprisoned at Rome in 61, certain personal enemies
preached Christ, but at the same time spoke or hinted falsehoods
against St. Paul in order to undermine his authority or add to the
bitterness of his captivity. Similarly, if one defends the truth to
make oneself appear different or better than one is, one speaks from
contention.

1360. Ways in which one is guilty of the mortal sin of contention: (a)
when one contends formally against the truth, that is, when one knows
the truth and intends to overcome it or suppress it; (b) when one
contends virtually against the truth, that is, when one is so bent on
carrying one’s point that one does not care whether it is true or
false. Thus, the Sophists aimed to win, right or wrong.

1361. When the aim of contention is the overthrow of error: (a) in
itself, such contention is good and praiseworthy, and at times
necessary; (b) by reason of circumstances, it may be a venial or a
mortal sin. Examples: A dispute on a matter that is unbecoming, such as
which of the disputants is greater (Luke, xxii. 24); dispute with
greater warmth than the case requires; a dispute that leads to scandal
or other evil consequences, as in religious controversies (I Tim., ii.
14).

1362. The Causes of Sinful Contention.--(a) The cause of that which is
principal in contention--namely, the departure from the truth held by
another and the stand made for error--is envy, pride and vainglory, as
said above (see 1854) concerning discord. (b) The cause of that which
is secondary in contention--namely, the wrangling or bawling manner and
the shouts or screams of the contenders--is anger.

1363. The sins in act against the peace of charity are the following:
(a) schism which is opposed to the peace of the spiritual society, the
Church; (b) war, which is opposed to international peace, and sedition,
which is opposed to national peace; (c) fighting, which is opposed to
peace between individuals.

1364. Schism.--Schism (etymologically, a split, rent) is defined: “A
voluntary separation of oneself from the unity of the Church.”

(a) Schism is a voluntary separation, that is, a separation intended
for its own sake. Every sinner in a sense separates himself from unity,
for sin divides one from God (Is., lix. 2); but it is only the
schismatic who expressly intends separation as such. Other sinners
expressly intend some inordinate gratification. Moreover, schism is not
the same thing as the state of the unbaptized, who have not separated
themselves from unity, or of the excommunicated, whom the Church
herself rejected from her body on account of some sin other than schism.

(b) Schism is a separation from unity, and so it differs from disbelief
in unity (heresy) and dislike of unity (hatred). One may separate
oneself from unity, although one believes in it. One may hate unity,
and yet not separate oneself from it. Further, schism does not
necessarily include affiliation with some schismatical body or the
setting up of such a body.

(c) Schism is a separation of oneself from unity--that is, schism does
not deprive the Church of the note of unity, but separates the
schismatic himself from that unity which is in the Church. The
schismatic may wish to take away the unity of the Church, but he
accomplishes only the loss of union of himself with the Church.

(d) Schism is a separation from unity, that is, from fellowship in the
mystical body of Christ (I Cor., xii). It is a refusal to recognize the
authority of the head of the Church, or to communicate with those
subject to him. Thus, schism differs from disobedience to the head of
the Church or to particular prelates in the Church, for one may disobey
orders and still recognize the authority of him who gives the orders.

(e) Schism is a separation from the unity of the Church, that is, of
the spiritual kingdom of Christ on earth. Hence, rebellion in matters
purely civil against a churchman who has civil authority, is not
schism, but is unjust war or sedition. Schism is possible only in the
Church Militant, for the members of the Church Suffering and the Church
Triumphant cannot fall away from unity.

1365. The Principal Schismatical Movements.--(a) In Apostolic times
there were local factions and dissensions, though not real schisms, at
Corinth (I Cor., i. 10 sqq.) and in Asia Minor (III John, i. 10). (b)
In post-Apostolic times there have been numerous schisms, such as that
of the Novatians at Rome in the third century, that of the Meletians in
Egypt in the fourth century, that of the Donatists in Africa in the
fourth century, that of the Acacians in the East in the fifth century.
The most lamentable of all the schisms, because of the number of those
whom it led away from unity, was the Eastern Schism, begun by Photius
in the ninth century and made permanent under Michael Caerularius in the
eleventh century.

1366. Schism is voluntary in two ways: (a) directly, when one intends
schism itself, wishing to separate oneself from the head or members of
the Church; (b) indirectly, when one intends to do that from which
schism follows. Thus, a person who prefers to act as if he were not a
member of the Church rather than desist from his design of calling or
presiding over an unauthorized Council, is guilty of schism, even
though he does not directly intend separation from the Church. His case
is similar to that of one who does not wish to kill his neighbor, and
yet is determined to do something from which the neighbor’s death will
surely result.

1367. There is a threefold unity of the Church, as follows: (a) unity
in the theological virtues and in the Sacraments. All the faithful have
the same faith, hope, charity, Sacraments, and thus there is a unity of
similarity; (b) unity between head and members. There is but one head
of the Church, Christ in heaven and the Vicar of Christ an earth. Thus,
there is a unity of subordination; (c) unity between the members of the
Church. All the faithful form but one society, and all are parts of one
great whole. Thus, there is a collective unity.

1368. The sin of schism is committed in two ways (Canon 1325, n. 2).
(a) It is committed by separation from the head of the Church on earth
and the keystone of unity, that is, the Pope (Col., ii. 18, 19). The
mere fact that a man is in rebellion against his bishop does not make
him a schismatic, if he continues to acknowledge subjection to the Holy
See. But such rebellion is often the first step towards schism. (b) The
sin of schism is also committed by separation from the members of the
Church. Thus, one who refuses to communicate with Catholics in matters
of faith or worship, choosing to act as an independent in those things,
is a schismatic.

1369. Rejection of a decision or command of the Pope can happen in
three ways:

(a) The reason for rejecting the decision may be the thing commanded,
and not the one who gave the command, as when a person refuses to keep
a fast or make a restitution commanded by the Pope, because he
considers it too difficult. In this case the person is guilty of
disobedience, but not of schism, even though he persists in his
refusal; for he rejects a commandment of the Church, not the head of
the Church.

(b) The reason for rejecting the command may be the one who gave the
command, considered as a private individual. As the Pope in his
personal relations is not above human weakness, he may be swayed by
hatred, prejudice or impulsiveness in issuing commands to or forming
judgments about individual subjects. Hence, if we suppose that it is
reasonably certain that a Pope is unfavorable to an individual, and
that the latter accordingly is unwilling to have a case in which he is
concerned fall under the immediate decision of that Pope, neither
schism nor any other sin is committed; for it is natural that the
person should wish to protect his own interests against unfairness.

(c) The reason for rejecting the Pope’s judgment may be the one who
gave the command considered in his official capacity as Pope. In this
case the person is guilty of schism, since he disobeys, not because the
thing ordered is difficult or because he fears that the individual will
be unjust, but because he does not wish to recognize the authority of
Pope in him who issued the judgment.

1370. Comparison of Heresy and Schism.--(a) These sins are not the
same, since heresy is opposed to faith, schism to charity. A person who
really believes that the Church is one in its head and its body, may
nevertheless out of pride, hatred, ambition, interest,
self-sufficiency, etc., decide not to recognize the authority of the
head, or not to communicate with the body. (b) There is an intimate
union between heresy and schism, since every heretic separates himself
from the unity of faith, while schism is always found to adopt some
heresy as a justification for its separation (I Tim., i. 6). Thus, the
Eastern Schism soon trumped up charges of heresy against the Church,
and history shows that schism almost invariably leads to a denial of
papal primacy.

1371. The Opposition between Schism and Charity.--(a) Charity in itself
is a spiritual bond of unity between the soul and God, for love is
unitive. One who sins against this unity by offending God or his
neighbor, is not thereby a schismatic, since one may hate an
individual, for example, without hating the Church. (b) Charity in its
effect is the communion of all the faithful in one mystical body of
Christ, for charity inspires the desire to love, not only individuals,
but also the spiritual society formed of individuals in the entire
world. One who sins against the unity and peace of the Church is a
schismatic.

1372. The Sinfulness of Schism.--(a) Schism has a special seriousness,
since it is opposed to the union and peace of mankind as a whole in the
universal spiritual society which is the Church. It seems to be the
greatest sin against the neighbor; for other sins are against the
individual or against the multitude in temporal things, while this sin
is against the multitude and in spiritual things. Scripture (cfr. I
Cor., i. 10) and Tradition (e.g., St. Clement of Rome, St. Ignatius of
Antioch, St. Irenaeus, St. Cyprian, St. Augustine) energetically condemn
the sin of schism.

(b) Objectively, it is not as serious as unbelief, since unbelief is
against God, schism against the neighbor; but subjectively, or in its
consequences, it may be greater than unbelief, as when a schismatic
sins with greater contempt than an unbeliever, or is an occasion of
more danger to others.

1373. Schism, like heresy, may be either formal or material (see 828).
(a) Formal schism is that described above, in which one wishes to
separate oneself from the unity of the Church, and is in culpable
revolt. It is a mortal sin. (b) Material schism is that in which one is
in fact separated from the unity of the Church, but is in good faith.
An example is the Great Schism of the West (1378-1417), when there were
rival claimants for the Papacy, and invincible ignorance among the
people as to who was the true head. This kind of schism is not a mortal
sin.

1374. The Spiritual Powers of Schismatics.--(a) The power of Orders is
not lost through schism, for that power is conferred through a
consecration, and the consecrations of the Church are permanent. Hence,
a schismatical priest can perform validly the acts that pertain to the
power of Orders, such as the celebration of Mass and administration of
the Sacraments; but he does not perform those acts lawfully, unless the
Church permits, for the power of Orders should not be used by an
inferior except as permitted by the superior.

(b) The power of jurisdiction may be lost through schism, for that
power depends on a commission received from a superior, which may be
withdrawn by him. Hence, a schismatical priest deprived of jurisdiction
could not absolve, excommunicate, grant indulgences, or perform other
acts that pertain to the power of jurisdiction.

1375. The law of the church on the powers of schismatics is as follows:

(a) All schismatics incur _ipso facto_ excommunication, as well as
various inhabilities and penalties (Canon 2314). It is fitting that
those who separate themselves should be declared outside the communion
of the faithful, and this is what Moses commanded to be done at the
time of the schism of Core: “Depart from the tent of these wicked men
and touch nothing of theirs, lest you be involved in their sin” (Num.,
xvi. 26).

(b) The excommunicated are forbidden the celebration of Mass and the
active use and administration of the Sacraments and sacramentals,
except when the faithful apply to them or when there is danger of
death, as declared in Canon 2261.

(c) The excommunicated are denied the power of jurisdiction except in
certain cases where the Church grants it for the sake of the common
good. Thus, they may give absolution in danger of death (Canon 882), or
in common error (Canon 209), or at request, if they are not _vitandi_
or sentenced (Canon 2261). It is the teaching of learned authorities
that the Roman Church for the good of souls has allowed ecclesiastical
jurisdiction to remain in the schismatic Oriental Churches for the
conferring of the Sacraments.

1376. War.--War is defined as a state of conflict between two or more
sovereign nations carried on by force of arms.

(a) It is a state of conflict, and so differs from passing conflicts,
such as battles, skirmishes, campaigns. The enemy in war is not only
those with whom one is actually fighting, but all those who side with
them, as counsellors, helpers, etc.

(b) War is between sovereign nations, and so differs from civil war,
sedition, riots, duels. Moreover, war is made by nation against nation,
not against particular individuals or groups of individuals within a
nation.

(c) It is carried on by force of arms, and so differs from trade war,
rivalry in preparedness for war, embargo, blockade, breach of
diplomatic relations, etc.

1377. There are two kinds of war, just and unjust. (a) War is just when
undertaken for a right cause (e.g., the independence of the nation);
(b) it is unjust when undertaken for a wrong cause (e.g., the
enslavement of a nation).

1378. Just war is either offensive or defensive. (a) Offensive war is
attack made on an enemy in order to avenge an injury or enforce a right
(e.g., invasion of the enemy’s territory to obtain compensation for
damages inflicted by him); (b) defensive war is resistance to unjust
attack made or menaced by an enemy (e.g., war made on the invader of
one’s country).

1379. Just war is called defensive in two senses. (a) In the strict
sense, it is defensive when the nation whose rights are unjustly
attacked does not initiate hostilities, that is, does not declare or
begin the war. (b) In a less strict sense, it is defensive when the
nation unjustly attacked declares war or strikes the first blow. Thus,
if the innocent nation knew that the enemy was secretly preparing war
against its independence, it would be on the defensive, even though it
declared war.

1380. War is not against the law of God. (a) Under the law of nature
Melchisedech blessed Abraham returning from victory over the four kings
(Gen., xiv. 18-20). (b) Under the written law, God many times ordered
or approved of war, as can be seen from Exodus and following books in
numerous places. (c) Under the New Law, John the Baptist acknowledged
the lawfulness of the soldier’s profession (Luke, iii. 14), a centurion
was praised by Christ (Matt, viii. 10), Acts, x. 2, speaks of the
officer Cornelius as a religious man, and St. Paul lauds warriors of
the Old Testament such as Gedeon, Barac, Samson, etc. (Heb, xi. 32-34).
Our Lord Himself used physical force against evildoers (John, ii. 14
sqq.).

1381. Certain sayings of our Lord--for example, that those who take the
sword shall perish by the sword (Matt, xxvi. 52), and that one should
not resist evil (Matt, v. 39)--are not an endorsement of extreme
pacifism, but are respectively a condemnation of those who without due
authority have recourse to violence, and a counsel of perfection, when
this serves better the honor of God or the good of the neighbor.
Moreover, these words of Christ were addressed, not to states, which
are responsible for the welfare of their members, but to individuals.
The Quakers have done excellent service for the cause of world peace,
but their teaching that all war is contrary to the law of Christ cannot
be admitted. The spirit of the Gospel includes justice as well as love.

1382. War is not against the law of the Church. (a) The Church has
never condemned war as such. She has always labored for the promotion
of peace or for the lessening of the evils of wars that could not be
prevented; but her official declarations and the writings of the
Fathers and Doctors show that she recognized that recourse to arms by
nations is not necessarily sinful. (b) The Church has put her approval
on some wars as necessary and laudable. Thus, the Crusades, to which
the salvation of Christian civilization is due, were promoted by the
Church; military orders for the defense of the Holy Sepulchre were
instituted by her, and she has raised to the honors of the altar
soldiers like Sebastian, Maurice, and Martin of Tours.

1383. War is not against the law of nature. (a) As the law of nature
allows even a private individual to use force to drive off an unjust
aggressor, it cannot be unlawful for a nation to have recourse to
defensive war when its rights are invaded. (b) As the law of nature
allows the individual to seek satisfaction for injury and restitution
for loss, it cannot be unlawful for a nation to make offensive war when
another nation will not make reparation, unless compelled to it by
force. If physical coercion were unlawful, a conscienceless nation
would take advantage of this at the expense of other nations, and thus
a premium would be set on iniquity.

1384. Like every other act, war is not morally good, unless its object,
its purpose and its circumstances are in accord with right. War is not
lawful, therefore, unless the three following conditions exist:

(a) Hostilities must be authorized by the public authority, for the
care of the State against internal and external disturbances has been
committed to the ruler (Rom., xii. 4; Ps. lxxxi. 4), and the individual
or the subject state can have recourse for protection of its rights to
the higher authority.

(b) There must be a just cause for war, that is, some fault on the side
of the other nation; for, if a nation may not use force against its own
subjects without sufficient reason, much less may it do so against
those who are not its subjects.

(c) There must be a right intention, that is, the desire to obtain some
good or to ward off some evil. Even if war is declared by the proper
authority and there is a sufficient reason for it, those who take part
in the war are guilty of sin if they have evil motives, such as the
exercise of cruelty, revenge, pride, or avarice. To delight in war
because one loves excitement or wishes to show one’s skill or get
promotion, is not a right frame of mind.

1385. What public authority has the right to declare war? (a)
Ordinarily, only the sovereign power--that is, the person or body in
whom the chief authority is vested according to the constitution of the
nation--can make war. War is an act of the nation, and hence only the
authority that represents the nation can make war. Subordinate bodies
in a confederation or union of states have the right to make war, if
custom or law allows it.

(b) In extraordinary circumstances, an inferior power can authorize
war, as when war is necessary and it is impossible to await a
declaration from the sovereign power. Thus, if a province were suddenly
invaded, it would be lawful for the head of the province to make war on
the invaders at once. It seems, indeed, that the head of a province
could justly authorize the invasion of a neighboring state, to protect
such province against aggressions, if the central authority would do
nothing; for such a war would be really defensive.

1386. In order that the cause of war be just, it is necessary that the
enemy nation has done or now menaces an injury which cannot be repaired
without war, and which is so serious that the evils of war are less
than that of toleration.

(a) Thus, a serious injury or grave dishonor inflicted by another
nation is the only just cause for the armed conflict which constitutes
war, for war is exercised as a punishment or a compulsion, and these
are unjust if no grave and formal fault is supposed.

(b) Only an injury that cannot be otherwise repaired is a just cause
for war, because a state has no right to use force against another
sovereign state except as a last resort. Hence, if the country at fault
has already made satisfaction or has promised to make satisfaction, war
should not be declared.

(c) Only an injury so grave that it outweighs the risks and losses of
war is a justification for making war, for when two effects, one good
and one evil, follow from an act, there must be a proportionately grave
reason for permitting the evil effect before acting (see 104, 105). It
would be wrong to avenge some small insult or some isolated injury at
the expense of immense treasure and enormous loss of life. Modern
warfare is so devastating that only the gravest reasons known to
society can authorize it. For, according to scientists, a single H-bomb
may cause death and destruction over a wide area, perhaps the space of
a hundred square miles. In view of the havoc which is foreseen to
outweigh the benefits of victory, it could happen that a nation with
justice on its side and the potential to wage war would nevertheless
not be justified in waging war (see 1410). This destructive power of
modern weapons, however, need not imply a sweeping condemnation of all
warfare. Spiritual values, e.g., freedom from tyranny, freedom to
worship God, still hold primacy over material values and can be deemed
so precious as to outweigh the great loss of lives and property
involved in defending them or recovering them through modern warfare.
“A people menaced by, or already victims of unjust aggression, if it
desires to think and to act in a Christian manner, cannot remain in
passive indifference” (Pope Pius XII, Christmas Message of 1948).

1387. In comparing the advantages and disadvantages of war, one should
take into consideration, not only the losses oneself will suffer, but
also the losses that will be suffered by others. (a) Thus, if the enemy
nation will be ruined as the price of one’s obtaining some small right,
charity would urge that one abstain from war. (b) If the world in
general or posterity will suffer greater evils materially or
spiritually than a nation is now suffering from the denial of some
non-essential right, charity at least should rule out a declaration of
war.

1388. Is there a just reason for war, when a fault has been committed
on both sides? (a) If the injuries are about equal and still in being,
there is no reason for war, for neither nation is in a position to
accuse the other of injustice. (b) If the injuries are quite unequal or
one nation has shown a willingness to cease from injury, the less
guilty nation has a right to make war; but it should first clear itself
of injustice, before it proceeds to chastise injustice in the other.

1389. Sufficient causes for making war are: (a) grave injury to the
honor of a nation, such as insult to its ruler or ambassadors (II
Kings, x.); (b) injury to the natural right of the nation to existence,
self-preservation, property, free action within its own sphere; thus, a
people may make war to defend their independence (I Mach., iii. 59), to
recover territory taken from them unjustly, to resist a violation of
neutrality (II Kings, viii. 5), to protect their own citizens and
commerce; (c) injury to the rights of the nation under positive law.
Thus, a nation may make war to uphold important international
agreements, to enforce the observance of treaties, and the like.

1390. Injury done to a third nation or to the subjects of a third
nation may also be a sufficient reason for war. (a) Thus, out of
justice, a nation is obliged to help its allies in a just war; for to
help those with whose interests one’s own interests are involved is
only self-defense. (b) Out of charity, a nation that has the right of
intervention may lawfully go to war to protect a weaker nation against
a stronger and bullying nation, to assist a government unjustly
attacked by its subjects, or to help innocent subjects who are
tyrannized over by their government.

1391. Is it lawful to go to war over religion or morality?

(a) Error in the religion or immorality in the practices of another
people is not a sufficient reason for making war on them. No one can be
forced to believe, says St. Augustine; and it is likewise true that no
one can be forced to love virtue, whereas external conformity without
conviction or love is hypocritical. Moreover, a nation has no authority
to correct the sins of those not subject to it. Hence, it would not be
right to attack a people for the sole reason that it was pagan or
polygamous.

(b) Interference, however, with the religious rights of others or
sinful practices that are injurious to others are a sufficient reason
for war. No war ever had a more legitimate cause than the Crusades,
which were undertaken to defend the Christian religion against the
unspeakable atrocities of infidels. The cause of humanity justifies a
war to put an end to such evils as cannibalism or human sacrifice.

1392. Is it lawful to make war on another nation in order to bring to
it the benefits of modern civilization? (a) If the uncivilized nation
lacks a government and suffers from disorder, it is an act of charity
for a civilized nation to set up a government there which will act for
the benefit of the people of the country. It is also lawful to make war
on those who resist the government thus established. (b) If the
uncivilized nation has its own orderly form of government and is at
peace, no other nation has the right to interfere under pretext of
introducing a higher type of government. Colonial expansion is not a
sufficient reason for war in such circumstances.

1393. The following causes for war are not sufficient:

(a) Motives clearly sinful are such as do not suppose any injury done
by the other nation, but rather some evil passion of pride, greed,
jealousy, suspicion, or selfishness on one’s own side. Hence, it is not
lawful to go to war for the glory of a ruler or of the nation, for the
enlargement of one’s territory, for the advantage that may be gained
over a commercial rival, for the preservation of the balance of power,
or for the prevention of difficulties at home.

(b) Motives apparently just, but really sinful, are injuries done by
another, if one has secretly provoked them in order to have a pretext
for war. It is not right to make war on a people because of attacks
made by their citizens, if these attacks were purposely caused by one’s
own citizens.

(c) Motives of displeasure with another nation are not sufficient as
motives for war, if the other nation has violated no right of justice,
but only acted in a way not consonant with charity or friendship. Thus,
the fact that one nation denies another financial assistance or the
tariff advantages granted to a third nation is not a _casus belli_; for
in matters of benevolence or privilege there is no strict claim or
title, and hence no right to have recourse to arms.

1394. Is war lawful when the justice of the cause is doubtful? (a) The
government may not declare war, unless it is morally certain that right
is on its side. The consequences of war are so dreadful, and the use of
force against another nation is such an extreme measure, that one
should refrain from hostilities as long as one’s moral right is
uncertain.

(b) Volunteers not already enlisted may not offer their services to a
belligerent, unless they are morally certain that his cause is just.
They participate in war from choice, and they should assure themselves
that their choice is correct.

(c) Subjects called to the colors should fight for their country, even
if they are in doubt about the justice of the cause, for the
presumption is on the side of the government. This does not mean,
however, that one should be willing to fight for one’s country, right
or wrong. nor that one would be obliged to fight for a cause manifestly
unjust, or to obey an order flagrantly wrong.

1395. What is the meaning of “moral certitude” in the previous
paragraph? (a) Some moralists believe that a high degree of probability
of the righteousness of his cause suffices in order that a ruler may
take steps towards war. (b) The greater number of moralists, however,
hold that no degree of probability suffices. The justifying reasons
must be clearer than day, and the state which goes to war must not
entertain a single doubt that its cause is right. This opinion we
prefer; for, if a jury may not sentence an accused to death as long as
there is a reasonable doubt of his innocence, neither ought a nation to
pass what is really a death sentence on hundreds or thousands of
citizens as long as there exists a doubt of a compelling reason for
such a course. It should, however, be observed that a ruler who has
only probable evidence that an injury has been done already, may have
certainty that it will be done, if it is not prevented by war.

1396. Is it possible that the cause of war should be just on both
sides? (a) Materially or objectively, the cause of war is just only on
one side, for, if one nation has the right to demand satisfaction or
restitution, manifestly the other nation has no right to refuse or
resist. (b) Formally or subjectively, the cause of war is just only on
one side, if the facts and obligations are known to both disputants,
for the nation that knows the right of the other side and yet opposes
it, does not act in good faith. (c) Formally or subjectively, the cause
of war is just on both sides, if the nation that is objectively in the
wrong is subjectively persuaded that it is in the right. And, even
though a government is in bad faith, its people as a rule will be in
good faith as a result of not understanding the facts or merits of the
controversy.

1397. It is possible that there should be objective justice and
injustice on the same side. (a) Thus, the side which is just as regards
the cause of the war, may be unjust in its conduct of the war on
account of the unlawful means it employs to win, or its continuation of
a hopeless struggle. (b) The side which was just as regards the
original cause of the war, may be unjust as regards a new cause that
appears. Thus, a nation which goes to war to regain a lost territory,
but which continues to fight for the sake of conquest after the
legitimate end has been achieved, contends for a just cause at the
beginning, but for an unjust cause later on. (c) The side whose grounds
are justifiable from the immediate point of view may be in the wrong if
causes are traced farther back.

1398. What are the duties before the beginning of war, according to
natural law?

(a) Examination of the Cause of War.--It is clear that those charged
with the declaration of war are bound to examine diligently and
prayerfully into the dispute, weighing the reasons on both sides, and
asking light from on high. To this end they should seek the counsel,
not of a few, but of many--not merely among those who are experts in
the diplomatic, legal, economic, and military aspects of the question,
but also among those who will look at the matter from its ethical side
and who are guided by fairness and justice. Since it is the people who
have to bear the burdens of war, it seems that many wars in the past
would have been prevented, had the wishes of the people been consulted.

(b) Judgment about the Merits of the Controversy.--It is also clear
that those who have to decide for war or peace should be impartial in
their judgment. Hence, they have to be on their guard against jingoism,
yellow journalism, and war interests, as well as against the pacifist
or the favorer of a foreign country at the expense of his own. They
should not proceed to offensive war, if their cause remains doubtful,
unless the other side provokes war by refusing peaceful settlement;
but, if they are in possession, they have the right to make defensive
war.

(c) Judgment about the Feasibility of War.--Prudence demands that, even
when a nation is convinced that it has a just cause to make war, it
should nevertheless refrain from this, unless it has a well-grounded
expectation that war will improve matters (Luke, xiv. 31, 32).
Statesmen who plunge their people into adventures whose end they cannot
at all foresee, are criminals.

(d) Efforts at Peaceful Solution.--Even if the cause is just and the
war feasible, hostilities should not be resorted to except as a last
means. Hence, pacific means--such as direct negotiation, mediation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, or pressure through trade embargoes,
boycotts, breach of diplomatic intercourse, etc.--should be tried in
the first place.

1399. The Chief Duties before Beginning War, According to International
Law.--(a) Before war is declared, an ultimatum should be issued to the
other nation, offering it final terms and a last opportunity to make
apology or satisfaction. (b) Foreigners who are in one’s territory
should be given an opportunity to settle their affairs and leave the
country within a reasonable time. (c) Ambassadors and other
representatives of the enemy should be provided with passports.

1400. In itself, as said above (see 1380 sqq.), war is not unlawful.
But in the light of the conditions required for a just war and of
circumstances as they are today, can war at the present time be ever
justifiable? (a) If the supreme interests of a nation are at stake
(such as its independence, the policies or interests vital to its
existence, its obligations under covenant or treaty of peace), war can
still be lawful today, for a nation cannot surrender its right to
self-defense, or betray its solemn engagements of cooperative defense.
(b) If less than supreme interests are at stake, war today seems
unjustifiable, for what proportion is there between the minor interests
of a single or several nations and the enormous destruction of modern
war and the dislocation of international security? Efforts of statesmen
to secure a world pact, outlawing or renouncing war as a means of
national policy, indicates progress for this view.

1401. What are the duties during war? (a) One should use every lawful
means, according to one’s position, to secure victory for one’s
country. Fighting to gain only a “stalemate,” in itself, is immoral.
(b) One should avoid such means as are opposed to natural or
international law.

1402. It is not true that all is fair in war, for even a just cause
cannot sanction unjust means. The commandments of God and the laws of
nations retain their force even amid the clash of arms. Examples of
acts of war that are unlawful, as being opposed to the natural law are
the following: (a) acts of irreligion, such as wanton destruction of
churches or monasteries; (b) attempts to seduce enemy soldiers from the
obedience or loyalty owed their commanders; (c) murder, that is, the
direct killing of innocent and unarmed persons, as when one refuses
quarter to soldiers who wish to surrender, fires on an officer bearing
a flag of truce, sinks passenger ships not engaged on errands of war,
massacres the civil population by raids from the air, places a
defenceless population at the mercy of savages or criminals employed as
soldiers; (d) the dishonoring of women, the establishment of brothels
for soldiers; (e) stealing, such as the unauthorized pillage of a town
or countryside; (f) lying, such as breaking treaties, not keeping faith
with the foe, entering into perjured agreements, circulating false
stories of atrocities, forging of documents, etc.

1403. Just war is resistance to unjust aggression, and so the same
means are lawful in warfare as are lawful in private aggression. (a)
Thus, the means used against an aggressor must not be evil in
themselves, as when a person protects himself against a murderer by
making an innocent person a shield. Hence, in war one may not use any
means that is opposed to the law of God, or to human contracts or other
obligations. (b) The means employed must be such as are really
necessary for overpowering the aggressor. Thus, it is not lawful to
kill a burglar when wounding him will suffice for the protection of
one’s property. Likewise, in war it is not lawful to exterminate or
depopulate an enemy, if the end of war can be attained by depriving the
enemy of his weapons.

1404. The principal classes of acts of war from the moral standpoint
are: (a) acts in which violence is done to things connected with
religion; (b) acts of violence against persons; (c) acts of violence
against property; (d) acts used to conceal truth.

1405. Acts of War and Sacred Times.--(a) It is lawful to carry on
warfare, offensively or defensively, on feasts, when this is necessary,
just as it is lawful to do servile work on those days in case of
necessity (I Mach., ii. 41; John, vii. 23). (b) But if a suspension of
hostilities can be arranged for feast days (especially for the greater
ones, such as Christmas and Easter), warfare should be discontinued at
those times.

1406. Acts of War and Sacred Places.--(a) It is lawful to attack a
church building, if it is certainly being used for military purposes.
It is also lawful to attack fortifications, and thus unintentionally to
harm adjacent church buildings. (b) It is not lawful, apart from these
reasons of real military necessity, to injure sacred places or edifices.

1407. Acts of War and Sacred Persons.--(a) It is lawful for clerics to
cooperate in a just war in spiritual ways, as by exhortations, prayers,
and religious ministrations. Moses prayed for the armies of Israel
during battle (Exod., xvii. 8 sqq.), the priests accompanied Josue
around the wall of Jericho (Jos., vi. 4), and St. Bernard and other
holy men preached crusades. (b) It is not lawful, apart from necessity
(as in case of conscription), for clerics to take part in actual
fighting. Warfare is unbecoming in a cleric, because he is enrolled for
a spiritual warfare (II Tim., ii. 4), and because his leader, Christ,
shed His own blood, not that of others (Matt, xxvi. 52). Hence, the
Church forbids clerics to volunteer as soldiers (Canon 141).

1408. The persons to whom violence is done during war are: (a)
Combatants, that is, all those who are engaged in the actual promotion
of the war. Direct combatants are the fighters, such as the officers
and privates of army, navy, and air force; indirect combatants are the
unarmed auxiliaries of the soldiers in military ways, such as makers of
munition, transporters of supplies, and those in the communication
service. (b) Non-combatants are enemy subjects who are neither fighters
nor auxiliaries of the armed forces, such as chaplains and members of
the medical service in the army, persons in civil life and occupation,
old men, women, and children. (c) Neutrals are those who are not
subject to either of the warring contenders, and who take no part in
the hostilities, although they may sympathize with one side.

1409. The Killing or Wounding of Enemy Combatants.--(a) According to
natural law, it is lawful to kill or wound the enemy in battle, or to
starve him by blockade, just as it is lawful in self-defense to kill or
wound an unjust aggressor. (b) According to international law, it was
expressly forbidden to attack in ways that make war more cruel without
hastening the decision.

1410. The Killing or Wounding of Non-Combatants.--(a) The indirect
killing of non-combatants (i.e., killing which is unintentional and
unavoidable) is lawful, according to the rules given for double effect
(see 103, 104). Hence, it is lawful to bombard the fortifications,
arsenals, munition works, and barracks of a town, to sink passenger
liners that are carrying arms or stores to the enemy, to cut off food
supplies from a town or country in order to starve out its troops,
although these measures will entail the deaths of some civilians as
well as of combatants. Humanity requires, however, that an effort be
made to spare the non-combatants, when possible, as by serving warning
of attack, so that they may be removed to safety. When it is a
question, however, of the use of modern weapons (the atom, hydrogen or
cobalt bombs) on military targets in the vicinity of large cities,
where it is foreseen that many thousands of civilians will be killed or
severely wounded, then the principle of double effect seems to rule out
the lawfulness of using such devastating weapons. The immediate evil
effect, the slaughter of the innocents, could hardly be called
incidental and only reluctantly permitted. Concretely, the inevitable
results of the use of such weapons would have to be intended directly,
if not as an end, at least as a means.

(b) The direct killing of non-combatants (i.e., killing which is
intentional) is unlawful and constitutes the sin of murder.
Obliteration bombing, the dropping of H-bombs or atom bombs on a
residential section of a city containing no military objectives, are of
this character; for they are attacks on civilians. It can not be argued
that such an attack would probably break down the morale of the
citizens to such an extent that they would force their rulers to make
peace and so save many thousands of lives. For this argument is based
on the principle that a good end justifies evil means.

Occasionally it is argued that modern “total” warfare demands that all
citizens contribute to the war effort and that consequently everyone is
a combatant. The argument can hardly be sustained, for Catholic
doctrine insists that those whose participation is only remote and
accidental are not to be classified as combatants. In a well-documented
article on “The Morality of Obliteration Bombing,” by John C. Ford,
S.J. (_Theological Studies_, V, 1944, pp. 261-309), the validity of the
distinction between combatants and innocent non-combatants, even in the
condition of modern war, is upheld. Fr. Ford shows that in an
industrial city, as found in the United States, three-fourths of the
population belong to the non-combatant category, and he lists more than
a hundred trades or professions which, according to the natural law,
exclude their members from the category of combatants. Direct attacks
on such a population clearly would constitute unjustifiable killing or
wounding of non-combatants.

1411. The Sentence of Death for Military Crimes.--(a) It is lawful to
sentence to death persons guilty of international crime, such as those
who approach when warned to halt, civilians who fire on the troops,
guerrillas, pirates, spies and deserters. (b) It is not lawful to
sentence to death persons not guilty of international crime. Thus, a
private soldier should not be executed because under orders he killed a
non-combatant; a hostage, not guilty of any capital crime, should not
be put to death, because his fellow-citizens for whom he is held rebel
or break faith.

1412. Imprisonment and Restraint.--(a) Combatants may be made prisoners
of war, non-combatants are subject to the restrictions of military
rules when their territory is occupied, and in very exceptional cases
they may be transported behind their enemy’s lines. (b) Prisoners of
war and inhabitants of occupied territory are to be treated as human
beings, but not better than the soldiers of one’s own army. They may
not be reduced to slavery, held as hostages, tortured or starved to
death, or placed in front trenches as a shield to one’s own forces.

1413. The Destruction or Seizure of Property During War.--(a) The
military property of the enemy nation or of its subjects may be
confiscated or destroyed, just as an individual has the right to
destroy the weapon of an unjust aggressor. Hence, a commander may
demolish fortifications, war factories, airships, warships, weapons and
artillery; he may cut off or seize supplies and provisions of money,
food or drink.

(b) The public, non-military property of the enemy may be occupied by a
successful invader. He may appropriate movable goods (works of art and
some others are excepted by international law), and he may use
immovable goods (public places of worship, museums, etc., are excepted
by law).

(c) As to private property of enemy subjects on land, international law
requires that immovables generally be respected, and movables can be
seized only for some necessary purpose of war. Requisitions and
contributions may be exacted and soldiers may be billeted in the homes
of citizens, but only so much may be levied as is needed for army
maintenance and civil administration, and compensation must be made, or
a receipt be given for future compensation. War is made, not against
private persons, but against the state.

(d) As to private property on sea, the usage has been that the merchant
ships of the enemy may be captured and made a lawful prize.

(e) The property of neutrals on land must not be molested, unless it is
not really neutral, as when it is being used by the enemy. As regards
the ships and shipping of neutrals on the high seas, they are not up to
the present protected by international agreement. Rather the naval
powers are divided between the theories of command of the seas and
freedom of the seas. Thus, Great Britain claims the right to search,
seize and hold the vessels or cargoes of neutrals who carry contraband
or attempt to trade with the enemy in the face of a blockade.

1414. It is an axiom that booty taken in war belongs, not to the
private soldiers, but to their government. Hence, the question arises:
Are private soldiers, who take the goods of citizens without
authorization from their officers, bound to make restitution? (a) If
they take what is necessary for their own sustenance, they act against
military discipline, but not against justice, and are not bound to
restore. (b) If they take other things, they are bound to restore,
since international agreements make this a duty of justice. But, if
neither of the belligerents observed this agreement, the obligation of
restitution cannot be insisted on as grave.

1415. Is it lawful to give over a city to be looted by the soldiery?
(a) In ancient times, this was sometimes permissible, as when
compensation and victory in a just war was otherwise impossible. (b) In
modern times and according to present international law, looting is
strictly forbidden. Violation of agreements by city heads gives no
right to attack the property of the citizens who are not responsible,
and valiant defense of the city by its troops does not forfeit the
rights of the inhabitants to their goods.

1416. Stratagems in War.--(a) It is lawful to use various artifices for
concealing one’s plans from the enemy, such as camouflage, smoke
screens, censored reports of engagements, etc. Thus, Josue by command
of the Lord prepared an ambush for the citizens of Hai (Jos., viii. 2).
(b) It is lawful also to conceal one’s identity by wearing the uniforms
of the enemy in order to obtain information about his plans. The Lord
commanded Moses to send out men to spy on the land of Chanaan (Num.,
xiii. 1). While it is not lawful to tell or signify untruth, it is
lawful to conceal the truth from those who have no right to know it.

1417. Reprisals are acts of retaliation by which one replies to
unlawful aggressions of the enemy by equivalent aggressions against
him. Their morality depends on circumstances. (a) Thus, if the act of
the enemy is opposed only to international law, it is not unlawful to
use the same act against him, for, since he has broken faith, the
treaty obligation no longer binds the other side. For example, if the
enemy, contrary to agreement, uses poison gas in warfare, it is lawful
to use poison gas against him. Reprisals should not be made, however,
without authorization from the proper authority. (b) If the act of the
enemy is opposed to natural law, it is not permissible to retaliate by
the same kind of acts. Two wrongs do not make a right. But one may
retaliate in lawful ways, or else issue a protest and await
compensation at the conclusion of the war. Thus, if the enemy murders
the civil population, this does not justify one in murdering enemy
citizens who are in one’s power.

1418. Duties of the Nation Victorious in War.--(a) The victorious
nation must not prolong the war after victory has been gained, or after
the enemy has sued in good faith for peace or armistice. (b) It must
not exact from the defeated foe more than it has a just right to.

1419. The Rights of the Victor.--(a) If the cause of the victorious
nation was unjust, its victory gives it no claim, for might does not
make right. On the contrary, it may be obliged to make restitution to
the defeated nation for the losses it has suffered. (b) If the cause of
the victor was just, the victorious nation has a claim to three things:
(i) to the satisfaction or restitution for the sake of which the war
was undertaken; (ii) to compensation for damages caused by the enemy
during the war, and (iii) to guarantees against a recurrence of the
former injury. Supervision of peace treaties by an impartial tribunal
has much to recommend it, since victors are prone to disregard charity
and justice when treating with a conquered foe, and to extort from him
forced agreements.

1420. The Obligation of a Victor Whose Cause was Unjust.--(a) If the
victorious nation fought in good faith, and only later perceived the
injustice of its cause, it is bound to restore only those things which
it has not consumed, and which make it better off than it was before
the war. (b) If it fought in bad faith, it should restore all. Victory
does not prove that one was right, but only that one was stronger. It
does not make a bad cause good.

1421. The Obligation of a Victor Who Fought Without Due Authorization,
or with a Wrong Purpose.--(a) Soldiers who inflict damage on the enemy
against the orders of the commanders (e.g., by burning dwellings,
robbing private citizens, murdering, etc.), are obliged to restitution
for those injuries, for such acts are not war, but brigandage. (b)
Soldiers who fight with a wrong motive (e.g., out of hatred), are not
obliged to restitution, since they have not committed injustice; for
similarly a judge, who sentences a convicted criminal, sins if his
motive is hate, but he is not held to restitution.

1422. What Indemnity may be Imposed on the Vanquished?--(a) According
to justice, one may exact compensation for the losses and expenses one
has sustained on account of war, since the enemy is responsible for
these. (b) According to charity, one may be obliged to relinquish part
of what is owed, or to grant easier terms of payment, or to cancel a
debt, as when the enemy is greatly impoverished, or cannot easily pay
at present.

1423. In cases of doubt, as when counter claims are made and neither
party is entirely victorious, or when a vanquished nation denies its
ability to pay what is demanded, recourse may be had to other ways of
settlement. (a) Thus, in the former case a compromise or mutual
condonation of claims, especially if both sides are exhausted by the
war, seems the reasonable solution. (b) In the latter case submission
to an impartial tribunal of arbitration would benefit the victors as
well as the vanquished, since in the long run it is not to the
advantage of the former that the latter be deprived of its goods and
productivity.

1424. Guarantees for the Future.--(a) One may insist on such guarantees
as will insure against a probable renewal of the offense committed by
the conquered nation. Hence, one may require that it destroy or deliver
over fortifications and munition plants, sink warships, reduce its
military force, punish certain individuals, or depose certain rulers.

(b) One may not insist on such guarantees as will make a renewal of war
by the enemy, now or in the future, absolutely impossible. As said
above, a nation has the right to go to war to defend itself against
aggression, but it has no right to work at destroying equality or
competition on the part of other nations. Hence, it is not lawful to
demand that the conquered nation surrender its independence or the
management of its affairs, or that one be allowed to annex all the
territory taken during war, if one’s rights or reasonable security does
not require these conditions. Subjugation or temporary occupation are
lawful, however, if there is no other way of obtaining redress or
securities.

1425. Punishment of Enemy Soldiers for Crimes Committed during
War.--(a) Special crimes committed during war (e.g., massacres of
non-combatants) may be punished, but the punishment should be visited
on those responsible, not on those who merely executed orders. (b) The
crime of the war itself should not be revenged on private soldiers, for
it is unjust to punish subjects for the madness of their officers and
rulers. As to the latter, moral guilt is not easily established. The
Nurenberg trials held commanders and high officers responsible for
crimes against humanity, and not without precedent.

1426. Preparation for Future Wars.--(a) Reasonable preparedness is not
only lawful, but a duty of the state to its own people. A nation should
have such a military establishment or such alliances as will safeguard
its right against probable attack. (b) Unreasonable preparedness is
unlawful since it burdens the people and prepares the way for war.
Examples of unreasonable preparations: maintenance of an army or navy
far in excess of those nations of similar rank; oppressive military
expenses or burdens; maneuvers offensive to other governments or too
dangerous for the troops engaged; ruinous competition in armaments.

1427. Preparation for peace or against war is a duty no less obligatory
than preparation for defensive war. Two chief ways of preparing for
peace: (a) will for peace; (b) work for peace.

(a) The will for peace is promoted when the nations educate their
people to a realization of the brotherhood of man, of the wrongfulness
and folly of a narrow nationalism, of the sinfulness of war which has
not all the conditions of a just war in its favor. Without the will for
peace, conferences and treaties will effect little.

(b) Work for peace is done by all who give their service to practical
plans for the prevention of war and the preservation of lasting world
amity. Among these plans are agreements among nations to substitute
moral right for material force, to abolish conscription and armaments,
to establish international tribunals, associations and world courts, to
make arbitration of disputes among themselves compulsory, to codify
international law. History bears witness to the many and great services
to humanity which the Popes have rendered by acting as arbiters between
nations that were on the point of war. If jealousies prevent agreement
among governments, the peoples of the world should nevertheless
continue to work for peace and by constitutional means make their
wishes prevail among the governments. With the Church we should pray:
“From pestilence, famine and war, deliver us, O Lord.”

1428. Fighting.--Fighting is an angry conflict between two or more
persons carried on by means of physical violence.

(a) Thus, it is an angry conflict, and so differs from contests of
strength or skill made for the sake of sport, amusement, recreation,
health, exercise and training. Hence, wrestling and boxing matches,
football games, fencing and similar athletic contests, in which fair
play and a sportsmanlike spirit prevail, are not fighting as here
understood. Similarly, the tournaments of the medieval knights were
sports or spectacles, rather than fights.

(b) It is a conflict, and so differs from punishment inflicted by
lawful authority, as when a police officer uses his club to prevent a
crime, a parent or teacher chastises insubordinate children, or a sober
man scuffles with an inebriate to take away his flask or with a lunatic
to deprive him of a weapon.

(c) It is a conflict between two or more individuals, and so differs
from war and sedition, which are conflicts between nations or parts of
a multitude.

(d) It is conducted by means of physical violence, that is by the
infliction of bodily injuries or harm. Thus, fighting differs from
quarreling, which is a dispute in words. It makes no difference whether
the attack be made by fists, fingernails or teeth, or by weapons or
missiles, or whether the bodily harm be direct (e.g., a blackened eye)
or indirect (e.g., a hat knocked off the head).

1429. Kinds of Fighting.--(a) As to its origin, fighting is provoked or
unprovoked, according as one who fights is attacking another or
defending himself against attack. (b) As to its manner, it is an
ordinary fight or a duel, according as it takes place without or with
previous arrangement and stipulated conditions. (c) As to its eject,
the civil law distinguishes between assault and battery. Assault is a
show of violence against the person of another, as when one lifts one’s
fist or cane in a threatening manner to put another in fear of bodily
harm. Battery is the actual infliction of personal violence, as when
one strikes, pushes, scratches, bites, or spits on another.

1430. The Sinfulness of Fighting.--(a) Unprovoked fighting is from its
nature a mortal sin. It is classed among the works of the flesh that
exclude from the kingdom of heaven (Gal, v. 20, 21), and it is
essentially opposed to the charity owed to a neighbor. It is frequently
only a venial sin, either because the act is not entirely deliberate,
as when one fights in sudden anger, or because the violence is of a
trifling kind, as when school-children pull one another’s hair or throw
snowballs.

(b) Fighting under provocation is no sin at all, when one intends only
to defend one’s rights and does not go beyond what is necessary for
lawful defence, as when one struggles with a burglar who is trying to
enter one’s house, and pushes him through the door. It is a venial sin,
when the person who is resisting aggression acts with some slight
degree of hate or revengefulness, or inflicts a little more injury than
is really necessary. It is a mortal sin, when the person who was
attacked fights in a spirit of hate and revenge, or deliberately and
needlessly seeks to kill or seriously maim the adversary.

1431. Causes of Fighting.--The remedy of sinful fighting is the removal
of its causes. The sources of fighting are proximate and remote.

(a) The immediate cause is anger. The angry man provokes fights (Prov.,
xv. 18, xxix. 22), for anger, being a desire of revenge, is not content
to injure another secretly, but wishes to punish him--that is, to
injure him in such a Way that he will know he is being punished and
will feel grief on that account. Anger also blinds one to the
foolishness of one’s actions, and so leads one precipitately into
quarrels and fights (Prov., xviii. 6).

(b) The remote cause of fighting is an inordinate desire of temporal
things, such as wealth, power, ease: “Why are there wars and disputes
among you? Is it not because of the desires that war among your
members?” (James, iv. 1). Those who are overmuch concerned with their
own interests, easily take offense at what they consider slights or
insults or opposition, their rage bursts forth, and they proceed at
once to visit revenge on those at whom they are offended. It was greed
and envy that caused the herdsmen of Palestine to fill up the wells dug
by Isaac and to fight with his servants for possession (Gen., xxvi. 14
sqq.).

1432. Hatred and Fighting.--(a) Hatred is not necessarily a cause of
fighting. The hater wishes evil to his neighbor, not as punishment, but
absolutely; his passion is calmer, more lasting, and more insatiable
than that of the angry man. If it suits him, he will bide his time
patiently, pretending friendship, but all the while plotting ruin to
the one he hates. (b) Hatred at times does bring on fighting, for, if
the hater sees that he can safely attack openly, he will use quarreling
and fighting as a means to his purpose.

1433. Occasions that Frequently Bring On Fighting.--(a) Boasting about
self or depreciation of others in the presence of persons who will take
offense occasions fights, for “he that boasteth and puffeth himself up
stirreth up quarrels” (Prov., xxviii. 25). Thus, disputes over the
respective merits of nations or political parties often bring on bloody
encounters. (b) Drunkenness occasions fights, for it so stupefies the
mind that one minimizes one’s danger and exaggerates one’s own
strength, and so is emboldened to attack others (Prov., xxiii. 29, 30).

1434. Evil Consequences of Fighting.--(a) Charity is wounded by
fighting, wherefrom there often result lasting hates, discords,
scandals. (b) Justice is wounded by fighting, as when a person unjustly
maims or kills his neighbor, and is himself imprisoned or executed, to
the disgrace and deprivation of his dependents.

1435. Duelling.--A duel is a prearranged combat between two persons
fought with deadly weapons, for the purpose of settling a private
quarrel.

(a) Thus, it is a combat, and hence the “suicide duel,” in which the
contenders draw lots with the understanding that the loser must kill
himself within a specified time, is not properly a duel.

(b) A duel is prearranged, that is, the time, place, and weapons are
determined in advance. Hence, if two feudists meet accidentally and
proceed at once to shoot, their combat is not strictly a duel. It is
not necessary, however, that a formal letter of challenge and a letter
of acceptance precede the fight.

(c) It is between two persons, that is, a determinate combatant is
matched against a determinate opponent. A true duel, however, might be
carried on between many couples simultaneously, as in the fight between
the twelve soldiers of Abner and the twelve soldiers of Joab (II Kings,
ii. 13-17). The presence of seconds or witnesses is not essential to a
duel.

(d) A duel is fought with deadly weapons, that is, with such arms as
are capable of inflicting severe wounds, so that there is serious
danger of grave wound or mutilation or death. There is no duel,
therefore, if one fights with weapons that cannot do serious harm (such
as fists, light sticks, mud), or if by agreement one uses dangerous
weapons in a way that precludes injury (e.g., by padding the edge of
one’s sword, loading one’s revolver with blanks, firing into the air,
as in sham or mock duels). But academic duels, in which students try to
stab each other in the face with small daggers, are true duels; for,
while the fighters are well protected in vital parts and serious or
fatal wounds rarely happen, it remains true that this manner of
fighting is mortally dangerous. The same remark applies to duels fought
on condition that only one or two rounds of shots shall be fired, or
that fighting shall cease as soon as blood has been drawn.

(e) A duel is fought for the purpose of settling a private quarrel. A
hand-to-hand combat during battle between two soldiers of contending
armies is not a duel in the proper sense of the word, since there is no
private quarrel between them, but only the public quarrel of their
countries.

1436. The Morality of Duelling.--(a) Generally, the duel is mortally
sinful. Like ordinary fighting, it is against charity, and in addition
it includes a will to kill or gravely injure another, to expose one’s
own life or limb to chance, and to usurp the function of the State.
This applies to the challenged as well as to the challenger, for one
can decline the combat to which one is dared.

(b) Exceptionally, a duel would not be sinful, if it took on the
character of a war, or of self-defense against an unjust aggressor.
Thus, in order to shorten a war or to lessen the bloodshed, it might be
lawful to make the whole issue depend on a single combat between the
commanders or between champions chosen from opposing armies, as in the
case of David and Goliath (I Kings, xvii); but in modern times such a
practice has been abandoned. Again, if a person had to choose between
certain death, if he refused a duel, and possible death, if he
consented to a duel, it would seem that he is in the position of one
attacked by an unjust aggressor; but it is not easy to picture such a
case as happening in normal conditions.

1437. The Fallacy of the Arguments for Duelling.--(a) The amusement of
the spectators was the purpose of the gladiatorial duels fought in
ancient Rome. But today there is no one who would not grant that the
butchering of human beings to make a holiday for the populace is
savagery.

(b) The decision of doubtful cases before the courts was the purpose of
the judicial duels fought among the Germans and Lombards in the early
Middle Ages. But manifestly such duels are a temptation of God, since
they rashly call on Him to disclose, through a duel between the
litigants, what the evidence in court did not disclose. The outcome of
the duel shows which party is stronger or more skilful, not which is in
the right.

(c) Training in bravery and the termination of serious differences is
the excuse offered for military and university duels. But to kill,
cripple, or brutalize youth does not make the nation stronger, and the
substitution of violence for law as a means of settling disputes is an
encouragement to crime.

(d) Satisfaction for insults or other injury, or the avoidance of the
reputation of being a coward, is the reason given for so-called affairs
of honor. But is it not a superstition and a relic of barbarism to
think that dishonor is wiped out by a dishonorable fight, or that a
person shows himself brave because he lacks the moral bravery to act
against the wrong opinions of the multitude?

1438. Penalties against Duelling.--(a) Church law deprives of
ecclesiastical burial those who die as the result of a duel, if
unrepentant (Canon 1240); it also declares excommunication reserved
simply to the Holy See and infamy against duellists and their helpers
(Canon 2351). (b) Civil law in English-speaking countries makes
duelling a crime. If death results, it is regarded as murder, and the
seconds are liable to punishment as accessories.

1439. What is the moral duty of restitution on account of injuries
caused in a duel? (a) The challenger and his heirs have no right to
restitution. (b) The challenged, if he accepted willingly, has no right
to restitution, for his free acceptance of the fight implies the
cession of such a right. (c) The challenged, if he accepted under grave
compulsion, has the right to restitution. If he is wounded, the
aggressor should pay the medical expense; if he is killed, the heirs
should be compensated.

1440. Sedition.--Sedition is a discord between different factions of the
same multitude so grave as to extend to physical conflict, and to the
destruction of the unity of the State.

(a) It is a discord, that is, a disagreement of wills, and so it
resembles schism, war and fighting. Difference of opinion in the
political parties of a country is not sedition, since there is a unity
of will and purpose in all of them with reference to the common good
and the peace of the State (cfr. 1197, 1348). In fact, under a
democratic system of government, the existence of some opposite parties
has proved a useful, if not necessary means of stimulating the interest
of citizens, and of expediting the business of legislation.

(b) Sedition is between different factions of the same multitude, that
is, between different sections or groups of the same body politic.
Thus, it differs from war (which is between states), and from fighting
(which is between individuals).

(c) Sedition extends to physical conflict, that is, it tends from its
character to break out into violence and to array the opposite factions
in fight against one another. If not accompanied by actual hostilities,
it is simple sedition. But, if fighting has begun, it is insurrection
or rebellion, when the people seek to overthrow the government; it is
civil war, if one part of the nation seeks to secede from or overcome
the other.

(d) It is prejudicial to the civil unity and peace of the people, that
is, it tends to the violent dismemberment of the State, or at least to
the disturbance of the common good. Thus, sedition is more serious than
riots, tumults, gang-warfare, and like particular disturbances, which
are not directed against the State itself, or against the harmony of
the whole body of the people. Sedition differs also from the peaceful
separation of parts of a state, and from the lawful self-defense of the
people against a tyrannical government.

1441. From the definition given above, it is plain that sedition is a
special distinct species of sin. (a) It differs from spiritual discord,
for unlike schism it is opposed, not to the unity of the Church, but to
the unity of the State. (b) It differs from other kinds of temporal
discord, for unlike war and fighting it is opposed, not to peace
between nations or individuals, but to peace between the members of the
same civil body. War takes away peace with foreigners, sedition takes
away peace with fellow-citizens; fighting attacks a private person or
persons, sedition attacks the public welfare of the country.

1442. Sedition in the strict meaning given it above is always sinful.
(a) Thus, it is a mortal sin from its nature, since it is opposed to
what is manifestly one of the greatest of temporal goods, namely, the
unity of the State. (b) It is opposed to charity, as destroying the
bond of peace; it is opposed to justice, as injuring a unity based on
law and common utility, to which the nation has a strict right. (c)
Sedition is graver in some persons than in others. Thus, the moral
causes of sedition (i.e., those that sow discords or promote
disaffection) are more responsible than those who are led and who carry
out acts of violence. The gravity of the sin in each case depends on
the amount of damage that is due to one’s influence or acts.

1443. Is one who resists a tyrannical government guilty of the sin of
sedition? (a) When resistance is made by legal and pacific means, such
as the rejection of a bad government at the polls, there is no
sedition. (b) When legal and pacific means are impossible and armed
aggression against a tyrant will benefit the common good, a rebel is
not guilty of the sin of sedition. In this case, it is rather the bad
ruler who causes discords and is seditious against the common good,
whereas the people only defend themselves according to the laws. Thus,
the rebellion of the Machabees against their Syrian oppressors was not
seditious. (c) When legal means are impossible but armed aggression
will not benefit the common good, a rebel is guilty of the sin of
sedition.




Art. 9: THE SINS AGAINST BENEFICENCE

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, q. 43.)

1444. Having discussed in the preceding paragraphs the sins opposed to
the internal acts of charity (love, joy and peace), we come now to
treat of scandal and cooperation which are opposed to the external acts
of charity--beneficence and brotherly correction.

1445. Scandal.--Scandal is derived from a Greek word signifying a snare
or trap prepared for an enemy, or a stone or block laid in the road
that he may stumble or trip over it. In use, it is applied in a wide or
general sense, and in a strict or special sense. (a) In its wide sense,
it refers to any kind of harm, especially of a spiritual or moral
nature, that one brings on others. (b) In its strict sense, it refers
to a fall into sin which one occasions for others by misconduct.

1446. The following are some examples of the word “scandal” as employed
in its wide sense: (a) It is used to signify physical or natural
injuries of various kinds. Thus, the servants of Pharaoh called the
plagues brought on Egypt by Moses a scandal (Exod., x. 7), and the
Psalmist says of the sinner that he laid a scandal (calamity) against
his brother (Ps. xlix. 20). Those who spread defamatory gossip are
called scandal-mongers, and “scandal” often signifies opprobrium or
disgrace, as when Shakespeare speaks of the wrangling of nobles as a
scandal to the crown. (b) The word “scandal” is also used to signify
moral injuries distinct from inducement to sin. Thus, the shock and
offense given to virtuous persons by blasphemous language spoken in
their hearing is described as a scandal, and one who would prevent
another from following some more perfect course or practice to which
there is no obligation (such as entering religion, saying grace at
meals, etc.), is sometimes said to scandalize.

1447. Definition of Scandal.--In the strict sense, scandal is defined
as “any conduct that has at least the appearance of evil and that
offers to a neighbor an occasion of spiritual ruin.”

(a) By conduct is understood external behavior or manner of acting in
the presence of others. Thus, scandal differs from sin, for sin is
committed, not only by external acts done before others, but also by
internal thoughts and desires and external acts that are secret.

(b) Scandal is conduct which is evil at least in appearance, that is,
sinful, or from the circumstances seemingly sinful. Thus, an act is not
scandalous, if it is morally indifferent or a less good, and is
perceivable as being such.

(c) Scandal tends to spiritual ruin, that is, to a fall into sin, great
or small. Here scandal strictly understood differs from scandal in the
wide senses given in the previous paragraph.

(d) Scandal is an occasion of a fall into sin, that is, it sets an
example of sin before the attention, and thus suggests to the will that
the will imitate the sin. Scandal is not, however, the cause of sin,
for a person causes his own sin in yielding consent to the suggestion
offered by scandal.

(e) Scandal is to another. A person may be said to scandalize himself
in the sense that by his looks or acts he puts himself in an occasion
of sin (Matt., v. 29, 30), or inasmuch as he maliciously makes the acts
of a virtuous neighbor an occasion of sin; but scandal is more properly
understood of an occasion of sin prepared for one’s neighbor.

1448. Causes of Scandal.--There are various divisions of scandal
according to the kinds of external acts. (a) There is scandal in words,
as profane language or calumnies spoken in a gathering of people. (b)
There is scandal in acts, as when one is perceptibly drunk or fights in
a city street. Scandal applies also to things, in so far as they are
the result of acts or related to acts, such as disedifying books,
pictures, dress. Thus, one gives scandal by having sinful objects on
display, such as profane mottoes on one’s wall, obscene advertisements
or announcements on one’s billboards. (c) There also may be scandal in
omission, as when one is conspicuously absent from Mass on Sundays.

1449. The following kinds of sinful acts are not scandalous, for they
are unknown to others, and hence cannot suggest sin: (a) internal acts,
such as wicked thoughts, desires, emotions; (b) external acts concealed
from others, such as inaudible profanity, intoxication not noticeable
by others, omission of an obligatory penance about which others have no
knowledge.

1450. There are, likewise, various divisions of scandal according to
the internal purpose of the scandalizer. (a) Scandal is directly
intentional, when the purpose of the scandalizer is to lead others to
the guilt of sin (diabolical scandal). Example: Titus blasphemes
religion before Caius in order that the latter may become irreligious,
and thus be more easily persuaded to follow a life of crime. (b)
Scandal is indirectly intentional when the purpose of the scandalizer
is to perform some action whose nature is such that it will lead others
to the guilt of sin, and he is determined to perform that action,
although not directly willing the neighbor’s guilt that will result.
Example: Titus does not like to see his children drunk, but he likes to
get drunk himself occasionally, knowing all the while that his example
encourages them to drink.

1451. In the following cases there is no intention of scandal: (a) when
one does an act that has no appearance of evil, and one neither
directly nor indirectly wills that it should be an occasion of sin to
anyone. Example: Balbus performs his duties faithfully, although he
knows to his regret that his fidelity occasions envy and hatred in
Claudius; (b) when one does an act that is evil or apparently evil, but
is invincibly ignorant of the scandal it may give. Example: Sempronius
and Titus converse together in a foreign tongue which they confidently
think Caius does not understand. The conversation is disedifying, and
Caius, who does understand, is shocked by what they say.

1452. The act of the scandalizer who intends, directly or indirectly,
the spiritual ruin of his neighbor, is called active scandal, while the
act of the person who takes occasion from the active scandal to incur
spiritual ruin, is called passive scandal. Active and passive scandal
are sometimes together, sometimes apart. (a) Thus, there is both active
and passive scandal, when the scandalizer wills the fall of his
neighbor, and the scandalized does fall. (b) There is active but not
passive scandal, when the scandalizer wills the fall of his neighbor,
but the latter does not fall into the snare. (c) There is passive but
not active scandal, when one makes the good action rightly performed by
another an occasion of sin. Thus, some made the life and passion of our
Lord a pretext for not accepting Him (Matt., xiii. 57; John, vi. 62; I
Cor., i. 23), and are said to have been scandalized at Him.

1453. As to the act that occasions the spiritual ruin of another, it
must be wrong either in reality or in appearance. (a) The scandalous
act is wrong in reality, when it is forbidden as a sin--for example,
offering sacrifice in the temple of an idol, or diverting to personal
use money collected for the poor. (b) The scandalous act is wrong in
appearance, when on account of circumstances it seems to be an act
forbidden as a sin. Thus, to take part in a banquet held in a pagan
temple might seem like participation in sacrificial rites (I Cor.,
viii. 10), to expend secretly the money collected for the poor might
have the appearance of improper use of funds (II Cor., viii. 20, 21).
Hence, St. Paul directs; “From all appearance of evil refrain
yourselves” (I Thess., v. 22).

1454. The acts wrong in reality or in appearance that give scandal are
innumerable, since the whole world is seated in wickedness (I John, v.
19). But today there are a number of acts that should be specially
mentioned, as they occasion sin oftener or for more persons than other
acts. Among these are: (a) occasions of sin against faith, such as
atheistical literature, as discussed in the section on faith; (b)
occasions of sin against morals, such as obscenity in dress, pictures,
plays, writings, and dances. These last-mentioned will be discussed now
in separate paragraphs.

1455. Obscenity.--Obscenity is a quality of words, acts or objects by
which impure thoughts are conveyed, or impure desires or actions
suggested. We may consider it either internally (i.e., in the intention
of the person who uses the words, acts or objects) or externally (i.e.,
in the nature of the things themselves which are used).

(a) Thus, internal obscenity, or the will to use what will corrupt the
minds and morals of others, is of course a mortal sin. If the intention
is to deprave another, the guilt of direct scandal is incurred; if the
intention is only to satisfy one’s own wish to use the sinful words,
acts or objects, the guilt is that of indirect scandal. Thus, a woman
who dresses fashionably in order to excite impure love is guilty of
direct scandal; if she dresses immodestly, not to excite impure love,
but to follow a fashion, she is guilty of indirect scandal.

(b) External obscenity is the tendency of words, acts or objects
themselves to call up impure images in the mind, or to excite impure
desires or actions in those to whom they are presented. The use of such
words, acts, etc., is therefore a mortal sin. For, if the thing said or
done is wrong in itself (such as obscene language), it is a scandalous
sin against purity, if it is wrong on account of those who will be
influenced (such as a talk on sex matters to immature or weak persons),
it is a sin of scandal. Hence, a good or even religious motive (such as
instruction, refutation of error, health, or mysticism) does not excuse
the employment of what is clearly obscene, for the end does not justify
the means.

1456. It is not always easy to determine in particular cases when a
thing is obscene from its very nature, but the following general rules
can be given:

(a) Pictures, statues and other images are obscene, when they represent
scenes of immoral or sexual acts, or lascivious attitudes or postures;
also, when they represent nude or partly nude human figures, ut quando
depinguntur verenda adultorum vel pectora aut partes minus honestae
mulierum.

(b) Female dress or adornment is lascivious, when there is a notable
display of the person through abbreviated skirts, necks, and sleeves;
or a suggestiveness expressed in transparency of material or a
closeness of fit that brings out the lines and curves of the figure; or
in an extremity of fashion whose striking color or design will make the
wearer conspicuous and direct special attention to her physical charms.

(c) Plays on the stage or moving picture screen are obscene by reason
of the lesson taught (as when purity is derided or impurity condoned),
by reason of the thing represented (as when the main theme is impurity,
or when acts of impurity are represented or suggested, or when sexual
passion is emphasized), or by reason of the players (as when they are
noted for immorality, or when their dress is indecent, or their
language objectionable).

(d) Dances are obscene in themselves when the postures, movements, or
contact of the dancers is indecent; they are obscene by reason of the
dancers, when these are indecently attired. Public dance halls,
cabarets, road houses, and night clubs--where there is no supervision
and young girls come unattended to dance until late hours with men
unknown to them, and where there is intoxication and
boisterousness--are the natural haunts of the obscene dance, but it may
be found even in more respectable places.

(e) Books or other writings contain obscenity When they inculcate or
recommend impure acts, or advise how these may be committed; when they
treat sins of impurity or narrate immoral facts or stories in such a
manner as to make vice seem alluring or pardonable to the intended
reader; when an erotic composition by language, allusions, details,
sympathetic treatment, etc., gives prominence to animal passion.

1457. As is stated elsewhere (see 1461 sqq.), scandal is not given
unless the persons affected by one’s conduct are susceptible to evil
influence. Hence, there is no obscenity when on account of
circumstances there is no suggestion of evil in things which under
other conditions would be immoral and seductive.

(a) Images of the nude in the studio of an artist, and anatomical
charts, figures or illustrations in a book intended for the instruction
of medical men, are not classed as obscene, since the persons for whom
they are made are supposed to be so much under the influence of the
esthetic or scientific principles of their professions that no harm
will be taken.

(b) The obscenity of dress is largely dependent on its novelty, for
things that are usual cease to excite special attention. This we can
see from the fact that styles that are conservative today would have
been extreme ten years ago. And so the scanty attire of hot countries,
the dress of the bathing beach, and the moderate decollete tolerated in
private gatherings are not obscene in their own proper times and places.

(c) Plays which contain gross or unseemly expressions or passages are
not therefore obscene, if in the main they uphold decency and morality;
otherwise, we should have to regard as immoral even the classic drama.
Newman says of Shakespeare: “Often as he may offend against modesty, he
is clear of a worse charge, sensuality, and hardly a passage can be
instanced in all that he has written to seduce the imagination or to
excite the passions.” It is a simple matter to omit from plays of this
kind the word or phrase that is offensive to modern ears or to the
innocence of youth.

(d) The fact that some individuals find all dancing a strong stimulus
to impure passion does not prove that every dance is obscene. Some
types of dance, it is true, might be rightly called “the devil’s
march”; other dances, named after various animals, may also be
suggestive. But there are also standard types of dance in which many
experience not temptation, but innocent pastime, and which have also
physical, esthetic and social values.

(e) To books and other writings should be applied what was said about
plays, namely, that they are not to be classed as obscene on account of
isolated passages unsuited for the reading of children or other
susceptible persons, or excitable to prurient or impure minds. Even the
Bible may seem objectionable to a prude, and the indecent will go
through its pages with a fine-tooth comb in the search for indecent
matter; but public opinion will rightly class as a lunatic the person
who would endeavor to have the Bible rated as obscene.

1458. Persons Who Give Scandal on Account of Obscenity.--(a) In case of
obscene pictures or statues, scandal is given by the artists, painters,
sculptors or others who make the images, and by the responsible persons
who place them in museums, galleries, parks or other places to which
there is general admission.

(b) As regards female dress, the guilty parties are proximately the
wearers, but remotely and principally the designers and society leaders
who impose their will in making the fashions dangerous and in causing
one extreme mode to follow quickly upon another.

(e) With respect to obscene plays, the scandal is given by playwrights,
managers, actors and actresses, and those who patronize or applaud
them. The public itself and the civil authorities share in the guilt,
when they supinely tolerate the degradation of the stage and the
corruption of morals.

(d) In the case of obscene dances, the givers of scandal are the
proprietors of resorts where the dances are held, the musicians and
singers (especially when the songs themselves are obscene), and the
dancers, spectators and other patrons.

(e) In the case of salacious publications or writings, authors,
publishers, printers, vendors, and the reading public share
responsibility for the scandal. Government censorship of the press is
not desirable, but government suppression of obscenity has always been
the policy of countries of English origin. The private citizen, then,
is not free of guilt if he takes no interest even when he sees piles of
indecent magazines, pictures, etc., being sold openly on the
newsstands. Canon Law (Canon 1404) forbids booksellers to sell, lend,
or keep books that deal _ex professo_ with obscenity, though there is
no objection to expurgated editions, as in the case of classical works.

1459. Results of Scandal.--The spiritual ruin occasioned by scandal is
sin.

(a) Thus, formal or material sin may be the result of scandal. Example:
Titus blasphemed before a boy who did not understand the meaning of the
word and before a youth who did understand, with the result that both
repeated the same blasphemy. Thus, the scandal given by Titus produced
material sin in the boy and formal sin in the youth.

(b) Mortal sin or venial sin may be the result of scandal, just as a
stone in the road may cause either a fall or a stumble.

(c) Sin of the same species or sin of a different species from that
committed by the scandal-giver may be the result of scandal. Thus, a
calumny spoken against a neighbor may induce a hearer either to repeat
the calumny, or to imitate the act imputed by the calumniator, or to
give up religion.

(d) Sin already committed by the person scandalized or sin which is new
to him, sin he had in mind to commit or sin he had not
contemplated--any one of these results suffice for scandal. Example: It
is scandal to recall to drunkenness by bad example a person who had
reformed, or by bad example to bring back to another’s mind and desire
a sin on which he was once resolved.

1460. Scandal resembles solicitation and complicity, since like them it
exercises an evil influence on others; but it is not identical with
them.

(a) Thus, solicitation influences another to evil by counsel,
persuasion, command, or invitation; scandal may influence to evil
either in these ways or by mere example. Again, solicitation does not
necessarily intend the fall of another into guilt, as does scandal.
Thus, one may solicit another to get drunk who had already determined
to get drunk, or one may persuade another that drunkenness is no sin,
and then solicit him to drunkenness. But, if one who intends the
demoralization and corruption of his neighbor solicits him to
drunkenness, solicitation is joined with scandal.

(b) Complicity or cooperation influences another to evil by helping him
in the commission of sin; scandal influences him to evil by suggesting
that he commit sin. Example: Titus, an elderly man, gets drunk or
praises drunkards in the presence of Balbus, a youth. Influenced by
these acts and words, Balbus tells his acquaintance Claudius that he
intends to get drunk, and Claudius supplies him with the intoxicants.
Titus is guilty of scandal, Claudius of cooperation.

1461. The persons before whom disedifying words, deeds or omissions are
done, are of two classes. (a) Persons apt to be scandalized are those
who are not experienced either in vice (especially that to which the
disedifying example would lead), or in virtue (especially the opposite
virtue); for such persons are readily subject to bad influence. Thus,
young persons Whose character is yet unformed, the ignorant and
well-meaning persons who are weak, are peculiarly disposed to be led
astray by example. (b) Persons not apt to be scandalized are those who
are habitually so bad or so good that anything disedifying done before
them is not calculated to influence their attitude towards evil.

1462. May a person hold himself guiltless of scandal, therefore,
because his wrongdoing was committed before those who are not apt to be
scandalized?

(a) If he is certain that the witnesses will not be weakened morally on
his account, and if he does not intend their fall, he is free of the
guilt of scandal. Thus, if one blasphemes in the presence of a lady
renowned for piety, or of a rough crowd of men whose daily talk is
interspersed with blasphemies, it is practically sure that no scandal
is given.

(b) If a person is not certain that the witnesses will suffer no moral
harm through his example, he cannot hold himself as not guilty of
scandal. For, no matter how good or how bad the witnesses may appear to
him, they may not be as fixed in character as he thinks, and his
misconduct may be the starting point for them of a downward course or
of a more rapid descent into evil. Generally speaking, there is this
uncertainty about the influence of bad example, for the reading of
character is no easy matter, and many sins are internal.

1463. There are two cases especially, when even the very good may
become bad or the very bad become worse through force of evil example:
(a) when the sin committed is from its nature very alluring. Sic
auctores censent vix fieri posse quin in materia luxuriae malum exemplum
peccati motus cieat; (b) the second case is when the authority of the
one who gives scandal is great. For the fact that he sides with or
seems to side with evil, will demoralize the good and encourage the
wicked in wrongdoing.

1464. Passive scandal (see 1452), that is, the spiritual fall
consequent on the example of another, is of two kinds: (a) scandal
given, which is a fall into sin occasioned by conduct really
disedifying, as when a youth becomes drunk because he has seen his
elders intoxicated; (b) scandal taken, which is a fall into sin
occasioned by conduct irreproachable in itself, but wrongly
interpreted, either out of malice (Pharisaic scandal), or out of
ignorance or frailty (scandal of little ones). The Pharisees were
scandalized at our Lord’s dining with sinners, because they themselves
were unmerciful (Matt., ix. 11 sqq.), and the weak brethren at Corinth
were scandalized at the eating of certain meats, because their
consciences were tender (I Cor., xi. 23 sqq.).

1465. Sinfulness of Scandal.--(a) Scandal in the wide sense is not
necessarily a sin. Thus, St. Peter acted out of love for his Master
when he wished to dissuade Him from the Passion, but our Lord, in order
to correct more vigorously the wrong ideas of Peter, called them a
scandal (Matt., xvi. 23).

(b) Passive scandal is always a sin in the one who falls because of the
conduct of another; but it does not always suppose that the conduct
which occasioned the fall was a sin, as is clear from the remarks made
above on Pharisaic scandal and the scandal of little ones.

(c) Active scandal is always a sin in the one whose conduct occasions
the fall of another, since that conduct is either sinful, or has such
an appearance of sin that it should have been omitted. But it does not
always suppose a sin in the person who witnesses the scandal, for he
may proceed without a fall in spite of the obstacle placed in his path.

1466. Is scandal a distinct species of sin, or only a circumstance that
may happen to any kind of sin?

(a) Passive scandal is not a special kind of sin. For the scandalized
person may fall into any and every kind of sin, and the fact that
example occasions his fall does not add any special or new opposition
to the virtue against which he offends. Thus, he who breaks the fast
because he saw others break the fast, is guilty of the same sin of
intemperance as those who gave him scandal. But passive scandal may be
an aggravating or an extenuating circumstance, aggravating if the
scandal was taken, extenuating if the scandal was given.

(b) Active scandal, if it is only indirectly intentional (see 1450) and
is offered by conduct evil in itself, is not a special sin. The reason
is that in such scandal one does not specially intend the spiritual
ruin of a neighbor, but only the satisfaction of one’s own desire.
Thus, he who breaks the fast before others to satisfy his own appetite,
does not directly wish the corruption of those others, and hence his
sin is that of intemperance with the added circumstance of bad example.

(c) Active scandal, if it is only indirectly intentional and is offered
by conduct not evil but evil-appearing, is reductively the special sin
of scandal, For, since all active scandal is sinful, and in this case
there is no other species of sin, the conduct not being really evil in
itself, the sin in question must be reduced to scandal. Thus, one who
is dispensed from the law of abstinence and who eats meat on a day of
abstinence in the presence of others who know he is a Catholic but do
not know he is dispensed, does not sin against temperance, but against
edification. His sin is that of scandal only reductively, since he does
not directly will the fall of others. There is also the circumstance
that the law of abstinence may suffer as a result of the scandal.

(d) Active scandal, if it is directly intentional (see 1450), is
directly also the special sin of scandal. For this kind of scandal
directly intends the spiritual ruin of a neighbor, and so is directly
opposed to a special good of another person and to the special
charitable act of fraternal correction. Hence, a person who breaks the
fast in order to lead his neighbor into a like transgression is guilty
of both intemperance and scandal; he who to make his neighbor sin
appears to break the fast, is guilty of scandal, but not of
intemperance.

1467. Practical Applications of the Preceding Paragraph to
Confession.--(a) Species of Sins.--In case of passive scandal there is
only one species of sin to be confessed, namely, the intemperance
occasioned by bad example; in case of active scandal indirectly
intended and offered by evil conduct, there is only one species of sin,
namely, intemperance, with the circumstance of publicity or bad
example; in case of active scandal indirectly intended and offered by
evil-seeming conduct, there is only one species of sin, namely,
scandal; in case of active scandal directly intended, there is only the
species of scandal, if the conduct of the scandalizer is only
evil-seeming, but there are several species of sin, if his conduct is
really evil, namely, his own intemperance and the scandal he gives.

(b) Number of Sins.--As many sins of scandal are committed as there are
persons present to be scandalized, for scandal is given to those
present as individuals, not as parts of a group (see 219). Hence, one
commits more scandals by being drunk on a public street than by being
drunk with a roomful of companions; and by attacking religion before a
large assembly than by attacking it before a small circle.

(c) Circumstances of Intention and Conduct.--Those who give bad example
should confess especially the end and the means employed, for on these
depends the important distinction between directly intentional and
indirectly intentional scandal and the specific character of the sin
committed, as explained in the preceding paragraph.

(d) Circumstance of Condition of the Persons Involved.--This should be
mentioned in confessing scandal, if it adds a new malice. Thus, the
fact that scandal is given by a superior bound by his office to give
good example, adds to the violation of charity a violation of justice;
the fact that the person whose ruin is intended is consecrated to God,
or married, or a relative, adds to the malice of intentional scandal
against chastity; the fact that a person is scandalized entirely
against his will, makes the sin scandal rather than simple solicitation.

(e) Circumstance of the Result of Scandal.--The results of scandal
should be confessed when they add a new malice to the sin or induce an
obligation of restitution. This subject will be considered in the three
following paragraphs.

1468. Is the scandalizer guilty of the species of sin to which his
conduct is calculated to lead the scandalized? (a) If the scandal is
directly intentional, that is, if the scandalizer intends that some
special sin or sins shall be committed by the one scandalized, the
former is guilty in desire of that which he intends that the latter
shall be guilty of in reality (cfr. 96, 102). Hence, if by calumniating
clerics or religious or church members one intends that one’s listeners
shall be induced to repeat these calumnies, or to do what the
calumniated persons were said to do, or to abandon religion, one is
guilty in desire of the particular sin or sins that one wills.

(b) If the scandal is only indirectly intentional, that is, if the
scandalizer foresees but does not expressly will the fall of the
scandalized (e.g., if he calumniates others to injure the calumniated
and not those who hear the calumny), the matter is more difficult, and
authorities differ in their opinions. Some moralists think that the
scandalizer is guilty of the result he foresees, because he wills it
interpretatively by offering the occasion for it. Others think that he
is not guilty of the result foreseen, because he does not effect it,
either in intention (for he does not desire it) or in reality (for he
is not bound, except by charity, to prevent its accomplishment in
others); he permits, but does not approve, the sin of his neighbor.

1469. A practical application of the previous paragraph to confession
may be made as follows: (a) those who are guilty of direct scandal must
confess not only their own sin, but also the sin to which their conduct
leads their neighbor; (b) those who are guilty of indirect scandal are
not obliged, according to the second opinion given above, to confess
the species of sin to which their conduct incited the beholder, and
hence, if their conduct was only evil-seeming, it suffices for them to
confess that they gave scandal.

1470. Is the scandalizer responsible for the injuries to third parties
resulting from the sins occasioned by his scandal?

(a) According to one opinion, he is bound to make his share of
restitution for injustices occasioned by his own bad example, because
it is admitted that he who counsels injustice is so bound, and example
is more persuasive than words of counsel. Hence, one who steals from
his employer before fellow-employees, and so brings on a custom of
stealing among them, is bound to restore, not only what he took
himself, but also a share of other losses not made good to the employer.

(b) According to the more common opinion, however, the scandalizer in
the present case is not held to restitution, except as regards his own
ill-gotten goods, even if there is question of scandal directly
intended. For, either the scandalizer is not guilty of the injustice
committed by the others, as not desiring it; or, at any rate, he is
only the occasion, not the cause or cooperator in that injustice.

1471. If scandal amounts to incitation or cooperation, the guilt of the
neighbor’s sin and responsibility for injury the neighbor causes are
incurred by the scandalizer.

(a) Thus, bad example may amount to incitation to sin, as when a person
knows that others are directed to imitate him, and yet he gives them
bad example. Even though he does not directly intend their fall into
sin, he does intend his own conduct, while realizing that there is
attached to it the circumstance that it is an invitation to sin; and
hence it would seem that the guilt of this sin is also contracted.

(b) Bad example may amount to cooperation in sin, as when a person by
his bad example shows others the way to commit sin, which they could
not have learned without his example. Hence, if a person opens a safe
to steal, knowing that other dishonest persons are observing in order
to learn the combination and steal, it seems that to some extent he
shares in the guilt and duty of restitution of the thieves who learn
from him. There is no doubt that a defamer is bound to make reparation,
not only before his immediate listeners, but also before others who
have listened to them; for, by defaming before talkative persons, he
virtually authorized them to spread his words.

1472. The Gravity of the Sin of Scandal.--(a) From its nature all
active scandal is a mortal sin. It turns man away from Christ (I Cor.,
viii. 12); it is spiritual murder, destructive of the souls of others,
and so contrary to the mercy and brotherly correction required by
charity (Rom, xiv. 15); it brings on oneself the wrath of God (Matt.,
xviii. 6), and on one’s family, friends and profession obloquy and
disgrace.

(b) From the indeliberation of the act or from the smallness of the
matter, active scandal may be venial, as will be seen in the following
paragraph.

1473. Mortal and Venial Scandal.--(a) Passive scandal is always a sin,
mortal or venial according to the fall occasioned by the conduct
witnessed. But mortal sin may be occasioned by venial sin, as when an
inferior takes the liberty to blaspheme, because his superior used
profane language; and venial sin may be occasioned by mortal sin, as
when the blasphemy of an infidel provokes his neighbor to use profane
language against the blasphemer.

(b) Active scandal indirectly intended is sometimes a venial sin, as
when the scandalous conduct is only a venial sin, or is no sin but has
the appearance of a slight sin; sometimes it is a mortal sin, as when
the scandalous conduct is a mortal sin, or when a person so despises
the spiritual welfare of his neighbor that he chooses to do an
evil-seeming act that will cause the neighbor to fall into serious sin.

(c) Active scandal directly intended is sometimes a venial sin, as when
a person intends by conduct venially sinful to lead a neighbor into
venial sin; sometimes it is a mortal sin, as when one intends to lead
one’s neighbor into mortal sin, or commits a mortal sin in order to
lead one’s neighbor into venial sin.

1474. Increase and decrease in gravity of scandal depends on the
internal dispositions of the scandal-giver and the external influence
he has on the person scandalized. (a) The internal factors on which the
quantity of scandal depends are the amount of deliberation and the
degree of intention. It is more serious to speak a scandalous word with
premeditation than to speak it somewhat thoughtlessly; more scandalous
to speak it when the hearer’s spiritual ruin is directly intended, than
when that ruin is not directly intended. (b) The external factors on
which the quantity of scandal depends are the amount of influence the
bad example has and the character of the evil to which it leads. It is
more serious to corrupt A, who would not otherwise have been corrupted,
than to corrupt B, who would have been corrupted even without one’s bad
example; it is more serious to cause another to commit mortal sin, than
to cause him to commit venial sin.

1475. Persons Scandalized.--Is it possible to scandalize people who are
firmly rooted in virtue?

(a) If the question be understood of scandal in a wide sense, even the
perfect may be scandalized. They may be shocked and horrified at the
evil example they witness; they may be hindered from performing the
external good works they desire to accomplish (I Thess., ii. 18). But
these things do not hinder them internally, or separate them from the
love of God (Rom., viii. 38, 39).

(b) If the question be understood of possibility in an absolute sense,
even the perfect may suffer real scandal, that is, they may be
influenced to sin on account of the example witnessed. Since they are
not confirmed in grace in this life, it is not repugnant that they
commit sin and lose grace.

(c) If the question be understood of possibility in a relative
sense--that is, if we consider what we should expect in view of the
character of perfect men, and what does usually happen--the perfect
cannot be scandalized, since they are so firmly united to God that the
sayings or doings, no matter of whom, cannot cause them to sin (Ps.
cxxiv. 1, 2), although they may at times be disturbed thereby (Ps.
lxxii. 2).

1476. Is it possible that the perfect should give scandal?

(a) If the question be understood of absolute possibility, even the
perfect may give scandal, since they are not immune from defect (I
John, i. 8). (b) If the question be understood of relative possibility,
as explained above, the perfect cannot scandalize, for their sins are
mostly internal acts not entirely deliberate, while the external words
or acts in which they fall short deviate so slightly from right as to
offer no occasion of sinning to another. The perfect man is one who is
on his guard, especially that he become not a stumbling-block to
others, and it is therefore a rare exception when he causes scandal.

1477. Duty of Avoiding Scandal.--At times it is impossible to avoid
giving scandal, unless one surrenders some spiritual or temporal good.
Hence, on this point there are two questions to be considered: (a) When
is one obliged to surrender spiritual goods for the sake of avoiding
scandal? (b) When is one obliged to surrender temporal goods for the
sake of avoiding scandal?

1478. The Surrender of Spiritual Goods in order to Avoid Scandal.--(a)
Spiritual goods that are so necessary that one cannot give them up
without committing sin may not be surrendered; for, according to the
order of charity, one must be more solicitous to keep oneself from sin
than to preserve others, and moreover a good end does not justify
sinful means. Hence, it is not lawful to commit mortal or even venial
sin to avoid giving scandal to another. Examples: One may not tone down
the doctrine of right and wrong in order to keep another from
blasphemy. One may not tell a slight lie to keep another from taking
undeserved offense.

(b) Spiritual goods which can be put aside without sin are not to be
neglected on account of malicious or Pharisaic scandal, as long as
there is a good reason which calls for their use; for the person who
takes malicious scandal from these spiritual things is in difficulty
through his own fault and can rescue himself, and it is not reasonable
that his malice should be permitted to impede the benefit of others.
Thus, our Lord declared that no attention was to be given the scandal
which the Pharisees took from His doctrine (Matt., xv. 14).

(c) Spiritual goods which can be put aside without sin should be
neglected on account of Pharisaic scandal, if there is no great reason
for their use; for one should not give another an occasion of sinning,
even if the other is in bad faith, unless there is necessity. Thus, our
Lord declared that the act of teaching truth to others should be
omitted, if it would only provoke rejection (Matt, vii. 6). Example: A
wife may omit saying grace aloud, if her prayer moves her husband to
mimicry or to attempts to make the prayer a mockery.

(d) Spiritual goods which can be put aside without sin should be
omitted on account of the scandal of little ones, as long as it remains
scandal from weakness or ignorance; for charity requires that one
assist those who are in spiritual need, and persons who are in danger
of scandal through no fault, or through a slight fault of their own,
are in spiritual need. Hence, one should conceal or delay the
performance of good works that are not necessary, if they would
scandalize the weak, or else one should explain to these persons the
righteousness of such works. In any case, one should not do these works
before those who without malice will be scandalized, but should await
such a time as will give them better knowledge, or put them in bad
faith. Examples: If a person knows that personal acts of piety which he
performs seem to some well-meaning persons superstitious and will shake
their faith, he should omit these acts when such persons are present.
If parents are scandalized because a child wishes to leave them in
order to become a priest or a religious, the child should delay for a
while, if there is hope of a change of view on their part.

1479. As was said in the chapter on law (see 288 sqq.), the higher law
has the preference in case of a conflict. Now, natural law itself
requires that one avoid the scandal of the weak. Hence the following
cases:

(a) Negative precepts of the natural law may not be contravened in
order to avoid the scandal of the weak; for such contravention is
necessarily sinful. Hence, one may not lie or commit perjury to prevent
scandal.

(b) Affirmative precepts of the natural law should be contravened in
order to avoid the scandal of the weak, but only when such scandal is a
greater evil than the omission of the thing commanded. Thus, one should
omit a fraternal correction or a punishment, if the one corrected would
be made worse, or the punishment occasion a schism. But one may not
neglect to help a person in extreme need because of scandal.

(c) Precepts of the divine law should be contravened on account of
scandal of the weak, unless contravention of the law is a greater evil
than permission of the scandal. Thus, the preaching of the Gospel is
commanded by divine law, and yet it may be omitted to avoid scandal
(Matt., vii. 6). Item integritas confessionis de jure divino est, et
tamen poenitens deberet peccatum silere, si intelligeret confessarium
cui ex necessitate confiteri deberet grave ex eo scandalum passurum.
But it is not lawful to omit Baptism in order to avoid scandal to those
who will be provoked to anger or blasphemy.

(d) Precepts of ecclesiastical law should be contravened, when
otherwise there will arise a scandal of the weak which is a graver evil
than the contravention of the precepts. Thus, a parish-priest should
say Mass on Sunday, even though not fasting, if this is necessary in
order to avoid great scandal among the people. A wife may omit Mass or
a fast, in order to prevent her ignorant husband from using blasphemies
or imprecations, or to avoid notable dissensions in the home. Puella
quae scit juvenem infirmum ex suo aspectu scandalizari debet sacro
omisso domi manere.

1480. In order that scandal of the weak may be considered a greater
evil than contravention of a grave precept, it is necessary that the
following conditions be verified:

(a) The evil of the scandal must be certain and grave, for an uncertain
or slight scandal is not a greater evil than certain contravention of a
grave precept. Thus, if one only has vague fears that scandal may be
given, or if one has no determined person in mind and thinks only that
someone or other will be harmed, there is no excuse for contravention
of the precept.

(b) The evil of contravening the precept must not impose intolerable
hardships or lead to greater scandals; for one is not required to
attempt the impossible, or to give scandal in order to avoid scandal.
Thus, it would be unreasonable to expect that a student should never
read the classical poets or philosophers of Greece or Rome, lest
scandal be given some person overstrict in this matter; that a wife
absent herself from Mass permanently, lest her ignorant husband be
provoked to rage; that a young lady be deprived of fresh air and
exercise, lest an old relative be disedified. If we have to choose
between occasioning irreligion in one person by attending Mass and
occasioning irreligion in many persons by staying away from Mass, we
should rather permit the scandal of the one. Moralists generally hold
that scandal of the weak does not justify absence from obligatory Mass
oftener than once or twice, and some hold that it does not require
absence from Mass at all.

1481. Good works that are of counsel only (such as evangelical
poverty), and those that are obligatory only under certain conditions
(such as almsdeeds), may be more easily put aside in order to avoid
scandal of the weak. It should be noted, however, that for some persons
these works are of precept, and hence they are to be judged, as regards
those persons, according to the rules given for contravention of
precepts. (a) Thus, the counsels are obligatory for those who have
vowed them (e.g., religious).

(b) Corporal and spiritual works of mercy are obligatory for prelates
and other clerics because of their office.

1482. Spiritual goods, therefore, whether of precept or of counsel, are
not to be surrendered entirely on account of any scandal, whether it be
Pharisaic scandal or scandal of the weak. But, out of charity for
others, these goods should not be made use of (apart from necessity) in
a way that would occasion spiritual ruin to anyone. Hence, if there is
danger of scandal: (a) they should be concealed, as when one goes to
Mass early in the morning or by another way, so as not to occasion
blasphemy in one’s neighbor; (b) they should be delayed, as when one
puts off a fraternal correction until the other person is in a frame of
mind to be corrected with profit; (c) they may be used but should be
explained, as when one is called to give Baptism to a person dying in a
notorious resort and takes witnesses with him, or tells the bystanders
the reason of his visit.

1483. When Should Temporal Goods be Surrendered for the Sake of
Avoiding Scandal.--(a) Temporal goods of which one is not the owner,
but only the custodian or administrator, may not be surrendered at will
on account of scandal; for no one has the right to give away the
property of others. Hence, rulers in Church or State may not
arbitrarily surrender common property; guardians may not give up the
property of their charges.

(b) Temporal goods of which one is owner should be surrendered on
account of the scandal of little ones, unless a greater evil results
from such surrender; for, as said above (see 1165 sqq.), one should be
willing to suffer some detriment in temporal things to avert from one’s
neighbor detriment in spiritual things. Hence, one should abstain from
a certain food, if one’s eating of it will cause spiritual ruin to some
innocent person (I Cor., viii. 13).

(c) Temporal goods are not to be surrendered on account of Pharisaic
scandal; for this would be injurious to the common good, since it would
encourage the wicked to despoil the conscientious, and it would also be
injurious to the wicked themselves, since they would continue in sin by
keeping what was not their own. Hence, one may demand money owed, even
if the debtor is greedy and will use profane language.

1484. The surrender of temporal goods spoken of in the previous
paragraph may be understood in a number of senses.

(a) It can be understood either of the act of giving another what is
held by us and is our own property, or of the act of permitting another
to keep that which is held by him but which belongs to us. Charity may
call for either kind of surrender as a means to the avoidance of
scandal. Example: Rather than have a bitter quarrel or lose a
friendship over a few cents of change, it is better to let the other
man keep what he owes you, or give him what you do not owe, if he is
also in good faith.

(b) The surrender of temporal goods can also be understood either of
the internal willingness to sacrifice temporal things for things
spiritual, when necessity requires, or of the actual external
sacrifice. Charity demands the internal willingness, but it does not
always demand the actual sacrifice; for sometimes such a sacrifice
would be harmful to the common welfare and the welfare of individuals.
Thus, the saying of our Lord that we should not contend with a neighbor
who wishes to take our coat, but should rather let him take our cloak
as well (Matt, v. 40), and the saying of St. Paul that the Corinthians
should prefer to suffer injury and fraud rather than have lawsuits
against fellow-Christians (I Cor., vi. 7), are to be understood of a
willingness to sacrifice temporal things in order to avoid scandal,
when a greater good makes this necessary. But those texts do not mean
that it is obligatory or advisable to make an actual sacrifice at other
times.

(c) The surrender of temporal goods may be understood either of a
giving over to others without protest or remonstrance, or of a yielding
to them only after one has tried to prevent scandal without incurring
temporal loss. Charity does not require, even when there is danger of
scandal of the weak, that one should surrender one’s goods without any
effort to save them. Thus, if an ignorant Catholic is shocked because
his priest asks for money to support the Church, the latter will do him
a service by explaining the right the Church has to be supported and
the duty of the members to contribute.

1485. Temporal goods may be understood here either of things of great
value (e.g., necessaries of life) or of things of minor value (e.g.,
luxuries). (a) Thus, if scandal will place a neighbor in extreme
spiritual need, even things of great value should be surrendered, if
this is necessary to avoid scandal. (b) If scandal will not place him
in extreme need, one is not obliged to surrender any except things of
minor value (see 1165 sqq.). Thus, St. Paul does not ask that his
converts give up all food in order to avoid scandalizing the weak, but
only such food as they can get along without (Rom, xiv. 15; I Cor.,
viii. 13).

1486. Should church goods ever be surrendered in order to avoid scandal
of the weak? (a) On the one hand, goods of the Church have a special
sacredness, because they have been given and set apart for spiritual
purposes and the common good of the Church. Hence, he would be an
unfaithful steward who would devote them to merely temporal ends, such
as the enrichment or exaltation of himself or of his friends, or who
would alienate them without due authority. (b) On the other hand, the
temporal goods of the Church are to serve spiritual ends, and the
spiritual must not be subordinated to the temporal. Hence, one of the
chief causes of scandal in the Church is the appearance of avarice in
churchmen (even as regards goods that are not personal, but common),
especially if they seem to put money before the salvation of the
people. There are times, therefore, when to avoid scandal a prelate or
priest ought to forego something really due the Church.

1487. Cases of Scandal and Renouncement of Church Goods.--(a) If there
is question of Pharisaic scandal alone, one should not renounce the
goods of which one is the custodian, but should resist spoliation as
far as one is able. Thus, St. Thomas of Canterbury would not agree to
the invasion of church rights by Henry II. So also a pastor should not
neglect the collection of dues needed for the maintenance of the
church, because some malcontents will take offense at this; neither
should he yield to the extortionate demands of some hired person who
will be scandalized because more is not paid.

(b) If there is question of the scandal of the weak, concessions should
be made, lest spiritual things be made to suffer for the temporal.
Thus, St. Paul would not accept any support for himself from persons
newly converted to Christianity, lest this prove a hindrance to the
preaching of the Gospel (I Cor., ix. 12). For the sake of the ignorant
or the weak, therefore, the Church does not insist on dues and other
payments, until these persons have had the opportunity of learning
their duty. The faithful, indeed, are bound to contribute to the
pastors who serve them, but the precept is an affirmative one, and
obliges therefore not at all times, but when the conditions of time,
place, person, etc., make this possible. It would be a real scandal of
the weak, if a person were driven from church because he did not
realize his duty of contributing, or if a poor person were taxed beyond
his means, or if an affluent cleric were always asking for money and
never giving to the needy, or if a priest were to talk collections
instead of doctrine, or devoted most of his time to money-making
enterprises. Anything that commercializes religion is also a scandal
both to Catholics and non-Catholics.

1488. Duty of Repairing Scandal.-The paragraphs immediately preceding
have spoken of the duty of avoiding scandal. There is also a duty of
repairing scandal that has been given. (a) Thus, there is a duty of
charity to repair the scandal one has given; for, if all are required
to practise fraternal correction, those especially are bound to this
who are responsible for the sins of others. (b) There is sometimes a
duty of legal justice, as when superiors, who are bound from their
office to give good example, give scandal to their subjects. (c) There
is sometimes a duty of commutative justice, as when the scandalizer has
employed unjust means (such as force, fear or traps) in order to lead
another into scandal.

1489. Ways of Repairing Scandal.--(a) Scandal is repaired publicly or
privately. Reparation is public, when it is made before the community,
and private, when it is made before individuals. (b) Scandal is
repaired explicitly or implicitly. Explicit reparation is made by
retractation of one’s words, by condemnation of one’s acts, by the
destruction of one’s scandalous writings, by efforts to bring back to
virtue those whom one has misled, etc. Implicit reparation is made by
reformation of one’s conduct, the abandonment of that which gave
scandal, the practice of good example, prayer for the person
scandalized, etc.

1490. Particular Kinds of Scandal to be Repaired.--(a) Scandal is
public or private. Public scandal is given before the community at
large, as when one openly apostatizes so that it is the talk of the
whole neighborhood or town, or writes a signed article favoring
atheism, or makes a disedifying speech before a gathering of people.
Scandal is private, when it is given before a few persons, and when it
does not tend to become generally known, as when husband and wife
quarrel before their domestic circle.

(b) Scandal is ordinary or extraordinary. Ordinary scandal is given by
bad example alone; extraordinary scandal adds to bad example injury or
injustice, or the debt of punishment for a crime. Thus, one who becomes
slightly intoxicated at a party gives ordinary scandal; while one who
by trickery schemes to get another into a situation in which he will be
effectually scandalized, or who strikes an inoffensive priest, or who
spreads disedifying printed matter, is guilty of extraordinary scandal.

1491. It rests with the prudent judgment of the confessor or
ecclesiastical authority to decide in particular instances the way in
which scandals are to be repaired. But in general the following rules
may be given:

(a) Public scandal should be repaired publicly, even though it has not
actually seduced those who are aware of it; for otherwise the evil
influence remains. Thus, a drunkard should take the pledge of total
abstinence, or else give an example of sobriety; an apostate should
renounce his errors as openly as he defended them.

(b) Private scandal may be repaired privately, that is, before the few
persons who were scandalized. Thus, the husband and wife who quarrelled
before their children make reparation when they tell the children not
to quarrel, and when they strengthen this advice by good example.

(c) Ordinary scandal may be repaired implicitly, that is, by turning
over a new leaf. Thus, one who has been away from Mass and the
Sacraments for a long time makes reparation when he appears at church,
goes to confession, and receives Communion; one who has been keeping
bad company makes reparation when he separates from his former
associates.

(d) Extraordinary scandal is repaired explicitly, that is, by making
the restitution or satisfaction which justice demands, or by performing
the penalty required by the law. Thus, if through treachery a person
has seduced another from virtue, he must either himself or through
others endeavor to recall the scandalized person to his former virtue;
if a person has been guilty of laying violent hands on a cleric, he
must perform the penance prescribed; if a person has distributed
scandalous literature, he must try to stop its circulation, or to
distribute contrary literature.

1492. When satisfaction requires public apology or retraction, this can
be made in various ways. (a) Thus, one may withdraw through the press
false statements publicly made; (b) one may apologize before a number
of witnesses authorized to make this known; (c) one may retract before
the pastor or confessor, with the understanding that the priest will
later declare that all due satisfaction has been made.

1493. Denial of Sacraments in Cases of Scandal.--Is it lawful to
administer the Sacraments to one who has not made satisfaction for
public scandal?

(a) If the obligation of reparation is not grave, it is lawful to
administer the Sacraments, since the person who gave the scandal is not
subject to grave sin and unworthy of the Sacraments, and his admission
to them will not be a new scandal.

(b) If the obligation of reparation is grave, it is lawful to admit the
party in question to the Sacrament of Penance; for every person rightly
disposed has a right to absolution, and the fact that a person who gave
scandal goes to confession is edifying. But absolution should be given
on condition that reparation for the scandal is seriously promised.

(c) If the obligation of reparation is grave, it is not lawful as a
rule to admit to the other Sacraments, until the reparation has been
actually performed. Thus, if it is notorious in a parish that a certain
individual has been living in a serious occasion of sin or has been
circulating impious doctrines, the occasion of sin should be removed or
the doctrines should be retracted, before the individual is admitted to
Communion, etc.; otherwise, a new scandal would be given the faithful
from the apparent approval given the scandalizer by the minister of the
Sacrament received.

1494. In certain cases, however, the Sacraments other than Penance may
also be given before reparation for grave scandal has been made,
namely, when the circumstances are such that the administration of the
Sacraments will offer no scandal. (a) Thus, a dying person who is
penitent but unable to perform some satisfaction for scandal given is
granted the Sacraments. (b) A person who is well disposed, but who has
not yet made satisfaction for scandal, may sometimes be given Communion
privately. (c) A person who is not well disposed, and who will not make
satisfaction for scandal, is sometimes permitted to contract marriage
before the priest, namely, when there is a grave reason for marriage
and scandal is precluded.

1495. Seduction.--Having discussed scandal, which leads others into sin
by bad example, we shall now consider, first, solicitation or
seduction, which leads others into sin by moral inducement, and,
secondly, cooperation, which assists another to sin (see 1460).

1496. Seduction is some external act (words, writing, signs or gesture)
by which one directly and explicitly seeks to win the consent of
another to sin. There are various modes of solicitation.

(a) There is command to sin, which is an authoritative direction to
commit sin imposed by a superior on his subject. Command is given
expressly, as when a father tells his son to steal; or implicitly, as
when he tells his son that it will please him if the son steals.

(b) There is counsel to sin, which is direct persuasion to do evil made
through argument that sin is lawful, or through instruction on the ways
of committing sin, or through advice, request, promises, threats, etc.,
as when one writes in praise of suicide to a person who is very
discouraged, and recommends it.

(c) There is enticement which is an indirect persuasion to sin made
through flattery, insinuation, calumny, narratives, etc. Thus, Absalom
worked on the people of Israel and beguiled them into rebellion against
his father (II Kings, xv. 1-6). Those who ridicule temperance and so
lead others to drink excessively, entice to drunkenness. A host who
offers little except fine meats on a Friday entices to the violation of
abstinence.

1497. The Malice of Solicitation.--(a) The gravity of this sin
according to its nature is mortal, but it may be venial on account of
imperfect deliberation or smallness of matter (see 1473). Thus, it is a
mortal sin to command one’s son to commit grand larceny or perjury, a
venial sin to command him to commit petty theft or tell a harmless lie.
(b) The circumstances of the sin that aggravate or extenuate are the
greater or less degree of deliberation and malice, the greater or less
evil of the sin to which one induces one’s neighbors, etc. (see 1473,
1474). (c) The species of the sin of solicitation is twofold; there is
the sin of scandal, opposed to charity, inasmuch as a neighbor is led
to sin, and there is also the sin which one persuades a neighbor to
commit (see 1468 sqq.).

1498. Applications to Confession and Satisfaction.--(a) Since the
seducer willed the species of sin to which he induced his neighbor, it
does not suffice that he tell in confession that he induced another to
sin; he must also tell the species of sin (e.g., theft), to which he
induced or attempted to induce another. (b) Since the seducer is guilty
of injustice against the person seduced, if he employed fraud, traps,
violence, etc., it does not suffice in such cases merely to confess
that he seduced; he must also tell that he used unjust means to seduce.
(c) Since the seducer is guilty of spiritual damage, he is bound to
make reparation for scandal given (see 1488 sqq.). (d) Since the
seducer is responsible for temporal damages that are due to his
influence (e.g., when he commands A to steal from or calumniate B), he
is held to restitution for any such damages (see Vol. II on Justice).

1499. In confessing a sin whose nature implies an accomplice (e.g.,
obscene conversation), is it necessary to mention the circumstance that
one seduced the other party? (a) If the seduction includes a special
malice against charity or against justice, it should be mentioned.
Thus, if the party seduced had been innocent and was scandalized, or
was trapped into sin, the fact of seduction should be mentioned. (b) If
the seduction includes no special malice against charity or justice, it
seems there is no obligation to mention it. Thus, if the party
solicited had been living a life of sin and consented to the
solicitation without any detriment to ideals or any unwillingness, no
scandal is given and no injustice committed by the solicitation, as far
as that party is concerned, and there seems to be no reason why the
circumstance of seduction must be confessed.

1500. Seduction is incitement to sin, and so differs from mere
permission of sin in another. It is never lawful to incite to sin, but
it is lawful for a sufficient reason to permit sin in others, as was
said above in reference to Pharisaic scandal (see 1477, 1482, 1483).
But, in applying this principle to concrete cases, it is sometimes
difficult to draw the line between incitement and mere permission. We
shall discuss now the following cases in which this difficulty occurs:
(a) when one requests another to do something which one knows will be a
sin for him; (b) when one advises another to commit a less rather than
a greater evil; (e) when the opportunity for another to commit sin is
not removed, or is prepared.

1501. Is it lawful to ask another to do something, when one knows that
he will not consent without sinning?

(a) If the thing requested is sinful in itself, the request is also
sinful. Hence, it is not lawful to ask a thief to sell the goods he has
stolen, nor is it lawful to request absolution from a priest who lacks
jurisdiction.

(b) If the thing requested is lawful in itself, but there is no
sufficient reason for the request in view of the fact that the other
will sin by granting it, the request is sinful. Hence, it is not lawful
to ask baptism from a person who is in the state of sin, when one can
easily obtain it from another person who is in the state of grace.

(c) If the thing requested is lawful, and there is a sufficient reason
for the request, one does not sin by making the request. Hence, it is
lawful for the sake of the common welfare to require that witnesses
take an oath, even though one knows that one of them will commit
perjury.

1502. Is it lawful to advise another to commit a less evil in
preference to a greater evil?

(a) If the other has not made up his mind to commit either evil, it is
not lawful to advise that he do either. Thus, to counsel another to
steal, and to make his victims the rich rather than the poor, is a
species of seduction.

(b) If the person has made up his mind to commit the greater evil and
the lesser evil is virtually contained in the greater, it is lawful to
advise that he omit the former for the latter. For in thus acting one
prevents the greater evil and does not cause the lesser evil, since it
is virtually contained in the greater evil which the other person had
already decided on. Thus, if Titus is bent on stealing $100, Balbus is
not guilty of seduction, if he persuades Titus to take only $10. We are
supposing, of course, that Titus is so determined to steal that it is
out of the question to deter him from taking at least a small amount.

(c) If the person in question has decided on the greater sin and the
lesser is not virtually contained in the greater, it is not lawful to
recommend that he commit the smaller instead of the greater sin. For,
if one does this, one does not save the other from the internal guilt
of the greater sin intended, while one does add the malice of the
lesser sin which was not intended. Thus, if Titus plans to kill Caius,
it is not lawful to advise that he rob him instead, or that he kill
Claudius instead, for robbery is a specifically distinct sin from
murder, and Claudius is a different person from Caius. But, if Titus
planned to kill Caius in order to rob him, it would not be unlawful to
point out that the robbery could be carried out without murder and to
advise accordingly.

1503. Not all theologians accept the last solution just given. (a) Some
reject it, and hold that, even when the lesser evil is not virtually
contained in the greater, it is lawful to advise the lesser. They argue
that what one does thereby is not to commit the lesser evil, to induce
it or approve it, but only to permit it in order to lessen the harm
that will be done, and they confirm their argument from scripture
(Gen., xix. 8). According to this opinion, then, which has some good
authorities in its favor, it would be lawful to advise robbery in order
to dissuade another from the greater evil of murder. (b) Others modify
the solution given in the previous paragraph, and hold that it is
lawful to propose the lesser evil or mention it, provided one does not
attempt to induce the other person to carry it into effect.

1504. Is it lawful so to prearrange circumstances that an occasion of
sin will seem to offer itself to another?

(a) If the end and the means used are good, this is lawful; for there
is no scandal or seduction, but sin or the danger of sin is permitted
for a proportionately grave reason. Examples: Sempronius knows that
someone is robbing his desk, and it is important that he discover the
thief. He leaves the desk open and watches from concealment to see
whether a suspected person who is coming to the room will steal.
Claudius is quite certain that Titus is stealing his chickens, but he
needs evidence in order to have Titus convicted and deterred from
future stealing. So, he leaves doors open and hides himself with
witnesses that Titus may be caught in the act.

(b) If the end or means is bad, it is not lawful to prepare an
opportunity for sin, because in either case one intends something
sinful. Examples: Sempronius knows that his wife Titia has been
unfaithful and he threatens to leave her. She, wishing to have a
countercharge to make or to secure evidence to discredit his word,
hires various dissolute females to lay traps for him and his friends.
Claudius out of revenge wishes that Caius be sent to jail, and he
therefore employs agents to provoke Caius into something criminal in
word or deed that will justify incarceration. Balbus knows that
Mercurius is a dangerous character, and he frames a scheme by which
Mercurius will be invited to participate in an act of banditry and be
captured. Titia and Claudius sin, because their purpose is wrong;
Balbus sins because he uses wrong means. All three are guilty of
seduction, at least in intention.

1505. Seduction was described above (see 1496) as an inducement to sin
through such manifest means as command, counsel, or enticement. But
there is also a more subtle form of seduction, which does not appeal
directly to the intellect or will, but makes a physical approach by
acting upon the body, senses, or imagination. This is a more cunning,
but none the less guilty form of seduction, examples of which are the
following:

(a) Seduction through bodily states is exemplified in those who
minister secretly to others drinks or drugs or foods that will produce
emotional disturbances or mental confusion and make them more
susceptible to temptation.

(b) Seduction through the senses is exemplified in those who surround
others with pictures, companions, music, examples, etc., that
continually speak of the desirability of vice or the undesirability of
virtue.

(c) Seduction through the imagination is seen in hypnotism or
suggestion when used to produce a vivid and strong impression of
something dangerous to be thought on. A spirit of bigoted uniformity
which demands that all dress, think and act alike even in matters where
there should be liberty, may also be very seductive; for, rather than
commit the unpardonable sin of seeming queer, a person may take to
drunkenness or whatever vice is popular in his crowd or group.

1506. Cooperation in Sin.--Cooperation or participation in sin,
strictly understood, is help afforded another, whom one has not
seduced, to carry out his purpose of sinning.

(a) Hence, cooperation differs from scandal and solicitation, for these
lead into sin one who had not decided on sin, while cooperation
supposes that the other party had already made up his mind to sin. The
scandalizer leads into sin, but does not help in its commission; the
cooperator does not lead into sin but he helps in its commission.

(b) Cooperation, however, may include scandal and solicitation as
regards future sins or as regards third parties. Example: Balbus, who
had decided on his own initiative to steal, finds to his surprise that
his conduct receives aid and comfort from Titus, a person of some
authority. This cooperation will act as an example or incitement to
Balbus to repeat the offense, and will likewise be an occasion of sin
to others.

1507. Cooperation is also different from complicity as follows: (a) The
cooperator acts as assistant or subordinate agent to the one who
commits sin, providing him with moral or physical help, or supplying
him with the means requisite for the act of sin. Thus, he whose
services are commandeered by robbers and who carries away the stolen
goods, or who puts a revolver into the hand of one bent on murder or
obscene books into the hands of one bent on the corruption of youth, is
a cooperator. (b) The accomplice acts as an equiprincipal or coordinate
agent with another in the commission of the same sin, performing his
own proper part or share of the joint act of sin. Thus, he who enlists
as a member of a robber band and acts as their chauffeur or lookout at
the time of “hold-ups,” or who fights a duel, or who carries on an
obscene dialogue, or listens willingly to obscene talk, is an
accomplice. The accomplice is always guilty, but the cooperator may be
guiltless.

1508. Kinds of Cooperation.--Divisions of Cooperation according to
Different Kinds of Acts.--(a) From the viewpoint of the internal act,
cooperation is either formal or material, according as one does or does
not intend the sin whose external commission one is aiding. Examples:
Caius offers a burglar information as to ways of climbing into a
second-story window. Claudius, being covered by a revolver, makes no
resistance or outcry while bandits are rifling his employer’s office.
Caius is an abettor of crime and a formal cooperator on account of his
guilty intent; Claudius aids the commission of burglary, but he is only
a material cooperator, since he does not intend what the criminals
intend.

(b) From the viewpoint of the external act, cooperation is positive or
negative, according as one does something to help the principal agent,
or does nothing to impede him. In the examples given above, Caius was a
positive, Claudius a negative cooperator. Positive cooperation is given
in a moral manner, as when one votes for an unjust law or sentence, or
cheers a sinful remark; or in a physical manner, as when one helps
bandits to bind and gag their victims, or leaves doors and windows
unfastened for the convenience of thieves.

1509. Divisions of Cooperation according to its Degree of
Influence.--(a) From the viewpoint of its activity, cooperation is
either occasional or effective. By occasional cooperation is understood
that which leads another into sin, or allows him to be drawn into sin,
but does not assist him to commit sin (e.g., scandalous example,
failure to give a fraternal correction or admonition). By effective
cooperation is understood assistance given another enabling him to
carry out, or to carry out more easily, an act of sin on which he had
resolved. As is clear from the explanation given above (see 1506),
there is question here only of effective cooperation.

(b) From the viewpoint of its nearness to the act of the principal
agent, cooperation is either immediate or mediate, according as one
shares in the sinful act of the principal agent, or in some act that
preceded or followed it. Thus, he who helps a thief to carry away
stolen goods is an immediate cooperator, while he who supplied the
thief with necessary keys before the theft, and he who offered refuge
to the thief or concealment for the stolen goods after the theft, are
mediate cooperators.

(c) From the viewpoint of the dependence on it of what is done,
cooperation is either indispensable or not indispensable, according as
the principal agent cannot act without it, or can. Example: Balbus
supplies intoxicants to Titus and Sempronius, who are intemperate.
Titus cannot secure intoxicants except from Balbus; Sempronius can
secure them elsewhere. Balbus’ cooperation is indispensable for Titus,
but not for Sempronius.

1510. Cooperation is also divided from the viewpoint of responsibility
or of the consequences incurred through it, into unjust cooperation and
merely unlawful cooperation.

(a) Unjust cooperation is participation in the guilt of an injury done
to a third party which involves the duty of restitution or strict
reparation. Thus, those who act as “fences” or receivers of stolen
goods, cooperate in injustice and are bound to restitution to the
rightful owners.

(b) Unlawful cooperation is participation in a sin that contains no
injustice to a third party, and that entails only the obligations of
repentance and satisfaction, and, if the case requires it, of amends
for scandal, proofs of sincerity, avoidance of dangers and submission
to penalty. Thus, those who cooperate by marrying illegally, or by
providing obscene literature to persons who demand it and insist on
having it, are guilty of sin and also fall under various punishments
prescribed in law. Cooperation, in so far as it is unjust, will be
treated specially under the head of Justice (see Vol. II); here we are
concerned with cooperation in general, and as it is a sin against
charity.

1511. Formal cooperation is either explicit or implicit. (a) It is
explicit, when the end intended by the cooperator (_finis operantis_)
is the sin of the principal agent. Examples: Balbus gives incense money
to an idolater, because he approves of idolatry and wishes to see
idolatrous rites performed. Caius joins an anarchistic society because
he agrees with its aims and wishes to help in their fulfillment.

(b) Formal cooperation is implicit, when the cooperator does not
directly intend to associate himself with the sin of the principal
agent, but the end of the external act (_finis operis_), which for the
sake of some advantage or interest the cooperator docs intend, includes
from its nature or from circumstances the guilt of the sin of the
principal agent. Examples: Balbus detests idolatry, but in order to
show courtesy he helps a pagan to burn incense before an idol, or he
assists in the repairing of a pagan shrine, though his act is looked on
as a sign of worship. Caius joins a freethinking society, not because
he likes its principles, but because he wishes to obtain through
membership certain social or financial advantages which he cannot
obtain in any other way.

1512. Mediate cooperation is also subdivided into proximate and remote.
(a) It is proximate or remote by reason of nearness, according as the
act of sin will follow closely or otherwise on the act of cooperation.
Thus, he who gives a ladder to a burglar cooperates in a remote
preparation; he who holds the ladder while the burglar goes up
cooperates in a proximate preparation. (b) Mediate cooperation is
proximate or remote as to definiteness, according as the preparation
points clearly or only vaguely to the commission of sin. Proximate
cooperation is an action which, from its nature or circumstances, is
regarded as morally connected with the evil action of the principal
agent, while remote cooperation is an action that has no such moral
connection with the sin that is committed. Thus, he who sells a
revolver to a gunman who is preparing for a murder cooperates
proximately, while he who sells the materials for this weapon
cooperates only remotely. Again, if one sells to a burglar a “jimmy,” a
dark lantern, a mask, a revolver, and explosives, the cooperation is
definite, since the circumstances indicate that robbery is
contemplated. But if one sells a burglar a pair of soft-sounding shoes,
the cooperation is indefinite, for the burglar may wish them in order
to give no disturbance in his own home, and not in order to attract no
attention in the homes of others.

1513. The Sinfulness of Cooperation.--The Sinfulness of Formal
Cooperation.--(a) Formal cooperation is always sinful, for it includes
the approval of the sin of another and the willing participation in the
guilt of that sin.

(b) Formal cooperation is from its nature opposed to charity; for
charity disapproves of the sins of others and strives to prevent them,
while formal cooperation, on the contrary, approves and assists the
sins of others.

(c) Formal cooperation is also opposed to the virtue violated by the
sin of the principal agent, in so far as the will of the cooperator
delights in or approves of the circumstance of help given to the sin of
the other (see 1468). Thus, if one opens the door to a caller whom one
suspects to be a burglar and at the same time mentally sympathizes with
the act of burglary, one is guilty in will of the act one approves.

(d) Formal cooperation as to its external act is opposed to the virtue
violated by the cooperator, when the external act has a malice of its
own. Thus, if one swears falsely in order to conceal the presence of a
burglar hidden in the house, one is guilty of perjury; if one disobeys
the laws of the Church by marrying clandestinely, one is guilty of
disobedience; if one scandalizes third parties by cooperating with sin,
one is guilty of scandal; if one shares in fraud, one is guilty of
injustice, etc. Hence, in confession it does not suffice to say that
one has cooperated in sin, but one must also tell the sin committed and
the necessary circumstances.

1514. The Sinfulness of Material Cooperation.--(a) Material
cooperation, in itself, is sinful; for charity commands that one strive
to prevent the sin of another, and much more therefore does it forbid
one to help in the sin of another. (b) Material cooperation, in case of
great necessity, is not sinful; for charity does not oblige under
serious inconvenience to self, and it does not forbid one to cooperate
by an indifferent act to prevent a neighbor from committing a greater
evil than the evil he has in mind. He who cooperates materially through
necessity does not cause sin, but uses his own right, which the bad
will of the other abuses and makes an occasion of sin (see 1447 d).

1515. Lawfulness of Material Cooperation.--The conditions necessary in
order that material cooperation be lawful are the same as for any other
act that has a double result (see 104); for from the cooperation follow
two results, one that is bad (viz., the sin of the other person) and
one that is good (viz., the avoidance of loss or the retention of
good). Two of the conditions required in the principle of double result
need not be considered, however, since their presence is manifestly
assured by the very fact that the cooperation is merely material. (a)
Thus, the condition that the good effect must not be secured through
the evil effect is verified; for, if one intends the sin of the other
party as a means to the good end, cooperation is formal. Hence, if
Balbus helps Claudius to get sinfully drunk, so that Claudius may go to
confession the sooner, the cooperation of Balbus in the drunkenness of
Claudius is formal. (b) The condition that the evil effect is not
intended is also verified; for the very definition of material
cooperation excludes the intention of the sin committed by the other
party.

1516. Hence, we may confine our attention to the two remaining
conditions stated in the principle of double effect, and conclude that
material cooperation is lawful when and if the act of the cooperator is
itself good or indifferent, and he has a reason sufficiently weighty
for permitting the sin of the other party.

1517. The first condition of material cooperation is that the act of
the cooperator must be good or at least indifferent; for, if it is
evil, the cooperation becomes implicitly formal. But, since it is often
difficult to determine in particular instances whether cooperation is
intrinsically evil or merely indifferent, one must examine the nature
and circumstances of the act.

(a) Thus, according to its nature, an act of cooperation is
intrinsically evil, if it has no uses except such as are evil; it is
indifferent, if, according to the intention of those who use it, it is
now good, now evil. Hence, it is intrinsically wrong to assist in the
manufacture or distribution of obscene books or pictures, or of drugs
or instruments used exclusively for immoral purposes, since the only
use to which such things can be put is sinful. It is also intrinsically
wrong to take part even remotely in pagan superstitions, or to give any
immediate assistance to an act which from its nature is opposed to the
Sixth Commandment. But it is not intrinsically wrong to assist in the
manufacture of firearms or poisons, which have many good uses, or to
act as bodyguard to a person who fears harm from others.

(b) According to its circumstances, an act of cooperation is evil, if
by reason of adjuncts it is wrong, as when it signifies approval of
evil, gives scandal to others, endangers the faith or virtue of the
cooperator, or violates a law of the Church. Thus, it is not from the
nature of the act wrong to invite a pedestrian to ride in one’s car;
but it is wrong from the circumstances when the pedestrian asks to be
taken to a spot where he intends to commit robbery. It is not wrong
intrinsically to work at building a temple; but it is wrong from the
circumstances, when this act is regarded by the public as a sign of
adherence to a false religion, or when the act causes scandal (see
983). The laws of the Church on mixed marriage or neutral schools
afford other examples of cooperation lawful in one set of
circumstances, but unlawful in another on account of significance,
scandal, danger, etc.

1518. But the circumstance that the cooperator knows for certain that
the principal agent will use the cooperation for sinful purposes, or
will take scandal to the extent of being strengthened in his evil
designs by reason of the assistance given, does not necessarily make
cooperation evil.

(a) Thus, the cooperator may know from the declaration of the principal
agent just what is to be done, and yet have no will whatever to concur
in the evil. Hence, if a person is forced at the point of a revolver to
help in robbing his own guests, he knows very well what is being done,
but he certainly does not approve of it.

(b) The cooperator may know that scandal will be occasioned by the
cooperation, either to the principal agent or to others, but he may
have sufficient reasons for permitting it (see 1478, 1482). Thus, if
the employee of an undertaking establishment has orders to assist at
the funeral of an anarchist, and will lose his means of livelihood if
he does not comply, he is not obliged to suffer this great detriment to
avoid Pharisaic scandal or even scandal of the weak. But he should, if
possible, declare his want of sympathy with anarchy, if he knows of
some anarchist present who regards his cooperation as a mark of
sympathy for the principles of the deceased.

1519. The second condition for lawful material cooperation is that the
cooperator should have a reason sufficiently weighty for permitting the
evil connected with his cooperation. The standards for judging whether
a reason is sufficiently weighty, are the rules given above on
permission of an evil effect (see 105).

(a) Hence, the graver the sin that will be committed, the graver the
reason required for cooperation. Thus, a greater reason is required for
cooperation in assault than for cooperation in theft.

(b) The nearer the cooperation is to the act of sin, the greater the
reason required for cooperation. Thus, he who sells paper to the
publisher of obscene books cooperates remotely; he who sets the type or
reads the proofs of such books cooperates proximately. A greater reason
is necessary for the latter than for the former cooperation.

(c) The greater the dependence of the evil act on one’s cooperation,
the greater the reason required for cooperation. Thus, a more serious
reason is needed to justify giving intoxicants to a person who abuses
liquors, if he is unable to procure them elsewhere, than if he can
easily get them from others. But the fact that, if you deny intoxicants
or other cooperation, another person will grant what you deny, is not
of itself a sufficient reason for cooperation.

(d) The more certain the evil act, the greater the reason required for
cooperation. Example: Titus gets drunk frequently, Balbus at intervals.
Hence, a greater reason is needed for providing liquor to Titus than to
Balbus.

(e) The more obligation one is under to avoid the act of cooperation or
to prevent the act of sin, the greater the reason must be for
cooperation. Hence, a much greater reason is necessary for lawful
cooperation by those who are bound _ex officio_, from piety or justice,
to prevent a sin (such as parents, spiritual directors, and policemen)
than on the part of those who are not so bound.

1520. Reasons for cooperation correspond in gravity with the importance
of the goods or evils involved (see 1163 sqq.).

(a) Hence, a grave reason for cooperation exists when, if one refuses
it, a great good will be lost or a great evil incurred. A day’s wages
or income is generally a great good; a severe or long-continued pain,
great anger of an employer or other superior, things that bring on
notable annoyance, shame, repugnance, etc., are examples of great evils.

(b) A very grave reason for cooperation is the gain or retention of a
very great good or the avoidance of a very great evil. A notable
percentage of the goods of one’s station in life should be considered
as a very great good. A severe and long-continued illness, unemployment
on the part of the breadearner of a needy family, serious detriment to
one’s honor, reputation or peace of mind, etc., are examples of very
great evils.

(c) Graver reasons for cooperation are those that surpass the very
grave without being supreme, such as the loss of one’s station in life,
incurable disease, loss of an eye or other principal member, severe or
perpetual imprisonment.

(d) Most grave reasons for cooperation are the public safety of Church
or State, loss of all one’s property, death, extreme disgrace, and the
like.

1521. When the sin committed by the principal agent is grave, but
contains no injustice to a third party, the reasons for cooperation
need not be so serious as when the sin is grave and unjust.

(a) Thus, immediate and indispensable cooperation is justified in order
to avoid grave loss to self; for example, one may ask absolution from
an unworthy minister, in order to recover the state of grace more
quickly.

(b) Immediate and not indispensable cooperation, or mediate and
indispensable cooperation, is lawful when it is necessary in order to
avoid a moderate loss. Examples: One may receive Communion from an
unworthy minister in order to make the Easter duty more conveniently.
One may supply intoxicants to a drunkard in order to avoid a brawl, if
there is no time to call in the strong arm of the law to subdue the
drunkard.

(c) Mediate and not indispensable cooperation is justified even by
avoidance of a slight loss. Example: A butcher may sell meat on Friday
to a cook who will serve it to some persons bound by abstinence, if the
cook can easily get the meat from others and the profit will go
elsewhere, unless the butcher sells her the meat.

1522. When the sin committed by the principal agent is a grave
injustice to a private party, the reasons for cooperation need not be
so serious as when the sin is against the public good.

(a) Thus, immediate and indispensable cooperation is permissible, if
without it one cannot avoid a loss to self that is both certain and of
a higher kind, or at least a greater one of the same kind than that
which will be suffered by the injured party; for this latter would be
unreasonable, if he expected one to suffer a greater loss in order to
spare him. Example: Mercurius, a servant, is threatened with instant
death if he does not open a safe of his employer, take from it certain
papers, and deliver them to a burglar.

(b) Immediate and not indispensable cooperation, or mediate and
indispensable cooperation, is allowed if necessary for the avoidance of
an equal loss to self. Examples: The burglar mentioned above can blow
open the safe if Mercurius refuses to open it, but, if he is put to
this trouble, he will steal from Mercurius valuables comparable to the
papers in the safe. Claudius, a servant, opens a backdoor, the only way
through which a burglar can enter secretly, because he is taken by
surprise, and refusal on his part will inevitably cost him the loss of
papers equally as valuable as those the burglar wishes to secure.
Sempronius wishes to rob a house, but he cannot get there without the
assistance of Caius, a chauffeur. Caius understands the purpose of
Sempronius, but, if he refuses to take him to the house, Sempronius
will give out information that will do almost as much harm to Caius as
the robbery would do to the owner of the house.

(c) Mediate and not indispensable cooperation is justified by the
avoidance of a loss to self less than the loss of the injured party,
but in proportion to it, Example: Balbus is usually honest, but today
he is going out to “fleece” a number of unsuspecting victims, and he
gives orders to his servant Titus to get his coat and hat and open the
door, and to his chauffeur Caius to drive him to the gambling place.
Titus and Caius have an inkling of Balbus’ plans, but no proofs. If
they disobey his orders, other servants will do what Balbus asks, the
swindling will not be stopped, but Titus will be demoted, and Caius
thrown out of the position necessary for his livelihood.

1523. When the sin committed by the principal agent is against some
good of a public character, though not against the common safety, still
greater reasons are necessary for cooperation than those given above.
(a) Thus, immediate and indispensable cooperation is allowed to avoid a
greater public evil, or an equal public evil joined with grave loss to
self; for it is lawful to permit a lesser in order to escape a greater
evil. Thus, the law may tolerate certain evils for the sake of public
tranquillity, if the attempt to suppress them would lead to serious
disturbances. One may delay to denounce a practice that is doing harm
to a family, if an immediate complaint would cause an equal harm to the
family and bring on the maker of the complaint a serious evil.

(b) Immediate and not indispensable cooperation, or mediate and
indispensable cooperation, is permitted when it is necessary to avoid
an equal public evil, or a very serious personal evil proportionate
according to prudent judgment to the public harm done. Thus, an actor
who has a harmless part in a somewhat evil play may act it for a time,
if the company can easily obtain substitutes but he cannot easily
obtain other employment and needs his wages. Similarly, the owner of
the only theatre in town may rent it to that company in order to be
able to refuse it to another company that is worse.

(c) Mediate and not indispensable cooperation may be allowed when there
is need of avoiding a grave loss to self which cannot be prevented
except by cooperation. Thus, the ushers in the theatre who have no
present way of supporting dependents except by the wages they are
earning, may help patrons to seats, even when the play that is being
shown is not morally unobjectionable.

1524. When the sin committed by another is directed against the
necessary public welfare (i.e., against the common safety of Church or
State), one may not cooperate, but should resist. In this case: (a)
cooperation is unlawful, for there is no greater public good to justify
it, and much less can it be justified by private good; (b) resistance
should be made, if possible; for the individual should be willing to
suffer loss, spoliation, and death itself to conserve the safety of the
Church or of the State.

1525. In giving reasons sufficient for cooperation with sins injurious
to the sinner alone or to some third party, we considered only the harm
or loss to oneself that would result from a refusal to cooperate. But
the good of others may also suffice for cooperation.

(a) Thus, the good of the sinner may justify one in cooperating, as
when one assists in order to prevent the commission of a greater evil.
It would not be wrong to give whisky to one who wished to make himself
drunk, if otherwise he would take poisoned alcohol.

(b) The good of a third party may justify cooperation, as when one
assists in perpetrating a minor injury against him in order to stop a
major injury. It would not be wrong to bind and gag a man who was being
robbed, if otherwise a burglar would murder him.

(c) The common good will often be a justifying reason. Thus, in
political affairs it is at times necessary in indifferent matters to
compromise with opponents, whose general policies one does not approve,
in order to secure the election of good citizens or the passing of good
laws, when these ends are very important for the general welfare. It is
lawful to administer a Sacrament to one who is unworthy in order to
avoid a public evil, such as disturbance or scandal among the people.

1526. Lawfulness of Immediate Cooperation.--(a) If one cannot cooperate
immediately without performing an act that is intrinsically evil (see
1517), immediate cooperation is, of course, unlawful. Thus, if one
helped a trembling assassin to administer poison or to stab or shoot to
death the victim, one would be an accomplice in murder; if one assisted
a decrepit pagan to burn incense before an idol, one would be an
accomplice in false worship. (b) If one can cooperate immediately
without performing an act intrinsically evil, immediate cooperation is
held lawful by some authorities, but there are others who say that all
immediate cooperation is sinful.

1527. Arguments for the Opposing Opinions on Immediate
Cooperation.--(a) Those who deny the lawfulness of all immediate
cooperation argue that immediate cooperation does not differ from
complicity, and hence that it is always intrinsically wrong. If theft
is the taking away of goods without the knowledge and consent of the
owner, what shall we call the act of a servant who assists a thief by
carrying out the family silver to a waiting automobile? The fact that
the servant does this to save himself from wounds or death cannot
change the moral character of the act, else we shall have to say that
the end may justify the means. And what is said of theft, can be said
likewise of other species of sin.

(b) Those who affirm the lawfulness of immediate cooperation in certain
cases argue that circumstances may take away evil from an act of
assistance given to a sinner, so that the act becomes indifferent or
good. Thus, theft is the taking away of what belongs to another against
the reasonable will of the owner. Now, the owner would be unreasonable
if he were unwilling that one should cooperate in removing his goods,
if one had to do so in order to protect one’s life, at least if one had
not engaged to defend his goods; for one is bound to protect one’s life
in preference to the goods of another. If a starving man may take a
loaf of bread without the owner’s consent, why may not one save one’s
life by assisting a desperate criminal to carry off money? Moreover, it
is commonly admitted that a person in great need may lawfully ask a
Sacrament from a minister who is unworthy and who will sin by
conferring it; that is, one may cooperate immediately with the unworthy
administration of a Sacrament and yet be free of guilt on account of
the circumstances.

1528. Special Cases of Cooperation.--The cases of cooperation, like
those involving scandal, are innumerable, but there are certain cases
which occur today more frequently than others, namely, those of
cooperation with evil publications, dances, and theatres, and those of
the cooperation of merchants, innkeepers, renters, servants, and
workingmen. Cooperation in sins against faith and sins against justice
are treated in their proper places, but it will be useful here to speak
of these other special kinds of cooperation, since they offer many
difficulties and a consideration of them now will illustrate the
general principles on cooperation just given. However, the following
points should be noted:

(a) The application of the definitions and rules about cooperation to
particular cases is one of the most difficult tasks of Moral Theology,
and hence there will be found great diversity of opinion among
theologians on particular points. Space forbids a discussion here of
the opposing opinions, and we shall have to content ourselves, in some
of the illustrations that follow, with solutions that are likely, but
whose opposites are also likely.

(b) The cases that follow are treated according to the principles of
cooperation. But frequently in actual life there will be other factors
to be considered, such as the occasion of sin to oneself or scandal to
others. It should be remembered, then, that when a particular kind of
material cooperation is here said to be lawful, this must be understood
as abstractly speaking; for in an individual instance there may be
circumstances of danger or disedification which would make it
unlawful--a thing that often happens.

1529. Formal Cooperation with Evil Reading Matter.--(a) Cases of formal
cooperation on account of explicit intention to do harm are those of
the managers, editors, ordinary collaborators and authors of
periodicals, newspapers, books, etc., which are opposed _ex professo_
to faith and good morals; for these persons are the brains which direct
and select what is to be written and published, and the matter they are
creating or putting on paper is evil, and has no direct purpose except
evil.

(b) Cases of formal cooperation on account of implicit intention to do
harm are those of the responsible heads of printing or publishing firms
and their printers, who agree to publish such objectionable written
matter; of booksellers, owners of newsstands, etc., who agree to sell
it; for, as we suppose, these persons understand that the matter in
question is intrinsically harmful and gravely forbidden.

1530. Cooperation with evil newspapers and other reading matter is
material and lawful if the matter itself is not entirely evil, that is,
if it has good uses as well as bad, and one has a reason for
cooperation that is just and proportionate to the kind of cooperation.
The following are examples of cooperation that may be merely material
and lawful:

(a) Moral cooperation is given by writers of good matter who assist as
collaborators; by those who offer small notices or advertisements; by
readers who use a book, periodical, newspaper, etc., for the good
matter it contains and skip the rest. For all these persons contribute
in a greater or less degree, according to their influence, reputation,
and ability, to the prestige and success of the journal, magazine or
volume, with which their names are connected or which they patronize.
Reasons sufficient to excuse in these cases, given by some authors, are
the following: for a permanent contributor, a very grave reason, such
as the need of support for his family which he cannot earn in any other
way; for an occasional contributor, a rather grave reason, such as the
opportunity of refuting error or of setting forth true principles (see
Canon 1386, Sec. 2); for the habitual reader, a reason somewhat grave,
such as the advantage of reports useful for his business which cannot
be found elsewhere; for the occasional reader, a slight reason, such as
entertainment to be derived from reading a good story; for the small
advertiser, a slight reason, such as profit in business. Those who by
laudatory descriptions in advertisements or book reviews urge others to
buy and read evil books are guilty of seduction, rather than
cooperation (see 1495).

(b) Financial cooperation is given by those who endow or subsidize a
publication, by shareholders, by large advertisers, by subscribers,
etc. Reasons considered sufficient in these cases are as follows: for
the original providers of capital, only a most grave reason; for the
buyers of much stock or advertising space, only a very grave reason;
for subscribers, a grave reason such as would suffice for habitual
reading.

(c) Material assistance is given by those who produce or distribute a
publication and by those who furnish necessary material. Among the
producers, the proximate cooperators are, first, the managers of the
printing company, and, secondly, the printers, the “readers” and the
correctors; the remote cooperators are the typesetters, arrangers of
ink and paper, binders, and machine operators. For proximate
cooperation it is held that a most grave reason suffices, as when a
printer cannot otherwise support himself and his family; for remote
cooperation a grave reason is needed. Among the distributors, there are
degrees of proximity in cooperation as follows: first, those who put
the reading matter into the hands of others (e.g., by keeping it on the
tables in their waiting rooms or offices); next, those who keep it for
purchasers who may ask for it; finally, those who are employed as
keepers of newsstands, newsboys, etc. We cannot think of any reason
sufficient to excuse the first kind of cooperation, since there is no
lack of good reading matter which doctors, lawyers, barbers, etc,, can
provide for those who are waiting in their rooms; for the second kind
of cooperation, a very grave reason suffices, such as loss of trade by
a poor bookseller, if he would not supply his patrons with popular
books or periodicals of a less elevated kind; for the third kind of
cooperation, a grave reason suffices.

Among the suppliers are those who sell to the printer his ink, type,
machinery, etc. These cooperate only remotely, and it is held that
profit is a sufficient reason for their cooperation. This we admit, if
the cooperation is not indispensable, but we do not think that profit
alone would uniformly justify voluntary cooperation upon which depended
the publication of pernicious matter.

1531. Formal Cooperation with Evil Dances or Plays.--(a) Cases of
formal cooperation on account of explicit intention to do harm are
those of the originators of sinful dances and the writers of indecent
plays. (b) Cases of formal cooperation on account of implicit intention
to do harm are those of the managements that produce bad shows,
organize bad dances, or make the arrangements or issue the invitations
for these affairs.

1532. Material Cooperation with Evil Dances or Plays.--Material
cooperation is lawful, if the cooperation is not itself intrinsically
wrong, and if there is a sufficient reason for permitting it.

(a) Cases of immediate material cooperation are those of players and
dancers who have harmless parts in the performance. A very grave
reason, such as avoidance of penury, is considered as sufficient excuse
here, at least for a time.

(b) Cases of proximate material cooperation are those of musicians or
singers, who do not perform lascivious music; of spectators, who show
no approval of the evil that is done; of those who buy tickets but do
not attend. A more serious reason is required in the musician at the
dance than in the musician at the play, for the former directs the
dance, while the latter only accompanies the play. Likewise, a more
serious reason is required when one attends often, or when one’s
patronage is essential to the success of the occasion, than when one
attends only rarely, or when the play or dance does not depend on one’s
presence or patronage.

(c) Cases of remote material cooperation are those of the owners who
rent their theatres or dance-halls or cabarets, of ushers, guards,
box-office employees, stage hands, etc. It is held that profit is a
sufficient reason to justify the owners in renting their places, if the
theatrical company or dance management can readily find other places in
case they are sent away. The ushers, guards, and the like are excused,
if they cannot easily find other employment; but this does not justify
gazing on immodest spectacles or laughing at or applauding obscene
jokes.

1533. Formal Cooperation by the Manufacture or Sale of Objects Whose
Sole Purpose is Gravely or Venially Sinful.--(a) Cases of explicit
cooperation are those of the inventor of contraceptives or of
instruments that frustrate generation, of the designers of blasphemous
representations or of tablets in honor of false deities, the authors of
somewhat profane or irreverent cards, and the like. (b) Cases of
implicit cooperation are those of persons who, for profit only, make or
sell objects such as those just mentioned, while knowing that the
purpose to which they naturally tend is the commission of sin.

1534. Material cooperation by the manufacture or sale of objects that
are used for gravely or venially sinful purposes, is lawful under the
conditions given in 1515. Hence, in the first place, the cooperation
itself must not be intrinsically sinful, that is, the object made or
sold must have good as well as evil uses. There are two classes of
objects of this kind: (a) there are some objects which may have good
uses, but which in fact are nearly always made to serve bad ends (e.g.,
idols, insignia of forbidden societies, pictures of the nude,
ultra-fashionable dress, certain drugs or poisons, blackjacks, and
pistol silencers); (b) there are other objects which are indifferent in
themselves, although often employed for sinful uses (e.g., dice,
playing cards and chips, rouge, lipsticks, necklaces and other feminine
adornments, imitation jewelry, adulterated articles, and the like).

1535. The rules about proportionate cause for cooperation by the
manufacture or sale of things that are employed in committing sin are
those given above in 1519.

(a) Hence, the greater the sin that will be committed or the more
harmful the consequences that will ensue from the use of an object, the
greater the reason required for making, repairing or selling it. In
some instances only a most grave reason will excuse, such as peril of
instant death for refusal. Thus, one may not sell poison or drugs to a
person who contemplates suicide, murder, or abortion. One may not sell
narcotics to a person who asks for them in good faith and who cannot
obtain them elsewhere, but who will become a drug-fiend if they are
given him. One may not sell morphine, heroin, etc., to a person who is
already a drug-addict and who will abuse the drugs, unless there is a
very grave reason for not refusing, such as danger that refusal will
lead him to set fire to the building. If one has all the playing cards
in some remote hamlet, one should not sell them without grave reason to
a customer who will spend a great part of the time at games to the
neglect of serious duties, nor without a very grave reason to a
customer who is a card sharper and who will swindle many innocent
victims, or to a gambler who will waste the money due to his wife and
family.

(b) The more closely related an object is with sinful uses, the graver
must be the excuse for having part in its manufacture or sale. Thus, an
ordinary reason (e.g., profit) might suffice for selling a lamb to a
pagan or attractive ornaments of dress to a woman, where only a very
grave or most grave reason would suffice for selling incense to a pagan
or ornaments that are frequently used as amulets or charms. Generally
speaking, it is seriously wrong and gravely sinful to make or sell
articles whose ordinary use is gravely sinful.

(c) The more a customer depends on a determinate manufacturer or
merchant to obtain such an object, the more serious must be the reason
for making or selling it. Thus, a grave reason, such as a notable loss,
is sufficient reason for selling a special fancy apparel to a notorious
“vampire” (i.e., a woman who carries on scandalous flirtations in order
to get presents), if the adornments can be obtained from other
dressmakers or modistes or stores; but a much graver reason would be
required, if the apparel could not be purchased except at one place. In
the former case, refusal to sell would not prevent the activities of
this woman; in the latter case, it would at least hinder her to some
extent.

(d) The more certain it is that an object will be employed sinfully,
the greater must be the reason for making, repairing or selling it.
Examples: Sempronius, a curio dealer, is asked by three men for a
statue of Joss along with joss-sticks and papers. The first customer
says he intends to use these articles for religious rites; the second
will not tell what his purpose is; the third wishes to present the
articles to a museum. Sempronius may not sell to the first customer
except for a most grave reason, such as fear of death if he refuses; he
may not sell to the second customer without a very great reason, such
as a very considerable loss to himself; he may sell to the third
customer for an ordinary reason, such as the profit he makes from the
sale. Titus, who sells firearms, knows that some of his customers,
though he has no particular individuals in mind, will use these weapons
unlawfully in poaching or shooting out of season. Since evil is not to
be presumed of any particular individual, Titus has the right to sell to
all for the usual reason of business profit.

1536. Is a merchant bound to inquire the use which a customer will make
of an article that is often employed for sin?

(a) If the positive law requires that the merchant inform himself, he
is bound to make inquiries necessary for obtaining the information.
Thus, if the civil law forbids the sale of weapons without a permit or
of poisons without a prescription, the merchant has to ask for the
customer’s authorization to buy.

(b) If the positive law has no such regulation, we should distinguish
between articles that are frequently used for sin and articles that are
generally used for sin. When an article of the former class is
requested, there is no obligation to make inquiries, for such an
obligation would be unduly burdensome; but, if an article of the latter
class is desired, one should make inquiries, unless one is morally
certain that the intention of the customer is good, or there is a very
grave reason for seeking no information. Thus, one may sell a deck of
cards to a stranger without asking for proofs that he is not a
confidence man in disguise; but one may not sell deadly poison to an
entire stranger merely on the strength of his word that he needs it for
medical or other lawful purposes.

1537. Sinful Cooperation in Providers of Food and Drink.--(a) There is
explicit formal cooperation with sins of gluttony, drunkenness,
violation of fast or abstinence, whenever one gladly supplies the means
for these sins to those who are about to commit them. Thus, if a host
supplies a guest who is overdrinking with all the intoxicants the
latter desires, and secretly wishes that the guest may make himself
drunk, there is explicit cooperation. There is implicit formal
cooperation when he who supplies the food or drink does not directly
intend evil, but when the act of giving the food or drink is from the
circumstances of the case an evil act, as when a person is given a meal
which will not agree with him and will make him sick or aggravate a
malady, or when a person who wishes to violate a fast ostentatiously to
show contempt is furnished with the eatables he asks for. (b) There is
unlawful material cooperation when one does not approve of the sin that
will be committed, but nevertheless without sufficient reason supplies
the food or drink. Thus, there is sinful cooperation when a restaurant
owner gives meat on Friday to one not dispensed, for no other reason
than the profit he himself will make.

1538. Material cooperation in providing food or drink to those who ask
it, but have no right to take it, is lawful when one has the right to
provide the food or drink, and there is a sufficient reason for
cooperation. The sufficiency of the reason depends on circumstances, as
explained in 1519.

(a) Hence, a greater reason is required when the sin that the other
person will commit will be greater. Thus, a grave reason, such as
indignation of a customer, might suffice for cooperation with a venial
violation of temperance or abstinence; but a graver reason, such as a
serious quarrel, is required if the violation will be mortally sinful.
A graver reason is also necessary when the consequences will be more
harmful (e.g., the fights of the drunkard, or the serious illness of
one who has neglected his diet) than when they are less harmful (e.g.,
the foolish talk of the drunkard, or the stupefaction of the glutton).

(b) A greater reason is required when the cooperation is closer. Thus,
in supplying meat the butcher cooperates only remotely, while the cook
who prepares it and the waiter who serves it cooperate proximately.

(c) A greater reason is necessary when one’s cooperation is essential
to the commission of the sin. Thus, in a large town where there are
many restaurants, the fact that a customer would quarrel if denied meat
on a day of abstinence would excuse cooperation, whereas in a small
village which has only one eating place, it seems there should be a
more serious reason, such as blasphemies or boycott or strike against
one’s business which the refusal of meat might evoke.

(d) A greater reason is called for when the sin of the other person is
more certain to follow. Thus, a restaurant-keeper who is patronized by
strangers of all kinds, temperate and intemperate, Catholic and
non-Catholic, may serve wine at meals, where this is allowed, and
provide meat on days of abstinence for all comers; for the diners are
not known to him, and it would not be possible for him to inform
himself whether they are sober in their habits or exempted from the law
of abstinence. But in a boarding house the landlady should not consent
to have strong beverages on the table, when she knows that some of
those present will thereby become intoxicated; neither should she agree
to provide meat on Fridays for a Catholic who is not excused from
abstinence, unless there is a serious reason, such as the loss of this
boarder which she cannot afford on account of her poverty. Moreover,
since dispensation is given from the laws of fast and abstinence but
not from the law of temperance, there is less certainty about the
intent to sin when one asks for meat on Friday than when one asks for a
great quantity of liquor to be brought to one’s table. Drunkenness is
also more certain when a person who asks for drink is already somewhat
under its influence.

1539. The sins with which one cooperates by supplying food or drink to
others who have no right to it are more or less serious according as
they violate the natural law or only positive human law.

(a) Thus, violation of fast and abstinence is opposed to the natural
law when it is intended as a manifestation of hatred of religion. One
may not cooperate with a violation of fast and abstinence which is
manifestly of this character.

(b) Violation of temperance is also opposed to natural law, and doubly
so when it leads to such evils as quarrels, fights, murders,
blasphemies, etc. It is not lawful to cooperate with intemperance,
unless this is necessary in order to prevent the commission of a
greater sin by the other person, or a serious loss to oneself. Thus, it
is not unlawful to supply whisky to a burglar who wishes to get drunk,
if this is the only way one can prevent the robbery of a third party or
serious injury to oneself.

(c) Violation of a fast or abstinence in itself is opposed only to
positive law; and, since fasting is more difficult than abstinence, one
is more easily excused from the observance of the former than from that
of the latter. Hence, if there is a doubt whether a customer has a
right to receive the food or drink he asks for, a restaurant-keeper can
decide more readily in the customer’s favor if there is question of
fast or abstinence than if there is question of intemperance, and more
readily still if there is question of fast than if there is question of
abstinence. Generally speaking, a restaurant-keeper may supply meat on
Friday to all who ask it, provided he has other substantial food
indicated on his bill of fare and shows himself willing to serve that
as well as meat.

1540. Renting of Houses or Rooms and cooperation in Sin.--(a) He who
rents to persons who wish to carry on disorderly, immoral, idolatrous,
unlawful, or other sinful occupations or practices, is guilty of formal
or unlawful material cooperation, if he approves of the conduct of the
renters or has no sufficient reason for renting to them. The same is
true if in a similar way one permits persons bent on evil (e.g.,
pickpockets) to lounge in one’s offices, hotels, etc.

(b) He who gives the use of his house, room, hall, field, etc., to
persons who will employ them for evil, is only a material and not a
guilty cooperator, if there is no prohibition of his act, and he has a
sufficient reason for it.

1541. Examples of reasons sufficient for cooperation in renting are as
follows:

(a) A very grave reason.--In civitatibus in quibus majoris mali vitandi
causa permissum est, licet locare domum meretricibus, dummodo non
sequatur grave nocumentum vicinis honestis vel major ansa peccandi ob
domus situm, et adsit ratio proportionate gravis, utputa quod alii
locatorii non adsint, dominus notabile damnum patiatur si domus non
occupetur, et meretrices facile alium locatarium obtinere possint.
Hodie vero quum constet meretrices plerasque invite vitam turpem
exercere (white slavery) et morbis pessimis morteque praematura affligi,
meretricium vero nocumentum multigenum bono publico (the social evil)
inferre, omnis vir probus abhorrebit a pretio locario ab
administratoribus lupanarium oblato.

(b) A more grave reason.--Meetings whose purpose is contrary to the
common good (e.g., anti-religious gatherings), even though permitted by
civil law, should not be given the use of one’s premises except in a
rare case of the greatest necessity.

1542. Unlawful Cooperation of Servants, Employees, and Workingmen.--(a)
Cooperation is formal if these intend the sin of their employer with
which they cooperate, or if the act of cooperation is itself
intrinsically evil. Thus, a bookkeeper does no wrong in merely keeping
a record of receipts and expenses; but, if he notices many instances of
great frauds and injustices done by his firm and keeps at his post in
order that dishonesty may be covered up and continued, he becomes a
formal cooperator. But a bookkeeper who falsifies or destroys records
in order that his business may be able to issue an incorrect statement
of its financial condition is involved in its guilt, even though his
motive is pity or loyalty. Other examples of formal cooperation are
those of a secretary who takes down dictation which contains
blasphemous or obscene expressions, and of a taxi-driver who tells his
passengers how to get to gambling dens, or who helps a criminal to get
away by driving him through dark streets.

(b) Cooperation is material and unlawful, when the intention and the
act itself are not evil, but when there is no sufficient reason for the
cooperation. Thus, the following proposition was condemned by Innocent
XI in 1679 as scandalous and pernicious: “Famulus qui submissis humeris
scienter adjuvat herum suum ascendere per fenestras ad stuprandam
virginem, et multoties eidem subservit deferendo scalam, aperiendo
januam, aut quid simile cooperando, non peccat mortaliter, si id faciat
metu notabilis detrimenti, puta ne a domino male tractetur, ne torvis
oculis aspiciatur, ne domo expellatur” (Denzinger, n. 1201). Though the
acts of cooperation of the servant here mentioned are not intrinsically
evil, the cooperation is proximate and positive and habitual, and the
wrong done so serious that only a most grave reason, such as fear of
death, could justify the help given by the servant to his master.

1543. Lawful Cooperation of Servants, Workingmen, or Employees.--(a) If
cooperation is remote and is not indispensable to the sin to be
committed, the mere fact that one is employed by the principal cause
will excuse; for the employee is not supposed to question the employer
about the reasons of orders given, and he is not responsible for the
intentions of the employer, but for the performance of what is assigned
to himself. Hence, the following kinds of cooperation are held
permissible for no other reason than that of service: carrying liquor
or food to an employer who wishes to make himself drunk or to break the
fast, buying and carrying to him papers which he should not read,
giving him his hat and coat or getting his car ready as he starts out
to attack an enemy, opening the door to a slanderer whom the mistress
of the house wishes to employ. Also, a public taxi-driver may take his
patrons to clubs or road-houses where they will become intoxicated, if
he is in no way responsible for their intention and shows no approval
of it, and they can go just as well without him.

(b) If cooperation is proximate, the mere fact that one is employed is
not sufficient as an excuse for cooperation; there must be some other
reason that is sufficiently weighty in view of the gravity of the sin
and the other circumstances. Thus, to drive one’s employer to the place
where he is to receive stolen valuables is justifiable, if one is under
threat of great bodily harm if one refuses. Item ob incommodum gravius
evitandum permittitur famulo deferre litteras heri amatorias ad amasiam
cum qua illicitum commercium habet, tempus et locum conveniendi amasiae
nuntiare, excubias agere dum simul adsint. But a servant who is called
on habitually to cooperate in these ways should secure another
position, if possible.

1544. The principles given as to servants should be applied likewise to
other persons who are subordinates, with due allowance made for the
difference of circumstances.

(a) Thus, children, wives, pupils, etc., may be less excusable in
cooperation than servants, since the former may be in a better position
to remonstrate against what is ordered. Hence, if the master of the
house who sometimes goes on a spree orders a servant to bring him his
demijohn, disobedience might be more difficult than if the same order
was given the wife.

(b) Children, wives, pupils, etc., may be more excusable, since unlike
the servants they may be unable to go elsewhere. Those who agree to
work at places known as vicious resorts, or who let their employer
understand that they will not see or hear many things, or who
habitually perform services proximately related to sin (what is called
“dirty work”), are guilty of formal cooperation, at least when they can
secure good employment elsewhere. Children, on the contrary, may be so
dependent on a tyrannical father that they cannot refuse cooperation
without serious consequences to themselves.

1545. Duties of Confessors.--Instruction should be given to penitents
who are guilty of sinful cooperation. (a) The confessor should instruct
ignorant penitents on the sinfulness of their cooperation, when there
is a duty of justice to do this, as when the penitents ask to be
instructed; or when there is a duty of charity, as when the sinfulness
of the cooperation in question is known to many persons, or the
penitents by reason of cooperation are giving great scandal or are in
serious danger. (b) The confessor should not instruct ignorant
penitents on the sinfulness of their cooperation--at least, not for a
time--if they are in good faith and if graver evils would result from
the instruction than from silence.

1546. Obligations to be Imposed on Penitents on Account of Sinful
cooperation.--(a) Some cases of cooperation cause the culprit to fall
under ecclesiastical penalties, for example, those who act as seconds
or spectators at duels (Canon 2351). (b) Some cases entail a duty of
reparation for scandal given, as when one has aided the diffusion of
irreligious or obscene literature or whisperings among the people. (c)
Some kinds of cooperation include dangerous occasions of sin which one
is bound to avoid, as when one works for a man who produces adulterated
wares or gets money under false pretenses.




Art. 10: THE COMMANDMENTS OF CHARITY

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, q. 44.)

1547. There is no commandment concerning charity in the Decalogue, but
charity is implicitly contained in all the commandments of other
virtues; for charity is the end of every commandment (I Tim., i. 5).
Thus, the commandments of the first table of the Law tend to the love
of God; the commandments of the second table to the love of neighbor.
On account of its supreme importance, however, charity was made the
object of special commandments in both the Old and the New Testament.

(a) In the Old Testament, at the second giving of the tables of the
Law, it is declared: “Now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require
of thee, but that thou fear the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, and
love him, and serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart and with all
thy soul?” (Deut., x. 12).

(b) In the New Testament, our Lord, being asked which is the great
commandment in the law, replied: “Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God,
with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind.
This is the greatest and the first commandment. And the second is like
to this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two
commandments dependeth the whole law and the prophets” (Matt, xxii.
37-40).

1548. Charity must come “from a pure heart, and a good conscience and
faith unfeigned” (I Tim., i. 5), and these words may be used to
indicate how all other commandments have charity for their purpose.

(a) “A pure heart” is had by the observance of the negative
commandments of the natural law, which forbid evil, or of the
commandments about the virtues regulative of the passions; and it is a
disposition preparatory for the love of God, since an impure heart will
be taken up with evil or with earthly things, and so turned away from
the goodness of God.

(b) “A good conscience” is had by the observance of the affirmative
commandments of the natural law, or of the commandments regulative of
actions; and it too tends to charity as its goal, for a bad conscience
fills one with dread and horror of the justice of God.

(c) “Faith unfeigned” is had by the observance of the supernatural law,
or of the commandments about worship of the true God; and it leads up
to charity, for a feigned faith, or false worship, separates one from
the truth of God.

1549. Though charity is but one virtue (see 1115), it has two acts: one
about love of God, which is the end, and another about love of
neighbor, which is a means to that end.

(a) If all understood that the end includes the means and the means
supposes the end, there would be no necessity for two distinct
commandments; for there is no love of God without love of neighbor (I
John, iv. 20), and he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law
(Rom., xiii. 8).

(b) But since many would not perceive that one of the commandments of
charity contains the other, it was necessary to propose these
commandments separately: “We have this command from God that he who
loves God love also his brother” (I John, iv. 21).

1550. Charity extends to other objects than God and the neighbor,
namely, to self and one’s own body (see 1133 sqq.); it also has other
acts than that of love, such as the acts of joy, peace, beneficence
(see 1193 sqq.), and the suppression of uncharitable hatred, sloth,
envy (see 1295 sqq.), etc. Nevertheless, on the two commandments of
love of God and love of neighbor depend the whole law and the prophets
(Matt., xxii. 40), and other commandments about charity are not
necessary.

(a) Thus, the objects of love are either the end or the means to the
end, and, as the two commandments of charity refer to both of these,
they omit nothing that is to be loved. It was not necessary to make
express command of love of self, for nature inclines to that
sufficiently, and the duty of keeping love of self within bounds is
provided for in the commandments that God be loved above all and the
neighbor as oneself.

(b) The acts of charity distinct from love result from love, and the
acts opposed to charity are virtually forbidden in the commandments of
their opposites. Hence, there was no need of explicit precepts about
the secondary acts of charity or of explicit prohibitions of the sins
against charity. But for the sake of those who might not perceive that
the minor functions of charity are commanded and acts of
uncharitableness forbidden in the two great commandments, special and
explicit laws were given which enjoin peace, joy, etc., and forbid
hatred, envy, etc.

1551. The precepts of the secondary acts of charity are: (a) joy:
“Rejoice in the Lord always” (Phillip., iv. 4); (b) peace: “Follow
peace with all men” (Heb., xii. 14); and (c) beneficence: “While we
have time, let us do good to all” (Gal., vi. 10).

1552. The prohibitions of uncharitableness are as follows: (a) against
hatred: “Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart” (Lev, xix. IT);
(b) against sloth: “Bow down thy shoulder and hear her (wisdom), and be
not grieved with her bands” (Ecclus., vi. 26); (c) against envy: “Let us
not be made desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another” (Gal., v. 26), (d) against discord: “Speak the same things and
let there be no schisms among you” (I Cor., i. 10); and (e) against
scandal: “Put not a stumbling-block or a scandal in your brother’s way”
(Rom., xiv. 13).

1553. The Commandment of Love of God.--In the commandment of love of
God two things are expressed: (a) the matter of the commandment is God,
the object of love; (b) the manner of the commandment is that God be
loved as the Last End, to whose love all other love is to be
subordinated.

1554. There is a twofold manner or mode of performing a virtuous act:

(a) The intrinsic mode is that which comes from the nature of the
virtue commanded. Thus, in the Fourth Commandment is included not only
the substance of an act (viz., that honor be shown), but also the mode
of the act (i.e., that such honor and so much honor be shown as is owed
to a parent by his child). The intrinsic mode is always included in a
commandment along with the substance of the act prescribed (cfr. 480
sqq.).

(b) The extrinsic mode is that which belongs to some virtue different
from the one commanded. This mode is not included in a commandment.
Thus, if honor be shown to parents out of love of God, the mode of love
of God is extrinsic to the commandment, for the commandment is
concerned with the virtue of filial piety, and the mode of the act
pertains to charity, which is a virtue distinct from filial piety.

1555. The intrinsic mode of performing an act of virtue is also twofold:

(a) The essential mode is that without which an act is not virtuous.
Thus, he who gives to his indigent parents according to his means and
their needs fulfills the essential mode of the Fourth Commandment, for,
if he gave them less than he could afford and they needed, his act
would not come up to the requirements of the commandment.

(b) The ideal mode of the performance of virtue is that which adds to
the virtue greater goodness and value, and which is intended by a
lawgiver as the end, but not as the object of his command. Thus, he who
gives to his indigent parents not only sufficiently, but also with a
great willingness and cheerfulness, fulfills the Fourth Commandment
with greater perfection than another who supports his parents with less
alacrity.

1556. The mode of the love of God prescribed in the first and great
commandment is that God be loved with the whole heart, etc. But “to
love with the whole heart, etc.,” can be understood in various senses.

(a) Thus, it may be understood to mean a love that is subjectively or
intensively great, as when one loves God with much fervor and
affection. This mode of love is ideal, since the measure of loving God
is to love Him without measure, but it is not essential. The end of the
commandment is that we love God ever more and more, and perform what is
required with ever greater promptitude and gladness; but the
commandment does not fix any certain degree of intensity, although it
would be inordinate to choose to love God less intensely than we love
creatures (see 1160).

(b) “To love with the whole heart” may be understood to mean a love
that is objectively or appreciatively great, as when one esteems and
loves God as the Supreme Good. This mode of love is essential, and
hence without it the commandment is not observed. However much one
loves God, if one does not love Him as the Supreme Good, one does not
love Him aright, and does not practise the virtue of charity that is
commanded.

1557. Love of God from the whole heart, objectively or appreciatively
understood, is either actual or habitual.

(a) Actually, one loves God with one’s whole heart when there is never
any interruption or distraction to one’s love, and one is continually
engaged in an act of loving God above all else. This is the ideal mode
of fulfilling the commandment of love, and it is also the end to which
the commandment is intended to lead. But it is only in heaven, where
God will be all in all (I Cor., xv. 28), that this ideal fulfillment
will take place.

(b) Habitually, one loves God with one’s whole heart when one is in the
state of grace, preferring the love of God to every contrary love,
although it is only at intervals that one is able to make acts of love.
This is the essential mode of fulfilling the command of love here on
earth. The whole heart must be given to God to the exclusion of love
for any mortal sin, for mortal sin separates from God.

1558. The mode of loving God is expressed in various places in
scripture (Deut., vi. 5; Matt., xxii. 37; Mark, xii. 30; Luke, x. 27),
and there are slightly different interpretations given to the words by
which it is conveyed. Thus, some exegetes see in the expressions
“heart,” “soul,” “mind,” “strength,” synonymous significations of the
one thought that God should be loved over all, and they think that
different words are used only in order to give greater clearness and
energy to the thought. But the following seems also a reliable
explanation: (a) God must be loved with one’s whole heart, that is, the
will must not intend any Last End other than God; (b) God must be loved
with one’s whole mind, soul and strength, that is, the powers moved by
the will--intellect, appetites and executive faculties--must be subject
to God, must be regulated according to His will, and must carry out His
commandments.

1559. Love of God with one’s whole heart excludes, then, opposite
loves, but it does not exclude other loves that are not opposite or
other dispositions that are less perfect. (a) Thus, love of God with
one’s whole heart does not exclude love of self or of neighbor. (b)
Love of God with one’s whole heart does not exclude the use of acts in
reference to God that do not reach the height of disinterested love,
such as acts of hope, gratitude, or fear (see 1033, 1054, 1093).

1560. There are various degrees of perfection in the fulfillment of the
commandment of love of God.

(a) The most perfect fulfillment is found in heaven, where there is no
turning from the love of God by grave sin, no impediment to its
exercise by venial sin, and no interruption of its act by other
occupations.

(b) The more perfect fulfillment of this commandment found on earth is
modelled on the love of God exercised by the Saints in heaven, and the
nearer one approaches to the model, the better does one fulfill the
commandment. Thus, he who avoids not only what is against charity
(i.e., mortal sin), but also, as far as possible, what is aside from
charity (i.e., venial sin), loves God more perfectly than one who is
careless about venial sin; and he who shuns, not only things unlawful
that are harmful to charity, but also things lawful that interrupt the
exercise of charity, loves God more, other things being equal, than
another who avoids the unlawful, but whose mind is greatly occupied
with lawful temporal matters.

(c) The ordinarily perfect fulfillment of the commandment is found in
all those who, both in their internal and in their external acts, avoid
all that is contrary to the love of God, although they fall into venial
sin and are mostly occupied with temporal affairs. Thus is charity the
bond of perfection (Col, iii. 14), the tie that binds man to his
highest good; those who keep the commandments for its sake are
followers after perfection, those who embrace counsels for its sake are
in the state of perfection.

1561. The Commandment of Love of Self.--Love of self is understood in
many senses. (a) According to its moral character, love of self is
either sinful or virtuous, and virtuous self-love is either natural or
supernatural (as was explained in 1136). (b) According to its physical
character, love of self is either innate or elicited. Innate love of
self is the tendency of nature to desire what pertains to the
perfection of self, such as existence and its preservation (see 1108).
Elicited love of self is the choice on the part of the reason and will
of an ultimate happiness for self and of the means thereto.

1562. Charity obliges each one capable of precept to an elicited
supernatural love of self. The obligation is grave for the following
reasons: (a) the love of God includes love of self, for we cannot love
God truly unless we also love those things that are His, especially His
rational creatures made to His image and destined for His society; (b)
the love of neighbor supposes love of self, for the commandment of love
(Matt., xxii. 39) offers love of self as the model for love of others.

1563. The goods which the law of charity to self requires one to desire
and seek after, are all those things that are necessary for the
attainment of one’s happiness and due perfection.

(a) Thus, as to supernatural goods, one is bound to obtain for oneself
things necessary for salvation. One is obliged, then, to acquire a
sufficient knowledge of the faith; to enter into a state of life for
which one is suited (e.g., matrimony or religion); to avoid sin and the
occasions of sin; not to delay conversion for a notable length of time;
to put oneself in the state of grace, especially at the hour of death.
But one is not obliged to perform these duties with the motive of
charity in mind, nor to elect for self works of supererogation or
counsels of perfection.

(b) As to intellectual goods, one is bound to seek what is necessary
for a proper fulfillment of the duties of one’s station in life. Thus,
one owes it in charity to oneself to seek the education and training
that are presupposed in one’s profession or occupation, and to bestow
the necessary study and attention. See above, on the intellectual
virtues (144 sqq.) and on the sin of ignorance (904 sqq.).

(c) As to corporal goods, one is obliged to use the ordinary means for
preserving life and health (on the desire of death, see 1063). Hence,
in matters of food, drink, clothing, and recreation, each one is in
duty bound to follow the laws of hygiene.

(d) As to the external goods of person (i.e., honor and reputation),
there is a strict duty of guarding them or of recovering them, as far
as possible.

(e) As to external goods of fortune (i.e., wealth and possessions), one
must aim to acquire as much as is necessary for one’s subsistence and
the fulfillment of duties to others. Hence the duty of labor for those
who do not possess the necessary means. But charity to self does not
demand that one aspire to reach the top of the ladder in the financial
world or to accumulate a very large surplus. One may indeed lawfully
seek to become a millionaire, or to become so wealthy as to be able to
retire with leisure, if one goes about this lawfully; but there is no
obligation to strive after more than is reasonably necessary.

1564. Man owes it to himself to put to good use the talents God has
bestowed upon him for his self-improvement and self-development. It is
a sin, therefore, greater or less according to circumstances, to
neglect the care of the mind or of the mental culture one should
possess.

(a) Thus, reason is the faculty that elevates man above the irrational
world, and knowledge is the perfection and excellence of that faculty.
What life or health is to the body, reason or knowledge is to the mind;
and so, just as it is a sin against the body to neglect life or health,
it is also a sin against the mind to neglect reason or knowledge.
Persons predisposed to insanity who expose themselves to alienation of
mind by the use of drugs or strong spirits or by practices or
occupations that expose them to shocks (such as gambling), and others
who value ignorance, scepticism, and error as if these infirmities were
goods, sin against the mind, at least materially.

(b) Reason and knowledge are also necessary in numberless ways to man’s
bodily, social, cultural, and religious life. Without the elements of a
general education in reading, writing and arithmetic, one is very
seriously handicapped in making a bare living; and without the
education of the high school, college or university, one is frequently
under a disadvantage in seeking to better oneself or improve one’s
position. Besides these utilities for practical affairs, education has
advantages of a loftier kind: it makes its possessor a more capable
citizen, a more pleasant companion and friend, a more influential
exponent of good causes, and a greater credit to the religion he
practises; it gives enjoyment to leisure, comfort to rest, and dignity
to success; the labor of acquiring it is a discipline of the will; the
taste for higher things it imparts is a natural protection against much
that is evil; the mental power and knowledge that are its gifts enable
one to expose error and fallacy and to uphold the truth and the right.
It is of precept, therefore, that one acquire the moral and mental
training which one’s salvation and calling in life make necessary; it
is of counsel--and the counsel is one that should be much urged in our
times--that one who has the opportunity of attaining to a higher
proficiency, to the advantage of self and society, should avail himself
of that opportunity.

1565. Examples of Sins Committed by Neglect of Necessary Education--(a)
Directly, one sins against the duty of cultivation of the mind when
through laziness or malice one slights the means of acquiring necessary
knowledge--as when pupils absent themselves from school, or give no
attention to the teacher or no preparation to their lessons; or when
collegians sacrifice study to athletics and amusements.

(b) Indirectly one sins against the duty of knowledge, when one is
responsible for habits that impede or prevent necessary concentration
of mind, as when one goes about so much socially that the mind is
always in a whirl, or reads so much light literature that everything
serious becomes a bore, or overeats so much that the brain becomes
sluggish, or pays no attention to the wise rule that a sound mind needs
a sound body.

1566. The proper care of the body and of health is not merely a thing
next to godliness; it is a moral duty, and so a part of godliness. God
Himself on Sinai gave to the Chosen People of old a sanitary code, and
the faithful observance by orthodox Jews of those regulations has had
much to do with the superior health and longevity of their race. Moral
Theology, therefore, is not digressing from its proper subject-matter,
if it gives some attention to rules of health. The duties owed to
physical well-being can be reduced to the following: (a) to secure for
the body the things needed for the maintenance and replenishment of its
substance and vigor, such as food, air, sleep and exercise; (b) to ward
off or remove those things that are injurious to or destructive of
health, such as excessive heat or cold, waste matter, poisons, and
disease; (c) to assist these physical means by psychical or spiritual
ones, such as cheerfulness and the will to keep well and fit.

1567. Food and drink are naturally a prime requisite for life, since
they furnish the material from which the body is built and renewed.
They should be used, however, in such a way as to serve their purpose.

(a) Thus, the quantity and quality have to be regulated according to
the needs of the individual and circumstances, and so will vary with
climate, age, health, and occupation. The distinction of clean and
unclean foods does not exist in the New Law (Rom., xiv. 14; Matt., xv.
17-20), but it is clear that the same kinds or amounts of food and
drink do not agree with all constitutions; that overeating,
undereating, and want of variety in diet are not conducive to good
health. Physicians recommend that something raw be eaten every day and
something indigestible at every meal, and that a person watch his
weight, keeping a little overweight up to middle life and a little
underweight after that age.

(b) The manner of eating is of first-rate importance, since the
digestion is harmed if one eats without appetite or with mental
preoccupation on deep subjects, or bolts the food, or makes excessive
use of relishes or condiments.

1568. Fresh air, on which the production of pure blood and the
continuance of vitality depend, is another necessity of life. Hence, we
may well heed the following rules which hygienists lay down on this
point: (a) let in fresh air and sunshine to the places where you live
and work, and exclude dust and smoke; (b) wear light, loose and porous
clothing, so that the skin may have air; (c) get out of doors in the
open air part of the time every day, even though the weather is
uninviting, for sunshine or natural light is also a requisite of good
health; (d) breathe through the nose, and not through the mouth.
Breathing should be deep, slow and regular, and one should take
deep-breathing exercises several times a day; (e) sleep in a
well-ventilated room, or out-of-doors if possible.

1569. Rest and relaxation are needful for body and mind alike, that the
burdens of life may not bear too heavily, and nature may be allowed to
exercise her ministries of renewal and restoration. But here, as in
other things, the guiding rule must be moderation.

(a) Through excess, some harm their health by indulging in too much
repose. A strong, healthy individual who remains in bed from midnight
till noon, or who gives most of the afternoon to a prolonged nap, is
storing up more energy than he or she needs, and will feel the worse
for it. Similarly, persons whose life is one round of vacations or
diversions pay for their aimless existence in various kinds of mental
or nervous disorders, to say nothing of the moral dangers to which they
are exposed (Ecclus., xxxiii. 29).

(b) Through defect, on the other hand, some injure their health by
depriving themselves of the sleep or rest they ought to take. The time
that should be given to repose differs with the individual. The young,
brain-workers and the feeble are in greater need than others; but there
is no one who can dispense with his proper share of rest. It is sinful,
therefore, to reduce needed sleep by late retiring or early rising, or
to work unremittingly to such an extent that the bodily powers and
resistance become unequal to the demands made on them and unfitted for
duties. According to physicians, seven hours out of every twenty-four
should be spent in bed, and the hours before midnight are much more
precious for rest than the early morning hours. Some holidays and
vacations are a necessity in these days of rapid and strenuous life.

1570. Physical exercise is a factor of good health, for it stirs up the
circulation of the blood, assists digestion, and rids the body of
surplus weight. Moreover, it has great value for the mind (to which it
gives diversion and refreshment) and for the soul (since it promotes
temperance and chastity). If taken in the form of sports, physical
exercise is a training in cooperation with others, in loyalty,
discipline, and fairness. But health is impaired by excess as well as
by defect in exercise.

(a) Examples of over-exercise are athletes who carry on endurance tests
to the point of exhaustion, devotees of violent forms of contests or
matches that overtax the heart, etc.

(b) Examples of under-exercise are ablebodied persons who prefer to
lounge about the house all day rather than bestir themselves; also
those who work indoors all day and who from choice ride rather than
walk, no matter how short the distance they have to go, etc. Persons of
sedentary life who can do so, should exercise every day, preferably
out-of-doors, playing at some game like golf, taking a brisk walk of
about five miles, or doing some manual labor, such as gardening or
sawing wood. Regular gymnastics or setting-up exercises, and the habit
of sitting, standing, and walking erect at all times are prescribed by
experts on health as very important.

1571. Under the head of preventive or curative measures that ought to
be attended to for the sake of bodily well-being are the following:

(a) In time of health sickness has to be guarded against. Suitable
clothing and shelter must be used as protection against injurious
effects of heat or cold; cleanliness must be cultivated by such means
as daily baths, frequent ablutions, washing of teeth, tongue and gums;
infections must be avoided; drugs or stimulants hurtful to one’s health
must not be indulged in, and attention must be given to daily, regular
and natural elimination and to the exclusion of poisons from the
system. According to authorities, one should drink at least six glasses
of water a day, but warm water is often preferable to cold or hot.

(b) In time of sickness efforts must be made at restoration of health,
if this is possible. It is of obligation to use the ordinary means to
recover physical fitness, that is, to take remedies and medicines that
are suitable, not on the advice of acquaintances or advertisements, but
on the recommendation of a competent physician in whose knowledge and
skill one has perfect confidence (Ecclus., xxxviii. 1 sqq.). But there
is no obligation to have recourse to extraordinary means of recovery,
such as a trip to a more balmy climate when one’s purse cannot afford
it. Similarly, a very painful and uncertain operation or mutilation is
not obligatory, unless one has dependents, and the danger to life from
the operation is slight. In time of sickness, as well as in health, we
should not omit to implore the divine aid.

1572. The state of mind has very much to do with good or bad health. It
is well known, for instance, that a happy, cheerful attitude helps
digestion and sleep; whereas worry, fear, anger or other emotional
stress will bring on dyspepsia, insomnia, disease, and perhaps
insanity. We should not overlook, therefore, the importance of the
mental factor in our efforts to maintain good health.

(a) Natural means of cultivating an even temper and a buoyant
disposition are: some kind of labor or occupation, avoidance of hurry
and worry in one’s affairs, cultivation of some interesting hobby or
avocation that will vary the monotony of business or work, use of
congenial recreations, whether of a more refined (e.g., conversation
with friends, literature, music, art, the drama, travel to historic or
beautiful scenes, etc.) or of a more material kind (e.g., reading tales
of mystery or adventure, raising pet animals, witnessing baseball
games, races, etc., playing billiards, cards, etc., smoking, attending
banquets, picnics, etc.). A sense of humor and laughter in moderation
are good for the health and not opposed to spirituality.

(b) Religious practices are all-important for cheerfulness of spirit.
Christian Science, indeed, is in error when it holds that faith thinks
or wills sorrow and disease and death out of existence, for evil is a
reality; but virtue and a good conscience rid one of many enemies to
peace, and there exist in the Church many supernatural and miraculous
means that benefit body, mind and spirit.

1573. Persons who give exaggerated attention to their health cannot
justify themselves by the commandment of charity to self; for this
commandment has to be interpreted according to the order of charity as
explained above (see 1164 sqq.). The bodily good has to be cared for,
but with due subordination to higher goods (Matt, vi. 25; Rom., xiv.
16).

(a) Thus, spiritual goods are more important than those of the body,
and it is lawful to practise mortifications by fastings, vigils,
hair-shirts, and the like, which, though afflictive to the flesh, are
refreshing to the spirit, provided all be done according to holy
prudence.

(b) Intellectual goods are better than those of the body, and it is not
sinful to devote oneself to studies, researches and other mental
occupations in preference to manual labor or athletic exercises which
would improve one’s physique, but not one’s mind. It is even lawful for
the sake of mental improvement to suffer some slight detriment to
health.

(c) Public good is greater than private good, and hence it is not only
lawful but laudable to expose health, or even life, for the advancement
of science or the welfare of the community. Many men and women in daily
life do this as part of the day’s work.

1574. Does charity to self oblige one to desire honors, such as
dignities, titles, positions or rank, precedence, testimonials,
eulogies, medals, decorations, monuments, and the like?

(a) Charity to self demands that one strive to acquire the excellence
that is expected of one, and so to be deserving of honor. For we must
let our light shine before men (Matt., v. 16; Rom., xii. 17; II Cor.,
vii. 21).

(b) Charity to self does not require that one actually secure honors.
For one cannot force another to declare one’s praises, since he may be
prejudiced or ignorant, and it is not seemly to sing one’s own
greatness or merit (II Cor., x. 18), except in self-defense (II Cor.,
xii. 11).

(c) Charity to self would require one to seek after an honor, if the
honor were necessary and the manner of seeking it honorable. Thus, it
is a duty to self to seek to obtain a diploma or certificate of good
character or proficiency, if this document is needed to exercise the
profession for which one has trained.

(d) Charity to self would forbid one to seek after an honor, if the
honor would prove harmful, or if it could not be obtained in a
respectable way. Thus, if an honor rightfully belonged to another, or
if it were bestowed in recognition of evil done, or if it would impose
obligations for which one knows oneself to be unsuited, or if it could
not be attained except by dishonesty, charity to self would urge one to
fly from the honor.

(e) Charity to self in other cases would permit one either to seek an
honor (as when a dignity will be useful and will be employed for good,
and is not sought out of vainglory or hypocrisy) or to forego it (as
when it is not necessary and one is moved to shun it, not out of
contempt, but out of some virtuous motive).

1575. Does charity to self require one to desire a good name?

(a) Charity to self does require that one desire to be worthy of a good
name, for one owes it to oneself as well as to others to be blameless
(Phil., ii. 14-16) and to provide good things in the sight of men
(Rom., xii. 17).

(b) Charity to self does require that one desire to have a good name.
Spiritually, a good name is an advantage, for many a one is encouraged
to continue in virtue by the good opinion which others have of him,
while many another is discouraged from attempting or continuing a good
life because he has a bad reputation. Temporally also, a good name is
useful or necessary, for, if others do not trust us or respect us, we
shall find it difficult to secure employment or position, or to
exercise our office fruitfully. Hence, scripture admonishes: “Take care
of a good name, for this shall continue with thee, more than a thousand
treasures precious and great” (Ecclus., xli. 15).

(c) Charity to self does not require that one actually have a good
name, since reputation may be lost through the work of detractors or
through one’s own unintentional imprudence, or through circumstances
over which one has no control.

(d) Charity to self ordinarily requires that one seek to acquire a good
name, if it has not yet been earned, also to preserve it, when gained,
to recover it, when lost; for, as a rule, there is no greater good for
which the good of reputation should be sacrificed. The means to be
employed, however, should not be evil, as when one uses hypocritical
pretense in order to pass as a man of piety, or has recourse to lying
or duelling, to undermining or attacking another in order to recover
one’s reputation. A good name is built up by fidelity to the duties of
one’s calling and the avoidance of what may be offensive or scandalous
to others; it is preserved or rebuilt by good deeds, especially those
one is known or supposed to have lacked, and in case of need by words
of self-defense, vindicating one’s conduct, or refuting aspersions or
false charges.

(e) Charity does not require one to seek after a good name, when this
should or may be sacrificed for the sake of some higher good. St. Paul
faithfully practised what he preached, that no dishonor might be
reflected on the Gospel; and yet his enemies looked on him as a seducer
and a nobody, as a melancholy and avaricious man. But the Apostle
answered his traducers that neither honor nor dishonor, neither evil
report nor good report, would move him from the exercise of his
ministry (II Cor., vi. 4 sqq).

1576. Sacrifice of reputation is not lawful, however, unless there is a
proportionately grave reason and the means are good.

(a) The end must be good and relatively important, not only if compared
with the good of personal reputation, but also if compared with the
public good and the rights of third parties. Examples: It would not be
right to allow oneself to be defamed in order to cover up the tracks of
a rascal who deserved punishment, or to distract attention from an evil
that is being done; for the purpose would then be the defeat of justice
or the success of some sinful plan. In such cases the end would not be
good. Neither would it be right to allow the sacrifice of a good name
for the notoriety and money profits to be gained in stage or book
royalties. The practice of many young men of accepting imputed faults,
of which they are not guilty, in order to be popular, or interesting,
or attractive, is also sinful. Money cannot buy back a lost reputation,
and popularity with the thoughtless is no compensation for disgrace
before the judicious and loss of self-respect. In these cases the end
is not important, if compared with the advantage of a good name. And
even when an end is good and more important than one’s fame, there will
frequently be rights of others involved that forbid a sacrifice of
reputation, as when a passive attitude in the face of calumny would
give scandal or cast discredit on one’s profession, office, work,
religion, family, or friends.

(b) The means must be good. Examples: Even if the ambition to be “a
good fellow” is praiseworthy, drunkenness and profanity are not
suitable ways of winning esteem, and the same applies to pretending
wickedness or accusing oneself of imaginary escapades and vices to
please a circle which admires wildness in youth. The means used in
these cases (drunkenness, profanity, lying) are evil in themselves.
Again, the wish to cultivate humility does not justify one in giving
scandal by consorting with evildoers as intimates, or by conducting
oneself in such a way as to lower the esteem or respect that is
entertained for one’s position. The means used in those cases are at
least evil-seeming and disedifying.

1577. Is self-detraction, that is, the revelation of some real fault or
defect, lawful?

(a) If there is question of faults or defects that are of a public
nature and generally known, a disclosure made in a good spirit and in a
proper manner, and from which beneficial and not harmful results can be
foreseen, is lawful, and sometimes obligatory. Example: Balbus has
calumniated his neighbors, and he now admits the fact, not to boast
about or excuse it, but to make satisfaction; he does not repeat the
details of his defamatory remarks, but merely states that he wishes to
retract what he had no right to say; he has every reason to think that
his present course will undo the harm caused by the defamation. Balbus
does right in thus acknowledging his mistake.

(b) If there is question of faults or defects not generally known, the
reasons for mentioning them should be more serious, unless the sins are
of a trifling nature. Examples: Caius once served a term in jail for
dishonesty, but he is now a decent citizen. His family would be
scandalized and would feel disgraced, if they knew this. But Caius
thinks it would be a suitable reparation to tell them of his former
guilt. Caius is wrong. To speak of his past experience would only add
the sin of scandal to the old one, and there are other ways in which he
can do penance in further expiation of dishonesty. Claudius wishes to
marry Sempronia, but the latter insists that there must be no secrets
between husband and wife, and that he must give her complete and
accurate answers on certain questions about his past career--for
example, whether he has ever been drunk, whether he has ever wished to
be drunk, whether he has ever had questionable relations with other
women, etc. Claudius should not deceive Sempronia, nor leave her in
ignorance of any serious objection to the marriage, even if she forgot
to mention it in her questions; but he owes it to himself not to put
himself in her power by giving her information which she would probably
use against him then or later. Titus has stolen a considerable sum,
and, for the sake of getting advice and direction on how to make
restitution, he consults a prudent friend who will regard his
communication as confidential, just as if he were a confessor. Titus
does not act against his own reputation by telling his case to this
friend.

1578. Confession of Sins against Charity Owed to Self.--(a) It is not
necessary to declare in confession that one has acted against the
charity due to self, if there is question only of sins in which
transgression of that charity was not directly intended; for to say
that one has sinned against God by blasphemy, or against self by
intemperance, or against the neighbor by injustice, is equivalent to
saying that one has hurt one’s own soul by sin. (b) It is necessary to
declare a want of charity to self, if one has expressly intended such a
sin. Thus, if a person who has been admonished to have care for his own
soul is so enraged thereat that he vows to deliver his soul over to
evil, and thereupon proceeds to commit various kinds of sin, he does
not declare his true state of conscience by merely mentioning these
latter sins. A case of this kind, however, is not usual (see 1307).

1579. The Commandment of Love of Neighbor.--Charity to
fellow-creatures, especially to members of the chosen nation, was
commanded in the Old Law. (a) Thus, internal love was made obligatory.
The Lord forbade hatred, revenge, remembrance of injuries (Lev., xix.
17), and commanded love of fellow-citizens (ibid.) and kindness to
foreigners dwelling in the land (Lev., xix. 33). (b) External love was
also obligatory. Alms and help were to be given the needy (Deut., xxii.
1, 2, xv. 11), loans were to be made without interest (Deut., xxiii.
19), kindness was to be shown to widows, orphans, the blind, the
crippled (Exod., xxii. 22, 23; Lev., xix. 14), part of each harvest was
to be left for the poor, and in the third, seventh and fiftieth years
special assistance was to be rendered the needy (Lev., xix. 9, xxv.
2-12; Deut., xiv. 28, 29).

1580. In the New Testament, which is the law of love, the precept of
charity to neighbors is given with greater clearness and perfection.
(a) Thus, internal love must be universal and modelled on the love
which Christ had for humanity. Enemies are to be loved as well as
friends, the bad as well as the good (Matt., v. 43-45), Gentiles as well
as Jews, since there is one Lord of all (Rom., x. 12). The new
commandment, whose observance will mark the faithful follower, is an
imitation of the charity of Christ (John, xiii. 34, 35). (b) External
charity must be practised, even at the cost of self-sacrifice (I John,
iii. 16), for it will be regarded by Christ as done to Himself (Matt.,
xxv. 40), and will be the subject of interrogation and eulogy at the
judgment (Matt., xxv. 34-46).

1581. In giving the commandment of love towards fellow-creatures, our
Lord indicated both the reason for the love and the mode in which the
love should be exercised: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself”
(Matt, xxii. 39).

(a) The reason for this love is that a fellow-creature is our neighbor,
or, as it is elsewhere expressed, our brother (I John, iv. 20, 21), our
friend (Lev., xix. 18). He, like ourselves, is made to the image of God
and is destined for the same beatitude.

(b) The mode of this love is that it should be similar, though not
equal, to the love one has for oneself. Hence, the end of loving our
neighbor should be God, that it may be a holy love; the rule to be
followed in loving him should be that we agree with his wishes in good,
but not in evil, that the love may be just; the manner of loving him
should be that one wishes him well, not that one only seeks pleasure or
advantage from him, and so the love will be sincere. For, as love of
self must be holy, just and sincere, the same qualities are required in
love of the neighbor.

1582. The following conditions must, therefore, be met in the love of
neighbor which charity commands:

(a) Love must not be of a covetous or selfish or superficial kind, but
must be sincerely benevolent and beneficent (see 1109). Those who wish
to retain the companionship or association of a neighbor because this
redounds to their own gain, on account of his wealth, influence, etc.,
while harming the neighbor, love themselves rather than the neighbor.
Nor is love of neighbor genuine if it exists only in the emotions, or
if it is manifested only in expressions of good will; for true love
includes benevolence and will be translated into beneficence when the
occasion presents itself (James, ii. 14 sqq.; I John, i. 22). Persons
who are most ready to shed tears at the distress of others, or who are
most profuse in compliments or good wishes, are frequently most
unwilling to assist others, especially if some sacrifice is necessary.

(b) The love of the neighbor must not be a sinful benevolence or
beneficence, but must desire for him and confer on him what are real,
and not merely apparent goods, such as we ought to desire for ourselves
(Matt., vii. 12). Those who secure for others lower and unnecessary
goods at the sacrifice of those that are higher and necessary, putting
wealth, pleasure, or position above virtue and a good conscience, have
not the love of charity, for “what does it profit a man to gain the
whole world, and lose his soul?” (Matt., viii. 36).

(c) The love of the neighbor must not be purely natural, but must wish
for him and confer on him real goods out of a supernatural motive. This
motive is the friendship one has for God, so that the neighbor is loved
because God loves him and desires to communicate to him a share in the
divine life through grace and glory. The motive of charity is absent,
therefore, when one loves only one’s friends, when one is kind to
others out of pity, or generosity, or admiration for their good
qualities, if there is no thought of God in this philanthropy or
humanitarianism.

1583. The commandment of love of neighbor is sufficiently complied with
as to its acts by all those who are leading a good Christian life. (a)
Thus, the internal acts of sincere affection, peace, joy, and mercy are
exercised by prayer for the living and the dead, or a devout recitation
of the Lord’s Prayer. (b) The external acts of spiritual and corporal
mercy are performed by those who are giving according to their means
and the necessities they meet.

1584. The commandment of love of neighbor is sufficiently complied with
as to its motive, even though the supernatural motive is not actually
present before the mind, or other and natural motives are also present.
(a) Thus, the supernatural motive directs our love of neighbor, if it
is present virtually, as will be explained in 1590. (b) Natural motives
of love that are good in themselves (such as ties of relationship or
nationality, common intellectual or other interests, the virtue or
ability of a neighbor) do not detract from the supernaturality of love,
provided their influence is subordinated to the divine friendship and
the desire of beatitude for the neighbor. Even a certain amount of
natural repugnance is not inconsistent with charity; on the contrary,
charity is seen to be great, if for love of God one does good to
implacable enemies, or waits on persons suffering from a loathsome
disease.

1585. Fulfillment of the Commandments of Charity.--We speak now only of
the commandment of love, in which the other commandments of charity are
contained (see 1550 b). The love which is commanded must have the
following qualities: (a) on the side of the subject who loves, it must
be internal and made at the proper times--that is, one must love from
the heart and affection, as well as in works and manifestations, and
must make and renew the act of love as the law requires; (b) on the
side of the object loved, it must be both universal and well-ordered;
one must not only love all to whom charity is due (see 1133 sqq.), but
one must also bestow love according to the rank of precedence in which
charity is due (see 1158 sqq.).

1586. The act of charity can be made in various ways.

(a) It is made in itself, when one elicits or expresses love; it is
made in its manifestations, when one performs an act of virtue distinct
from charity. One who sincerely loves God with his whole heart will
keep the commandments (John, xiv. 21), and hence acts of temperance,
justice, fortitude, etc., may be called acts of love, in the sense that
they are indications of love.

(b) The act of charity may be made internally or externally. Thus,
affection for another as a friend in God, and a sincere desire of his
good, are internal acts of love; while spiritual or temporal alms
bestowed upon him, such as instruction or aid in time of sickness, are
external acts of love.

(c) The act of charity may be made explicitly or implicitly. Charity is
called explicit with reference to a person or object which is loved in
itself, and not as included in another; it is called implicit with
reference to a person or object loved as included in another, as when
means and end involve each other, or a part is contained in the whole.
Thus, he who loves God above all things loves God explicitly and his
neighbor implicitly; he who loves his neighbor as a future co-sharer in
bliss loves his neighbor explicitly and God implicitly (see 1549); he
who includes all mankind in a common act of love, gives explicit love
to the race collectively, and implicit love to individual members of
the race not mentioned (e.g., enemies or strangers).

1587. For the fulfillment of the commandment of charity other acts of
virtue are not enough. There must also be love. (a) Thus, as to charity
towards God, our Lord declares that love of God is the great
commandment on which the others depend, and St. Paul makes salvation
depend on love: “If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
anathema” (I Cor., xvi. 22). (b) As to charity towards the neighbor,
the fulfillment of other commandments in his regard is inferior to the
fulfillment of the commandment of fraternal love, and thus the
commandments of justice to others are distinct from the commandment of
love. Innocent XI condemned the proposition that we are not obliged to
love our neighbor by a formal act of love (Denzinger, _Enchiridion_, n.
1160).

1588. For the fulfillment of the law of charity, external acts of love
are not enough; there must also be internal love or affection.

(a) With regard to charity towards God, there can be no question of
external charity through acts of beneficence, as is clear; but one is
obliged to signify one’s love of God, if silence would cause scandal or
convey an expression of hatred of God. Mere lip-service, however, will
not do, for God must be loved and served from the heart (Matt., xxii.
37; Eph., vi, 6; II Thess. iii., 5; etc.).

(b) With regard to charity towards the neighbor, external charity is
commanded (see 1210 sqq. and 1551). But there must also be internal
charity, for we are bidden to love our neighbor as we love ourselves
(Matt, xxii. 39), as Christ loved us (John, xv. 12), from the heart (I
Pet., i. 22). If a man distributed his goods to feed the poor, not out
of love, but out of vanity or other sinful motives, his act would not
be an exercise of charity. Innocent XI condemned the proposition that
we may satisfy through external acts alone the precept of loving our
neighbor (Denzinger, n. 1161).

1589. Must the internal act of love be explicit? (a) Love of God should
be explicit, for the commandment of charity is that God be loved as the
Last End, and the other commandments are to be observed as means to
that End (see 1120, 1547). The Last End is that which is loved for its
own sake, and hence distinctly, while the means are loved for the sake
of the Last End. (b) Love of the neighbor is required to be explicit as
regards all neighbors in general, when this is necessary for the
preservation of charity towards God, or the fulfillment of obligations
of charity towards man; it should be explicit as regards an individual,
when this is necessary for the proper discharge of external works or
other duties of charity, as when one will not be able to overcome a
temptation to hatred unless one makes an act of charity which expressly
includes the person one is tempted to hate. But one who loves his
neighbor implicitly through an act of supernatural love of God, and
neglects no external duty of charity towards others, is considered to
have sufficiently complied with the law in ordinary circumstances.

1590. The Intention of Performing All Good Works out of Love for
God.--(a) This intention is actual, when one expressly wills God as the
Last End of one’s actions. The commandment of loving God above all
things does not require an actual reference of each good work to His
love (see 1120, 85, 86).

(b) This intention is virtual but explicit, when previously a person
had the actual intention and never retracted it, and now acts under the
influence of that explicit and unretracted intention, though he does
not advert to the Last End as he now acts. Thus, if an act of love of
God above all things is made supernaturally by a Christian or naturally
by a non-Christian, and later on by reason of the acts of love these
persons give alms to the poor and do not think of God as they give the
alms, their works are not actually, but virtually and explicitly done
for His love. The commandment of love of God, as we shall see (1593
sqq.), obliges one at certain times to elicit an act of love of God as
the Last End, loved above all things else (in unbelievers it must be an
act of natural benevolence, and in believers an act of supernatural
charity); and, since such an act includes a consecration of one’s works
to God, the commandment requires likewise at certain times a virtual
and explicit reference of good works to the love of God.

(c) The intention is virtual and implicit, when there is no previous
act of love of God influencing a present act, but this act itself is
good, tending from its character and object to the Last End, and it is
precisely its character and object that cause it to be chosen by the
agent. Thus, if an infidel, who has made no offering of his works to
God, gives an alms out of love of mercy, or honors his parents out of
love of piety, or pays his debts out of love of justice, he has
explicit love for virtue and implicit love for the Author and End of
virtue. The commandment of love of God, being affirmative, does not
oblige one at all times to elicit acts of love of God as the Supreme
Good, and hence, apart from the occasions when that affirmative
commandment calls for exercise, a virtual and implicit intention of
acting for the sake of God suffices to excuse from sin.

1591. Applications of the Preceding Paragraph.--(a) A Christian who
makes acts of love of God at the necessary times fulfills the
commandment of loving God with his whole heart and the precepts of
doing all things for the glory of God (I Cor., x. 31), and in charity
(I Cor., xvi. 14), and in the name of Christ (Col., iii. 17).

(b) An infidel invincibly ignorant of the supernatural law, who makes
acts of natural benevolence with reference to God when he should, does
not sin against the precept of charity, and observes the law of natural
love.

(c) A person who in no way refers a deliberate act to love of God,
natural or supernatural, sins in that act. His sin is venial, if the
evil intended is small (e.g., an alms given purely out of vainglory);
it is mortal, if the evil is grave (e.g., an alms given for the purpose
of seduction into serious sin).

1592. It should not be inferred from what has been said on the
qualities which charity must have, or the influence it must exercise,
that the duty of love of God is only for the perfect, or that it is
with difficulty accomplished. (a) On the contrary, charity is a
universal obligation, for it is the first commandment (Matt., xxii. 38),
and he who does not love is accursed (I Cor., xvi. 22). (b) Neither is
the commandment hard (I John, v. 3), for nature itself inclines one to
love the Supreme Good, and grace helps one to remove the impediments to
a love of friendship that will cling to God above all. The observance
of the commandments indicates that one is guided habitually by love,
while a devout recitation of the Lord’s Prayer is an actual expression
of that love; and hence conscientious persons should not worry lest
they may have been wanting in God’s love.

1593. With reference to the times when the precepts of charity oblige,
we should distinguish three kinds of precepts: (a) the negative
precepts forbid sins against charity (such as hatred, envy, scandal,
etc.), and they oblige at all times; (b) the positive precepts of
external beneficence oblige when occasion requires, as was said above
(see 1210 sqq.); (c) the positive precepts of internal love oblige at
certain special times, as will now be explained.

1594. The precept of love of God obliges directly--that is, by reason
of the virtue of charity itself--at the following times: (a) at the
beginning of the moral life, that is, of the use of reason; (b) during
life; (c) at the close of life, or when one is about to die (Denzinger,
nn. 1101, 1289).

1595. The Obligation of an Act of Love of God at the Beginning of the
Moral Life.--(a) The beginning of the moral life here signifies the
moment when a child arrives at a full use of reason, and is able to
deliberate on things of grave importance, such as the duty of having a
supreme purpose in life and of doing good and avoiding evil. This
moment does not coincide necessarily with any fixed period of the
child’s age (e.g., the seventh year), but depends on the gradual
development of the moral conscience and may be earlier or later
according to intelligence, surroundings, education, etc, (see 932).

(b) The act of love of God here signifies the turning to God as one’s
Last End, but it may be made either formally or virtually, according to
the knowledge had. A formal act of love of God is made, when one has
explicit knowledge, either through faith or through natural reason,
concerning God as the Supreme Good and Last End, and when one loves Him
as such. A virtual act of love of God consists in a resolution to
direct one’s life according to reason, or in a love of the goodness of
virtue; for in such an act there is implied a love of the Author and
End of moral good. The faithful who cannot remember having made this
first act of charity when they came to the use of reason, should not
disturb themselves at this, for the commandment was fulfilled by any
service they freely offered to God.

(c) The reason for requiring an act of love at the beginning of the
moral life is, that in that moment one has the choice placed before one
of good or evil, and that faith, hope and charity, being fundamental
precepts, should precede the other virtues of the law.

1596. Ignorance as Excusing from the Act of Love of God.--(a) Ignorance
of God as the Author of the supernatural order excuses from the precept
of supernatural love or charity, if it is invincible ignorance. Thus, a
pagan who knows nothing of revelation does not sin by omitting an act
of charity towards God.

(b) Ignorance of God as the Author of the order of nature does not
excuse from a natural act of benevolence towards God, if the person in
ignorance, though an infidel, has sufficient use of reason, for
ignorance of God is then inexcusable (Rom., i. 20).

1597. The Obligation of the Act of Love of God throughout Life.--(a)
The existence of an obligation to make frequent acts of love of God
during life is a consequence of the preponderant part played by charity
among the virtues (see 1115 sqq.), for how is one to regulate one’s
life according to the virtues, if one does not frequently renew that
virtue which is the inspiration and direction of all the others? The
Old Testament requires that one have the commandment of love of God
frequently in one’s thoughts (Deut., vi. 5-7), and in the New Testament
it is called the commandment on which all the others depend (Matt.,
xxii. 37-40). The Church has condemned propositions that made
infrequent performance of the act of love--such as once in a lifetime,
once in five years--sufficient (Denzinger, nn. 1155-1157).

(b) The details of this obligation--that is, the frequency with which
and the times at which the act of love of God must be made under pain
of grave sin--is a matter of dispute among authorities. Some think once
in three years sufficient; others, guided perhaps by the analogy of the
precept of yearly Communion, regard once a year as sufficient; others,
with St. Alphonsus, hold for once a month, basing their opinion on the
difficulty of overcoming temptations if acts of love of God are omitted
for more than a month; others, with Scotus, think the act of love of
God should be made once a week, for, since the Sundays are set aside
for the worship of God, the Church seems to have thereby determined
with regard to the act of divine charity that which the law of God had
left undetermined; finally, some teach that an act of love of God must
be made daily, arguing that Christ commanded the Lord’s Prayer to be
said daily, and that its first petitions contain formal acts of love of
God.

1598. None of the opposed opinions just given can be considered as
demonstrated and theoretically certain. But in actual life this offers
no difficulty, and the following are accepted as practical rules that
may be acted on:

(a) Those who live habitually in the state of grace may be regarded as
having fulfilled sufficiently the commandment of love of God, for “if
any man love Me, he will keep My word” (John, xiv. 23).

(b) Those who live habitually in an occasion of sin or in sin itself,
no doubt neglect the commandment of love of God; but it is not
necessary that they accuse themselves of the omission to their
confessor, since it is understood in the mention of the occasion of sin
or bad habit. The confessor, however, ought to admonish careless
penitents about the obligation of love of God, of recitation of the Our
Father, etc. Mortal sin revokes the direction of one’s works towards
God, and, though one is not obliged to renew that direction immediately
after repentance, a delay beyond four or five months according to some
authors would be notable.

1599. Obligation of the Act of Love of God at the Close of Life.--The
duty of making an act of love of God when one is at the point of death
is admitted by all for the following cases: (a) the dying person is
directly obliged to make an act of love of God when this is the only
way in which he can secure justification, as when he is not in the
state of grace and cannot receive the Sacraments; (b) the dying person
is indirectly obliged to make an act of love of God when otherwise he
cannot securely struggle against temptations to despair, doubt, etc.

1600. The duty of making an act of love of God at the time when death
is near is considered as doubtful by some authorities when the
following points are morally certain: (a) when the dying person has
already sufficiently complied with the duty of making an act of love
(e.g., when he made such an act just before he fell into danger of
death), or is now in the state of grace (e.g., when he has received
absolution with attrition just before or after the danger); and also
(b) when the dying person will not expose himself on account of
omission of the act of charity to the violation of any serious
commandment.

1601. In practice, the priest who is attending the dying person should
act as follows:

(a) He should remind the dying person of the obligation, if it appears
certain, and should suggest to him the motives and assist him in
pronouncing the form. In many manuals of the Ritual exhortations and
aspirations suitable for this purpose are given.

(b) The priest should recommend the act of love of God, even though the
obligation does not appear certain, if no harm will result from his
doing so. For this will better prepare the dying person for entrance
into eternity.

(c) He should not speak of the act of love of God, if the obligation is
uncertain and harm would result from his doing so (e.g., if the dying
person is in good faith, and would be much disturbed if told about the
act of love to be made).

1602. Thus far we have spoken of the obligation which the precept of
love of God imposes directly, or by reason of charity itself. There is
also an obligation that is indirect, or by reason of some virtue or
commandment distinct from charity.

(a) Thus, by reason of a virtue distinct from charity, one is bound to
make an act of love of God, if this act is the only means of avoiding
sin against that virtue. Example: Titus suffers severe temptations to
injustice, and finds that only the love of God keeps him from
injustice. In temptation, therefore, he should make an act of love of
God.

(b) By reason of a commandment distinct from that of charity, one is
bound to make an act of love of God, if otherwise one cannot fulfill
rightly the commandment in question. Thus, if a person has to receive
or administer a Sacrament of the living, or solemnly to administer a
Sacrament, when he is not in the state of grace and has not the
opportunity of receiving absolution, he is obliged to make an act of
perfect contrition, which includes an act of love of God.

1603. An implicit love of neighbor is contained in every true act of
love of God (see 1549, 1586). But in some cases love of neighbor must
be explicit (see 1589).

(a) Thus, one is bound to explicit love directly (or by reason of
charity itself), when the law of charity requires this. _Per accidens_,
charity requires an internal act of love, when without this act some
good commanded by charity (e.g., reconciliation with an enemy, alms to
one in distress) will not be done, or some evil forbidden by charity
(e.g., hatred, revenge) will not be overcome. _Per se_, it does not seem
that charity requires explicit acts of love towards the neighbor, but
only those implicit acts contained in the love of God; in practice,
however, conscientious persons frequently make explicit acts of
fraternal charity, as when they pray for the living and the dead, or
say the Our Father with due attention and devotion.

(b) One is bound to explicit love indirectly (or by reason of some
other virtue than charity), when apart from such explicit love that
other virtue cannot be exercised as commanded. Example: Balbus is often
tempted to defraud Caius, and does not resist the temptation
successfully, unless he puts himself into a charitable disposition
towards Caius.

1604. The Necessity of Charity.--(a) The habit of charity is necessary
as a means (see 360, 785) for all persons, infants included, so that
without it no one can be saved. For it is only with this virtue that
one possesses the divine indwelling (I John, iv. 16), and is made a
friend of God. Those who have not the wedding garment of charity are
cast into the outer darkness (Matt., xxii. 13).

(b) The act of charity is also necessary as a means of salvation to all
adults, for it is only by actual charity that they turn towards their
Last End, and without actual charity they are in death (I John, iii.
14). A person who is justified through attrition joined with a
Sacrament receives grace and the habit of charity, and by his voluntary
acceptance he consents to the divine friendship and thus makes an act
of charity.

(c) The act of charity is obligatory under grave precept at the
beginning of the moral life, frequently during life, and at the hour of
death (see 1594 sqq.).

1605. Is it possible that a sin against the love of God be only venial?
(a) The imperfection of the act makes such a sin only venial, as when
without full deliberation one wishes to omit an obligatory act of love.
(b) The slightness of the matter makes such a sin venial, when it is
aside from, but not contrary to, the love of God, as when one makes an
act of love of God with culpable lukewarmness. Venial sin is not,
strictly speaking, opposed to the commandment of love, since it does
not destroy love.

1606. As the order of charity is commanded as a part of the law of
charity, one is obliged not only to love those to whom love is
commanded, but also to give greater love to those to whom greater love
is due.

(a) God must be loved above all creatures, since He is to be loved with
the whole heart (Deut., vi. 5; Matt., x. 37).

(b) Self must be loved more than the neighbor, for love of neighbor is
commanded only as like to that of self (Matt., xxii. 9).

(c) One should love one’s neighbor more than one’s own body, since we
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren (I John, iii. 16). The
claims of self and of the neighbor to love are in the following order:
the spiritual goods of self, the spiritual goods of the neighbor, the
bodily goods of self, the bodily goods of the neighbor, the external
goods of self, the external goods of the neighbor.

(d) Among neighbors, those who are better or more nearly related to
self should be given the preference in love; for we should do good to
all, but especially to those who are of the household of the faith
(Gal, vi. 10), and those persons are specially blamed who have no care
for their own and for those of their own house (I Tim., v. 8). The
claims of neighbors on our help (as was explained in 1176 sqq.) rank in
the following order: wife, children, parents, brothers and sisters,
other relatives, friends, domestics, citizens of the same town, state,
and country, and, finally, all others.

1607. The order of charity is commanded, because it is a mode intrinsic
to the performance of the act of charity (see 1554); it is a
circumstance without which the act of love is not in proportion to the
person to whom it is shown. Thus, love given to God is not in
proportion to His lovableness, if it is exceeded by the love given to a
creature; love given to the members of one’s family is not in
proportion to their claims, if it is less than the love given to
strangers.

(a) Hence, outside cases of a neighbor’s need, the law of charity
requires that one give him the amount of internal love that corresponds
with the external charity due to him. Thus, love for a father should be
in proportion to the external honor one is bound to show one’s parent;
love for a brother in proportion to the external marks of friendship
that are due a brother. He who has no filial love for his parents, or
fraternal love for his brethren, does not fulfill the law of charity.

(b) In cases of a neighbor’s need, the law of charity requires that the
internal love be in proportion to the external charitable assistance
one should give. Thus, if a parent and a stranger are in equal
necessity, more help and more love are due the parent; but if a
stranger is in need, and a parent is not in need, more help and more
corresponding love, as to that particular case, are due the stranger.

1608. It should be noted, however, that there is a twofold love of the
neighbor.

(a) Obligatory love is that which is commanded, and which is due another
as a debt, such as love for God, for a parent, for all neighbors in
general, etc. The amount of love for fellow-creatures that is
obligatory is, of course, not infinite, for no creature is infinitely
lovable; neither is it mathematically fixed, for, as said above, it may
be greater or less according to circumstances; but it is comparative or
relative--that is, it should agree with the higher or lower claim to
external charity that a neighbor has on one.

(b) Optional love, or love of supererogation, is that which is not
commanded, but which may be given lawfully, such as special friendship
outside a case of need for an enemy or stranger. As there is no precept
regarding this kind of love, neither is there any precept regarding the
order of love as between those to whom it is given, and one may invert
the order that is obligatory as regards commanded love. Thus, if a
brother and a cousin are both well-to-do, and one has property to
bequeath to which neither of them has any right, it is not against
charity to leave more to the cousin and less to the brother, or some to
the cousin and none to the brother. This supposes, however, that in the
matter of obligatory love the preference in order of charity has been
shown the brother (as explained in 1158-1182).




Art. 11: THE GIFT OF WISDOM

(_Summa Theologica_, II-II, qq. 45, 46.)

1609. Wisdom is the Gift of the Holy Ghost which corresponds with and
serves the virtue of charity (see 159 sqq., 808 sqq., 1041 sqq.), and
hence it is discussed in this place.

The following points concerning Wisdom will be treated: (a) the Nature
of the Gift of Wisdom; (b) the Persons who Possess the Gift of Wisdom;
(c) the Beatitude of the Peacemakers, which pertains especially to
Wisdom; (d) the Sin of Foolishness, which is opposed to Wisdom.

So far is it from being improper to give some space in Moral Theology
to the Gifts of the Holy Ghost (as if they pertained only to higher
mysticism), that it is even necessary to emphasize them. The Gifts are
essential to salvation, and play a most important part in the daily
spiritual life, whether in correcting or reinforcing the virtues, or in
giving immediate direction from the Holy Spirit. Man, it is true, does
not set them into action, but it is man’s part to value them, to hold
himself in readiness for them, and to hearken to their whispered
enlightenment and counsel. The Gifts of the Holy Ghost are the very
soul of Theology and of the Christian life.

1610. The Nature of the Gift of Wisdom.--Wisdom is defined as “a habit
for judging things in the light of their First Cause, the Supreme Good,
which is infused into the soul along with sanctifying grace.”

(a) Wisdom is a habit, and so it differs from passing acts. Thus, a man
in the state of sin who avoids idolatry, judges in the light of the
highest cause that worship is not to be given to creatures; but he
lacks the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, and therefore does not judge in
virtue of that special instinct or power which originates from the
abiding presence of the Holy Ghost.

(b) Wisdom judges, and this sets it apart from habits that belong to
the will (e.g., the Gifts of Piety, Fortitude, and Fear), as well as
from habits whose chief act is assent (e.g., the virtue of Faith) or
penetration (e.g., the Gift of Understanding).

(c) The standard by which Wisdom judges things is the First Cause of
all, or the Supreme Good, as when our Lord explained that the condition
of the man born blind was due to the purpose of God to be glorified
through that blindness (John, ix. 3). The wise man is he who goes back
to first principles, to the origins of things, to ultimate purposes;
but it is not every wisdom that estimates things according to the
Supreme Good, and there is a false wisdom (see 1623) whose canon of
excellence is the imperfect good opposed to Supreme Good. The Gift of
Wisdom, therefore, is distinct from sinful wisdom, which is wise at
doing evil (Jer., iv. 22); from particular wisdom, which understands
well the theory and practice of some science, art, or profession, and
is able therefore to decide correctly and to arrange successfully such
matters as fall under a special kind of activity, as in medicine or
architecture or strategy (I Cor., iii. 10).

(d) The things that make up the object of Wisdom are, in the first
place, divine things (e.g., the attributes, plans, government,
operations of God); and, in the second place, created things, whether
in the speculative order (e.g., mind and matter, good and evil,
science, religion, history), or in the practical order (i.e., human
actions). Wisdom contemplates the divine as known from faith or the
beatific vision, and then, with the things of God as its rule, it
judges the things of earth and directs the conduct of men: “The
spiritual man judgeth all things” (I Cor, ii, 15). Thus does Wisdom
differ from the Gifts of Knowledge and of Counsel; for Knowledge is
concerned directly with secondary causes and rises from the creature to
the Creator, While Counsel is not a speculative but a practical Gift,
and is a response to direction given by the Holy Spirit for the
guidance of conduct.

(e) The Gift of Wisdom is an infused perfection of the intellect, “a
wisdom descending from on high” (James, iii. 15). Hence, while it
resembles the virtue of Wisdom, which also judges human and divine
things through first causes (see 145), it differs from that virtue,
even with reference to the same objects, on account of its different
way of approach. Theology and philosophy judge correctly because they
employ study and the investigation of reason; but the Gift of Wisdom
has a right judgment because it depends, not on analysis or
argumentation, but on a supernatural knowledge had through faith (or
vision in case of the blessed) and a supernatural experience of God
through charity. Wisdom may express itself, indeed, in the concepts and
language of philosophy or theology, but it is not through scientific
processes that it knows and judges.

(f) The Gift of Wisdom is infused into the soul along with sanctifying
grace; for, like the other Gifts of the Holy Ghost, it is intended to
supplement through the action of the Holy Spirit the control exercised
by grace, which is imperfect on account of the limitations of the
virtues. The Gift of Wisdom, therefore, is an ordinary and normal fact
in the spiritual life, and must not be confused with rare and
extraordinary phenomena--with the “word of wisdom” (I Cor., xii. 8),
which was granted to the Apostles and at times to other preachers of
the faith, nor with the clear contemplation of God bestowed in the
state of innocence, nor with the infused knowledge or light of glory
enjoyed by Christ and some of the Saints while on earth. Thus, while
all who are in the state of grace possess the Gift of Wisdom,
comparatively only a few have received the “word of wisdom”--that is,
the ability to instruct others in the higher mysteries of faith and to
explain to them with ease and in suitable language the meaning of these
mysteries and their relation to supreme causes. Both these graces are
supernatural, but, while the Gift of Wisdom is needed by each
individual for his own sanctification, the word of wisdom is needed
only in certain cases for the sanctification of others.

1611. From the foregoing definition it is seen that Wisdom belongs both
to the will and to the intellect.

(a) In its cause, Wisdom belongs to the will. The cause of right
judgment by means of divine things is either the suitability of the
intellect, which knows well how to judge, or the suitability of the
will, which is inclined towards divine things. Thus, he who is well
versed in moral science will give a correct decision about a case of
chastity as it falls under the inquiry of reason, and he who is chaste
will judge correctly about the same case, even without moral science,
but from the sympathy he has for the virtue. The intellectual virtue of
Wisdom, then, judges aright because the intellect is sound in its
procedures; but the Gift of Wisdom is right in its judgments, because
the will has been united to God through charity, so that there has
resulted in one a suitability for judging about the things of God:
“Give me one who loves, and he will understand what I say” (Augustine,
_Tract. xxvi. in Joan_.).

(b) In its essence, Wisdom belongs to the intellect, for it consists in
judgment, and this is an act that is exercised, not by the affections,
but by the reason. Through love the soul becomes one spirit with God (I
Cor., vi. 17), and the will experiences the sweetness of this union
(Ps. xxxiii. 9); the intellect then judges concerning the divine which
has been the object of its mystical communion. The Gift of Wisdom,
built as it is on faith and charity, differs utterly from private
interpretation of revelation (which is subversive of faith) and from
the Modernistic experience of the divine (which is explained as a
natural intuition had by a special religious sense of a reality that is
divine and yet only subjective and unknowable).

1612. From the definition and explanation of the Gift of Wisdom it also
follows that this Gift is practical as well as speculative.

(a) Primarily, Wisdom is speculative, for one must consider divine
things in themselves before one applies them to other things; and,
moreover, the object of Wisdom is God, who is the first truth in the
order of knowledge or speculation. It is by Wisdom, then, as well as by
the other intellectual Gifts or extraordinary graces, that the act of
supernatural contemplation is exercised; but Wisdom, more perfect than
the other Gifts, ascends at once to things that are heavenly, divine
and eternal, and thinks of God as transcending in perfection every
known or knowable degree of created excellence, and as being most true,
most beautiful, most lovable (Eph., iii. 17-19).

(b) Secondarily, Wisdom is practical, for God whom it contemplates is
the supreme rule of action, as well as the first truth. Thus does the
higher Gift of Wisdom unite in itself what are found separate in lower
virtues--the speculative quality of the virtue of Wisdom and the
practical quality of Prudence (see 1620).

1613. The practical uses of the Gift of Wisdom are indicated in
Coloss., iii. 16-17, iv. 6: “Let the word of Christ dwell in you
abundantly, in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in
psalms, hymns and spiritual canticles, singing in grace in your hearts
to God. All whatsoever you do in word or in work, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ.... Walk with Wisdom towards them that are
without, redeeming the time. Let your speech be always with grace,
seasoned with salt.”

(a) The contemplation of divine things is useful for instruction in the
truths of faith and the duties of religion (“teaching and admonishing
one another”); for the mind becomes in a way divine, like the things on
which it dwells, filled with knowledge of God and of Christ and of the
means of holiness.

(b) Wisdom helps one to fulfill the duty of praying to God with
reverence and interior devotion (“singing in your hearts to God”); for
Wisdom makes one perceive and feel the sweetness and attraction of the
things of God.

(c) It directs one in both words and works (“do all in the name of
Christ”); for the intellect which judges things in the light of
eternity and with the fervor of divine charity will not mislead in
matters of salvation.

(d) It enables one to profit by opportunities of edification
(“redeeming the time”); for the example of a life directed by tender
love of God and by kindness and courtesy to all is a recommendation of
virtue and religion in the sight of the world.

1614. Wisdom is a Gift of the Holy Ghost, and is numbered with the
other six communications of the Spirit: “And the Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom, etc.” (Is., xi. 2).

(a) Likeness to the Other Gifts.--The Gifts of the Holy Ghost are
energies diffused in the powers of the soul as instruments of the
supernatural governance of the indwelling Spirit, just as the moral
virtues are the instruments of the natural governance of reason. The
infused virtues (e.g., faith or charity), unlike the acquired virtues
(e.g., temperance or fortitude), do not suffice for the government of
the soul; for, while these latter are according to nature, the former
surpass nature, and are received by it imperfectly. Hence the need of
the Gifts, which on earth supplement the infused virtues, strengthening
them against contrary vices, developing secondary acts of the virtues
which the virtues only initiate, and in heaven perfecting the blessed
in good.

(b) Unlikeness to the Other Gifts.--Wisdom, which is enumerated by
Isaias in the first place, is also given the highest rank among the
Gifts by theologians, on account of its greater elevation, more
universal scope, and the directive power it exercises. Fittingly, then,
is Wisdom assigned as the Gift that serves Charity, the queen of the
virtues: Charity loves God above all things; Wisdom dwells with delight
upon the object of this love (Wis., viii. 16), looks upon life with the
eyes of love, and in directing its human actions communicates to them
something of the savor and sweetness of divine charity.

1615. The Persons Who Possess Wisdom.--The Gift of Wisdom, as said
above (see 1610), is given with sanctifying grace, and hence only those
and all those who are in God’s friendship have this supernatural
endowment.

(a) Only those in the state of grace have divine Wisdom, for without
love of God it is impossible to have that right judgment of things that
is consequent on the relish for and connaturality with divine things.
Hence, it is said: “Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor
dwell in a body subject to sins” (Wis., i. 4).

(b) All those who are in the state of grace have the Gift of Wisdom,
for man is so weak and the supernatural virtues are so far above him
that, even when he has received these virtues, he is unable to make
proper use of them or to preserve them in time of temptation, unless he
has received the supplementary forces that will enable him to obey more
easily and promptly the voice and impulse of the Holy Ghost. Thus,
Charity destines man to beatitude, but, unless he has Wisdom to value
this virtue and privilege, to spurn the false wisdom of the world, to
think on the love of God with delight and to make it the norm of his
judgments and decisions, he will not progress in Charity, nor retain
it, nor arrive at the beatitude to which it destines him.

1616. Though all who are in the state of grace possess all the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, these Gifts are not had in the same way by all their
possessors. Thus, the following points should be noted with reference
to the Gift of Wisdom:

(a) The Gifts, like the infused virtues, are possessed habitually by
baptized children and insane persons, and actually by adults. Just as
infants have the possession but not the use of certain natural gifts
(such as reason and responsibility), so likewise supernatural life and
powers are granted them through baptismal regeneration, but the
exercise of this life and of these powers is prevented by their
inability to realize what they possess and to make use of it. The lack
of bodily development, which impedes the use of natural reason, also
impedes the use of supernatural Wisdom.

(b) The Gift of Wisdom is had in itself by all who are in the state of
grace; but in its extension, which is the “word of Wisdom,” it is
possessed only by highly gifted souls who have a special mission from
God (see above, 1610 sqq.). With sanctifying grace, each one receives
the supernatural Gift of judging rightly about heavenly things and of
regulating his conduct by them in so far as is necessary for the
attainment of salvation; otherwise, we should have to say that grace is
inferior to nature, and does not provide what is necessary for its end.
But the ability to explain heavenly things so as to draw others to the
truth, and to apply heavenly doctrines to the guidance of others so as
to lead them to good, is one of the gifts freely given, which the
Spirit divides according as He wills (I Cor., xii. 11): “To one by the
Spirit is given the word of Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge,
etc.” (ibid, 8).

1617. The Gift of Wisdom in itself (i.e., as intended directly for the
benefit of the recipient and not for the benefit of others) is also had
in varying degrees. (a) Thus, different persons do not possess this
Gift in equal measure; for to some is granted the contemplation of
loftier mysteries not granted to others, and suprahuman Wisdom plays a
greater part in the direction of some lives than in that of others. (b)
The same persons do not possess Wisdom in an equal degree at all times.
Thus, in Baptism all the Seven Gifts are received, but in Confirmation
they are in some way perfected, either in themselves by a greater
refinement or sensibility to the action of the Holy Spirit, or as
regards their possession by their subject through a firmer hold of them.

1618. The Exercise of the Gift of Wisdom.--(a) The external magisterium
(i.e., revelation and the teaching Church) conveys the truths of faith
to the mind of the believer. (b) The internal Teacher, the Holy Ghost,
illuminates the soul with Wisdom, so that it ponders on the first
principles of faith and makes the love of them control its judgments,
Words, and actions: “You have the unction from the Holy One and know
all things” (I John, ii. 20), that is, all that is needed for salvation.

1619. The Beatitude and the Fruits that Correspond to Wisdom.--The
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, by supplying for what is imperfect in the
habits of virtue (e.g., by protecting faith against dullness of
perception, hope against presumption, charity against distaste for
divine things), give to these virtues a perfectionment like to that
which they will have in the state of beatitude, and to their exercise a
corresponding enjoyment. Hence, to the Gifts, which are most excellent
habits, correspond those most perfect or most delightful acts of virtue
known as Beatitudes and Fruits (see 159 sqq.).

(a) There appears a special correspondence of the seventh beatitude
(“Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of
God,” Matt., v. 9) with Wisdom, both as regards their merit, and as
regards their reward. The work of Wisdom is to reduce all things to
unity, to see life and the world as a whole, to look upon creatures as
parts of one great divine plan. Similarly, the work of the peacemakers
is to put an end to dissension and division and to reconcile the
warring powers of the soul, or to introduce harmony between those that
are at enmity: “The Wisdom that is from above is peaceable” (James,
iii. 17). Again, the reward promised the peacemakers is that they shall
be called the sons of God, and of Wisdom it may be said that it makes
one the image of the Son of God, who is Eternal Wisdom.

(b) The Fruits of the Holy Ghost that are assigned to Wisdom are, with
regard to God: charity, or a tender love of God (“The charity of God is
poured out in our hearts,” Rom., v. 5.), joy, or delight at union with
God (“Rejoice in the Lord always,” Phillip., iv. 4), peace, or security
in the enjoyment of God (“There is much peace to them that love Thy
law,” Ps. cxviii. 165). The Fruits that have reference to the love of
neighbor are: goodness, or an internal benevolence characterized by
sweetness (“The fruit of the light is in all goodness,” Eph., v. 9),
and kindness, or a beneficence accompanied by cheerfulness (“The Lord
loves the cheerful giver,” II Cor., ix. 7).

1620. St. James (iii. 17, 18) describes the direction which Wisdom
gives to human actions (see 1612, 1613) and the fruit of peace to which
it conducts them, as follows: “The Wisdom that is from above, first
indeed is chaste, then peaceable; modest, easy to be persuaded;
consenting to the good, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging,
without dissimulation. And the fruit of justice is sown in peace to
them that make peace.”

(a) Thus, first, Wisdom directs one to be free from sin (“chaste”), for
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom (Ps. cx. 110).

(b) Next, Wisdom directs one to work for peace within one’s own soul,
by following moderation where one can decide for oneself (“modest”), by
seeking advice where one is in doubt (“easy to be persuaded”).

(c) Further, Wisdom directs one to be peaceful towards others, to be
well disposed towards their good or benefit (“consenting to the good”),
compassionate and helpful in their distress (“full of mercy and good
fruits”), not partial or hypocritical in criticizing their defects
(“without judging, without dissimulation”).

(d) Finally, Wisdom, having sown in peace, reaps the peace of
righteousness. False wisdom leads to wrangling and disorder, true
Wisdom to concord and harmony.

1621. The Sins Opposed to Wisdom.--Just as blindness and dullness-that
is, the want of all or of sufficient perceptiveness in spiritual
things--are opposed to the Gift of Understanding (see 912), so
stupidity and foolishness--that is, the want of all or of sufficient
good judgment about spiritual things--are opposed to the Gift of Wisdom.

1622. Foolishness is defined as “a slowness and darkness of mind that
is due to some moral defect, and that makes it difficult for one to
judge rightly about the Last End of things and the Chief Good.”

(a) Foolishness is slow and darksome, and thus the contrary of Wisdom,
which is alert and discerning.

(b) It is a defect of judgment, and so differs from the sins of
blindness and dullness of heart.

(c) It is an error of judgment about the chief concern of life and the
things of greatest value, and thus it is different from the innocent
simplicity of many good persons, whose judgment is not sound in affairs
of this world.

(d) It is brought on by moral fault, and is therefore not to be
identified with invincible ignorance, which is a physical imperfection
caused by nature, as in the weak-minded and the insane.

1623. Just as true Wisdom seems foolishness to the world, so does true
foolishness seem wisdom to the world (I Cor., iii. 18 sqq.). There is a
counterfeit wisdom, which places its last end in some created good, and
which is therefore foolishness before God. St. James (iii. 15)
describes false wisdom as “earthly, sensual, devilish”; and these words
express very well three chief classes of worldly wisdom. (a) Some of
the worldly-wise aim above all things at amassing and increasing wealth
or other external possessions (earthly wisdom). (b) Others seek chiefly
pleasure, health, comfort, or other bodily goods (animal wisdom). (c)
Others imitating Lucifer, who is king over all the sons of pride (Job,
xli. 25), devote their whole lives solely to the pursuit of inordinate
excellence of some kind--that is, of selfish domination or honors or
glory, etc. (devilish wisdom).

1624. The foolishness we are now considering is sinful, for it is a
voluntary choice of evil, a violation of commandments, and the
ruination of man. In scripture the term “fool” is applied to the
wicked, the impious, the objects of divine anger (Ps. xiii. 1), and
hence it was that our Lord declared severe penalty against those who
call another a fool (Matt., v. 22).

(a) Foolishness is a voluntary choice of evil, for it consists in a
turning away from spiritual things or an entire absorption in the
things of this world, with the result that one becomes unfitted to
judge aright concerning the values of human existence: “The animal man
does not perceive the things of the Spirit of God” (I Cor., ii. 14).
But the fact that his taste is perverted, and that he has no relish for
the spiritual, is due to his own deliberate rejection of good and the
cultivation of evil.

(b) Foolishness is a violation of commandments about the knowledge and
employment of truth (see 914 sqq.): “See how you walk, not as unwise,
but as wise” (Eph., v. 15, 16).

(c) Foolishness leads to perdition, for, being defective in its
judgment, it barters away the future for present satisfaction and sells
its birthright for a mess of pottage: “The prosperity of fools destroys
them” (Prov., i. 32); “Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required
of thee” (Luke, xii. 20).

1625. The causes of the sin of foolishness, as was said above (see
1623), are the wrong and sinful views taken of life, which make men
judge all things by the standards of gain or pleasure or power, rather
than by the standard of the First Cause, in comparison with whom all
these lower goods are but trivial. But, among all the vices that lead
mankind astray from Wisdom, the preeminence is held by lust, for its
attraction is greater and its hold on the soul more complete. As
chastity especially disposes for heavenly contemplation and Wisdom (see
912) by the refinement and elevation and spirituality it gives the
mind, so does sensuality especially indispose for these goods by the
coarseness and degradation and materialism that follow in its wake.




