The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Essay on the Trial by Jury
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An Essay on the Trial by Jury

Author: Lysander Spooner


        
Release date: June 27, 2010 [eBook #32984]
                Most recently updated: January 6, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/32984

Credits: Produced by Susan Goble, Curtis Weyant, Graeme Mackreth
        and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        https://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Susan Goble, Curtis Weyant, Graeme Mackreth
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net







AN ESSAY

ON THE

TRIAL BY JURY.


BY LYSANDER SPOONER.


 BOSTON:
 JOHN P. JEWETT AND COMPANY.
 CLEVELAND, OHIO:
 JEWETT, PROCTOR & WORTHINGTON.
 1852.


 Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1852, by
 LYSANDER SPOONER,
 In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Massachusetts.


NOTICE TO ENGLISH PUBLISHERS.

The author claims the copyright of this book in England, on Common Law
principles, without regard to acts of parliament; and if the main
principle of the book itself be true, viz., that no legislation, in
conflict with the Common Law, is of any validity, his claim is a legal
one. He forbids any one to reprint the book without his consent.


 Stereotyped by
 HOBART & ROBBINS;
 New England Type and Stereotype Foundery,
 BOSTON.


NOTE.

This volume, it is presumed by the author, gives what will generally be
considered satisfactory evidence,--though not all the evidence,--of what
the Common Law trial by jury really is. In a future volume, if it should
be called for, it is designed to corroborate the grounds taken in this;
give a concise view of the English constitution; show the
unconstitutional character of the existing government in England, and
the unconstitutional means by which the trial by jury has been broken
down in practice; prove that, neither in England nor the United States,
have legislatures ever been invested by the people with any authority to
impair the powers, change the oaths, or (with few exceptions) abridge
the jurisdiction, of juries, or select jurors on any other than Common
Law principles; and, consequently, that, in both countries, legislation
is still constitutionally subordinate to the discretion and consciences
of Common Law juries, in all cases, both civil and criminal, in which
juries sit. The same volume will probably also discuss several political
and legal questions, which will naturally assume importance if the trial
by jury should be reëstablished.




CONTENTS.

                                                                       PAGE


CHAPTER I.   THE RIGHT OF JURIES TO JUDGE OF THE JUSTICE OF LAWS,         5

             SECTION 1,                                                   5

             SECTION 2,                                                  11


