PART III.

PROPHETIC.




PART III.

PROPHETIC.




THE ARGUMENT RECAPITULATED—THE RELIGIOUS ANTICIPATION OF THE FUTURE
ILLUSTRATED AND JUSTIFIED BY THE HOPES OF SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
PHILANTHROPY.


We began this book by referring to the circumstance, that the same
illustrious individual who originated the idea of “the Great Exhibition,”
and who has done so much to extend and realize it, suggested as an
inscription for the Royal Exchange, a single sentence from our English
Bible—“_The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof._” It is the
first verse of the 24th Psalm. The suggestion was adopted;—and hence, on
the front of the building referred to,—in very plain letters,—rather
rude if any thing,—without adornment,—or figure or flourish of any
sort—but conspicuous and legible, in our own homely, honest, Saxon
tongue, stands, open to all the world, the public proclamation of our
faith as a people—“The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.” It
stands there, on the front of the edifice, which is the commercial centre
of this great city,—the place of meeting for the men of different lands
and of many languages, who, as the representatives of every clime and
country upon earth, constitute, daily, a sort of typical gathering of all
nations,—men connected with the “_industry_,” by being connected with the
trade and traffic, of the world.

We proposed to put the two things together,—the inscription on the
Exchange, with the anticipated gathering in the Palace of Industry,—and
to consider the first as announcing to the second certain great truths,
and these again as involving universal duties; and we further proposed
to consider, in conclusion, what would be the result, to Europe and
the world, if, by ourselves and our many visitors, with the aggregate
of nationalities whom they will represent, these truths were all to be
acknowledged, and the duties resulting from them were all to be done.

We then proceeded—taking in connexion with the first verse of the
psalm, which constitutes the inscription on the Exchange, the entire
sacred composition of which it is a part,—and viewing _that_, too,
in connexion with the whole volume of Divine Revelation to which it
belongs—we proceeded, on this principle, to develope and illustrate
the truths and the duties to which we referred. Thus expounded, we
found the confession, that “the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness
thereof,” to include the following things. It involved, in the first
place, _the existence of God_;—the acknowledgment of this,—and the
acknowledgment of it in connexion with the idea of _personality_. In the
second place, it involved God’s proprietorship of the world and man,
and the recognition of this as carrying with it the acknowledgment of
his being _the Creator_, since, immediately after the statement that
“the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof,” the Psalm goes on
to say, “the world, and _they that dwell therein;—for he hath founded
it upon the seas and established it upon the floods_.” In the third
place, we educed from the confession that the “_fulness_” of the earth
is God’s, the doctrine of _Providence_, including in that, the original
disposition of materials for the service of man in the construction
of the globe,—the whole arrangement of things, animate and inanimate,
on its surface,—the establishment of all the laws of production,—the
continual _administration_ of these laws, by God’s personal supremacy
and presidency over nature,—the gifts which he confers, on nations
and individuals, of contrivance and skill, taste and genius,—with
whatever else belongs to the constant communication of good, and the
progressive advance and improvement of society. All these ideas were
largely illustrated by various striking passages of Scripture; and the
acknowledgment of the truths of _Creation_ and _Providence_, were both
shown to involve in them further evidence of the previous truth of the
Divine personality.

We next advanced to some additional ideas of both truth and duty,
which the acknowledgment of all this involved,—especially as this
acknowledgment was illustrated by the whole psalm that was supposed
to be before us, and as _that_ was illustrated by the whole scheme of
Divine discovery developed in the Bible, and the connexion between the
Jewish and Christian revelations. We found the following things to be
thus brought out. In the first place, the duty of _worship_:—this was
suggested by the question, which immediately follows the acknowledgment
of God, of creation, providence, and the Divine proprietorship of the
earth and the world,—“Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord,
who shall stand in his holy place?” Next, there was the answer to
this question, which involved the obligation of _universal virtue_ in
God’s worshippers—that is, upon all men, since _all_ men are alike
bound to worship him: “He that hath clean hands and a pure heart;
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.”
This was expounded as a demand for inward and outward purity—purity
of soul, lip, and life—in all who habitually approached God in the
solemnities of worship. But this demand for universal virtue in
_each_ worshipper,—associated with the obligation of _all_ men to
worship,—viewed in connexion with the general consciousness of defect and
sin, and the proof and prevalence of ungodliness in the world,—led, in
the third place, to the discussion of the great question—_how humanity
was to come to the attainment of that character, which was essential to
the fulfilment of its religious obligations_? To be in a proper moral
and spiritual state for the discharge of habitual, acceptable worship,
considered as a duty, we found, by a process of scriptural reasoning, to
involve _another_ and _a previous_ duty; that, namely, _of accepting the
gospel as a system of mercy, and of submitting to Christ as the Redeemer
of the world_. We argued this, from looking at the lessons taught by the
principle that pervaded the appointments of the Jewish ritual, and the
prophetic bearing on the promised Messiah, of some of the hymns used
by the people in the Hebrew worship. We showed how the whole of the
ancient Institute taught the necessity of atonement and sacrifice,—pardon
through a propitiation, and purity and holiness as divine effects; we
saw how it intimated that it did not _itself_ provide these, but, by
typical rites, significant ceremonies, and prophetic songs, anticipated
their coming in “the fulness of time,” when they should be procured
and dispensed by one who was regarded as the hope and “the desire of
all nations.” Without positively saying that the latter part of the
twenty-fourth psalm was a distinct and _intended_ prophecy of Christ,
we showed, from the language of those psalms that are so, as quoted and
expounded in the New Testament, that it might consistently be regarded
as _illustrative_ of Christ—of his return in triumph to the heavenly
world, when, after having “overcome the sharpness of death,” “he ascended
up on high, to receive gifts for men, even for the rebellious, that the
Lord God might dwell among them,” and that _they_ might become the holy
and spiritual “priesthood” of God. In this way, we endeavoured to show
how an intelligent Christian might associate with the first verse of
the twenty-fourth psalm, all the scriptural revelations respecting HIM,
who, in the _Te Deum_,—one of the noblest of ancient Christian hymns,—is
invoked in language borrowed from the close of it: “_Thou art_ THE KING
OF GLORY, _O Christ!_” and that thus, the simple words on our Exchange,
which at first sight appear to announce only the general principles of
Theism, would come to utter in the ear of instructed reason and enlarged
faith, the specific truths of an Evangelical Christianity. It thus comes
to pass, that we are taught ourselves, by the inscription referred to,
and shall teach the nations to whom we exhibit it, that, for men “to
ascend into the hill of the Lord, and habitually to worship in his holy
place;” appearing there in “the beauty of holiness,” and everywhere
exemplifying universal virtue; they must _first_ come to him as sinners,
through Christ, and that, then, being cleansed from their sins, by being
“washed, justified, and sanctified, in the name of the Lord Jesus and
by the spirit of our God,” they can constitute a holy, _worshipping_
Church; and with “clean hands,” and “pure hearts,” offer up “spiritual
sacrifices,” fragrant and acceptable to Him whom they approach,—such
approach, again, ever re-acting on their further attainment of personal
righteousness.

It now only remains for us to conclude and complete our originally
projected course of observation, by setting forth what would be the
future condition of the nations, _supposing that all the world learned
and practised the truths and duties which have thus been enumerated_.

It is not unnatural to look at the subject in this way. Philosophers, and
politicians, and social economists, are all regarding the great event
which is just at hand,[1] as constituting the beginning of a new era and
of better times; and as embodying in itself something like a prophecy of
a brightened and improved future for the nations. For the first time in
the history of the world, there is to be a flowing of the peoples of all
lands to one spot. They are not summoned together by blast of trumpet;
they come not inflamed by mutual animosities, nor with souls bent on
conquest and carnage. Nor do they come for the purpose of witnessing
games and tourneys,—feats of strength or speed,—the rude contests of
muscular athletæ,—the skill of charioteers,—the sanguinary spectacle
of gladiatorial shows,—or the combat of plumed knights, with their
glittering armour and gallant bearing, their caparisoned steeds and gay
attendants, making war look like a holiday entertainment. The gathering
of the nations about to be held is to be altogether of another sort. The
crowds that move to it, are not to move as a thunderbolt or a whirlwind,
carrying in their course havock and desolation; they are to bring with
them, in their tranquil march, the useful products of their respective
countries, and the bloodless trophies of their industry and their skill.
These are to be all collected and arranged in one great and extraordinary
edifice, where they are to enter into a sort of peaceful contest and
amicable rivalry, while the people themselves of every region are to
mingle together, and to look on, and to observe, and compare, and wonder,
and rejoice:—and it is expected to come to pass, that however unable the
most of them may be to understand the spoken languages of the rest, all
will be able to read and to interpret what will be written everywhere
on the whole scene, and to comprehend the import of the common voice
that shall seem to be issuing from the objects around them. The products
of the different regions of the earth will recognise each other as
belonging to one and the same world; the multitudes of things that will
illustrate the achievements of skill and industry, though constructed
or fabricated by the hands of men of many languages, will have among
themselves a common dialect—a language of their own—but which all the
different national workers shall alike understand. Everything will
speak of oneness, brotherhood,—the same nature, the same faculties, the
same Father,—the folly and wickedness of men _not_ “living together in
unity,”—of their degrading powers that are so wonderful, and so prolific
of wonders, and desolating a world which they have such vast ability to
beautify and adorn! From such a lesson it is hoped and expected that the
crowds will disperse wiser and better,—more loving and more fraternal;
and that a basis will be laid for such future peaceful and profitable
intercourse, as shall render war an utter impossibility. It may be
supposed, also, that the approaching event will only prove the first of
a long series of similar exhibitions, which shall successively occur in
all coming time, and which shall take place in different cities of Europe
and America, till at length they may be fixed in some distant region of
those lands that witnessed the birth or were honoured by being the cradle
of the race, or in those which are at present the nurseries of nations
as yet without a name. The whole thing, to some minds, is thus shaping
itself into a prophetic type of a new aspect of the civilized world.
But it is easy to see, that this prophecy is one which includes many
others; for it could not be fulfilled, to the extent of its grand and
comprehensive meaning, without a variety and number of important social
and political changes being supposed as the necessary conditions of such
a spectacle in _other_ lands, as that which is possible and prepared for
in our own.

We are merely adding then, to the calculations of philosophy, the higher
thoughts suggested by the principles of our national faith, when we take
the truths included in that faith, and, supposing them to be received by
the nations of the earth, as we have drawn them out from the words that
are enthroned in the midst of our city and in the sight of all men,
proceed to inquire what would be the result of their being universally
learned and embraced, and the duties they impose being universally
obeyed. The inscription on the Exchange, if appropriate for _it_, is
appropriate for the Palace of Industry too.[2] It is a glorious thing to
think that we are living at such a time as this, and are about to witness
such a festival as that projected by the Consort of our Sovereign;—not
the banquet of a vain and idolatrous voluptuary, making “a feast for a
thousand of his lords,” ready to desecrate what is sacred to religion,
and to pour out libations of wine and strong drink, that “he and his
princes, his wives, and his concubines, may lift up themselves against
the God of heaven,” blaspheming his name and abusing his gifts, and
“praising the gods of gold and of silver, of brass and of iron, of wood
and of stone;”—it is not this, or we might expect the appearance of a
mysterious hand, once more, with its “MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN,” to
pronounce the doom of a voluptuous court and a devoted country;—it is not
this, but a vast banquet for the eye and the intellect, the heart and
the reason;—and one, too, projected on such a principle of recognising
in all things the dominion of Him “who liveth for ever and ever,”—and
“who ruleth alike over the hosts of heaven and the inhabitants of the
earth,”—“in whose hand our breath is, and whose are all our ways,”—and
“_from whom cometh_ the gold and the silver, the brass, the iron, the
wood and the stone;” the fruits of the earth and the abundance of
the seas;—with every power and faculty of man—ability to accomplish
and capacity to enjoy;—the whole thing so proceeds, we trust, on the
acknowledgment of Him,—that, instead of a vision to strike terror and to
scatter in confusion, we should rather imagine that we see written,—in
radiant letters, by the hand of love and not of vengeance, to kindle
devotion and strengthen faith,—on the crystal walls of the Palace of
Industry, giving a glory to all its contents—“THE EARTH IS THE LORD’S,
AND THE FULNESS THEREOF;—THE WORLD, AND THEY THAT DWELL THEREIN.”

Supposing this, then, to become the creed of the world, enlarged and
illustrated by Christian associations, and for all its personal and
practical lessons to be fully carried out, let us see what would be the
condition of human society.

[1] These pages were written previous to the opening of the “Exhibition,”
and refer to it as approaching. They do not appear quite so soon as it
was once hoped they would have done, but it has been thought best to
retain their original form of expression.

[2] Since this was written, the Author has been gratified by learning
that Prince Albert has selected the words, with the addition of the
second clause of the verse, for the English motto on the cover of the
_Catalogue_ of the Exhibition. It is taken, however, from the Prayer-book
translation of the Psalms, instead of from that of the authorized
version. The sense is the same, although the phraseology is slightly
varied. The words are, “_The earth is the Lord’s, and all that therein
is: the compass of the world, and they that dwell therein._”




I.

_Universal Theism._


In the first place, there would be, everywhere,—in all lands and
in all hearts,—the belief and acknowledgment of the one living and
true God. All doubt, denial, and error, respecting this cardinal and
central truth, would have passed away. There would be no Atheism,—the
rejection and repudiation of a personal God; no Pantheism,—which is only
Atheism under another name; no Scepticism,—professed uncertainty as
to whether there is really a God or not; and no Polytheism—the belief
of a mere rabble of divinities. All these forms of thought would cease
and determine, and give place to the universal admission of the great
fact of the Divine existence. No human being would be to be found, who
could look over the earth with all its wonders, and survey the heaven
with its sun and stars,—and see no proof or probability in either,
of the existence anywhere of a being or a personality _greater_ than
himself! This is the amount of the Atheistic creed,—if creed it can be
called, that consists only in denials and negations. The universe is _a
thing_,—wonderful indeed, but nothing more,—having no consciousness, no
capacity for voluntary action, nothing about it of personal properties;
and, if there be no independent personal God, then, the greatest being
that is known to exist in the whole universe,—the only one that can be
spoken of as a person, is man himself!—a somewhat lame and impotent
conclusion!—a poor summit to the infinitude of things! There are those
who say that they believe this;—there will be none to say it, when it
comes to be a universally admitted truth, that “the earth is the Lord’s,
and the fulness thereof.” In the same way, there will be no thinkers,
or professed thinkers, whose minds, repelled by the gross darkness
of positive denial, but not drawn into the light of positive belief,
wander in the fogs and mists of uncertainty, and “reason downwards
till they _doubt_ of God.” And in the same way, the myriads of gods,
which the Asiatic nations conceive to be filling the heavens and the
earth,—large and small,—great and little, but most of them debased,—will
all disappear, like the more elegant system of the Greeks, that once
divided the domain of nature, and parcelled it out among its subordinate
divinities. Cleared and cleansed from all these various forms of error,
the large heart of universal humanity will be open to the air and the
sunlight of true thought, and will reflect, as from a mirror, the image
of Him, who has “set his glory above the heavens,” and of whom it is
said, that “the knowledge of him” is abroad “in all the earth,” since,
“from the creation of the world,” he hath made manifest, “by the works
of his hands,” “even his eternal power and Godhead.”




II.

_Universality of Christian Worship._


In the second place, there will be added to this universal acknowledgment
of God, as the object of belief, a further recognition of him as the
object of worship. All men would be worshippers of God, if, throughout
the world, there should be not only the prevalence of the belief of that
God is, but the working out of the results of that belief,—that _because_
he is, he is “the hearer of prayer,” and that “to him,” therefore, “all
flesh should come.” Taking this subject, however, in connexion with all
the explanatory illustrations which we have already advanced, it is easy
to see that it is of wide compass, and will include far more than might
at first be apparent.

The God, whom we suppose to be acknowledged, is the God of the Bible, and
the worship by which we suppose him to be approached, would be worship
conducted on the principle which pervades it, and regulated by all that
its spirit and precepts concur to prescribe. The Being referred to in
the Scriptural expression,—“The earth is the _Lord’s_,”—is not one whose
existence and character are demonstrated by philosophy, and who may thus
be considered as a sort of hypothesis;—it is, as we have said, _the God
of the Bible_,—the God who has made himself known by supernatural facts
and verbal revelation, and whose discovery of himself in the works of
his power, and in the constant displays of his wisdom and beneficence,
is to be supplemented and enlarged by the whole of the utterances of his
grace and mercy. On this principle it was, that we took the expression,
“The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof;” not as an independent
and isolated sentence,—not as a thing to be looked at by itself,—but in
connexion with the contents of the entire volume of which it is a part:
and we saw, when we did so, that it brought out, into great prominence,
such a view of the teaching of Scripture in respect to the relations
of God and man, as necessarily affected, very materially, the whole
theory and practice of worship. But it is this _view_ of the meaning
of the passage, that we are supposing to be learned and acknowledged
by the nations, and therefore the worship, in which we are further
supposing them to unite, would of course be _that_ which the whole of our
exposition would inculcate or explain.

It is remarkable, too, that philosophical Deism never leads to worship in
its disciples,—at least not to anything in the form of regular social or
public acts. It is possible for a simple Theist consistently to pray, or
to extol and adore the Deity he acknowledges; and it _may_ be, that some
Theists privately do so,—though all probabilities,—it may by no means
_uncandidly_, be said,—are rather against it. What would be possible
and consistent, however, in a Deist by himself, would be equally so in
a company of such. On the principle of their believing in a personal
God, they might meet together for public worship. _But they never do._
The mere admission of the one principle that God is, would seem not to
be sufficient to lead men to worship;—it needs to be connected with
another principle—that which affirms that “God _has spoken_,” or that,
by some means, he has supernaturally made himself known, revealed his
interest in human nature, and drawn near,—or _draws_ near,—to the human
race. All religions, always and everywhere, have pre-supposed something
of supernatural intercourse between God and man;—they have had, or
have, their traditionary belief of divine appearances,—their notions
of a priesthood peculiarly favoured or filled by the divinity, through
which, and through whose acts, the people could acceptably approach and
pray. The believers in the Bible believe, of course, in supernatural
manifestations of the Divine Being, made to them in the records, and
embodied in many of the facts, of the book; and it is this belief
that makes them worshippers. For the habit of worship, then, facts
everywhere and abundantly demonstrate, you must have a religion; and
for the existence of religion, you must have the belief of supernatural
discoveries of God to man, in addition to the display of himself in his
works. Deism is not a religion, but a philosophy; it has a God, but it
does not worship; and it does not worship, because God, according to its
conception of him, has never broken the silence of nature, or narrowed
the distance between him and his creatures by passing over the limits of
fixed law. All men who worship, whether their worship be pure or corrupt,
do so, we repeat, because they have a religion, and they have a religion,
because they believe in something supernatural as to their knowledge
of God; something which makes their belief of him _faith_ in what is
demonstrated by miraculous fact or divine statement; and not merely
_opinion_, as the logical conclusion of a speculative philosophy.

These principles and reasonings being apprehended, will clear the way
to the intelligent perception of the variety of things that must be
understood as included in the idea of all the world becoming worshippers
of God, _as the result of their perception of what we, as a nation, are
supposed to teach_. For men to be worshippers, their knowledge of God
must be religious, not philosophic; for it to be religious, it must
be founded on belief in a supernatural revelation; it will _be_ this,
when they acknowledge that “the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof,” in words taken from the Jewish Scriptures, and regarded as
an utterance of, the Divine voice. By such an acknowledgment they will
recognise the _whole_ of those Scriptures, as “given by inspiration of
God,” or, as written by men who wrote “as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost.” But the admission of _this_, will draw with it the admission of
the _second_ series of writings, and the acknowledgment of their intimate
connexion with the first, as the perfect development of what the first
foreshadowed, and the record of the fulfilment of what they foretold.
The faith of the men, therefore, who begin with the confession that “the
earth is the Lord’s,” and who profess it in the words of a Divine saying,
and _as such_, must go on till it takes in what the Hebrew institute
taught in type, and the Hebrew prophets uttered in words, when they
“spake beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and of the glory that
should follow;” and it must still go on, and can only be rationally and
consistently complete, when it receives the whole of the evangelical
discoveries of the New Testament respecting the redemption of the Christ
of God. _This_, then, would be the faith of future society, the world
over; and by _this faith_ its worship would be regulated, if, as we are
supposing, the nations should learn from us our religious belief in all
its extent, and should follow it out in all its obligations.

The worship of the world, then, would be Christian worship. Men would be
worshippers, because they would be religious; they would be religious,
because they would have a religion, not a philosophy; and that religion,
would be the one taught in the Christian Scriptures, and founded on
the facts of the Christian revelation. All that we shall say of the
consequence of this, at present, is, that, just as the admission of a
personal God puts aside all forms of denial or error upon that point,
so, the admission of a particular form of Divine discovery, and the
establishment of worship according to the principles of a specific
revelation, will put aside all other systems of worship, and overturn the
pretensions of all other supernatural beliefs. Mohammedanism and idolatry
would alike die under the predominance of the Christian sentiment;—the
one as including too little, in not adding to the knowledge of God
the knowledge of the redemptive act of the Christ; and the other as
including too much, in having “gods many and lords many,” and worshipping
these through visible objects, or regarding the visible objects as
Divine; thus “falling down to the work of their hands,” and “turning the
truth of God into a lie.” When Christian worship shall be universal in
the earth, the gods, and priests, and altars and temples of all other
religions will have departed; everything gross, cruel, and obscene will
have passed away, and have given place to the practical knowledge of the
one living and true God,—to Him, “who is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity,” and who requires to be worshipped by men of “clean hands” and
of “pure hearts.” Then will be brought to pass many of the sayings that
are written in THE BOOK which often portrays, in prophetic song, visions
of the triumph of religion and righteousness, and of that FUTURE, which
it sees, and celebrates, and it is _to make_ for humanity. “The Lord will
famish all the gods of the earth.” “The idols he will utterly abolish.”
“It shall come to pass, that the gods which have not made the heavens and
the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from underneath
these heavens.” “So men shall fear the name of the Lord from the west,
and his glory from the rising of the sun.” “For, from the rising of the
sun even to the going down of the same, his name shall be great among
the Gentiles; and, in every place incense shall be offered unto him,
and a pure offering.” “Behold the days come, saith the Lord, when they
shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least even unto the
greatest.” “In that day, shall there be one Lord and his name one.” For
“the kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.”




III.

_The Scriptures will purify and restore the Church._


But in the third place, as we are supposing the nations of the world
to be intelligently led from the simple sentence,—“the earth is the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,” to the admission of the contents of the
entire book, and the full understanding of the whole system of mercy and
mediation, as developed in shadow, in the Hebrew ritual, and given, in
substance, in the work of Christ; and as we are supposing, that, because
of the fact of their knowledge, their worship will be Christian;—we wish
it further to be observed, that, because of the _mode_ of their acquiring
that knowledge, and on account of _the accuracy_ and _extent_ of it,
their worship will not only be Christian as to its _general_ character,
but it will come to be of a kind distinguished by certain _specific_
peculiarities.

That is to say, learning their faith from a certain book, and from being
taught to comprehend the entire contents of it,—and finding in that
book, that though there are “some things in it hard to be understood,”
it is yet in its entireness _the property of the people_; it will come
to pass, that all the people will claim to possess it,—will stand to
their claim,—and will enforce and carry it, until there shall be none
that shall dare to deny or to resist. Then, again, a whole world of
intelligent and earnest men, with the Bible in their hands, as Divine
thought,—studying the book “till the word of Christ dwells in them
richly, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,”—“having the form of
knowledge and of truth” there;—marking and comprehending “the things
that differ,” and spiritually taught to distinguish between that, which,
however glorious when in its proper place, came, at last, to have “no
glory, because of the glory that excelleth;”—“waxed old and vanished
away as a thing that was done with,” in consequence of that coming in
its stead, which was never to be moved—never to be surpassed, and never
supplanted by any further or superior dispensation;—men, understanding
all this, and understanding, too, that, in consequence of it all, they
have the knowledge of a sacrifice which could never be repeated,—and “a
great High Priest of their profession, who has entered into heaven, and
appears in the presence of God for them,”—and that themselves are “a holy
priesthood,” and that spiritual acts, affections, and duties, _are the
incense and sacrifices of the Christian church_, “with which ‘_alone_’
God is well pleased;”—such men—and we are supposing the whole world to
be such—would cleanse Christendom of the corruptions of the faith, just
as Christianity, generally considered, would, by its active and universal
diffusion, subvert and extinguish the idolatries of Heathenism.—Human
priesthood, visible altars, the sacrifice of the mass, literal incense,
the “lifting-up of the soul unto vanity,” in the sense of the adoration
of saints and martyrs, the worship of a woman, of pictures, images, and
relics of the dead,—ecclesiastical tyrannies, popular superstitions, and
popular serfdom,—with everything else that is incompatible with a vital
and diffused Christian intelligence,—all these would pass away;—the one
offering of the one Priest—and the exclusive intercession of the “one
Mediator between God and men,”—would be the only things before the mind
of the churches;—while they would meet habitually, and meet everywhere,
to worship in simplicity,—“in spirit and in truth,”—undeceived by empty
ritualisms,—regaled and refreshed by “a rational service,” and edified
and established by a ministry of instruction. Christ will be understood
to be “a priest upon a throne;” to be the Head of the church, and the
superior and “Prince of the kings of the earth,” and to hold in his
hands “the keys of death and of the invisible world,”—“to open so that
no man can shut, and to shut that no man can open;”—and when all this is
apprehended by the nations, _it will not be endured_ that there shall be
a sort of blasphemous mimicry of it all in the pretensions and claims
of the Man of Sin. “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof;
the world, and they that dwell therein;”—when this is understood, in its
Christian acceptation, and all men are aware that for all equally “Christ
died,”—that they are his property, and that none are to interfere between
him and his,—that _He_ alone is “Lord” alike, “of the dead and of the
living,” and that by “setting his love” on all, he makes each individual
spiritually “great,” and stamps a dignity on the nature he redeemed,—when
these things are known and felt, there will be none who will “lord it
over God’s heritage,” or none to submit to the attempted usurpation.




IV.

_Universal Virtue._


In the next place,—in consistency with the principles previously
expounded, of the character that God demands in his worshippers,—the
necessity to their acceptance, in divine service, of their possession
and culture of universal virtue,—and the manner by which, in Christian
worshippers, virtue expands and developes into holiness;—in consistency
with this, we have next to remark, that when men have become what we have
sketched _as to religion_, there will be the prevalence among them of _an
elevated morality_. It is not denied that there may be virtue and morals
without faith;—and that the honourable, and the true, and the lovely,
and the beautiful, in habit and behaviour, may exist in the man who is
destitute of religion. It is quite possible that an individual who denies
that “the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,” by denying that
there is any Lord to whom it can belong;—who, therefore, has no sense
of religious reverence,—no idea of Divine authority,—no thought of a
future account,—who never worships, never acts from spiritual motives,
or as “seeing Him who is invisible,”—it is quite possible for such a
man to find reasons in the present, visible constitution of things, for
making the best of the life that now is, by living purely, uprightly,
and honestly in the world. We admit this. But we are now supposing that
all men have risen into a higher sphere, through the reception and power
of religious faith,—and that their virtue, instead of being a thing that
has its roots in the earth, and is nourished by mere mundane influences,
is a thing which flows down upon them from heaven, and is quickened and
invigorated by intercourse with God. The _religious_ man, if he be true
to his privileges and profession, will have all the virtues of the man
of the world, besides some others which the latter has not;—and still
further, as those that they have in common, are, in _him_, fed and
sustained from a far higher and diviner source than what nourishes those
of the man of the world, they ought to be seen to be both more pure and
more elevated than his, in simple correspondence with that circumstance.
Future society, then, being supposed to have come under the influence
of religious truth,—to be reconciled to God through the death of his
son, and to be regenerated and renewed by the sanctifying Spirit, and, as
such, habitually “to ascend into the hill of the Lord,” and to worship
acceptably “in his holy place,” it is to be expected, as the result of
this, that it will “increase and abound in all holy conversation and
godliness.” Now, there is no personal or social virtue that the New
Testament does not inculcate, or that the spirit of the gospel is not
adapted to nourish and expand. If the nations of the world were each
to possess a national religion in the sense of _the whole nation being
religious_, then, every individual would be chaste and temperate, upright
and truthful, fortified by the strength and softened and adorned by
the beauties of holiness. Every family would be loving and harmonious;
parents wise and worthy of respect; children obedient; brethren living
“together in unity.” All business would be conducted justly; commercial
transactions would be all clean, and capable of being touched with “clean
hands;” trade and handicrafts would be noble and dignified, by being
pervaded by the great idea of “duty,” and attended to on principles
which would be the very same as those that control the doings of an
angel, or direct and inspire a seraph in his songs! Nowhere would be seen
drunkenness, or seduction;—robbery and murder would be things of the
past. There would be no oppression on the part of the rich; no pride or
tyranny in the powerful; no injustice between class and class; no envy in
the less favoured of God’s children, prompting them to harsh or petulant
judgments of their more distinguished or opulent brothers. There never
can be literal and absolute equality of station or circumstance;—there
never can be a uniformity of rank or possessions. In the most perfect
condition of the world and man, there must still of necessity be master
and servant, the employer and the employed;—the head of one, the hand of
another, the capital of a third, the back for a burden, and the feet for
toil; all these will always be required, and must be furnished, and must
act, in any improved state of society. But they may act harmoniously.
There need be no fraud, oppression, or injustice. There may be everywhere
given “the fair day’s wages for the fair day’s work;”—and there may
be everywhere rendered “the fair day’s work for the fair day’s wages.”
Society, like the church, is a body with its members. It has its head
and feet, its ear and eye, its mouth and hands;—the health of the body,
or its physical perfection, does not consist in every member having the
same office; but in all fulfilling their respective functions, without
disturbance,—each being thus in unity with the rest. The perfect and
healthful development of society consists in a condition analogous to
this. Christian communism, and Christian socialism, if anything of the
sort shall hereafter be, will be found to consist, not in society’s
ceasing to be a body by becoming entirely but one member—a huge head,
or a gigantic foot, or a great, swinging, muscular arm,—but in all the
members acting healthily in their own place; and, while doing so, each
having the same care of the other. In this way, and in this way alone,
can society be preserved from opposite dangers;—from becoming a monster
without parts, that must of necessity perish from the want of organic or
functional vitality—or being torn by intestine schisms and dissensions
that must tear it to pieces or make it explode!

It is not possible to enlarge on these and kindred matters, that might
be introduced under the present illustration. Enough has been said
to make manifest the general principle, that, on the supposition of
the diffusion in the world of an intelligent, vital, and uncorrupted
Christianity, there would result from it the fruits of a universal
righteousness. Every family would be “a church in the house;” children
would be trained in the way they should go; and conversion from outward,
practical wickedness, would be seldom needed in adult age. Education
would be universal. Learning and knowledge would be “the stability of
these times”—with the fear of God, and the hope of salvation. Science
would be devout, and literature pure. The universe would be explored
with reverence and humility; discoveries announced without boasting; and
improvements and inventions received with gratitude. No books would be
written to demoralize and corrupt,—nor the arts be allowed to minister
to licentiousness. Industry would be cheerful, and labour honoured; the
fruits of the earth would be taken and used as a Divine gift; and the
productions of skill would be connected with thoughts of the Maker of the
mind. In that day, there would be on every object “holiness to the Lord,”
for all men would act in consistency with the belief, that “the earth is
His, and the fulness thereof.”




V.

_Nationalities._


In the last place: it only remains to be remarked, that this universality
of religion and righteousness, in each nation of the earth respectively,
would come to have an effect on the relations and intercourse of each
with the rest, and on its own internal constitution and action. If
all nations were really to believe that “the earth is the Lord’s, and
the fulness thereof,” and especially to connect with this the next
clause,—“the world, _and they that dwell therein_;”—and if they were
honestly to carry such a creed fairly out, into all its great practical
results,—it would be found to be the charter of peace and freedom,
order and liberty, in all lands. Let men get the idea that the earth is
God’s, not theirs,—and that all the race are alike his,—his, at once, as
created by his goodness and redeemed by his mercy;—and especially let it
be imagined, that all habitually mingled in his worship, and that all
felt inspired by a desire to live in constant, practical harmony with
his will;—why, there could be neither war, nor slavery, nor anarchy, nor
despotisms;—men _could_ not be brought, on the supposition suggested,
to be trained and taught to _slaughter_ one another!—or to _steal_ one
another!—or to buy, and sell, and fetter, and lash those who were the
exclusive property of God, and who, whatever their colour, were each
of them as much _a man_ as themselves! No monarch could be seduced
into the belief that a whole people was made for _him_;—or that power
was not _a trust_;—or that it could be used for any purpose but the
good of the nation, and according to the eternal principles of right
on which God himself governs his own. Nor would a people imagine that
any new institutions would benefit them, or any change or revolution be
an improvement, if they were not each of them a king over himself.—We
do not mean to say that one form of political government may not be
intrinsically better than another;—but we do mean to say that the Future
of the world will no more be distinguished by the same form of political
government being universal, than by the universal prevalence of one
mode of ecclesiastical polity;—and we further mean to say, that the
diffusion of an intelligent and instructed Christianity would carry into
the bosoms of all men the Scriptural principles, that government is the
institution of God;—that God, in this respect, is the God of order;—and
that reverence for authority and submission to law are as much Christian
duties as anything else.—Authority may be abused, and law may be unjust;
but he who acts in the fear of God, will suffer much, and think more,
before he will be persuaded that political rebellion and disobedience are
virtues. We do not say that there are not occasions when the one may be
patriotic and the other right;—but there is a time coming when none in
the places of trust and power will so act as for this to be the case,—and
when none in those of submission and obedience will feel that a dignified
and manly loyalty has become either an impossibility or a burden.
Governors, nowhere, will fear discussion; or fetter the press; or refuse
reforms; or cripple independence;—and people, nowhere, will abuse their
rights; or desire, or demand, the unreasonable or unjust. The aggregate
of families, which make up a nation, living in unity, like each of the
families that constitute or compose it, the aggregate of nations will
dwell together in the same spirit, and with the same results. Commerce
will bring, more and more, the whole earth into friendly intercourse;—the
sea that would seem to divide the nations, shall be as a chain to bind
people to people, and land to land. Instead of meeting for hostile
purposes, there will be the interchange of visits to promote science, to
perfect literature, to spread art, to cultivate religion—or to honour
God in the results of industry, by the circulation round the world of
an Exhibition like that which is just at hand. If, in all these ways to
which we have adverted, the lessons of our Royal Exchange were to be
learned, and we ourselves, and our expected visitors, to carry them out,
in the full development of individual, social, and national life,—many of
the pictures of the prophets would be realized; the kingdom of heaven
would be established on the earth; and the tabernacle of God would be
universally with man. Evils might remain, but everything would tend to
mitigate or diminish them. The world would be a temple,—the nations a
church;—all work would be a daily worship, while daily worship, strictly
so called, would hallow and sanctify all work. The day of rest would
be welcomed as it came,—but welcomed for its devotion, as well as its
repose. From all hearts, from all hands, from palace and cottage—from
the mine and the market-place—from the field and the factory—the forge
and the loom—the city and the sea, from all nations and from all
men,—there would be going up constantly to heaven, that which is required
when Christians are exhorted in language like this—“Dearly beloved, I
beseech you, by the mercies of God, _that ye present your bodies as
living sacrifices_, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable
service.” Were this ever to be universally realized, the final cause
of the creation of the world, might, without a figure, be said to be
attained. God’s great idea would be seen to be complete; and He himself,
if we might so speak, after being grieved by the wickedness of the race,
would return again to the unruffled, deep, and ineffable satisfaction
with which he was filled before the world was, when, anticipating the
results of his creative energy, “_he rejoiced in the habitable parts of
the earth_, AND HIS DELIGHTS WERE WITH THE SONS OF MEN.”




PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS.


Having thus filled up our originally projected outline of thought, we
shall rapidly conclude and consummate the argument by two or three
practical suggestions.

1. In the first place, a few hints may not be inappropriate as to the
spirit with which Christians should contemplate the Exhibition. There are
some prophets, of these our times, whose “scrolls” in relation to the
great event, are filled with “lamentation, mourning, and woe.” They can
see nothing, in the thing itself, but a gigantic display of pride and
vain glory,—and they apprehend nothing, from the meeting of the nations,
but mutual corruption, prolonged riot, and perhaps blood. Their favourite
analogies are the Tower of Babel, Nebuchadnezzar’s golden image, or
the Devil tempting Christ by revealing on the mount “all the kingdoms
of the world and the glory of them,” or some such human or diabolical
atrocities! Now it is a pity to give way to these dark imaginings;—to see
nothing in our fellow-man but what is bad, and to expect nothing from the
hand of God but the thunderbolt of vengeance, or the “vials of wrath!”
It is far better, far more becoming, especially in those that believe
that “the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the world, and
they that dwell therein,” to take healthy, cheerful, and hopeful views,
of the great event,—whose origin, it is at least possible, _may_ have
been good, and whose influence and results _may_ be useful. It ought
by no means to be thought a self-evident thing, that there is nothing
in the multitude of minds and hearts, which have all been engaged in
perfecting the Exhibition, but selfish vanity and godless pride. In
many there may have been frequent and great thoughts of God, devout
humility, and earnest prayer for that blessing without which nothing can
be successful. Supplications may have gone up, in various languages and
from many lands, that God would direct and crown the work, and cause it
to promote his kingdom and glory; and, though the numbers may have been
small, who have thus sought to hallow and sanctify the project by prayer,
in comparison with those who are interested in it without devotion and
without reference to the Divine blessing, _Christians_ should remember,
that, in a world like ours, living under mercy, the very principle
of the Divine government is, to bless one man through the medium of
another, and even to bless the many for the sake of the few;—just as ten
men of righteousness and of faith might have saved the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah, and as those that were saved, were saved on account of
one such man,—for “when the Lord destroyed the cities of the plain, he
REMEMBERED ABRAHAM, and—_sent Lot out from the midst of the overthrow_.”
Let Christians, therefore, have faith in one another. Let them believe
that many as good as themselves are engaged in the Exhibition, and have
devoutly sought for it the blessing of the Most High. Let others learn
to do likewise. Instead of indulging in forebodings and prophecies
which, being uttered, might fulfil themselves, they should rather
exercise trust in Providence, indulge hope for the church and the world,
and earnestly endeavour to serve both, by hearty, honest, and sincere
_intercession_ for all nations, and for all men,—that that God, who can
make even “the _wrath_ of man to praise him,” would educe praise and
glory to Himself, and much that shall be productive of happiness to men,
from what brings them together _in peaceful intercourse_, and reminds
them of their common relation to himself. The “crisis” of the world
occurred when there was a gathering of strangers and foreigners in one
place;—they were brought together at the time of the crucifixion,—they
were assembled again at the wonders of Pentecost,—and there can be no
doubt that there was a designed coincidence on both occasions. God
has sanctified the meeting of numbers, of “men of every nation under
heaven,”—“Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in
Mesopotamia, and in Judæa, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia
and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya, about Cyrene, and
strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes, and Arabians,”—God
has sanctified a gathering like this to his own purposes,—to the
establishment of his kingdom and the spread of his truth; and what he has
done before he may do again; and he _will_ do it, if Christians devoutly
and earnestly seek it, by such a spirit of prayer, as, “loving all
things, and believing all things, and hoping all things,” will crave at
his hand a blessing for their brothers, and crave it so that it cannot be
denied.

2nd. In _visiting_ the Exhibition, there are many sentiments which
Christians might indulge as means of impression or improvement to
themselves. It is hardly necessary, after having gone through the
foregoing argument, to press upon the reader the duty of seeing and
remembering God in all that will be displayed of the riches of nature and
the products of art. It is true, indeed, that it is to be the Exhibition
of the Industry _of the Nations_,—that is, it is, in a manner, to reveal
and magnify MAN by accumulating and displaying his wonderful works. But
there is a way of doing this, that may be humble and religious, and there
is a way of regarding and of looking upon it, which may minister much to
the health and nourishment of the divine life. To think highly of what
man _is_, and to strengthen such thoughts by becoming familiar with what
he has _done_, may only make us think more wisely and wonderfully of God,
and more justly of _the worth of the soul_, and of the importance of
salvation to that nature whose capacities would seem to be so mysterious
and so vast! To think of man lying like a wreck on the outside of Eden,
naked and ignorant, without a teacher and without tools,—his mind
darkened, his spirit depressed,—with understanding, indeed, and impulses
and instincts to help him in his first efforts at labour,—a whole world
of raw material under his foot, the compass of the earth for the sphere
of his achievements, his head and hand the instruments of action, but the
one as yet without knowledge, and the other equally without skill! And
then to think of what he has done! How that poor, solitary, naked man,
beginning with some rude attempt at the cultivation of the earth and the
collection of flocks,—seeking for himself and his dependent companion,
the mere supply of their animal wants, clothing of the coarsest, unwoven
and undressed,—with food unprepared and unpalatable,—and shelter that
might be furnished by a few trees or a hole in a rock! To think what he
has become _since then_! How one generation has improved upon another,
and how discovery and invention, and labour and skill, and industry
and genius, have covered the earth with a succession of wonders; and
_then_ to think, how a sort of representative epitome of these is to
stand before us in the marvellous contents of the last and greatest
wonder of the world! That wonder will include specimen and proof of what
man has done for himself and his dwelling-place, since he lay helpless
on the margin of the earth, like a ship-wrecked mariner that had got
to shore, but with the loss of all things. Guided and helped by the
Divine power, but in a manner consistent with his intelligent nature,
his free thought and personal agency, the mind of man was developed and
enlarged, society formed, and arts and handicrafts, science and letters,
rose and realized what history records, and what modern civilization so
wonderfully represents. Rock and forest, earth and ocean, animated nature
in all its forms, everything placed around and beneath him, supplied
materials which he learned to employ for his convenience and use. He
covered the earth with towns and cities, erected temples, palaces, and
pyramids,—subdued the most stubborn of the beasts of the field, tamed the
most ferocious, outstripped the swiftest, and reduced the strongest to
obedience and servitude. He clothed himself in skins, in fur, in flax, in
silk and wool,—gradually improving as he went on, till fineness of fabric
and elegance of design have become the property of the people at large.
He decorated and adorned his private abode, and filled public buildings
and public places with the creations of beauty and the triumphs of art.
He has crossed the ocean and sounded its depths; he has penetrated the
earth and drawn thence her concealed treasure; he has interrogated
nature, and obtained, or forced from her, the most astonishing replies;
he has soared into the heavens, has counted, weighed, and measured
the stars; he can foretell events with certainty and precision—the
appearance of a comet, or the occurrence of an eclipse; he has made
fire and water, lightning and steam, to do his bidding,—to transmit his
messages, transport his property, carry himself, lighten his labour,
and perform his work. He has given to sound sentiment and eloquence,
and has made instruments of music that can subdue multitudes. Of all
these achievements, and of a vast variety of other forms of skilfulness
and power, the Great Exhibition will present the proofs, and exhibit
them in their latest and most perfect development. And yet it is to be
remarked, that with all it will do, _it will leave the greatest and the
most wonderful of the works of man uncollected and unseen_. Mechanical
industry has its many marvels,—art and science their miraculous results;
but the highest form of the greatness of humanity is to be met with in
books,—in the art that has given visibility to speech, and permanent
endurance to thought and emotion,—and in the thoughts and emotions of
gifted minds, which, in every age, and in all lands, have adorned the
race by the researches of the intellect, the conflagrations of eloquence,
and the sublimities of song. These things cannot be represented in the
Palace of Industry; and yet these are the things that belong to the
highest regions of the mind;—to powers and faculties that more than
anything else illustrate the inherent greatness of man;—that lead him to
the contemplation of the right, the divine, the beautiful and the good
in action and character;—that render him capable of religious faith;—and
that might make him a happy and virtuous intelligence if he were called
to exist separate from the body,—without the feeling of physical
necessities, without a surrounding material world, and without members
to mould and fabricate, and work up anything whatever in the way of mere
mechanical dexterity.

Now these thoughts, and a thousand others of a kindred sort, may all
be indulged by a reflective man in visiting the Exhibition,—indulged
devoutly, and turned to eminent spiritual advantage. Every thing that
man is seen to have achieved,—every proof of his sagacity and power,
his skill and performance—will only enhance, in a thoughtful soul, the
impression of the wonderfulness of that nature which God originally made
for himself, which sin has degraded, and which Christ has redeemed. The
number of such proofs increasing the conception of the wonderfulness
of the nature they so marvellously manifest, will render the fact of
redemption credible,—increasing the probability that God should interpose
to recover and restore it. And the great fact, that, after all that the
grand pageant can do, and in spite of the splendour and magnificence
of its contents, it will actually leave the most wonderful portion of
the human mind unillustrated, and incapable of illustration,—why, this
may well lead to the solemn remembrance of some of the most impressive
of Scriptural truths. “What is a man profited, if he shall _gain the
whole world_ and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?” “All flesh is as grass, and _all the glory of man_ as
the flower of grass; the grass withereth, the flower fadeth, _but the
word of the Lord endureth for ever_; and this is the word which by the
gospel is preached unto you.” “_All these things shall be dissolved_;”
“_the earth and all things that are therein shall be burned up_,—but we,
according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth in which
dwelleth righteousness.” And still further, the fact of the exhibition of
the _half_, merely, of the greatness of man by the works of his hands,
(and _that_ the lesser and lower portion,) may suggest the analogy that
there is in this, with the manner of God’s discovery of himself. He, in
his works, has revealed and illustrated his wisdom and power, goodness
and beneficence, and, to the eye of reason, these are largely reflected
there;—but the manifestation of his _moral_ attributes, his justice and
love, compassion and mercy, is made to faith in the gospel of his Son;
and however most men may be alive to the first, and blind or insensible
to the second of these discoveries, there are beings in the universe who
are intent on the higher exhibitions of God,—just as there are devout and
meditative men who will gaze on the wonders of the Palace of Industry
only to be reminded of the spiritual and immortal of human nature, which
the edifice with its marvels will do little to illustrate! Heaven has its
“fulness” as well as earth. That fulness is “the fulness of Christ;”—his
sufferings on earth and the glory that is to follow. This is called “the
unsearchable riches.” In the mystery of redemption are “hid,” or lie
embodied, “_all the treasures_ of wisdom and knowledge,”—_the higher
forms_ of God’s manifestation of himself to his creatures. “Into THESE
THINGS _the angels desire to look_.” And they do this in exact conformity
with the Divine purpose in the revelation of himself in this the greatest
of his works, for it was set forth, “TO THE INTENT _that unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places_, might be made known _by
the church_ the manifold wisdom of God.”

3rd. But British Christians have a great and solemn lesson to learn from
the view that we have taken, in this discussion, of their language to the
world. If it be so, that we profess as a nation, and utter openly in the
hearing of all men, _the truths_ that have been illustrated, then, also,
ought it to be felt, that we lie under the most binding and imperative
obligations to exemplify _the duties_ which have been explained and
enforced. It becomes us to cultivate the devout and practical recognition
of God; to keep his Sabbaths; to wait upon him in worship; to approach
him through Christ, that we may do so acceptably; to “live in the
spirit,” that “we may not fulfil the lusts of the flesh;” “to walk in
the spirit,” that our daily virtue may be divine holiness. It is well “to
hold forth the word of truth,” and to witness for God, for the gospel,
and for righteousness, in the sight of the nations; but it must be done
_practically_ as well as by profession,—by conduct in harmony with the
articles of our creed,—or our testimony will expose us to ridicule and
rebuke, and may provoke by its mockery the vengeance of the Most High.
Let England beware, that it do not itself, amidst the blaze and glory of
the Great Exhibition, forget the truth and the lessons taught by it, that
“the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” Let it beware, “lest,
being lifted up with pride, it fall into the condemnation of the devil.”
It is a terrible thing not to give God the glory of our achievements;—“to
sacrifice to our own net, and to burn incense to our own drag.” It was
when the king’s heart was lifted up with pride, and when he said to
himself, “Is not this Great Babylon that I have built,”—it was then that
God smote him from on high, seared his intellect, and sent him to herd
with unintelligent natures! England is first in the commerce of the
world; her “merchant princes” are the nobles of civilization; her markets
and manufactures have decked her with beauty and made her great;—but
it would be well for her to remember, that it was just such a country
that, in ancient times, had her magnificence described with the greatest
minuteness by God’s prophets, but described to illustrate the extent
of her ingratitude, the aggravations of her sin, and the certainty and
completeness of her predicted destruction. It was fearfully realized.
The glory of Tyre was swept away, and her place became bare as the top
of a rock, on which the fisherman might spread out his net to the sun!
It might be well, too, to remember, that the prophetic description in
the book of the Apocalypse, of the Babylon that is to fall in some yet
future judgment of God, is the description of a commercial and maritime
city, over which the merchants of the earth mourn and lament “because
her judgment hath come, and no man buyeth her merchandise any more.”
That these instances should neither be type nor prophecy of Britain, she
must take care to walk by the light of her own creed—that “the earth is
the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,”—and according to all the devotion
and humility and practical righteousness that this would inculcate.
It is well with a people when their garners are full and their flocks
prolific;—when their sons are as plants grown up in their youth, and
their daughters as polished marble columns; when there is no political
convulsion in the land, and no complaining of poverty in their streets.
“Happy is the people that is in _such_ a case;” but _happier_ they “WHOSE
GOD IS THE LORD.”

4th. Trusting that, as a people, we are not altogether inattentive
to what has been described, let us learn, in conclusion, the value
we should attach _to the blessing of our characteristic and national
Christianity_. We do not mean, the forms or peculiarities of any
church;—the secondary distinctions, that may have their importance,
as the separate testimonies to a particular truth prominently held by
different members of the Protestant family. We refer to our EVANGELICAL
PROTESTANTISM _itself_, which is substantially the same throughout our
many sects, and which is held and taught, with more or less clearness,
by all the influential Denominations in the land. To this, under God,
we owe our free political constitution, our civil rights, and our
religious liberty; to this we are indebted for the power we are at
present exercising and using in the face of the world,—the power of
throwing our metropolis open to the nations,—receiving them all, without
passports, and with hardly a precaution, to our streets and squares,
our court and senate, our families and our homes. We have no fear that
our soldiers will be corrupted, or our population seduced;—we apprehend
nothing of injury to our faith, or of temptation to our loyalty. Our
press will be as free, our minds as unfettered, our comments on men and
measures as outspoken, as if none were our daily audience but ourselves.
To impress the moral of all this on the mind of the reader, and on our
own, we might do it, perhaps, most effectively, by putting it in the
form of a friendly address to a reflective foreigner, who might be
looking with wonder on the phenomena around him. “Stranger,” we might
say, “you have looked with surprise on our industry and commerce, our
trade and manufactures; you have seen in our equipages the signs of
our wealth; and, in other ways, how opulence and comfort are diffused
among our people; you have been impressed with the many proofs of our
intelligence, and have wondered, perhaps, most of all, at the liberty
we enjoy and the loyalty we cherish. You have seen A QUEEN _honoured
and beloved_;—and her Royal Consort taking the lead, not in reviews of
military pomp, or only in the parade of magnificent hospitalities; but
in presiding over the displays of peaceful industry, and welcoming the
representatives of science and art. You have seen the multitudes that
crowd to our churches, and wondered at the comparative quiet of our
sabbaths. _Know_, therefore, that for all this, and for far more that is
unseen, we are indebted _to the glorious inheritance of our faith_;—our
OPEN BIBLE, our conscientious inquiry, our habits of worship, and our
religious instructors. We have much amongst us of which it becomes us
to think with shame;—much of which it is impossible to speak but in
moderated phrase, and even with tears;—but if there is anything that has
raised thy admiration, or inflamed thy curiosity,—anything in our general
reverence for law, in our political moderation, our civil order,—our
respect for rank, combined with our individual consciousness of personal
manhood; if there is anything that shows that our morals are not debased,
or our manners frivolous, or our habits sordid, or our minds enslaved
by the gross and the voluptuous,—carry away with thee the certainty and
conviction, that everything that may be good about us as a people, we owe
to our possession of _that_ ONE BOOK,—to our mode of interpreting, and
our constancy in teaching it,—_which tells us to acknowledge_,—and, by
God’s blessing, helps us to act, however imperfectly, on the practical
belief,—_that despotism and priestcraft, anarchy and disorder, pride
and oppression, vanity and selfishness, lawlessness and wrong, are all
alike disobedience to God and injurious to his creatures_, FOR ‘THE EARTH
IS THE LORD’S, AND THE FULNESS THEREOF; THE WORLD, AND THEY THAT DWELL
THEREIN.’”




POSTSCRIPT.




Postscript.

THE EXHIBITION OPENED.


The first of May, eighteen hundred and fifty-one, was a day to be
remembered to all time! On it the nations of the earth combined together
to “make history,” in a manner they had never done before;—in one also,
which, in its prominent peculiarity, can never be repeated. There may
be similar Exhibitions in future periods of the world’s progress, but
_the first_ can never be again. Even respecting those which may be
imagined to occur, although they may be distinguished by new features and
characteristics of their own, and though these may, in some respects,
surpass those of the one now opened, they cannot be anticipated with
that depth of interest, nor excite by their inauguration those profound
emotions, which preceded and distinguished the sublime event which has
just taken place. The preceding pages were written in the prospect of
that event, and were intended to appear before its occurrence. The author
cannot regret, however, that circumstances interfered with the fulfilment
of his purpose, since to this he is indebted for the opportunity of
adding a supplementary section to his little work, commemorative of the
grand and magnificent ceremonial of which he was privileged to be a
spectator.

It is not the writer’s intention to attempt to describe the opening
of the Exhibition, with all that minuteness of detail in respect to
what occurred in the interior of the structure,—or with those stirring
delineations of the bustle and excitement, the lines of carriages and
congregated crowds, that imparted animation to the scene without,—which
have already been furnished by the public prints. He merely wishes to
note a few things which were interesting or suggestive to his own mind,
and especially such as were felt to be in harmony with the spirit and
object of the present volume.

It was his good fortune to obtain admittance into the Palace of Industry,
on the memorable morning of the first of May, before the gates were
opened to the public. He had traversed it frequently during the previous
weeks, and had seen it in various stages of its progress. One morning, in
March, he was there so early, that while walking along its galleries he
observed that he was the _only visitor_ upon them at that moment. Few of
the counters were then erected, hardly any of the articles unpacked;—the
wide spaces and vast dimensions of the wonderful structure spread before
him in clear and unobstructed perspective;—there was something, too, of
solitariness in his position, though multitudes of workmen were occupied
below, above, and around him;—the whole scene, from its simple magnitude,
was inexpressibly sublime; it stirred within him thoughts and feelings
which were not, indeed, “too deep for tears,” but which could only find
utterance and relief in their indulgence; while, as he passed on, and
for the first time saw the compartments of the different countries, and
read the names of the various nations that were preparing to stand,
side by side, in peaceful rivalry,—his emotions deepened to an intensity
which it was difficult to bear, and which cannot be described! He was in
the building, also, for some time, three days before the opening, and
could then form some idea of what would be the number and variety of its
contents; though so much, even at that late period, remained to be done,
that he wondered how it would be possible for the preparations to be
finished by the time appointed. As, however, he walked into the transept,
when that time had come,—approached the centre,—and looked along the
naves stretching to such an extent on either side,—it was not without a
feeling of admiration and surprise, mingled with something of solemnity
and awe, that he looked on the splendid and gorgeous spectacle that stood
revealed in all its completeness!

The mere material scene was sublime when beheld by itself,—empty, and
comparatively still; but much more impressive and affecting was it, when
filled with its immense multitude of spectators. There was much that
was stirring in the sight of the rush and inundation of the crowd, as
it kept flowing in, in vast waves, at every opening; and much that was
impressive when the noise and murmur of its movements had subsided,—when
all had found or had been forced into their places,—and when floor and
gallery, and every part that the eye could reach, was seen to be occupied
by human beings,—by an assembly larger than any that had ever, in
England, been congregated before under one roof,—and by one that had met
for an object, and under circumstances, unparalleled in the annals of the
world!

Men see in all external events and objects, what the light that is in
them reveals. Things are, to us, what we are to them. He that visits
foreign countries, brings back according to what he takes. The same sight
may be a very different thing to two different persons, in proportion
as they may differ in knowledge, in opinion, in taste, in sympathies.
The eye of a clown may look on a prospect that in some souls would
produce rapture or occasion tears, with hardly more intelligence than
that of the ox that he drives before him. The outside of things is open
to all; their inner significance is revealed only to those who have an
inner eye to read it; and even such significance may be differently
interpreted according as the eye is influenced and affected by the degree
of intelligence, the tendencies, and the tastes of the inward man to
whom it belongs. It is quite possible that some may see nothing in the
great Exhibition but an ordinary, though enormous, fancy bazaar; and that
others saw nothing in the ceremonial of the opening but a state pageant,
court dresses, and an immense crowd of men and women! It is quite
possible, too, that some of the incidents of the day, which appeared to
us touching in themselves, or pregnant with meaning, were indebted for
this to the capricious activity of our own fancy, as well as to their
inherent beauty or significance. But, however this may have been, there
certainly were some things that we felt to be deeply interesting as they
occurred, and remarkably suggestive as illustrating the character and
tendencies of the event. We shall not attempt to recall all that struck
us at the time; but a few words may not be amiss on what immediately
bore, or appeared to us to bear, on some of the topics of this book.

On getting a sight of the catalogue of the Exhibition,—which we did
before entering the interior of the building,—we were gratified to find
on the cover and the title-page:

    “THE EARTH IS THE LORD’S, AND ALL THAT THEREIN IS;
    THE COMPASS OF THE WORLD, AND THEY THAT DWELL THEREIN.”

We were aware that this was to be the English motto, and that two Latin
ones had also been selected. We were glad to find the Divine sentence
placed where it was, and placed by itself; that it stood, as it were,
in _front_ of the Nations as they joined one another, and moved towards
the great point of attraction; that it _faced_ them, and spoke as with
the voice of an oracle; that while the words of men occupied their
proper subordinate position _behind_ those of the book of God—out of
sight—needing, as it were, to be sought for, and found, and _solicited_
to announce themselves,—these stood in their solitary majesty, revealing
themselves by their own light, claiming to speak as having a right to
be heard, and authoritatively announcing to the diversified tribes and
peoples of the earth, and to every visitant of the palace of wonders,
_Whose_ they themselves were, and to whom belonged _all they saw._

This volume was written and in the press before we were aware that _the
inscription on the Exchange_ was to be _the motto of the Exhibition_;
otherwise, the natural course would have been, to have taken the words in
their _latter_ use rather than the former, and thus to have expounded and
illustrated what England _actually does say_ to herself and the nations
through the medium of the event which is bringing them together. When
we first heard of what was to be the English motto of the catalogue, we
were exceedingly disposed to wish it could be given in the words of the
authorized version (those on the Exchange) “The earth is the Lord’s,
_and the fulness thereof_,” instead of those of the translation in the
Prayer-book, “The earth is the Lord’s, and _all that therein is_.” On
further reflection, however, we are willing to think, that while the
two expressions are substantially the same, there is just that shade
of difference between them that fits each for its respective position;
“the _fulness_ of the earth” being most appropriate to a commercial
edifice,—“_all that therein is_” to an industrial exhibition. However
this may be, it was to us, as may be supposed, a gratifying circumstance
that the first sight that met our eye, on the very threshold, or in the
porch of the Palace of Industry, while making our way to the opening
ceremonial, was that which assured us, that the words whose import we
had been endeavouring to illustrate in “a book for the Exhibition,” were
to lie beneath the eye, and to address themselves to the reason and the
religious consciousness, of every individual by whom it would be visited.

The recognition of God, in connexion with the Exhibition, has always
marked the references to it of its most distinguished promoter. The
religious services on the day of the opening were solemn and appropriate,
and seemed at once to crown and sanctify the work. “I confidently
hope,”—said his Royal Highness, Prince Albert, at the banquet at the
Mansion-house, in honour of the undertaking,—“I confidently hope, that
the first impression which the view of this vast collection will produce
upon the spectator, will be that of deep thankfulness to the Almighty
for the blessings which he has bestowed upon us here below.” It was a
most impressive sight, on the opening of the splendid spectacle thus
anticipated, to see some twenty-five or thirty thousand people, all
under the influence of a sentiment of reverence, deeply calm, serious,
and still, uniting in an act of solemn devotion, while the highest
ecclesiastical dignitary in the land, standing by the side of our august
sovereign, who seemed to bow in humility before the footstool of Him who
is “the King of kings,” expressed in a manner the most appropriate, the
“deep thankfulness” of the vast assembly “for the blessings which the
Almighty has bestowed upon us,” and acknowledged _Him_ in the riches of
nature and the wonders of art with which the edifice was filled! Every
reader will probably have seen the prayer to which we thus refer. It
seems, however, not inappropriate to give it a place in these pages; the
more so as its sentiments are so in harmony with many of those we have
been attempting to express. It was as follows:

“Almighty and everlasting God, who dost govern all things both in heaven
and in earth, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy, accept,
we beseech Thee, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and receive
these our prayers which we offer up unto Thee this day on behalf of the
kingdom and people of this land. We acknowledge, O Lord, that Thou hast
multiplied on us blessings which Thou mightest most justly have withheld.
We acknowledge that it is not because of works of righteousness which we
have done, but of Thy great mercy, that we are permitted to come before
Thee with the voice of thanksgiving, and that instead of humbling us for
our offences, Thou hast given us cause to thank Thee for Thine abundant
goodness. And now, O Lord, we beseech Thee to bless the work which Thou
hast enabled us to begin, and to regard with Thy favour our purpose of
knitting together in the bonds of peace and concord the different nations
of the earth; for with Thee, O Lord, is the preparation of the heart in
man. Of Thee it cometh that violence is not heard in our land, wasting
nor destruction within its borders. It is of Thee, O Lord, that nations
do not lift up the sword against each other nor learn war any more;
it is of Thee that peace is within our walls and plenteousness within
our palaces; it is of Thee that knowledge is increased throughout the
world, for the spirit of man is from Thee, and the inspiration of the
Almighty giveth him understanding. Therefore, O Lord, not unto us, not
unto us, but unto Thy name be all the praise. While we survey the works
of art and industry which surround us, let not our hearts be lifted up
that we forget the Lord our God, as if our own power and the might of
our hands had gotten in this wealth. Teach us ever to remember that all
this store which we have prepared cometh of Thine hand and is all Thine
own. Both riches and honour come of Thee, and thou reignest over all.
In Thine hand it is to make great and to give strength unto all. Now,
therefore, O God, we thank Thee; we praise Thee and intreat Thee so
to overrule _this assembly of many nations_, that it may tend _to the
advancement of Thy glory, to the diffusion of Thy Holy Word_, to the
increase of general prosperity, by promoting peace and goodwill among
the different races of mankind. Let the many mercies which we receive
from Thee dispose our hearts to serve Thee more faithfully, who art the
Author and Giver of them all. And finally, O Lord, teach us so to use
those earthly blessings which Thou givest us richly to enjoy, that they
may not withdraw our affections from those heavenly things which Thou
hast prepared for those that love and serve Thee, through the merits and
mediation of Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom, with Thee and the
Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory.”

Prince Albert, after having, in the words above quoted, expressed
his hope respecting the religious impression to be produced by the
Exhibition, proceeded to say that he trusted its _second_ lesson
would be, “the conviction” that the full enjoyment of the blessings
of Providence “could be realized only in proportion to the help we
are prepared to render to each other; therefore only by _peace, love,
and ready assistance, not only between individuals, but between the
Nations of the earth_.” The opening ceremonial of the first of May, was
an impressive commentary on this sentiment. Within the same building
were congregated the representatives of many nations, and people from
every quarter of the globe. All met and mingled together in perfect
harmony, and seemed at once disposed to regard each other with fraternal
cordiality, and to be pervaded and possessed by those sentiments which
are nourished and developed by the sunlight of love. Everybody seemed
bright; good-humoured; happy; willing to please and to be pleased! It
was as if all the world had met to celebrate the arrival or reign of
universal concord. The Palace of Industry was the Temple of Peace. There
were some military uniforms, and a few soldiers here and there, but no
one thought of _fighting_! It was not a battle,—it was not even a review.
It was not War when merely making a holiday; showing himself off in his
fine clothes to a gaping multitude, and startling or amusing them by his
gigantic sport. A little boy—a child of some five or six years old—while
we were all waiting for the coming of the Queen, got away from his
mother, or sister, ran into the midst of the central crowd of dignitaries
and diplomatists, walked up the steps of the platform on which was the
chair of state, turned round and stood looking about happy and delighted,
and then went back again to the cover of the wing from which he had
escaped! The whole thing showed such a sense of _security_,—such a
feeling in the boy that there was nothing to frighten him or to hurt him
_there_,—that he appeared like an impersonation of the spirit of the
place. He could not have done or felt as he did in any assembly of thirty
thousand people that ever met in the world before within the same walls.
Such assemblages there _have_ been, and larger,—but they met for purposes
of cruelty and blood,—to see men fight with beasts or with each other.
In the Crystal Palace is mirrored, we trust, the dawn at least of the
predicted day, when “the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the
fatling together; AND A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD THEM.”

Then there was to be seen for some time in apparently friendly
conversation, the Iron Duke and the Lancashire cotton-spinner;—Wellington
and Cobden;—the man of war and the apostle of peace! It was a suggestive
sight. The old soldier did a great and necessary work in his day. By his
decisive stroke at the battle of Waterloo, he terminated the protracted
contentions of Europe, and gave to us, as a nation, a peace that has
continued for thirty-five years. _To that prolonged peace, we are in a
great measure indebted for the Exhibition of Industry_. It would not have
been improper, therefore, if, while looking on the scene he had lived to
witness,—a scene that glorified his own eighty-second birthday, and which
was so different from all that he had been familiar with in his youth,—it
would not have been improper if the military veteran had felt that there
was a connexion between what he saw and what he had _done_. Than he, we
believe, there is no one more aware of the horrors of war, or who would
more bitterly lament its necessity;—and though he can hardly be expected
to think Peace Societies the sole or best defence of a nation, it is not
to be doubted that he would welcome “permanent and universal peace,” and
that he rejoices in an enterprise that may help to secure it. _There they
were, then_,—two representative and typical men;—side by side;—talking
like brothers! There they were;—the one the monument of a past age,—the
other the personal prophecy of a coming one. The one the chronicle of
bygone times, when nations thought themselves “natural enemies,” and men
knew of no arbiter but the sword;—the other the advocate of _another_
arbitration, and the apostle of the industrial intercourse of the world.
The one was old,—the other young. Let us hope that this, too, was a
type of _the principles_ they respectively represented;—that that of
appealing and trusting to the sword, is past its vigour and is falling
into decay,—while that of uniting by mutual benefits, and of superseding
the arguments of brute force by those of reason and love, is in its
prime and manhood, and has before it a long period of service. There are
a few specimens of cannon in the Exhibition, but there are far more of
agricultural instruments. The time will come when none of the former will
find their place in any collection of the works of “Industry,”—except,
it may be, some that shall be preserved as curious, though sad and
humiliating, relics of a former age. “Weapons of war” are destined to
disappear, and to give place to the engine and the compass,—the press
and the tool-chest,—the plough and the pruning-hook!

The incidents thus referred to, were felt to be suggestive of many
thoughts in harmony with the sentiment last quoted from the speech of
Prince Albert. That sentiment, however, received ampler illustration
by what was seen on the reading of the address of the Commissioners to
her Majesty,—by the closing language of that address itself,—and by
her Majesty’s reply. The procession that approached the throne for the
presentation of the address, consisted not only of Englishmen headed
by the Consort of the Sovereign, but of the foreign representatives of
twenty-six different nations, states, or kingdoms. These, for the time,
were all ONE;—one body,—filled with one sentiment, pervaded, as it
were, by one soul;—and they all united in uttering through their common
head, in the name of their several countries, and in the presence of a
multitude almost as mixed and multifarious as themselves, the following
words:—

“It is our heartfelt prayer that this undertaking, _which has for
its end_ the promotion of all branches of human industry, and _the
strengthening of the bonds of peace and friendship_ AMONG ALL NATIONS
OF THE EARTH, may, by the blessing of Divine Providence, conduce to
the welfare of your Majesty’s people, and be long remembered among the
brightest circumstances of your Majesty’s _peaceful_ and _happy reign_.”

It was a great thing to see the representatives of Austria and Denmark,
France and Belgium, Prussia and Germany, Russia and Rome, Spain and
Portugal, Turkey and Tuscany, the United States, Tunis, Sardinia, Greece,
and of many other lands, joining together in the expression of a common
hope, and the utterance of a united prayer, that what they were doing
might “strengthen the bonds of peace and friendship among all the nations
of the earth;” and to think, too, that they did this, not only in their
own names, and in those of their respective countries, but in the name
of _all_ lands and peoples in the world that might have any contribution
in the Exhibition, whether they had personal representatives among the
Commissioners or not. The closing paragraph of her Majesty’s reply
echoed the closing sentiment of the address,—a sentiment that came to
her like an utterance from the heart of universal humanity! It was an
over-powering sight, by the way,—that of one so young, elevated in the
midst of so vast a multitude, and virtually receiving the homage of so
many nations:

    “A wondrous sceptre ’tis to bear;
      Strange mystery of God which set
      Upon her brow yon coronet,—
                    The foremost crown
    Of all the earth on one so fair!
      That chose her to it from her birth,
      And bade _the sons of all the earth_
                    _To her bow down_.”

Although the closing passage in her Majesty’s speech is that to which we
confine our attention, as the speech itself is very brief, we give it
entire:

“I receive with the greatest satisfaction the address which you have
presented to me on the opening of this Exhibition.

“I have observed with a warm and increasing interest the progress of
your proceedings in the execution of the duties intrusted to you by the
Royal Commission; and it affords me sincere gratification to witness the
successful result of your judicious and unremitting exertions in THE
SPLENDID SPECTACLE _by which I am this day surrounded_.

“_I cordially concur with you in the prayer, that by God’s blessing
this undertaking may conduce_ to the welfare of my people, and _to the
common interests of the human race_, by encouraging the arts of peace
and industry, _strengthening the bonds of union among the nations of the
earth_, and promoting a friendly and honourable rivalry in the useful
exercise of those faculties which have been conferred by a beneficent
Providence for the good and the happiness of mankind.”

But we must draw to a close. There were many other incidents on which
we could willingly linger, as illustrative of the views we had always
indulged of the character and tendencies of the great experiment. The
union in one edifice of such an unprecedented number of human beings,
was itself a most imposing and magnificent spectacle. The Queen appeared
to feel this. As she stood in a position to command a view of the vast
spaces of the building, all of which were densely filled, she seemed
impressed with a sense of awe at the sublime spectacle, and could not
help, even during the reading of the address of the Commissioners,
partially withdrawing her attention from them, to steal a glance at
“the splendid spectacle by which she was surrounded.” That spectacle,
however, partook of the tender, the beautiful, and the domestic even,
as well as the sublime. Into it, the Queen and her illustrious Consort
came, each leading by the hand one of their children! Up and down,
through and amongst that mass of people, they moved together in the
same manner. Pomp and state were in some degree laid aside, and the
sovereign, for the time, seemed to have become one with the people. She
was received with affection, as well as loyalty; and appeared to enjoy
and to acknowledge her reception, not so much as a crowned Queen, as a
happy _woman_, an elated wife, and a loving mother! It must have been
the most wonderful hour in the whole life of Prince Albert,—that hour of
the opening of the Exhibition!—intense must have been the feelings with
which he looked on the realization of his great idea; the end of so much
anxiety; the commencement of the harvest of so much hope! Everything
was propitious. The sun in the heavens shone down upon the scene with
unwonted brightness, as if He who “sits in the centre” thereof, approved
the undertaking and blessed it from on high. There was not an accident
of any sort,—nothing for one moment to excite alarm, to produce panic,
or occasion apprehension in the mind of the assembly. In spite of the
tens of thousands that filled it, in no part of the edifice was there
crack or strain, the indication of weakness, or any sign of insecurity.
The outdoor crowds, instead of being disposed to rudeness or riot, or
capable of being excited to tumult and rebellion (!), would seem to have
been more than usually pacific; a sort of restraint appears to have been
upon the worst even of those who congregate on such occasions; for, on
the following day, there were no cases of either quarrels or robberies
such as ordinarily attend state pageants and civic processions. The royal
Patrons of peace and industry retired from the scene in which they had
developed a new phase of royalty, and read a new lesson to kings, amid
the benedictions and prayers of the multitude with whom they had met and
mingled. They could not but retire happy and glad; grateful to God for
what they had witnessed, and what they had done; and, in the fulness of
their emotions of devout thankfulness, like David, perhaps, “returned
home to bless their household.” As it is not likely that anything will
occasion a _greater_ gathering of the populace in the parks, in connexion
with the Exhibition, and as the ceremony of the opening has given such
a glow of cheerfulness and confidence to the public mind, it is to be
hoped that the many prophecies and prognostications of evil, which some
have indulged in, will now cease, and that all will unite, by cordial
sympathy with the great object, and fervent prayer to Almighty God,
to seek the realization of those peaceful, patriotic, and world-wide
results, which many of the wise and good hope that “the Great Exhibition”
may be an instrument in the hand of Providence to secure, and which as
Englishmen, Christians, and lovers of our kind, we ought all constantly
and earnestly to pursue. In this way, every devout man may help to hasten
that anticipated FUTURE, some of the general characteristics of which we
have endeavoured to deduce from the Scriptural motto on the books of the
Exhibition. Of that period a pregnant and impressive type was presented
in the opening ceremonial, when, in the bearing of all the nations of the
earth, _representatively present in the spacious edifice_, there rose
up,—to the praise and glory of that God, “_whose is the earth and the
fulness thereof, the world and they that dwell therein_,” and to whom we
are indebted not only for “all the blessings of this life,” but for “the
means of grace, and the hope of glory,”—the grand, solemn, _prophetic_
song,—

    “Hallelujah! for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
    The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and
      of his Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever.
    King of kings, and Lord of lords. Hallelujah!”

With the following stanzas, descriptive of the different parts of the
scene thus reviewed, we here close our pleasant labour:

THE GATHERING OF THE NATIONS.

    “A peaceful place it was but now,
      And lo! within its shining streets
      A multitude of nations meets:
                    A countless throng

    I see beneath the crystal bow,
      And Gaul and German, Russ and Turk,
      Each with his native handiwork
                    And busy tongue.

    I felt a thrill of love and awe
      To mark the different garb of each,
      The changing tongue, the various speech
                    Together blent.
    A thrill, methinks, like His who saw
      “All people dwelling upon earth
      Praising our God with solemn mirth
                    And one consent.”

THE PRAYER.

    “High Sovereign in your Royal state!
      Captains and Chiefs and Councillors,
      Before the lofty palace doors
                    Are open set,
    Hush! ere you pass the shining gate;
      Hush! ere the heaving curtain draws,
      And let the Royal pageant pause
                    A moment yet.

    People and Prince a silence keep!
      Bow coronet and kingly crown,
      Helmet and plume bow lowly down;
                    The while the priest

    Before the splendid portal step,
      While still the wondrous banquet stays,
      From Heaven supreme a blessing prays
                    Upon the feast!”

    …

    “Behold her in her Royal place:
      A gentle lady—and the hand
      That sways the sceptre of this land
                    How frail and weak!
    Soft is the voice, and fair the face;
      She breathes Amen to prayer and hymn,
      No wonder that her eyes are dim,
                    And pale her cheek.”

PEACE AND CONCORD.

    “The representatives of man
      Here from the far Antipodes,
      And from the subject Indian seas,
                    In congress meet;
    From Afric and from Hindostan,
      From western continent and isle,
      The envoys of her empire pile
                    Gifts at her feet.

    Our brethren cross the Atlantic tides,
      Loading the gallant decks which once
      Roar’d a defiance to our guns,
                    With peaceful store;

    Symbol of peace, their vessel rides!
      O’er English waves float Star and Stripe,
      And firm their friendly anchors gripe
                    The father shore!”

    …

    “Look yonder, where the engines toil;
      These England’s arms of conquest are—
      The trophies of her bloodless war:
                    Brave weapons these!
    Victorious over wave and soil,
      With these she sails, she weaves, she tills,
      Pierces the everlasting hills,
                    And spans the seas!

    The engine roars upon its race,
      The shuttle whirrs along the woof,
      The people hum from floor to roof,
                    With Babel tongue.
    The fountain in the basin plays,
      The chanting organ echoes clear,
      An awful chorus ’tis to hear,—
                    A wondrous song!

    Swell, organ,—swell your trumpet blast!
      March, Queen and Royal pageant, march
      By splendid aisle and springing arch
                    Of this fair Hall.
    And see! above the fabric vast,
      God’s boundless Heaven is bending blue,
      God’s peaceful Sun is beaming through,
                    And shining over all!”

London: Printed by William Tyler, Bolt-Court.

       *       *       *       *       *

_In the Press, and shortly will be published._

FRENCH AND GERMAN EDITIONS OF THE ROYAL EXCHANGE AND THE PALACE OF
INDUSTRY.

UNIFORM WITH THE PRESENT VOLUME.

_Just published._

THE PALACE OF GLASS AND THE GATHERING OF THE PEOPLE.

A BOOK FOR THE EXHIBITION.

Foolscap 8vo. 2_s._ extra cloth boards.

THE INDUSTRIAL EXHIBITION.

Books and Tracts suited for distribution at the present season in the
following languages:

ENGLISH. FRENCH. DUTCH. SPANISH. SWEDISH. GERMAN. ITALIAN. PORTUGUESE.
DANISH. RUSSIAN. MODERN GREEK.

May be obtained at 56, Paternoster Row, and 164, Piccadilly; also of

    NISBET AND CO., 21, Berners Street, Oxford Street.

    SOHO BAZAAR, Soho Square, Counters Nos. 536 & 537.

    HANBURY AND CO., 70, Edgware Road.

    J. GROOM, Soho Bazaar.

    J. F. SHAW, 27, Southampton Row.

    B. SEELEY AND CO., 2. Hanover Street, Regent Street.

    C. HASELDEN, 21, Wigmore Street.

    S. J. LADD, 10, Jonson’s Place, Harrow Road.

    H. FASE, 1, Edwardes’ Terrace, Kensington.

    P. HANCE, 14, Upper Gloucester Place, King’s Road, Chelsea.

    J. L. PORTER, 43, Sloane Street.

    W. F. RAMSAY, 11, Brompton Row.

    MILLER AND FIELD, 6, Bridge Road, Lambeth.

    J. ROBERTS, 2, Arabella Row, Pimlico.

    W. H. DALTON, 28, Cockspur Street, Charing Cross.

    T. VARTY, 81, Strand.

    MRS. PRESS, Depository, Church Street, Hackney.

    W. HANDS, Clapham.

    G. W. MEDES, Camberwell.

    J. H. JACKSON, Islington Green.

    W. D. THOMSON, 138, Upper Street, Islington.

    T. K. GORBELL, 16, Hereford Place, Commercial Road East.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Royal Exchange and the Palace of
Industry; or, The Possible Future of, by Thomas Binney

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROYAL EXCHANGE ***

***** This file should be named 58058-0.txt or 58058-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/0/5/58058/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Books project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


