PART I.

EXPOSITORY.




HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION, AND PLAN OF THE WORK.


On the night of the 10th of January, in the year 1838, the inhabitants of
London—those especially residing in the heart of the city—were alarmed by
a cry expressive or prophetic of calamity or peril.—THE ROYAL EXCHANGE
_was in flames_! Feelings and sentiments were excited by the occurrence
different from those produced by an ordinary conflagration. The Royal
Exchange was one of the great public buildings of the metropolis; it was
the third too which, within a very short period, had met with a similar
fate. It was not only the monument of individual munificence, the gift
to the city which he had adorned and served, of an eminent merchant,—a
man of talents, goodness, learning, and largeness of heart; it was the
central point in the British empire for the meeting of the men of all
nations; the palace of trade; the place of commercial congress; the hall
in which assembled from day to day the “merchant princes” of England,
and the representatives of the traffic and the wealth of the world.
The flames spread; the devouring element secured to itself the entire
edifice; it fed upon and consumed floor and roof, picture and statue,
destroying or defacing everything it touched, till the whole building was
reduced to ashes, and nothing remained of it but smouldering ruins.

In a little time a new edifice was projected, larger and more magnificent
than the former, and thus better fitted to meet the wants of the age, and
to indicate the progress and advancement of society. The first stone was
laid by the youthful husband of our young queen,—one might almost say the
young bridegroom of a royal bride,—and the building rose with comparative
rapidity, unfolding and embodying its great idea. As it approached
completion, and its front was to be adorned by some significant figures
or allegorical device, questions arose as to whether an inscription
should be placed there with them, and as to what that inscription should
be. The illustrious individual who had laid the first stone of the
structure suggested for that inscription a simple text from the English
Bible, “THE EARTH IS THE LORD’S, AND THE FULNESS THEREOF.” The suggestion
was adopted; it was carried into effect; and hence there may be read, on
the front of our Royal Exchange, and read in our land’s language,—but
addressed to all men; for they are addressed not only to the British
merchant, but to the representatives of every nation under heaven,—the
few plain words which have just been repeated,—

THE EARTH IS THE LORD’S, AND THE FULNESS THEREOF.

Words, however, these, which, while simple in appearance, are pregnant
and suggestive in the highest degree; for they are full to overflowing,
of great practical divine thoughts.

The suggestion of this inscription for the Royal Exchange was the
suggestion not only of sound judgment and good sense, but of piety,
humility, and religious faith. It attributes nothing to any individual;
it proclaims no national or municipal greatness; it breathes no
flattery to monarch, merchant, class, or kingdom:—it is simply a devout
recognition of Almighty God, “from whom, and by whom, and for whom are
all things:”—who created the world, and adorned and beautified it; who
covered it with verdure, made it fruitful, fills it with its various
products, and sustains it for the service of man. It is a great thing to
have this public recognition of the Most High made, as it were, every
hour of every day, from the very centre of all mundane and secular
activities;—it is a stirring recollection, that that very building,
thought by many to be the temple of Mammon, should stand forth as a
preacher and teacher on behalf of God; and, _still more so_, that its
English voice should be distinctly heard above the din and discord of its
many languages, perpetually proclaiming to its busy multitudes, and the
busy multitudes of the whole city, what, if practically pondered, would
cool avarice, prevent fraud, moderate ambition, inspire truth, dictate
justice, make every man feel as a brother to his fellow, and all nations,
ranks, and conditions of men, as the members of one vast and undivided
confraternity.

It is interesting to think that the same illustrious Prince who
suggested the inscription for the Royal Exchange, originated the idea
of the Exhibition of the industry of all nations. It is to the honour
of England, that the first time that the whole world, so to speak,
comes together for a peaceful purpose, the meeting takes place in the
British metropolis; and it is to the honour of the husband of England’s
Queen, not only that he should have been the father of _this_ thought,
but that by a previous one he should have attempted, as it were, to
sanctify industry, and trade, and commerce, and manufactures, by an
open recognition of the providence of God as the source of them all.
It is worth living for, to be, first, the occasion of a great central
commercial edifice, in one of the greatest cities of the world, bearing
on its front the record of the central truth of religion; and then,
secondly, to be the cause of the congregating together, in that city, of
men of all lands and of all languages, to look, among other things, upon
that edifice, and to observe the truth which the people it represents
have there publicly enthroned!

The writer of the following pages proposes, then, to unite in his
reflections the two things which, through the agency of the same mind,
are thus already united in fact—the INSCRIPTION on the Royal Exchange,
and THE EXHIBITION OF THE INDUSTRY OF ALL NATIONS. He intends, in the
first part, to point out and illustrate the great primary religious
truths which are involved in the announcement of the inscription itself.
As it, however, is the first verse of a psalm, he purposes, in the second
part, to look at it in connexion with the whole of the psalm, and at the
psalm in connexion with the whole of Revelation, and thus to bring out
and associate with the inscription additional ideas of both truth and
duty. Then, supposing the whole series of these truths and duties to be
earnestly adopted and practically exemplified by all nations—by England
herself, and by those to whom they will be virtually presented on their
meeting together in the British metropolis—it is proposed, in the last
part, to describe what, on such a supposition, would be the coming future
of Europe and of the world.




I.

_The Divine Existence and Personality._


The first idea suggested by the words of the inscription is the existence
of God: “_The earth is the Lord’s._” It is here assumed that there is a
God; and it is further assumed that God is a person. He is the possessor
and proprietor of the world: he has an existence distinct from it: he
is capable of looking upon it, and of regarding it as his own: “The
earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the _world, and they
that dwell therein_.” Not only is the material structure his, but the
living inhabitants; and not only those of inferior rank, but the Lord
and Master of them all. The same being that claims “the fowls of the
mountains, the wild beasts of the field and the forest, and the cattle
upon a thousand hills,” claims also to be the proprietor of _man_,
the source and sovereign of the intelligent universe;—“all souls are
mine.” God is not nature, nor nature God. God and the universe are not
one and the same thing. He is not a force, a power, a law; he is not
attraction, electricity, or any of the great active material agents,
or all of them put together: he is not necessity, chance, fate: he is
not a thing, nor the sum of things, but a person: he is a mind, with
faculties, affections, character, and is as distinct from the “earth” and
the “world” as a man is distinct from a house or a clock, or anything
whatever that he can call _his_.

The personality of God—his existence as an intelligent agent distinct
from the universe,—is destructive of all theories of atheism and
pantheism; of the philosophy which teaches that there is no God at all,
and of that which teaches that all things are God. The two systems,
indeed, are essentially one; they are alike opposed to the existence
of religion, and render faith and piety impossible. A principle is
proclaimed in the words before us,—words ceaselessly uttered, and uttered
to all men, from the commercial centre of this great city,—which repels
and repudiates a godless philosophy, in whatever form it may be held or
taught—by whatever name it may be indicated or concealed.

The truth thus referred to, the foundation truth of all religion, is
taught and illustrated in the Holy Scriptures in the most remarkable
manner. The Bible, indeed, seldom or never attempts to _prove_ that there
is a God; it rather assumes his existence, takes it for granted, proceeds
upon it as a necessary intuitional truth, and regards any one who would
pretend to deny it, either as “a fool” who is prompted to the denial by
his corrupt “heart;” or as a philosopher who has become “vain in his
reasonings,” and whose “understanding is darkened.” While, however, the
Bible starts with the acknowledgment of God, and proceeds throughout
on the recognition of his existence, it occasionally illustrates his
personality, supremacy, distinctness from the universe and correlative
truths, in a way which is at once adapted to confirm these views where
they are admitted,—to demonstrate them to those that doubt,—and to cover
with contempt idolaters or sophists by whom they may be denied.

Two or three scriptural passages may be quoted here, in support or
illustration of this statement. Let it be remembered then, that the
Scriptures always ascribe to God _personal_ attributes. He is “a God of
knowledge.” His “understanding is infinite.” He acts “according to the
council of his will.” He is “holy,” “just,” “good,” “pure;” He loves
and hates, observes and remembers, approves and condemns, punishes and
rewards. His personal omniscience, and consequent independence of all
other beings, is powerfully asserted by Isaiah:—“Who hath directed the
Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught _him_? With whom
took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path
of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of
understanding?” But the personality of God, and his distinct existence
from the universe, are sometimes united together in a very striking
way. He is referred to as the Creator—the source whence all things have
proceeded; and then, on the principle that _what there is in the effect
there must first have been in the cause, and must continue to be in an
existing cause_, his personal properties are argued from the fact that
such properties actually exist,—exist, that is, in men,—beings whom he
has made: “He that planted the ear, shall not _he_ hear? he that formed
the eye, shall not _he_ see? … he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not
_he_ know?” The same argument, in another form, is used by the apostle
Paul, when reasoning with the philosophers of Athens. Having referred
to God as the Creator of the world; as giving “to all life, and breath,
and all things;” and as “having made all nations of men that dwell on
the face of the earth;”—having illustrated his position by the saying
of one of their own poets,—“we are also his offspring,”—he proceeds to
argue thus:—“forasmuch then, as _we_ are the offspring of God, we ought
not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone,
graven by art and man’s device:” in other words, “seeing that _we_ have
thought, intelligence, and will,—that we have affections, consciousness,
personality,—and seeing that we are the creatures of God, and must have
derived from _him_ whatsoever we possess, it is absurd to think of him
as _im_personal, material, unintelligent, since he must certainly have
in himself what he has been able to confer.” There is great force in
this form of putting the truth as it is put both by the prophet and the
apostle. To ordinary common sense, it would seem to be demonstrative.
It appears so natural to infer that the great parent of _persons_ must
_be_ a person;—that the source of thought must be able to think;—that
the fountain whence flows to the intelligent universe, faculty and
affection, reason and will, must possess these in infinite plenitude in
itself;—it would appear so natural to reason thus, and so obvious, as
almost to render reference to it superfluous, were it not that it is
now fashionable to think of the universe as a mere machine, and God as
the central and pervading force, and that this machine, in the course
of its ceaseless and everlasting action, and in the process of its
varied movements from eternity, has happened, or contrived, to grind out
_thought_ along with other things, and to fill worlds with persons (or
what seem to be such) as well as with form and colour, and the different
objects of material existence! In reference to such a theory, we may
appropriately adopt the words of the psalmist, which stand in immediate
connexion with those already quoted. “Understand, ye brutish among the
people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise?—The Lord knoweth the thoughts
of man, that they are vanity.”




II.

_Creation._


But the words of the Inscription, read in connexion with the second
verse of the psalm from which it is taken, further illustrate the ideas
adverted to—God’s existence, personality, and distinction from the
universe—by placing the fact of his ownership of the earth, on the
previous fact of his having created it. “The earth is the Lord’s, and the
fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein. For _he hath
founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods_.”

God is thus distinctly recognised as the Creator of all things, and as
hence becoming, or being, their proprietor, by necessary consequence.
That the universe is a creation, in the most strict and literal sense
of the word, is the teaching of the Bible;—a truth which, while leading
to that of his universal proprietorship of the earth and the world,
as necessarily implies and strikingly illustrates his own distinct
independence and personality: “Through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen
were not made of things which do appear.” The meaning of this statement
is, that visible objects—that is, the whole visible universe—did not
_originally_ spring out of visible materials. However long might be
the periods, during which the substance of the earth was undergoing
preparatory processes, previous to the appearance of its destined
inhabitant, there was a time when that substance was _not_. There was a
period when the Eternal lived alone,—when space was literally infinite,
except as filled and pervaded by _him_,—when nothing material anywhere
existed, by which any portion of space could be inclosed or limited. In
that mysterious solitude, God was as much a personality,—as much a mind
with thought and will,—as he is now. He could not then be confounded with
his works, for his works were not; and he ought not now to be confounded
with them because they _are_. It is possible to conceive of all the suns
and systems that exist, as being swept away into utter nothingness, and
yet to understand that God might continue in all the fulness of his being
and perfections. “In the beginning,”—at some period in the immeasurable
depths of the abyss of that eternity which is the dwelling-place of
Deity, God exerted the act of creation, and gave birth to what we call
matter, which, in the revolutions of ages, he framed and fashioned into
separate worlds. The Lord was, “_before_ his works of old.” He was “from
everlasting, _or ever the earth was_.” “When there were no depths,” he
existed;—“before the mountains and hills,—while as yet he hath not made
the earth, nor the fields, nor (even) the dust (or matter) of the world.”
This is the sublime and awful truth which the Scriptures teach as to the
primary relation of God to the universe, and on the ground of which they
ascribe to him successive acts of formative power,—often in language
highly figurative, but always meant to convey the idea of the exercise of
the wisdom, goodness, foresight, and similar attributes of a _personal_
agent in the Maker of the world.

“Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the
earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.”
“He prepared the heavens, he set a compass upon the face of the depth.
He established the clouds above, he strengthened the foundations of the
deep. He gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his
commandment.” “He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and
hangeth the earth upon nothing.” He is “the great God that formed all
things.” “O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made
them all.” “The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth, by understanding
hath he established the heavens. By his knowledge the depths are broken
up, and the clouds drop down dew.” “Of old thou hast laid the foundation
of the earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands” “The sea is
his,—he made it; and his hands formed the dry land.” “Mine hand hath
laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the
heavens.” “Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these
things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power; not
one faileth.” “Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand,
and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the
earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills
in a balance?” “_I_ have made the earth—the man and the beast that are
upon the ground, by my great power and by my out-stretched arm.” “Where
wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou hast
understanding. Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who
laid the corner-stone thereof? Hast thou commanded the morning since thy
days; and caused the day-spring to know his place? Hast thou entered into
the springs of the sea? Hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth?
Where is the way where light dwelleth? And as for darkness, where is the
place thereof? Canst _thou_ bind the sweet influence of Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season,
or guide Arcturus with his sons? Who hath put wisdom into the inward
parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?” “There is a spirit
in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding.”
God made “man in his own image.” He is “the Father of spirits.” “The
heavens declare his glory, and the firmament showeth his handiwork.”
“That which may be known of God is manifest” to men, “for God hath showed
it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead;” so that men are “without excuse,”
if, knowing God, or not liking “to retain God in their knowledge,” they
“worship him not as God,” but, “professing themselves to be wise, become
fools,” changing “the truth of God into a lie.”

Such are some of the statements of Scripture respecting the creation
of the world and man. To admit these, it is not necessary to deny the
revelations of science as to the physical antiquity of the globe,
and the successive phenomena that distinguished the history of the
pre-adamite earth. There might have been then a wonderful series of
gradual developments, and various material and animal formations;—the
point to be kept in view is, that all these were _intelligently presided
over_ by the Author of nature; and that they all followed in obedience
to laws, which _he_ not only ordained, but _administered_. The “Crystal
Palace” is the embodiment of an idea conceived and perfected in a
personal intelligence. It has been constructed and reared by rule and
compass, measure and weight, and according to the suggestions of wisdom
and skill. All the variety of its extraordinary contents bear the impress
of thought and purpose, design and contrivance, faculty and power; but
no one confounds the work with the workmen, or imagines that the skill
impressed on the productions is something inherent in the productions
themselves, or that they have sprung, by necessity, from the impulse or
operation of unintelligent force! Any one who saw the apparently confused
and chaotic jumble of coarse packages and unarranged materials, as they
lay about the building, previous to being put into harmonious order,
could never have imagined that they had in themselves any tendency to
take the places and assume the appearances to which they were destined,
independently of the mind, the thought, plan, reason, and ability of
the person or persons by whom all was to be effected. Even if it had
been possible to conceive such a thing,—to conceive, namely, that they
should, without the immediate agency of hands, have gradually arranged
themselves into beautiful groups, and that _thus_ confusion was to be
succeeded by order,—this would only have been regarded as the result
of processes to which they had been subjected by human sagacity, and
as the proof of profounder and more wonderful contrivance on the part
of the presiding genius of the scene. Instead of tempting a thoughtful
observer to confound and identify the thing done with the actual doer,—or
to lose sight of him, and to attribute all to necessity or chance, or
to some mysterious appetencies in the things themselves,—it would only
have carried the idea of personality further back, and have augmented
his admiration of the attributes that distinguished it. In the same
way, adhering to the truth that the heavens and the earth are an actual
creation, then, whatever may have been the processes through which they
gradually passed till the whole fabric was developed and perfected,
_all was the work of a personal agent distinct from the actual universe
itself_, and all that was done was accomplished through the action
of those laws which he framed,—to which he subjected them,—which he
administered,—which the things did not originate,—which they could not
understand, and from which they could not escape. _He_—the living,
spiritual, personal God—was the Mover and Maker, the Designer and
Doer from first to last. In the same way, just as nothing can be more
completely a man’s own than that which is the product of his own skill,
when acting independently, and operating on his justly obtained material,
so nothing can be such a proof of the proprietorship of God in the
universe and its inhabitants, as that by him they were all alike “created
and made.” “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the world,
and they that dwell therein. _For he hath founded it upon the seas, and
hath established it upon the floods._”




III.

_Providence._


The idea suggested by the words of the inscription, of the “FULNESS”
of the earth belonging to God, deserves a distinct and specific
consideration.

By the “_fulness_” of the earth, we understand all that it contains of
raw material capable of being subjected to human skill, and all that
it produces, of whatever sort, animal or vegetable, for the service of
men,—for the sustenance of sentient nature,—for happiness, or glory and
beauty. By all this being God’s, by this “fulness of the earth” belonging
to _him_, we understand that it is to be attributed to him as its
Author; that he originally deposited, in the depths of the mountains and
the womb of the world, their mineral wealth; that he covered the earth
with verdure and fruitfulness, and filled the air, the sea, and the field
with their numerous inhabitants; that he established the laws by which
there should be a constant succession in all the varieties of animal and
vegetable nature; and that he so _superintends_ the whole arrangement,
and _personally_ administers these laws, that all that they produce may
be properly regarded as the _immediate_ product of his power and skill.
“Fulness,” so produced, is _his_, “_from_ whom and _by_ whom” it comes,
with scarcely less emphasis than if it was to be spoken into being in the
“twinkling of an eye,”—at the utterance of a single word, or by a sudden
act of omnipotent volition.

The inhabitants, then, of this great city are reminded every day, as they
look up at the front of their Royal Exchange, not only of the existence
and personality of God, and of his being the proprietor of all things,
but of his being _this_, by _his continued providence and government of
the world_, as well as by his having created it at first. It was God
that for ages wrought in secret, constructing the rocks and consolidating
the mountains, depositing the useful and precious metals, spreading the
coal-field, and preparing materials of every sort for future society.
It was he who commanded “the dry land to appear,” and the waters to be
gathered into seas: who covered the earth “with the grass of the field,
and with the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit;” who
fixed the sun in the heavens, and gave him to the world for cheerful
light and genial warmth; who “spread abroad the clouds,” and “caused
rain,” and established the laws of vegetable production: it was God
who caused the waters to be filled “with the moving creature that hath
life;” that caused “the fowl to fly above the earth in the open firmament
of heaven;” and that made “the beast of the earth after his kind, and
cattle, and everything that creepeth upon the earth;”—it was God that
gave to them the law “to increase and multiply, and to fill the earth;”
and then gave the earth to the children of men, and commanded them, too,
not only “to increase and multiply and to replenish the earth,” but “to
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth.” It was God who “made of one blood
all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth,” and who,
as “the Most High, who ruleth over the children of men, and doeth as he
will with the inhabitants of the earth,” “separated the sons of Adam,
and divided to the nations their inheritance,” and “determined their
appointed times, and the bounds of their habitation.” It was God who
appropriated to different climes their diversified productions;—who hid
beneath the surface of various peoples mineral varieties;—who conferred
on the nations different talents and different tastes;—who made exchange
of productions a mutual want, necessity, or convenience;—and who thus
established the law of commercial intercourse. It was God that gave to
man improvable reason, so that he was not bound down to unintelligent
instinct in constructing his habitation or providing for his necessities,
but was empowered and intrusted with the inventive head and the skilful
hand; could become the accomplished and cunning artificer, so that out
of the raw material of the world he could call forth new appearances
and forms of things, and thus cover the earth with another creation! It
was God who appointed wood to swim, and water to flow, and fixed the
poles, and fashioned the loadstone, and gave the compass, and bound
the breast of the first mariners as with triple brass, that all the
wonders of navigation might ensue, and enterprise and discovery, and the
peaceful and profitable intercourse of nations. And it is God that still
presides over and governs all things; that gives spring and summer, and
winter and harvest; it is he who distils the influences of the heavens,
and perpetuates the fertility of the earth; it is he who gives annual
abundance, and causes all nations, the world over, to rejoice in what
comes to them as if it were a new and instant creation,—a gift and
gratuity dropped from the sky! It is God “that gives to man power to
get wealth,” and that confers on the nations their respective tastes
and distinctive genius,—their capacity for labour, or their love of the
beautiful, or their skilful handicraft, or their omnipotent enterprise,
or their gigantic achievements! It is God that thus makes them useful to
each other;—that binds them together from the very circumstance of their
separate gifts and their mutual necessities;—and that imparts to them an
interest in each other’s industry, from the different forms and uses that
it takes;—and it is he, we trust, who is bringing them together to the
GREAT EXHIBITION, so that, while they wonder at the result, the vastness
and the variety of their own doings, they may acknowledge _Him_, to whom
they are indebted for material and skill, time and capacity, life and
all things;—_whose_ they themselves are;—from whom cometh every good
and every perfect gift; and, as _whose property_, all that they possess
should be held and used. “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.”

The propriety of thus attributing everything to God, and of recognising
his providence in the laws of the world, the productions of the seasons,
the results of industry, the instruments of commerce, and even in the
adornments of civilization, and the allowable luxuries of elegance and
refinement, and also in the gifts of invention, subtlety, and mechanical
skill,—all this is so frequently taught or referred to in Scripture,
that a few appropriate illustrative passages may with great propriety be
inserted here.

The attentive reader will notice that the several quotations that follow
illustrate the most of the ideas that have been advanced, and that they
do this very much in the order in which they have been given. The first
passage, from the Book of Job, we give in the language of Mr. Goode’s
translation, as it expresses the sense of the original, with some
approach to scientific exactness.

“Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a bed for the gold which men
refine. Iron is dug up from the earth, and the rock poureth forth copper.
Man delveth into the region of darkness, and examineth to the utmost
limit the stones of darkness and death-shade: he breaketh up the veins
from the matrice, which, though nothing thought of under the foot, are
drawn forth, are brandished among mankind. The earth of itself poureth
forth bread, but below it windeth a fiery region. Sapphires are its
stones, and gold is its ground.”

The following sentences, while forming part of an argument respecting
moral and spiritual wisdom,—the fear of God and departure from evil,—are
remarkable as an enumeration of valuable substances, and are here quoted
simply as such.

“But where shall wisdom be found, and where is the place of
understanding? It cannot be “gotten for gold,” nor “silver;” it cannot be
valued with “the gold of Ophir,” “the precious onyx,” or “the sapphire;”
“gold” and “crystal” cannot equal it; nor “coral,” nor “pearls;” nor “the
topaz of Ethiopia;” for “the price of wisdom is above rubies.”

When we rise from the cavern and the mine, from noticing the precious
metals and precious stones, and look abroad on the surface of the earth,
or upwards to the sky, or over the great and wide sea, the Scripture
meets us with innumerable utterances of what, if we are wise, we shall
see there of the ever present, active, and beneficent God. “He causeth
the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that
he may bring forth food out of the earth; and wine that maketh glad
the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread that
strengtheneth man’s heart.” “He sendeth the springs into the valleys,
which run among the hills. They give drink to every beast of the field:
the wild asses quench their thirst. By them shall the fowls of the
heaven have their habitation, that sing among the branches. He watereth
the hills from his chambers: the earth is filled with the fruit of his
works.” “The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon
which he hath planted.” “Thou makest darkness and it is night, wherein
all the beasts of the forest do creep forth. The young lions roar after
their prey, and seek their meat from God.” “The earth is full of thy
riches: so is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts. These wait all upon thee, that
thou mayest give them their meat in due season. That thou givest them
they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good. Thou
hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath,
they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they
are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth. The glory of the
Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice in his works.” He
is “the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are
afar off upon the sea.” He “by his strength setteth fast the mountains,
being girded with power:” He “stilleth the noise of the waves, and the
tumult of the people.” “Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and of
the evening to rejoice. Thou visitest the earth and waterest it: thou
greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou
preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for it. Thou waterest the
ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest
it soft with showers: thou blessest the springing thereof. Thou crownest
the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness. They drop upon
the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills rejoice on every
side. The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered
over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.”

In the following passages, the various powers and capacities of humanity,
as displayed in agriculture and art, are represented as Divine gifts.
The farmer and mechanic, the designer and manufacturer, the engraver and
draftsman, the worker in metals, in wood, stone, and in every sort of raw
material, all accomplish their several operations in virtue of ability
which God confers. “Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my
speech. Doth the ploughman plough all day to sow? Doth he open and break
the clods of his ground? When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth
he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the
principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rye in their place? For
GOD _doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him_. This also
cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in council, and
excellent in working.” “And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, See, I
have called by name Bezaleel, the son of Uri;—and I have filled him with
the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge,
and in all manner of workmanship, to devise cunning works, to work in
gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in cutting of stones, and to set
them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.
And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach;—and,
in the hearts of _all that are wise-hearted_ I have put wisdom, that
they may make all that I have commanded thee.” And Hiram, king of
Tyre, sent also to Solomon “a cunning man, endued with prudence and
understanding,—skilful to work in gold, and silver, in brass, in iron, in
stone, in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson;
also to grave any manner of engraving, and to find out every device that
might be put to him.”

The next quotations illustrate commercial intercourse, the dependence
of nation on nation, trade by sea, and the importation of natural
curiosities, as well as of valuable products and useful material, with
other kindred matters. “The Lord gave Solomon wisdom,—and there was peace
between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together:” and
Solomon wrote to Hiram, “Thou knowest that there is not among us any
that can skill to hew timber like the Sidonians. Now, therefore, let thy
servants hew me cedar-trees out of Lebanon, and unto thee will I give
hire for thy servants, according to all that thou shalt appoint.” And
Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, “I have considered the things which thou
sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire, concerning timber of
cedar, and concerning timber of fir. My servants shall bring them down
from Lebanon to the sea; and I will convey them by sea in floats, to the
place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged
there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire
in giving food for my household. So Hiram gave Solomon cedar-trees and
fir-trees; and Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for
food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil.”

And Solomon “went to Ezion-geber, and to Eloth, at the sea-side, in the
land of Edom. And Hiram sent him by the hands of his servants ships,
and servants _that had knowledge of the sea_; and they went with the
servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty
talents of gold and brought it to king Solomon:” “and once every three
years came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, and ivory,
and apes, and peacocks.” The 27th chapter of Ezekiel is one of the
most extraordinary descriptions that is anywhere to be met with, of
the exchange of commodities and the intercourse of nations by means of
commerce. The different productions of various peoples and climes are
enumerated; the “fulness” of all lands is represented as flowing into the
markets of Tyre,—brought there by the ships and sailors of every maritime
nation;—while Tyre itself is spoken of as the nurse of mariners and the
mistress of the sea,—her beauty and abundance radiant and wonderful,—and
her merchant princes as the lords of the world. All this may breed
luxury, foster pride, promote corruption, and lead ultimately to national
degradation and decay: but this is not the _necessary_ effect of
abundance, nor does it forbid us to refer riches, prosperity, commerce,
manufactures, and everything else that adorns life, to the beneficence
of God. “The earth is the Lord’s, and _the fulness thereof_.” HE pours
down, year by year, the riches of the skies,—calls up the treasures of
the earth, spreads abroad the abundance of the seas,—adds to the value of
many of his gifts what they derive from the labour, skill, and ingenuity
of man,—and excites the nations to exchange and trade, that each country
may share in the joy and the productions of all. In this way it comes to
pass, that _the whole race_, in relation to _the entire world_, might be
addressed in the language of Moses to the chosen people when he described
the land promised to their fathers. “The Lord thy God bringeth thee into
a good land; a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that
spring out of valleys and hills: a land of wheat, and barley, and vines,
and fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive-oil and honey; a land
wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack
anything in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
mayest dig brass.” “Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious
things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,
and for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the
precious things put forth by the moon, and for the chief things of the
ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills, and
for the precious things of _the earth_ AND FULNESS THEREOF, and for the
good will of Him that dwelt in the bush.” “He made Jacob to ride on the
high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields;
and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty
rock; butter of kine and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of
the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and he
drank the pure blood of the grape.”

Unusual as some of these expressions are, especially those of a
figurative character, they may be taken to indicate the intention of
Providence to bless the obedient in “the life that now is,” as well as
in relation to that “which is to come.” “God giveth us all things richly
to enjoy;” if faith and piety, love and obedience, pervaded the race,
everything that adorns and beautifies existence might be delighted in
and used without injury. By free and universal commercial intercourse,
the abundance and blessings of favoured regions may become the common
property of all. There may thus be established throughout all nations,
an equality of privilege, each sharing in the productions of the rest.
With such views, we may appropriately conclude the present chapter by the
following passages, weaving them into a song for the entire race:

    “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof;
    The world, and they that dwell therein.”
    “The Lord is good to all:
    And his tender mercies are over all his works.
    The eyes of all wait upon him;
    And he giveth them their meat in due season.
    He openeth his hand,
    And satisfieth the desire of every living thing.
    _My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord_:
    AND LET ALL FLESH BLESS HIS HOLY NAME, FOR EVER AND EVER.”




