CHAPTER I

THE METAPHYSICS OF THE UNDERSTANDING


Metaphysics is what reaches after substance, and this implies that one
unity, one thought is maintained in opposition to dualism, just as Being
was amongst the ancients. In metaphysics itself we have, however, the
opposition between substantiality and individuality. What comes first
is the spontaneous, but likewise uncritical, metaphysics, and it is
represented by Descartes and Spinoza, who assert the unity of Being and
thought. The second stage is found in Locke, who treats of the opposition
itself inasmuch as he considers the metaphysical Idea of experience, that
is the origin of thoughts and their justification, not yet entering on
the question of whether they are absolutely true. In the third place we
have Leibnitz’s monad—the world viewed as a totality.


A. FIRST DIVISION.

We here encounter the innate ideas of Descartes. The philosophy of
Spinoza, in the second place, is related to the philosophy of Descartes
as its necessary development only; the method is an important part of
it. A method which stands alongside of Spinozism and which is also a
perfected development of Cartesianism, is, in the third place, that by
which Malebranche has represented this philosophy.


1. DESCARTES.

René Descartes is a bold spirit who re-commenced the whole subject
from the very beginning and constituted afresh the ground-work on which
Philosophy is based, and to which, after a thousand years had passed, it
once more returned. The extent of the influence which this man exercised
upon his times and the culture of Philosophy generally, cannot be
sufficiently expressed; it rests mainly in his setting aside all former
presuppositions and beginning in a free, simple, and likewise popular
way, with popular modes of thought and quite simple propositions, in his
leading the content to thought and extension or Being, and so to speak
setting up this before thought as its opposite. This simple thought
appeared in the form of the determinate, clear understanding, and it
cannot thus be called speculative thought or speculative reason. There
are fixed determinations from which Descartes proceeds, but only of
thought; this is the method of his time. What the French called exact
science, science of the determinate understanding, made its appearance at
this time. Philosophy and exact science were not yet separated, and it
was only later on that this separation first took place.

To come to the life of Descartes—he was born in 1596, at La Haye in
Touraine, of an ancient and noble race. He received an education
of the usual kind in a Jesuit school, and made great progress; his
disposition was lively and restless; he extended his insatiable zeal
in all directions, pursued his researches into all systems and forms;
his studies, in addition to ancient literature, embraced such subjects
as philosophy, mathematics, chemistry, physics, and astronomy. But the
studies of his youth in the Jesuit school, and those studies which
he afterwards prosecuted with the same diligence and strenuous zeal,
resulted in giving him a strong disinclination for learning derived from
books; he quitted the school where he had been educated, and yet his
eagerness for learning was only made the keener through this perplexity
and unsatisfied yearning. He went as a young man of eighteen to Paris,
and there lived in the great world. But as he here found no satisfaction,
he soon left society and returned to his studies. He retired to a suburb
of Paris and there occupied himself principally with mathematics,
remaining quite concealed from all his former friends. At last, after
the lapse of two years, he was discovered by them, drawn forth from his
retirement, and again introduced to the great world. He now once more
renounced the study of books and threw himself into the affairs of actual
life. Thereafter he went to Holland and entered the military service;
soon afterwards, in 1619, and in the first year of the Thirty Years’ War,
he went as a volunteer with the Bavarian troops, and took part in several
campaigns under Tilly. Many have found learning unsatisfying; Descartes
became a soldier—not because he found in the sciences too little, but
because they were too much, too high for him. Here in his winter quarters
he studied diligently, and in Ulm, for instance, he made acquaintance
with a citizen who was deeply versed in mathematics. He was able to carry
out his studies even better in winter quarters at Neuberg on the Danube,
where once more, and now most profoundly, the desire awoke in him to
strike out a new departure in Philosophy and entirely reconstruct it;
he solemnly promised the Mother of God to make a pilgrimage to Loretto
if she would prosper him in this design, and if he should now at last
come to himself and attain to peace. He was also in the battle at Prague
in which Frederick the Elector-Palatine lost the Bohemian crown. Yet
since the sight of these wild scenes could not satisfy him, he gave up
military service in 1621. He made several other journeys through the rest
of Germany, and then proceeded to Poland, Prussia, Switzerland, Italy
and France. On account of its greater freedom he withdrew to Holland, in
order there to pursue his projects; here he lived in peace from 1629 to
1644—a period in which he composed and issued most of his works, and
also defended them against the manifold attacks from which they suffered,
and which more especially proceeded from the clergy. Queen Christina
of Sweden finally called him to her court at Stockholm, which was the
rendezvous for all the most celebrated men of learning of the time, and
there he died in 1650.[154]

As regards his philosophic works, those which contain his first
principles have in particular something very popular about their method
of presentation, which makes them highly to be recommended to those
commencing the study of philosophy. Descartes sets to work in a quite
simple and childlike manner, with a narration of his reflections as they
came to him. Professor Cousin of Paris has brought out a new edition of
Descartes in eleven octavo volumes; the greater part consists of letters
on natural phenomena. Descartes gave a new impetus to mathematics as well
as to philosophy. Several important methods were discovered by him, upon
which the most brilliant results in higher mathematics were afterwards
built. His method is even now an essential in mathematics, for Descartes
is the inventor of analytic geometry, and consequently the first to point
out the way in this field of science to modern mathematics. He likewise
cultivated physics, optics, and astronomy, and made the most important
discoveries in these; we have not, however, to deal with such matters.
The application of metaphysics to ecclesiastical affairs, investigations,
etc., has likewise no special interest for us.

1. In Philosophy Descartes struck out quite original lines; with him the
new epoch in Philosophy begins, whereby it was permitted to culture to
grasp in the form of universality the principle of its higher spirit in
thought, just as Boehme grasped it in sensuous perceptions and forms.
Descartes started by saying that thought must necessarily commence from
itself; all the philosophy which came before this, and specially what
proceeded from the authority of the Church, was for ever after set aside.
But since here thought has properly speaking grasped itself as abstract
understanding only, in relation to which the more concrete content still
stands over on the other side, the determinate conceptions were not
yet deduced from the understanding, but taken up only empirically. In
Descartes’ philosophy we have thus to distinguish what has, and what
has not universal interest for us: the former is the process of his
thoughts themselves, and the latter the mode in which these thoughts are
presented and deduced. Yet we must not consider the process as a method
of consistent proof; it is indeed a deep and inward progress, but it
comes to us in an ingenuous and naïve form. In order to do justice to
Descartes’ thoughts it is necessary for us to be assured of the necessity
for his appearance; the spirit of his philosophy is simply knowledge as
the unity of Thought and Being. And yet on the whole there is little to
say about his philosophy.

a. Descartes expresses the fact that we must begin from thought as such
alone, by saying that we must doubt everything (_De omnibus dubitandum
est_); and that is an absolute beginning. He thus makes the abolition
of all determinations the first condition of Philosophy. This first
proposition has not, however, the same signification as Scepticism,
which sets before it no other aim than doubt itself, and requires that
we should remain in this indecision of mind, an indecision wherein mind
finds its freedom. It rather signifies that we should renounce all
prepossessions—that is, all hypotheses which are accepted as true in
their immediacy—and commence from thought, so that from it we should in
the first place attain to some fixed and settled basis, and make a true
beginning. In Scepticism this is not the case, for with the sceptics
doubt is the end at which they rest.[155] But the doubting of Descartes,
his making no hypotheses, because nothing is fixed or secure, does not
occur in the interests of freedom as such, in order that nothing should
have value except freedom itself, and nothing exist in the quality of
an external objective. To him everything is unstable indeed, in so
far as the Ego can abstract from it or can think, for pure thought is
abstraction from everything. But in consciousness the end is predominant,
and it is to arrive at something fixed and objective—and not the moment
of subjectivity, or the fact of being set forth, known and proved by me.
Yet this last comes along with the other, for it is from the starting
point of my thought that I would attain my object; the impulse of freedom
is thus likewise fundamental.

In the propositions in which Descartes gives in his own way the ground
of this great and most important principle, there is found a naïve and
empirical system of reasoning. This is an example: “Because we were born
as children, and formed all manner of judgments respecting sensuous
things before we had the perfect use of our reason, we are through many
preconceived ideas hindered from the knowledge of the truth. From these
we appear not to be able to free ourselves in any other way but by once
in our lives striving to doubt that respecting which we have the very
slightest suspicion of an uncertainty. Indeed it is really desirable to
hold as false everything in respect to which we have any doubt, so that
we may find more clearly what is most certain and most knowable. Yet
this doubt has to be limited to the contemplation of the truth, for in
the conduct of our life we are compelled to choose the probable, since
there the opportunity for action would often pass away before we could
solve our doubts. But here, where we have only to deal with the search
for truth, we may very reasonably doubt whether any thing sensuous and
perceptible exists—in the first place because we find that the senses
often deceive us and it is prudent not to trust in what has even once
deceived us, and then because every day in dreaming we think we feel or
see before ourselves innumerable things which never were, and to the
doubter no signs are given by which he can safely distinguish sleeping
from waking. We shall hereby likewise doubt everything else, even
mathematical propositions, partly because we have seen that some err
even in what we hold most certain, and ascribe value to what to us seems
false, and partly because we have heard that a God exists who has created
us, and who can do everything, so that He may have created us liable to
err. But if we conceive ourselves not to derive our existence from God,
but from some other source, perhaps from ourselves, we are all the more
liable, in that we are thus imperfect, to err. But we have so far the
experience of freedom within us that we can always refrain from what is
not perfectly certain and well founded.”[156] The demand which rests
at the basis of Descartes’ reasonings thus is that what is recognized
as true should be able to maintain the position of having the thought
therein at home with itself. The so-called immediate intuition and inward
revelation, which in modern times is so highly regarded, has its place
here. But because in the Cartesian form the principle of freedom as such
is not brought into view, the grounds which are here advanced are for the
most part popular.

b. Descartes sought something in itself certain and true, which should
neither be only true like the object of faith without knowledge, nor the
sensuous and also sceptical certainty which is without truth. The whole
of Philosophy as it had been carried on up to this time was vitiated by
the constant presupposition of something as true, and in some measure,
as in the Neo-Platonic philosophy, by not giving the form of scientific
knowledge to its matter, or by not separating its moments. But to
Descartes nothing is true which does not possess an inward evidence
in consciousness, or which reason does not recognize so clearly and
conclusively that any doubt regarding it is absolutely impossible.
“Because we thus reject or declare to be false everything regarding which
we can have any doubt at all, it is easy for us to suppose that there is
no God, no heaven, no body—but we cannot therefore say that we do not
exist, who think this. For it is contradictory to say that what thinks
does not exist. Hence the knowledge that ‘I think, therefore I am,’ is
what we arrive at first of all, and it is the most certain fact that
offers itself to everyone who follows after philosophy in an orderly
fashion. This is the best way of becoming acquainted with the nature of
spirit and its diversity from body. For if we inquire who we are who can
set forth as untrue everything which is different from ourselves, we
clearly see that no extension, figure, change of position, nor any such
thing which can be ascribed to body, constitutes our nature, but only
thought alone; which is thus known earlier and more certainly than any
corporeal thing.”[157] ‘I’ has thus significance here as thought, and
not as individuality of self-consciousness. The second proposition of
the Cartesian philosophy is hence the immediate certainty of thought.
Certainty is only knowledge as such in its pure form as self-relating,
and this is thought; thus then the unwieldy understanding makes its way
on to the necessity of thought.

Descartes begins, just as Fichte did later on, with the ‘I’ as
indubitably certain; I know that something is presented in me. By this
Philosophy is at one stroke transplanted to quite another field and
to quite another standpoint, namely to the sphere of subjectivity.
Presuppositions in religion are given up; proof alone is sought for,
and not the absolute content which disappears before abstract infinite
subjectivity. There is in Descartes likewise a seething desire to
speak from strong feeling, from the ordinary sensuous point of view,
just as Bruno and so many others, each in his own fashion, express as
individualities their particular conceptions of the world. To consider
the content in itself is not the first matter; for I can abstract from
all my conceptions, but not from the ‘I.’ We think this and that, and
hence it is—is to give the common would-be-wise argument of those
incapable of grasping the matter in point; that a determinate content
exists is exactly what we are forced to doubt—there is nothing absolutely
fixed. Thought is the entirely universal, but not merely because I
can abstract, but because ‘I’ is thus simple, self-identical. Thought
consequently comes first; the next determination arrived at, in direct
connection with it, is the determination of Being. The ‘I think’ directly
involves my Being; this, says Descartes, is the absolute basis of all
Philosophy.[158] The determination of Being is in my ‘I’; this connection
is itself the first matter. Thought as Being and Being as thought—that
is my certainty, ‘I’; in the celebrated _Cogito, ergo sum_ we thus have
Thought and Being inseparably bound together.

On the one hand this proposition is regarded as a syllogism: from thought
Being is deduced. Kant more especially has objected to this that Being
is not contained in thinking, that it is different from thinking. This
is true, but they are still inseparable, or constitute an identity;
their difference is not to the prejudice of their unity. Yet this maxim
of pure abstract certainty, the universal totality in which everything
implicitly exists, is not proved;[159] we must therefore not try to
convert this proposition into a syllogism. Descartes himself says:
“There is no syllogism present at all. For in order that there should be
such, the major premise must have been ‘all that thinks exists’”—from
which the subsumption would have followed in the minor premise, ‘now
I am.’ By this the immediacy which rests in the proposition, would be
removed. “But that major premise” is not set forth at all, being “really
in the first instance derived from the original ‘I think, therefore, I
am.’”[160] For arriving at a conclusion three links are required—in this
case we ought to have a third through which thought and Being should have
been mediated, and it is not to be found here. The ‘Therefore’ which
binds the two sides together is not the ‘Therefore’ of a syllogism; the
connection between Being and Thought is only immediately posited. This
certainty is thus the _prius_; all other propositions come later. The
thinking subject as the simple immediacy of being-at-home-with-me is
the very same thing as what is called Being; and it is quite easy to
perceive this identity. As universal, thought is contained in all that
is particular, and thus is pure relation to itself, pure oneness with
itself. We must not make the mistake of representing Being to ourselves
as a concrete content, and hence it is the same immediate identity which
thought likewise is. Immediacy is, however, a one-sided determination;
thought does not contain it alone, but also the determination to mediate
itself with itself, and thereby—by the mediation being at the same time
the abrogation of the mediation—it is immediacy. In thought we thus have
Being; Being is, however, a poor determination, it is the abstraction
from the concrete of thought. This identity of Being and Thought,
which constitutes the most interesting idea of modern times, has not
been further worked out by Descartes; he has relied on consciousness
alone, and for the time being placed it in the fore-front. For with
Descartes the necessity to develop the differences from the ‘I think’ is
not yet present; Fichte first applied himself to the deduction of all
determinations from this culminating point of absolute certainty.

Other propositions have been set against that of Descartes.
Gassendi,[161] for example, asks if we might not just as well say
_Ludificor, ergo sum_: I am made a fool of by my consciousness, therefore
I exist—or properly speaking, therefore I am made a fool of. Descartes
himself recognized that this objection merited consideration, but he
here repels it, inasmuch as it is the ‘I’ alone and not the other
content which has to be maintained. Being alone is identical with pure
thought, and not its content, be it what it may. Descartes further says:
“By thought I, however, understand all that takes place in us within
our consciousness, in as far as we are conscious of it; thus will,
conception, and even feeling are identical with thought. For if I say
‘I see,’ or ‘I walk out,’ and ‘therefore I am,’ and understand by this
the seeing and walking which is accomplished by the body, the conclusion
is not absolutely certain, because, as often happens in a dream, I may
imagine that I can see or walk even if I do not open my eyes nor move
from my place, and I might also possibly do so supposing I had no body.
But if I understand it of the subjective feeling or the consciousness of
seeing or walking itself, because it is then related to the mind that
alone feels or thinks that it sees or walks, this conclusion is perfectly
certain.”[162] “In a dream” is an empirical mode of reasoning, but there
is no other objection to it. In willing, seeing, hearing, &c., thought is
likewise contained, it is absurd to suppose that the soul has thinking
in one special pocket, and seeing, willing, &c., in others. But if I say
‘I see,’ ‘I walk out,’ there is present on the one hand my consciousness
‘I,’ and consequently thought, on the other hand, however, there is
present willing, seeing, hearing, walking, and thus a still further
modification of the content. Now because of this modification I cannot
say ‘I walk, and therefore I am,’ for I can undoubtedly abstract from
the modification, since it is no longer universal Thought. Thus we must
merely look at the pure consciousness contained in the concrete ‘I.’ Only
when I accentuate the fact that I am present there as thinking, is pure
Being implied, for only with the universal is Being united.

“In this it is implied,” says Descartes, “that thought is more certain to
me than body. If from the fact that I touch or see the earth I judge that
it exists, I must more certainly judge from this that my thought exists.
For it may very well happen that I judge the earth to exist, even if it
does not exist, but it cannot be that I judge this, and that my mind
which judges this does not exist.”[163] That is to say, everything which
is for me I may assert to be non-existent, but when I assert myself to be
non-existent, I myself _assert_, or it is _my_ judgment. For I cannot set
aside the fact that I judge, even if I can abstract from that respecting
which I judge. In this Philosophy has regained its own ground that
thought starts from thought as what is certain in itself, and not from
something external, not from something given, not from an authority,
but directly from the freedom that is contained in the ‘I think.’ Of all
else I may doubt, of the existence of bodily things, of my body itself;
or this certainty does not possess immediacy in itself. For ‘I’ is just
certainty itself, but in all else this certainty is only predicate; my
body is certain to _me_, it is not this certainty itself.[164] As against
the certainty we feel of having a body, Descartes adduces the empirical
phenomenon that we often hear of persons imagining they feel pain in
a limb which they have lost long ago.[165] What is actual, he says is
a substance, the soul is a thinking substance; it is thus for itself,
separate from all external material things and independent. That it is
thinking is evident from its nature: it would think and exist even if no
material things were present; the soul can hence know itself more easily
than its body.[166]

All else that we can hold as true rests on this certainty; for in order
that anything should be held as true, evidence is requisite, but nothing
is true which has not this inward evidence in consciousness. “Now the
evidence of everything rests upon our perceiving it as clearly and
vividly as that certainty itself, and on its so entirely depending from,
and harmonizing with this principle, that if we wished to doubt it we
should also have to doubt this principle likewise” (our _ego_).[167] This
knowledge is indeed on its own account perfect evidence, but it is not
yet the truth, or if we take that Being as truth, it is an empty content,
and it is with the content that we have to do.

c. What comes third is thus the transition of this certainty into
truth, into the determinate; Descartes again makes this transition
in a naïve way, and with it we for the first time begin to consider
his metaphysics. What here takes place is that an interest arises in
further representations and conceptions of the abstract unity of Being
and Thought; there Descartes sets to work in an externally reflective
manner. “The consciousness which merely knows itself to be certain now
however seeks to extend its knowledge, and finds that it has conceptions
of many things—in which conceptions it does not deceive itself, so long
as it does not assert or deny that something similar outside corresponds
to them.” Deception in the conceptions has meaning only in relation to
external existence. “Consciousness also discovers universal conceptions,
and obtains from them proofs which are evident, _e.g._ the geometric
proposition that the three angles of a triangle are together equal to two
right angles is a conception which follows incontrovertibly from others.
But in reflecting whether such things really exist doubts arise.”[168]
That there is such a thing as a triangle is indeed in this case by
no means certain, since extension is not contained in the immediate
certainty of myself. The soul may exist without the bodily element, and
this last without it, they are in reality different; one is conceivable
without the other. The soul thus does not think and know the other as
clearly as the certainty of itself.[169]

Now the truth of all knowledge rests on the proof of the existence of
God. The soul is an imperfect substance, but it has the Idea of an
absolute perfect existence within itself; this perfection is not begotten
in itself, just because it is an imperfect substance; this Idea is thus
innate. In Descartes the consciousness of this fact is expressed by his
saying that as long as the existence of God is not proved and perceived
the possibility of our deceiving ourselves remains, because we cannot
know whether we do not possess a nature ordered and disposed to err
(_supra_, p. 226).[170] The form is rather a mistaken one, and it only
generally expresses the opposition in which self-consciousness stands to
the consciousness of what is different, of the objective; and we have
to deal with the unity of both—the question being whether what is in
thought likewise possesses objectivity. This unity rests in God, or is
God Himself. I shall put these assertions in the manner of Descartes:
“Amongst these various conceptions possessed by us there likewise is
the conception of a supremely intelligent, powerful, and absolutely
perfect Being; and this is the most excellent of all conceptions.” This
all-embracing universal conception has therefore this distinguishing
feature, that in its case the uncertainty respecting Being which appears
in the other conceptions, finds no place. It has the characteristic that
“In it we do not recognize existence as something merely possible and
accidental, as we do the conceptions of other things which we perceive
clearly, but as a really essential and eternal determination. For
instance, as mind perceives that in the conception of a triangle it is
implied that the three angles are equal to two right angles, the triangle
has them; and in the same way from the fact that mind perceives existence
to be necessarily and eternally implied in the Notion of the most
perfect reality, it is forced to conclude that the most perfect reality
exists.”[171] For to perfection there likewise pertains the determination
of existence, since the conception of a non-existent is less perfect.
Thus we there have the unity of thought and Being, and the ontological
proof of the existence of God; this we met with earlier (p. 63, _seq._)
in dealing with Anselm.

The proof of the existence of God from the Idea of Him is in this wise:
In this Notion existence is implied; and therefore it is true. Descartes
proceeds further in the same direction, in so far as after the manner
of empirical axioms he sets forth: (α) “There are different degrees of
reality or entity, for the substance has more reality than the accident
or the mode, and infinite substance has more than finite.” (β) “In the
Notion of a thing existence is implied, either the merely potential
or the necessary,” _i.e._ in the ‘I’ there is Being as the immediate
certainty of an other-being, of the not-I opposed to the I. (γ) “No
thing or no perfection of a thing which really exists _actu_ can have
the Nothing as original cause of its existence. For if anything could
be predicated of nothing, thought could equally well be predicated of
it, and I would thus say that I am nothing because I think.” Descartes
here arrives at a dividing line, at an unknown relationship; the Notion
of cause is reached, and this is a thought indeed, but a determinate
thought. Spinoza says in his explanation, “That the conceptions contain
more or less reality, and those moments have just as much evidence as
thought itself, because they not only say that we think, but how we
think.” These determinate modes as differences in the simplicity of
thought, had, however, to be demonstrated. Spinoza adds to this step in
advance that “The degrees of reality which we perceive in ideas are not
in the ideas in as far as they are considered merely as kinds of thought,
but in so far as the one represents a substance and the other a mere
mode of substance, or, in a word, in so far as they are considered as
conceptions of things.” (δ) “The objective reality of Notions” (_i.e._,
the entity of what is represented in so far as it is in the Notion),
“demands a first cause in which the same reality is contained not merely
objectively” (that is to say in the Notion), “but likewise formally or
even _eminenter_—formally, that is perfectly likewise: _eminenter_, more
perfectly. For there must at least be as much in the cause as in the
effect.” (ε) “The existence of God is known immediately”—_a priori_—“from
the contemplation of His nature. To say that anything is contained in
the nature or in the Notion of a thing is tantamount to saying that it
is true: existence is directly contained in the Notion of God. Hence
it is quite true to say of Him that existence pertains of necessity to
Him. There is implied in the Notion of every particular thing either a
possible or a necessary existence—a necessary existence in the Notion
of God, _i.e._ of the absolutely perfect Being, for else He would be
conceived as imperfect.”[172]

Descartes likewise argues after this manner: “Problem: to prove _a
posteriori_ from the mere Notion within us the existence of God. The
objective reality of a Notion demands a cause in which the same reality
is not merely contained objectively” (as in the finite), “but formally”
(freely, purely for itself, outside of us) “or _eminenter_” (as
original). (Axiom δ.) “We now have a Notion of God, but His objective
reality is neither formally nor _eminenter_ contained within us, and it
can thus be only in God Himself.”[173] Consequently we see that with
Descartes this Idea is an hypothesis. Now we should say we find this
highest Idea in us. If we then ask whether this Idea exists, why, this
is the Idea, that existence is asserted with it. To say that it is only
a conception is to contradict the meaning of this conception. But here
it is unsatisfactory to find that the conception is introduced thus: ‘We
have this conception,’ and to find that it consequently appears like an
hypothesis. In such a case it is not proved of this content in itself
that it determines itself into this unity of thought and Being. In the
form of God no other conception is thus here given than that contained
in _Cogito, ergo sum_, wherein Being and thought are inseparably bound
up—though now in the form of a conception which I possess within me.
The whole content of this conception, the Almighty, All-wise, &c., are
predicates which do not make their appearance until later; the content
is simply the content of the Idea bound up with existence. Hence we
see these determinations following one another in an empirical manner,
and not philosophically proved—thus giving us an example of how in _a
priori_ metaphysics generally hypotheses of conceptions are brought in,
and these become objects of thought, just as happens in empiricism with
investigations, observations, and experiences.

Descartes then proceeds: “Mind is the more convinced of this when it
notices that it discovers within itself the conception of no other thing
wherein existence is necessarily implied. From this it will perceive that
that idea of highest reality is not imagined by it, it is not chimerical,
but a true and unalterable fact which cannot do otherwise than exist,
seeing that existence is necessarily involved in it. Our prejudices
hinder us from apprehending this with ease, for we are accustomed to
distinguish in all other things the essence” (the Notion) “from the
existence.” Respecting the assertion that thought is not inseparable
from existence, the common way of talking is as follows: ‘If what men
think really existed, things would be different.’ But in saying this men
do not take into account that what is spoken of in this way is always a
particular content, and that in it the essential nature of the finality
of things simply signifies the fact that Notion and Being are separable.
But how can one argue from finite things to the infinite? “This Notion,”
Descartes continues, “is furthermore not made by us.” It is now declared
to be an eternal truth which is revealed in us. “We do not find in
ourselves the perfections which are contained in this conception. Thus
we are certain that a first cause in which is all perfection, _i.e._
God as really existent, has given them to us; for it is certain to us
that from nothing, nothing arises” (according to Boehme God derived the
material of the world from Himself), “and what is perfect cannot be the
effect of anything imperfect. From Him we must thus in true science
deduce all created things.”[174] With the proof of the existence of God
the validity of and evidence for all truth in its origin is immediately
established. God as First Cause is Being-for-self, the reality which is
not merely entity or existence in thought. An existence such as this
first cause (which is not what we know as a thing) rests in the Notion of
the not-I, not of each determinate thing—since these as determinate are
negations—but only in the Notion of pure existence or the perfect cause.
It is the cause of the truth of ideas, for the aspect that it represents
is that of their Being.

d. Fourthly, Descartes goes on to assert: “We must believe what is
revealed to us by God, though we cannot understand it. It is not to
be wondered at, since we are finite, that there is in God’s nature as
inconceivably infinite, what passes our comprehension.” This represents
the entrance of a very ordinary conception. Boehme on the other hand says
(_supra_, p. 212): ‘The mystery of the Trinity is ever born within us.’
Descartes, however, concludes: “Hence we must not trouble ourselves with
investigations respecting the infinite; for seeing that we are finite, it
is absurd for us to say anything about it.”[175] This matter we shall
not, however, enter upon at present.

“Now the first attribute of God is that He is true and the Giver of all
light; it is hence quite contrary to His nature to deceive us. Hence the
light of nature or the power of acquiring knowledge given us by God can
affect no object which is not really true in as far as it is affected by
it” (the power of acquiring knowledge) “_i.e._ as it is perceived clearly
and distinctly.” We ascribe truth to God. From this Descartes goes on to
infer the universal bond which exists between absolute knowledge and the
objectivity of what we thus know. Knowledge has objects, has a content
which is known; we call this connection truth. The truth of God is just
this unity of what is thought by the subject or clearly perceived, and
external reality or existence. “Thereby an end is put to doubt, as if it
could be the case that what appears quite evident to us should not be
really true. We can thus no longer have any suspicion of mathematical
truths. Likewise if we give heed to what we distinguish by our senses in
waking or in sleeping, clearly and distinctly, it is easy to recognize
in each thing what in it is true.” By saying that what is rightly and
clearly thought likewise is, Descartes maintains that man comes to know
by means of thought what in fact is in things; the sources of errors lie
on the other hand in the finitude of our nature. “It is certain, because
of God’s truth, that the faculty of perceiving and that of assenting
through the will, if it extends no further than to that which is clearly
perceived, cannot lead to error. Even if this cannot be in any way
proved, it is by nature so established in all things, that as often as we
clearly perceive anything, we assent to it from ourselves and can in no
wise doubt that it is true.”[176]

All this is set forth very plausibly, but it is still indeterminate,
formal, and shallow; we only have the assertion made to us that this is
so. Descartes’ method is the method of the clear understanding merely.
Certainty with him takes the first place; from it no content is deduced
of necessity, no content generally, and still less its objectivity as
distinguished from the inward subjectivity of the ‘I.’ At one time we
have the opposition of subjective knowledge and actuality, and at another
their inseparable union. In the first case the necessity of mediating
them enters in, and the truth of God is asserted to be this mediating
power. It consists in this, that His Notion contains reality immediately
in itself. The proof of this unity then rests solely upon the fact of its
being said that we find within us the idea of complete perfection; thus
this conception here appears simply as one found ready to hand. With this
is compared the mere conception of God which contains no existence within
it, and it is found that without existence it would be imperfect. This
unity of God Himself, of His Idea, with His existence, is undoubtedly
the Truth; in this we find the ground for holding as true what is for us
just as certain as the truth of ourselves. As Descartes proceeds further
we thus find that in reality everything has truth for him only in so far
as it is really an object of thought, a universal. This truth of God has
been, as we shall see, expressed even more clearly and in a more concise
way by a disciple of Descartes, if one may venture to call him so—I mean
Malebranche (who might really be dealt with here),[177] in his _Recherche
de la vérité_.

The first of the fundamental determinations of the Cartesian metaphysics
is from the certainty of oneself to arrive at the truth, to recognize
Being in the Notion of thought. But because in the thought “I think,”
I am an individual, thought comes before my mind as subjective;
Being is hence not demonstrated in the Notion of thought itself, for
what advance has been made is merely in the direction of separation
generally. In the second place the negative of Being likewise comes
before self-consciousness, and this negative, united with the positive
I, is so to speak implicitly united in a third, in God. God, who before
this was a non-contradictory potentiality, now takes objective form to
self-consciousness, He is all reality in so far as it is positive, _i.e._
as it is Being, unity of thought and Being, the highest perfection of
existence; it is just in the negative, in the Notion of this, in its
being an object of thought, that Being is contained. An objection to
this identity is now old—Kant urged it likewise—that from the Notion of
the most perfect existence more does not follow than that _in_ thought
existence here and now and the most perfect essence are conjoined, but
not _outside_ of thought. But the very Notion of present existence is
this negative of self-consciousness, not out of thought,—but the thought
of the ‘out of thought.’

2. Descartes accepts Being in the entirely positive sense, and has
not the conception of its being the negative of self-consciousness:
but simple Being, set forth as the negative of self-consciousness,
is extension. Descartes thus separates extension from God, remains
constant to this separation, unites the universe, matter, with God in
such a way as to make Him its creator and first cause: and he has the
true perception that conservation is a continuous creation, in so far
as creation as activity is asserted to be separated. Descartes does
not, however, trace extension in a true method back to thought; matter,
extended substances, stand over against the thinking substances which
are simple; in as far as the universe is created by God, it could not
be as perfect as its cause. As a matter of fact the effect is less
perfect than the cause, since it is that which is posited, if we are to
remain at the conception of cause pertaining to the understanding. Hence
according to Descartes extension is the less perfect. But as imperfect
the extended substances cannot exist and subsist through themselves or
their Notion; they thus require every moment the assistance of God for
their maintenance, and without this they would in a moment sink back into
nothing. Preservation is, however, unceasing reproduction.[178]

Descartes now proceeds to further particulars, and expresses himself as
follows: “We consider what comes under consciousness either as things or
their qualities, or as eternal truths which have no existence outside
our thought”—which do not belong to this or that time, to this or that
place. He calls those last something inborn within us, something not
made by us or merely felt,[179] but the eternal Notion of mind itself
and the eternal determinations of its freedom, of itself as itself. From
this point the conception that ideas are inborn (_innatæ ideæ_) hence
proceeds; this is the question over which Locke and Leibnitz dispute. The
expression “eternal truths” is current even in these modern times, and it
signifies the universal determinations and relations which exist entirely
on their own account. The word ‘inborn’ is however a clumsy and stupid
expression, because the conception of physical birth thereby indicated,
does not apply to mind. To Descartes inborn ideas are not universal,
as they are to Plato and his successors, but that which has evidence,
immediate certainty, an immediate multiplicity founded in thought
itself—manifold conceptions in the form of a Being, resembling what
Cicero calls natural feelings implanted in the heart. We would rather say
that such is implied in the nature and essence of our mind and spirit.
Mind is active and conducts itself in its activity in a determinate
manner; but this activity has no other ground than its freedom. Yet if
this is the case more is required than merely to say so; it must be
deduced as a necessary product of our mind. We have such ideas, for
instance, in the logical laws: “From nothing comes nothing,” “A thing
cannot both be and not be,”[180] as also in moral principles. These are
facts of consciousness which Descartes however soon passes from again;
they are only present in thought as subjective, and he has thus not yet
inquired respecting their content.

As regards things, on which Descartes now directs his attention, the
other side to these eternal verities, the universal determinations
of things are substance, permanence, order, &c.[181] He then gives
definitions of these thoughts, just as Aristotle draws up a list of the
categories. But although Descartes laid it down formerly as essential
that no hypotheses must be made, yet now he takes the conceptions, and
passes on to them as something found within our consciousness. He defines
substance thus: “By substance I understand none other than a thing
(_rem_) which requires no other something for existence; and there is
only one thing, namely God, which can be regarded as such a substance
requiring no other thing.” This is what Spinoza says; we may say that it
is likewise the true definition, the unity of Notion and reality: “All
other” (things) “can only exist by means of a concurrence (_concursus_)
of God”; what we still call substance outside of God thus does not exist
for itself, does not have its existence in the Notion itself. That is
then called the system of assistance (_systema assistentiæ_) which
is, however, transcendental. God is the absolute uniter of Notion and
actuality; other things, finite things which have a limit and stand in
dependence, require something else. “Hence if we likewise call other
things substances, this expression is not applicable both to them and
to God _univoce_, as is said in the schools; that is to say no definite
significance can be given to this word which would equally apply both to
God and to the creatures.”[182]

“But I do not recognize more than two sorts of things; the one is that
of thinking things, and the other that of things which relate to what
is extended.” Thought, the Notion, the spiritual, the self-conscious,
is what is at home with itself, and its opposite is contained in what
is extended, spatial, separated, not at home with itself nor free.
This is the real distinction (_distinctio realis_) of substances: “The
one substance can be clearly and definitely comprehended without the
other. But the corporeal and the thinking and creating substance can
be comprehended under this common notion, for the reason that they
are things which require God’s support alone in order to exist.” They
are universal; other finite things require other things as conditions
essential to their existence. But extended substance, the kingdom of
nature, and spiritual substance, do not require one another.[183]
They may be called substances, because each of them constitutes an
entire range or sphere, an independent totality. But because, Spinoza
concluded, each side, the kingdom of thought as well as nature, is one
complete system within itself, they are likewise in themselves, that is
absolutely, identical as God, the absolute substance; for thinking spirit
this implicit is thus God, or their differences are ideal.

Descartes proceeds from the Notion of God to what is created, to thought
and extension, and from this to the particular. “Now substances
have several attributes without which they cannot be thought”—that
signifies their determinateness—“but each has something peculiar to
itself which constitutes its nature and essence”—a simple universal
determinateness—“and to which the others all relate. Thus thought
constitutes the absolute attribute of mind,” thought is its quality;
“extension is” the essential determination of corporeality, and this
alone is “the true nature of body. What remains are merely secondary
qualities, modes, like figure and movement in what is extended,
imagination, feeling and will in thinking; they may be taken away or
thought away. God is the uncreated, thinking substance.”[184]

Descartes here passes to what is individual, and because he follows
up extension he arrives at matter, rest, movement. One of Descartes’
main points is that matter, extension, corporeality, are quite the same
thing for thought; according to him the nature of body is fulfilled in
its extension, and this should be accepted as the only essential fact
respecting the corporeal world. We say that body offers resistance, has
smell, taste, colour, transparency, hardness, &c., since without these
we can have no body. All these further determinations respecting what is
extended, such as size, rest, movement, and inertia, are, however, merely
sensuous, and this Descartes showed, as it had long before this been
shown by the Sceptics. Undoubtedly that is the abstract Notion or pure
essence, but to body or to pure existence, there likewise of necessity
pertains negativity or diversity. By means of the following illustration
Descartes showed that with the exception of extension, all corporeal
determinations may be annihilated, and that none can be absolutely
predicated. We draw conclusions respecting the solidity and hardness
of matter from the resistance which a body offers to our disturbance,
and by means of which it seeks to hold its place. Now if we admit that
matter as we touch it always gives way to us like space, we should have
no reason for ascribing to it solidity. Smell, colour, taste, are in
the same way sensuous qualities merely; but what we clearly perceive is
alone true. If a body is ground into small parts, it gives way, and yet
it does not lose its nature; resistance is thus not essential.[185] This
not-being-for-itself is however a quantitatively slighter resistance
only; the resistance always remains. But Descartes desires only to think;
now he does not think resistance, colour, &c., but apprehends them by the
senses only. Hence he says that all this must be led back to extension
as being special modifications of the same. It is undoubtedly to the
credit of Descartes that he only accepts as true what is thought; but the
abrogation of these sensuous qualities simply represents the negative
movement of thought: the essence of body is conditioned through this
thought, that is, it is not true essence.

Descartes now makes his way from the Notion of extension to the laws of
motion, as the universal knowledge of the corporeal in its implicitude;
he shows (α) that there is no vacuum, for that would be an extension
without bodily substance, _i.e._ a body without body; (β) that there are
no atoms (no indivisible independent existence), for the same reason,
viz., because the essence of body is extension. (γ) He further shows
that a body is set in motion by something outside of it, but of itself
it continues in a condition of rest, and likewise it must, when in a
condition of movement, be brought to rest by another outside of it—this
is the property of inertia.[186] These are unmeaning propositions, for
an abstraction is involved for instance in asserting simple rest and
movement in their opposition.

Extension and motion are the fundamental conceptions in mechanical
physics; they represent the truth of the corporeal world. It is thus
that ideality comes before the mind of Descartes, and he is far elevated
above the reality of the sensuous qualities, although he does not reach
so far as to the separation of this ideality. He thus remains at the
point of view of mechanism pure and simple. Give me matter (extension)
and motion and I will build worlds for you, is what Descartes virtually
says.[187] Space and time were hence to him the only determinations of
the material universe. In this, then, lies the mechanical fashion of
viewing nature, or the natural philosophy of Descartes is seen to be
purely mechanical.[188] Hence changes in matter are due merely to motion,
so that Descartes traces every relationship to the rest and movement
of particles, and all material diversity such as colour, and taste—in
short, all bodily qualities and animal phenomena—to mechanism. In living
beings processes such as that of digestion are mechanical effects which
have as principles, rest and movement. We here see the ground and origin
of the mechanical philosophy; but further on we find that this is
unsatisfactory, for matter and motion do not suffice to explain life.
Yet the great matter in all this is that thought goes forward in its
determinations, and that it constitutes from these thought-determinations
the truth of nature.

In his consideration of the system of the world and the movement of the
heavenly bodies, Descartes has worked out the mechanical view more fully.
He thus comes to speak of the earth, the sun, &c., and of his conception
of the circling motion of the heavenly bodies in the form of vortices:
of metaphysical hypotheses as to how small particles pass into, out of,
and through pores and act on one another; and finally to saltpetre and
gunpowder.[189]

Universal reflections should have the first claim on our attention; but
on the other hand the transition to the determinate is accomplished in a
system of Physics which is the result of observations and experiences,
and this is done entirely by means of the understanding. Descartes thus
mingles many observations with a metaphysic of this nature, and to us
the result is hence obscure. In this philosophy the thinking treatment
of empiricism is thus predominant, and a similar method has been adopted
by philosophers from this time on. To Descartes and others, Philosophy
had still the more indefinite significance of arriving at knowledge
through thought, reflection, and reasoning. Speculative cognition, the
derivation from the Notion, the free independent development of the
matter itself, was first introduced by Fichte, and consequently what
is now called philosophic knowledge is not yet separated in Descartes
from the rest of scientific knowledge. In those times all the knowledge
of mankind was called philosophy; in Descartes’ metaphysics we thus
saw quite empirical reflection and reasoning from particular grounds,
from experiences, facts, phenomena, being brought into play in the
naivest manner, and one has no sense of speculation in the matter. The
strictly scientific element here really consisted mainly in the method of
proof as it has long been made use of in geometry, and in the ordinary
method of the formal logical syllogism. Hence it likewise happens that
Philosophy, which ought to form a totality of the sciences, begins with
logic and metaphysics; the second part is composed of ordinary physics
and mathematics, mingled no doubt with metaphysical speculations, and
the third part, ethics, deals with the nature of man, his duties, the
state, the citizen. And this is the case with Descartes. The first part
of the _Principia philosophiæ_ treats _De principiis cognitionis humanæ_,
the second _De principiis rerum materialium_. This natural philosophy,
as a philosophy of extension, is, however, none other than what a quite
ordinary physics or mechanics might at that time be, and it is still
quite hypothetical; we, on the other hand, accurately distinguish
empirical physics and natural philosophy, even though the first likewise
pertains to thought.

3. Descartes never reached the third part, the philosophy of Mind, for,
while he made a special study of physics, in the region of ethics he
published one tract only, _De passionibus_. In this reference Descartes
treats of thought and human freedom. He proves freedom from the fact of
the soul thinking that the will is unrestrained, and of that constituting
the perfection of mankind. And this is quite true. In respect to the
freedom of the will he comes across the difficulty of how to reconcile it
with the divine prescience. As free, man might do what is not ordained of
God beforehand—this would conflict with the omnipotence and omniscience
of God; and if everything is ordained of God, human freedom would thereby
be done away with. Yet he does not solve the contradiction contained
in these two different aspects without falling into difficulty. But
conformably to the method which he adopts, and which we pointed out
above (pp. 238, 239), he says: “The human mind is finite, God’s power
and predetermination are infinite; we are thus not capable of judging of
the relationship in which the freedom of the human soul stands to the
omnipotence and omniscience of God—but in self-consciousness we have
the certainty of it given us as a fact. And we must hold only to what
is certain.”[190] When he proceeds further much appears to him still
incapable of explanation; but we see obstinacy and caprice likewise
exhibited in his stopping short at the assertion as to the best of his
knowledge. The method of knowledge as set forth by Descartes, takes the
form of a reasoning of the understanding, and is thus without special
interest.

These, then, are the principal points in the Cartesian system. Some
particular assertions made by Descartes, which have been specially
instrumental in giving him fame, have still to be mentioned—particular
forms which have been formerly considered in metaphysics, and likewise
by Wolff. For example, in the first place we gather that Descartes
regarded animals and other organisms as machines moved by another,
and not possessing the principle of the spontaneity of thought within
them[191]—a mechanical physiology, a cut and dry thought pertaining
to the understanding, which is of no further importance. In the sharp
opposition between thought and extension, the former is not considered
as sensation, so that the latter can isolate itself. The organic must as
body reduce itself to extension; any further development of this last
thus only proves its dependence on the first determinations.

In the second place, the relation between soul and body now becomes an
important question, that is, the return of the object within itself
in such a way that thought posits itself in another, in matter. As to
this, many systems are offered to us in metaphysics. One of these is
the _influxus physicus_, that the relation of spirit is of a corporeal
nature, that the object is related to mind as bodies are to one another—a
conception like this is very crude. How does Descartes understand the
unity of soul and body? The former belongs to thought, the latter to
extension; and thus because both are substance, neither requires
the Notion of the other, and hence soul and body are independent of
one another and can exercise no direct influence upon one another.
Soul could only influence body in so far as it required the same, and
conversely—that is, in so far as they have actual relation to one
another. But since each is a totality, neither can bear a real relation
to the other. Descartes consistently denied the physical influence
of one on the other; that would have signified a mechanical relation
between the two. Descartes thus established the intellectual sphere in
contradistinction to matter, and on it based the independent subsistence
of mind; for in his _cogito_ ‘I’ is at first only certain of itself,
since I can abstract from all. Now we find the necessity of a mediator
to bring about a union of the abstract and the external and individual.
Descartes settles this by placing between the two what constitutes the
metaphysical ground of their mutual changes, God. He is the intermediate
bond of union, in as far as He affords assistance to the soul in what
it cannot through its own freedom accomplish, so that the changes in
body and soul may correspond with one another.[192] If I have desires,
an intention, these receive corporeal realization; this association of
soul and body is, according to Descartes, effected through God. For
above (p. 239) we saw that Descartes says of God that He is the Truth of
the conception: as long as I think rightly and consistently, something
real corresponds to my thought, and the connecting link is God. God
is hereby the perfect identity of the two opposites, since He is, as
Idea, the unity of Notion and reality. In the Idea of Spinoza this is
worked out and developed in its further moments. Descartes’ conclusion
is quite correct; in finite things this identity is imperfect. Only the
form employed by Descartes is inadequate; for it implies that in the
beginning there are two things, thought or soul and body, and that then
God appears as a third thing, outside both—that He is not the Notion of
unity, nor are the two elements themselves Notion. We must not however
forget that Descartes says that both those original elements are created
substances. But this expression ‘created’ pertains to the ordinary
conception only and is not a determinate thought; it was Spinoza,
therefore, who first accomplished this return to thought.


2. SPINOZA.

The philosophy of Descartes underwent a great variety of unspeculative
developments, but in Benedict Spinoza a direct successor to this
philosopher may be found, and one who carried on the Cartesian principle
to its furthest logical conclusions. For him soul and body, thought and
Being, cease to have separate independent existence. The dualism of
the Cartesian system Spinoza, as a Jew, altogether set aside. For the
profound unity of his philosophy as it found expression in Europe, his
manifestation of Spirit as the identity of the finite and the infinite in
God, instead of God’s appearing related to these as a Third—all this is
an echo from Eastern lands. The Oriental theory of absolute identity was
brought by Spinoza much more directly into line, firstly with the current
of European thought, and then with the European and Cartesian philosophy,
in which it soon found a place.

First of all we must, however, glance at the circumstances of Spinoza’s
life. He was by descent a Portuguese Jew, and was born at Amsterdam in
the year 1632; the name he received was Baruch, but he altered it to
Benedict. In his youth he was instructed by the Rabbis of the synagogue
to which he belonged, but he soon fell out with them, their wrath having
been kindled by the criticisms which he passed on the fantastic doctrines
of the Talmud. He was not, therefore, long in absenting himself from the
synagogue, and as the Rabbis were in dread lest his example should have
evil consequences, they offered him a yearly allowance of a thousand
gulden if he would keep away from the place and hold his tongue. This
offer he declined; and the Rabbis thereafter carried their persecution
of him to such a pitch that they were even minded to rid themselves of
him by assassination. After having made a narrow escape from the dagger,
he formally withdrew from the Jewish communion, without, however, going
over to the Christian Church. He now applied himself particularly to the
Latin language, and made a special study of the Cartesian philosophy.
Later on he went to Rhynsburg, near Leyden, and from the year 1664 he
lived in retirement, first at Voorburg, a village near the Hague, and
then at the Hague itself, highly respected by numerous friends: he
gained a livelihood for himself by grinding optical glasses. It was
no arbitrary choice that led him to occupy himself with light, for it
represents in the material sphere the absolute identity which forms the
foundation of the Oriental view of things. Although he had rich friends
and mighty protectors, among whom even generals were numbered, he lived
in humble poverty, declining the handsome gifts offered to him time after
time. Nor would he permit Simon von Vries to make him his heir; he only
accepted from him an annual pension of three hundred florins; in the
same way he gave up to his sisters his share of their father’s estate.
From the Elector Palatine, Carl Ludwig, a man of most noble character
and raised above the prejudices of his time, he received the offer of a
professor’s chair at Heidelberg, with the assurance that he would have
liberty to teach and to write, because “the Prince believed he would not
put that liberty to a bad use by interfering with the religion publicly
established.” Spinoza (in his published letters) very wisely declined
this offer, however, because “he did not know within what limits that
philosophic liberty would have to be confined, in order that he might
not appear to be interfering with the publicly established religion.”
He remained in Holland, a country highly interesting in the history
of general culture, as it was the first in Europe to show the example
of universal toleration, and afforded to many a place of refuge where
they might enjoy liberty of thought; for fierce as was the rage of the
theologians there against Bekker, for example (Bruck. Hist. crit. phil.
T. IV. P. 2, pp. 719, 720), and furious as were the attacks of Voetius
on the Cartesian philosophy, these had not the consequences which they
would have had in another land. Spinoza died on the 21st of February,
1677, in the forty-fourth year of his age. The cause of his death was
consumption, from which he had long been a sufferer; this was in harmony
with his system of philosophy, according to which all particularity
and individuality pass away in the one substance. A Protestant divine,
Colerus by name, who published a biography of Spinoza, inveighs strongly
against him, it is true, but gives nevertheless a most minute and kindly
description of his circumstances and surroundings—telling how he left
only about two hundred thalers, what debts he had, and so on. A bill
included in the inventory, in which the barber requests payment due him
by M. Spinoza of blessed memory, scandalizes the parson very much, and
regarding it he makes the observation: “Had the barber but known what
sort of a creature Spinoza was, he certainly would not have spoken of his
blessed memory.” The German translator of this biography writes under
the portrait of Spinoza: _characterem, reprobationis in vultu gerens_,
applying this description to a countenance which doubtless expresses the
melancholy of a profound thinker, but is otherwise mild and benevolent.
The _reprobatio_ is certainly correct; but it is not a reprobation in the
passive sense; it is an active disapprobation on Spinoza’s part of the
opinions, errors and thoughtless passions of mankind.[193]

Spinoza used the terminology of Descartes, and also published an account
of his system. For we find the first of Spinoza’s works entitled “An
Exposition according to the geometrical method of the principles of the
Cartesian philosophy.” Some time after this he wrote his _Tractatus
theologico-politicus_, and by it gained considerable reputation. Great as
was the hatred which Spinoza roused amongst his Rabbis, it was more than
equalled by the odium which he brought upon himself amongst Christian,
and especially amongst Protestant theologians—chiefly through the medium
of this essay. It contains his views on inspiration, a critical treatment
of the books of Moses and the like, chiefly from the point of view that
the laws therein contained are limited in their application to the Jews.
Later Christian theologians have written critically on this subject,
usually making it their object to show that these books were compiled at
a later time, and that they date in part from a period subsequent to the
Babylonian captivity; this has become a crucial point with Protestant
theologians, and one by which the modern school distinguishes itself from
the older, greatly pluming itself thereon. All this, however, is already
to be found in the above-mentioned work of Spinoza. But Spinoza drew the
greatest odium upon himself by his philosophy proper, which we must now
consider as it is given to us in his Ethics. While Descartes published
no writings on this subject, the Ethics of Spinoza is undoubtedly his
greatest work; it was published after his death by Ludwig Mayer, a
physician, who had been Spinoza’s most intimate friend. It consists of
five parts; the first deals with God (_De Deo_). General metaphysical
ideas are contained in it, which include the knowledge of God and nature.
The second part deals with the nature and origin of mind (_De natura
et origine mentis_). We see thus that Spinoza does not treat of the
subject of natural philosophy, extension and motion at all, for he passes
immediately from God to the philosophy of mind, to the ethical point of
view; and what refers to knowledge, intelligent mind, is brought forward
in the first part, under the head of the principles of human knowledge.
The third book of the Ethics deals with the origin and nature of the
passions (_De origine et natura affectuum_); the fourth with the powers
of the same, or human slavery (_De servitute humana seu de affectuum
viribus_); the fifth, lastly, with the power of the understanding, with
thought, or with human liberty (_De potentia intellectus seu de libertate
humana_).[194] Kirchenrath Professor Paulus published Spinoza’s works
in Jena; I had a share in the bringing out of this edition, having been
entrusted with the collation of French translations.

As regards the philosophy of Spinoza, it is very simple, and on the
whole easy to comprehend; the difficulty which it presents is due
partly to the limitations of the method in which Spinoza presents his
thoughts, and partly to his narrow range of ideas, which causes him in
an unsatisfactory way to pass over important points of view and cardinal
questions. Spinoza’s system is that of Descartes made objective in the
form of absolute truth. The simple thought of Spinoza’s idealism is this:
The true is simply and solely the one substance, whose attributes are
thought and extension or nature: and only this absolute unity is reality,
it alone is God. It is, as with Descartes, the unity of thought and
Being, or that which contains the Notion of its existence in itself. The
Cartesian substance, as Idea, has certainly Being included in its Notion;
but it is only Being as abstract, not as real Being or as extension
(_supra_, p. 241). With Descartes corporeality and the thinking ‘I’ are
altogether independent Beings; this independence of the two extremes
is done away with in Spinozism by their becoming moments of the one
absolute Being. This expression signifies that Being must be grasped as
the unity of opposites; the chief consideration is not to let slip the
opposition and set it aside, but to reconcile and resolve it. Since then
it is thought and Being, and no longer the abstractions of the finite
and infinite, or of limit and the unlimited, that form the opposition
(_supra_, p. 161), Being is here more definitely regarded as extension;
for in its abstraction it would be really only that return into itself,
that simple equality with itself, which constitutes thought (_supra_, p.
229). The pure thought of Spinoza is therefore not the simple universal
of Plato, for it has likewise come to know the absolute opposition of
Notion and Being.

Taken as a whole, this constitutes the Idea of Spinoza, and it is
just what τὸ ὄν was to the Eleatics (Vol. I. pp. 244, 252). This Idea
of Spinoza’s we must allow to be in the main true and well-grounded;
absolute substance is the truth, but it is not the whole truth; in
order to be this it must also be thought of as in itself active and
living, and by that very means it must determine itself as mind. But
substance with Spinoza is only the universal and consequently the
abstract determination of mind; it may undoubtedly be said that this
thought is the foundation of all true views—not, however, as their
absolutely fixed and permanent basis, but as the abstract unity which
mind is in itself. It is therefore worthy of note that thought must
begin by placing itself at the standpoint of Spinozism; to be a follower
of Spinoza is the essential commencement of all Philosophy. For as we
saw above (Vol I. p. 144), when man begins to philosophize, the soul
must commence by bathing in this ether of the One Substance, in which
all that man has held as true has disappeared; this negation of all
that is particular, to which every philosopher must have come, is the
liberation of the mind and its absolute foundation. The difference
between our standpoint and that of the Eleatic philosophy is only this,
that through the agency of Christianity concrete individuality is in the
modern world present throughout in spirit. But in spite of the infinite
demands on the part of the concrete, substance with Spinoza is not yet
determined as in itself concrete. As the concrete is thus not present in
the content of substance, it is therefore to be found within reflecting
thought alone, and it is only from the endless oppositions of this last
that the required unity emerges. Of substance as such there is nothing
more to be said; all that we can do is to speak of the different ways
in which Philosophy has dealt with it, and the opposites which in it
are abrogated. The difference depends on the nature of the opposites
which are held to be abrogated in substance. Spinoza is far from having
proved this unity as convincingly as was done by the ancients; but what
constitutes the grandeur of Spinoza’s manner of thought is that he is
able to renounce all that is determinate and particular, and restrict
himself to the One, giving heed to this alone.

1. Spinoza begins (Eth. P. I pp. 35, 36) with a series of definitions,
from which we take the following.

a. Spinoza’s first definition is of the Cause of itself. He says: “By
that which is _causa sui_, its own cause, I understand that whose
essence” (or Notion) “involves existence, or which cannot be conceived
except as existent.” The unity of existence and universal thought is
asserted from the very first, and this unity will ever be the question
at issue. “The cause of itself” is a noteworthy expression, for while we
picture to ourselves that the effect stands in opposition to the cause,
the cause of itself is the cause which, while it operates and separates
an “other,” at the same time produces only itself, and in the production
therefore does away with this distinction. The establishing of itself as
an other is loss or degeneration, and at the same time the negation of
this loss; this is a purely speculative Notion, indeed a fundamental
Notion in all speculation. The cause in which the cause is identical
with the effect, is the infinite cause (_infra_, p. 263); if Spinoza had
further developed what lies in the _causa sui_, substance with him would
not have been rigid and unworkable.

b. The second definition is that of the finite. “That thing is said to be
finite in its kind which can be limited by another of the same nature,”
For it comes then to an end, it is not there; what is there is something
else. This something else must, however, be of a like nature; for those
things which are to limit each other must, in order to be able to limit
each other, touch each other, and consequently have a relation to each
other, that is to say they must be of one nature, stand on a like basis,
and have a common sphere. That is the affirmative side of the limit.
“Thus a thought is” only “limited by another thought, a body by another
body, but thoughts are not limited by bodies nor” conversely “bodies by
thoughts.” We saw this (p. 244) with Descartes: thought is an independent
totality and so is extension, they have nothing to do with one another;
they do not limit each other, each is included in itself.

c. The third definition is that of substance. “By substance I understand
that which exists in itself and is conceived by itself, _i.e._ the
conception of which does not require the aid of the conception of any
other thing for its formation (_a quo formari debeat_);” otherwise it
would be finite, accidental. What cannot have a conception formed of it
without the aid of something else, is not independent, but is dependent
upon that something else.

d. In the fourth place Spinoza defines attributes, which, as the moment
coming second to substance, belong to it. “By attribute I understand
that which the mind perceives as constituting the essence of substance;”
and to Spinoza this alone is true. This is an important determination;
the attribute is undoubtedly a determinateness, but at the same time it
remains a totality. Spinoza, like Descartes, accepts only two attributes,
thought and extension. The understanding grasps them as the reality of
substance, but the reality is not higher than the substance, for it
is only reality in the view of the understanding, which falls outside
substance. Each of the two ways of regarding substance—extension and
thought—contains no doubt the whole content of substance, but only in one
form, which the understanding brings with it; and for this very reason
both sides are in themselves identical and infinite. This is the true
completion; but where substance passes over into attribute is not stated.

e. The fifth definition has to do with what comes third in relation to
substance, the mode. “By mode I understand the affections of substance,
or that which is in something else, through the aid of which also it
is conceived.” Thus substance is conceived through itself; attribute
is not conceived through itself, but has a relation to the conceiving
understanding, in so far as this last conceives reality; mode, finally,
is what is not conceived as reality, but through and in something else.

These last three moments Spinoza ought not merely to have established
in this way as conceptions, he ought to have deduced them; they are
especially important, and correspond with what we more definitely
distinguish as universal, particular and individual. They must not,
however, be taken as formal, but in their true concrete sense; the
concrete universal is substance, the concrete particular is the concrete
species; the Father and Son in the Christian dogma are similarly
particular, but each of them contains the whole nature of God, only under
a different form. The mode is the individual, the finite as such, which
enters into external connection with what is “other.” In this Spinoza
only descends to a lower stage, the mode is only the foregoing warped
and stunted. Spinoza’s defect is therefore this, that he takes the
third moment as mode alone, as a false individuality. True individuality
and subjectivity is not a mere retreat from the universal, not merely
something clearly determinate; for, as clearly determinate, it is at the
same time Being-for-itself, determined by itself alone. The individual,
the subjective, is even in being so the return to the universal; and
in that it is at home with itself, it is itself the universal. The
return consists simply and solely in the fact of the particular being
in itself the universal; to this return Spinoza did not attain. Rigid
substantiality is the last point he reached, not infinite form; this he
knew not, and thus determinateness continually vanishes from his thought.

f. In the sixth place, the definition of the infinite is also of
importance, for in the infinite Spinoza defines more strictly than
anywhere else the Notion of the Notion. The infinite has a double
significance, according as it is taken as the infinitely many or as
the absolutely infinite (_infra_, p. 263). “The infinite in its kind
is not such in respect of all possible attributes; but the absolutely
infinite is that to whose essence all belongs that expresses an essence
and contains no negation.” In the same sense Spinoza distinguishes in
the nine-and-twentieth Letter (Oper. T. I. pp. 526-532) the infinite of
imagination from the infinite of thought (_intellectus_), the actual
(_actu_) infinite. Most men, when they wish to strive after the sublime,
get no farther than the first of these; this is the false infinite, just
as when one says “and so on into infinity,” meaning perhaps the infinity
of space from star to star, or else the infinity of time. An infinite
numerical series in mathematics is exactly the same thing. If a certain
fraction is represented as a decimal fraction, it is incomplete; ⅐
is, on the contrary, the true infinite, and therefore not an incomplete
expression, although the content here is of course limited. It is
infinity in the incorrect sense that one usually has in view when
infinity is spoken of; and even if it is looked on as sublime, it yet is
nothing present, and only goes ever out into the negative, without being
actual (_actu_). But for Spinoza the infinite is not the fixing of a
limit and then passing beyond the limit fixed—the sensuous infinity—but
absolute infinity, the positive, which has complete and present in itself
an absolute multiplicity which has no Beyond. Philosophic infinity,
that which is infinite _actu_, Spinoza therefore calls the absolute
affirmation of itself. This is quite correct, only it might have been
better expressed as: “It is the negation of negation.” Spinoza here also
employs geometrical figures as illustrations of the Notion of infinity.
In his _Opera postuma_, preceding his Ethics, and also in the letter
quoted above, he has two circles, one of which lies within the other,
which have not, however, a common centre.

[Illustration]

“The inequalities of the space between A B and C D exceed every number;
and yet the space which lies between is not so very great.” That is to
say, if I wish to determine them all, I must enter upon an infinite
series. This “beyond” always, however, remains defective, is always
affected with negation; and yet this false infinite is there to hand,
circumscribed, affirmative, actual and present in that plane as a
complete space between the two circles. Or a finite line consists of
an infinite number of points; and yet the line is present here and
determined; the “beyond” of the infinite number of points, which are not
complete, is in it complete and called back into unity. The infinite
should be represented as actually present, and this comes to pass in the
Notion of the cause of itself, which is therefore the true infinity. As
soon as the cause has something else opposed to it—the effect—finitude
is present; but here this something else is at the same time abrogated
and it becomes once more the cause itself. The affirmative is thus
negation of negation, since, according to the well-known grammatical
rule, _duplex negatio affirmat_. In the same way Spinoza’s earlier
definitions have also the infinite already implied in them, for instance
in the case of the just mentioned cause of itself, inasmuch as he defines
it as that whose essence involves existence (_supra_, p. 258). Notion
and existence are each the Beyond of the other; but cause of itself, as
thus including them, is really the carrying back of this “beyond” into
unity. Or (_supra_, p. 259) “Substance is that which is in itself and is
conceived from itself;” that is the same unity of Notion and existence.
The infinite is in the same way in itself and has also its Notion in
itself; its Notion is its Being, and its Being its Notion; true infinity
is therefore to be found in Spinoza. But he has no consciousness of this;
he has not recognized this Notion as absolute Notion, and therefore has
not expressed it as a moment of true existence; for with him the Notion
falls outside of existence, into the thought of existence.

g. Finally Spinoza says in the seventh place: “God is a Being absolutely
infinite, _i.e._ a substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of
which expresses an eternal and infinite essence.” Does substance, one
might here ask, possess an infinite number of attributes? But as with
Spinoza there are only two attributes, thought and extension, with which
he invests God, “infinite” is not to be taken here in the sense of the
indeterminate many, but positively, as a circle is perfect infinity in
itself.

The whole of Spinoza’s philosophy is contained in these definitions,
which, however, taken as a whole are formal; it is really a weak point
in Spinoza that he begins thus with definitions. In mathematics this
method is permitted, because at the outset we there make assumptions,
such as that of the point and line; but in Philosophy the content
should be known as the absolutely true. It is all very well to grant
the correctness of the name-definition, and acknowledge that the word
“substance” corresponds with the conception which the definition
indicates, but it is quite another question to determine whether this
content is absolutely true. Such a question is not asked in the case of
geometrical propositions, but in philosophic investigation it is the very
thing to be first considered, and this Spinoza has not done. Instead of
only explaining these simple thoughts and representing them as concrete
in the definitions which he makes, what he ought to have done was to
examine whether this content is true. To all appearance it is only the
explanation of the words that is given; but the content of the words is
held to be established. All further content is merely derived from that,
and proved thereby; for on the first content all the rest depends, and
if it is established as a basis, the other necessarily follows. “The
attribute is that which the understanding thinks of God.” But here the
question is: How does it come that besides the Deity there now appears
the understanding, which applies to absolute substance the two forms
of thought and extension? and whence come these two forms themselves?
Thus everything proceeds inwards, and not outwards; the determinations
are not developed from substance, it does not resolve itself into these
attributes.

2. These definitions are followed by axioms and propositions in which
Spinoza proves a great variety of points. He descends from the universal
of substance through the particular, thought and extension, to the
individual. He has thus all three moments of the Notion, or they are
essential to him. But the mode, under which head falls individuality,
he does not recognize as essential, or as constituting a moment of true
existence in that existence; for it disappears in existence, or it is not
raised into the Notion.

a. The main point then is that Spinoza proves from these Notions that
there is only One Substance, God. It is a simple chain of reasoning,
a very formal proof. “Fifth Proposition: There cannot be two or more
substances of the same nature or of the same attribute.” This is implied
already in the definitions; the proof is therefore a useless and
wearisome toil, which only serves to render Spinoza more difficult to
understand. “If there were several” (substances of the same attribute)
“they must be distinguished from one another either by the diversity of
their attributes or by the diversity of their affections” (modes). “If
they are distinguished by their attributes, it would be directly conceded
that there is only one substance having the same attribute.” For the
attributes are simply what the understanding grasps as the essence of the
one substance, which is determined in itself, and not through anything
else. “But if these substances were distinguished by their affections,
since substance is by nature prior to its affections it would follow that
if from substance its affections were abstracted and it were regarded
in itself, _i.e._ in its truth, it could henceforth not be regarded as
distinct from other substances.” “Eighth Proposition: All substance is
necessarily infinite. Proof: For otherwise it must be limited by another
substance of the same nature, in which case there would be two substances
of the same attribute, which is contrary to the fifth proposition.”
“Every attribute must be conceived for itself,” as determination
reflected on itself. “For attribute is what the mind conceives of
substance as constituting its essence, from which it follows that it
must be conceived through itself,” _i.e._ substance is what is conceived
through itself (see the fourth and third definitions). “Therefore we may
not argue from the plurality of attributes to a plurality of substances,
for each is conceived by itself, and they have all been, always and at
the same time, in substance, without the possibility of the one being
produced by the other.” “Substance is indivisible. For if the parts
retained the nature of the substance, there would be several substances
of the same nature, which is contrary to the fifth proposition. If not,
infinite substance would cease to exist, which is absurd.”[195]

“Fourteenth Proposition: No other substance than God can either exist or
be conceived. Proof: God is the absolutely infinite substance, to whom
can be denied no attribute which expresses the essence of substance,
and He exists necessarily; therefore if there were a substance other
than God, it must be explained by means of an attribute of God.”
Consequently the substance would not have its own being, but that of
God, and therefore would not be a substance. Or if it were still to be
substance, “then there would necessarily follow the possibility of there
being two substances with the same attribute, which according to the
fifth proposition is absurd. From this it then follows that the thing
extended and the thing that thinks” are not substances, but “are either
attributes of God, or affections of His attributes.” By these proofs and
others like them not much is to be gained. “Fifteenth, proposition: What
is, is in God, and cannot exist or be conceived without God.” “Sixteenth
proposition: By the necessity of the divine nature infinite things must
follow in infinite modes, _i.e._, all that can fall under the infinite
understanding. God is therefore the absolute First Cause.”[196]

Spinoza then ascribes freedom and necessity to God: “God is the absolute
free cause, who is determined by nothing outside of Himself, for He
exists solely by the necessity of His nature. There is no cause which
inwardly or outwardly moves Him to act, except the perfection of His
nature. His activity is by the laws of His Being necessary and eternal;
what therefore follows from His absolute nature, from His attributes,
is eternal, as it follows from the nature of the triangle from eternity
and to eternity that its three angles are equal to two right angles.”
That is to say, His Being is His absolute power; _actus_ and _potentia_,
Thought and Being, are in Him one. God has not therefore any other
thoughts which He could not have actualized. “God is the immanent cause
of all things, not the transient (_transiens_),” _i.e._, external
cause. “His essence and His existence are the same, namely, the truth.
A thing which is determined to perform some action, is, since God is
cause, necessarily determined thereto by God; and a thing which is thus
determined cannot render itself undetermined. In nature nothing is
contingent. Will is not a free cause, but only a necessary cause, only a
mode; it is therefore determined by another. God acts in accordance with
no final causes (_sub ratione boni_). Those who assert that He does so,
appear to establish something apart from God, which does not depend on
God, and which God in His working keeps in view, as though it were an
end. If this view is taken, God is not a free cause, but is subject to
fate. It is equally inadmissible to subject all things to the arbitrary
pleasure of God, _i.e._, to His indifferent will.”[197] He is determined
solely by His own nature; the activity of God is thus His power, and that
is necessity. He is then absolute power in contrast to wisdom, which
sets up definite aims, and consequently limitations; particular aims,
thoughts of what is about to come to pass, and the like are therefore put
out of the question. But beyond this universal, no advance is made; for
it must be noticed as specially singular, that Spinoza in the fiftieth
Letter (Oper. T. I. p. 634) says that every determination is a negation.
Moreover, if God is the cause of the world, it is implied that He is
finite; for the world is here put beside God as something different from
Him.

b. The greatest difficulty in Spinoza is, in the distinctions to which
he comes, to grasp the relation of this determinate to God, at the same
time preserving the determination. “God is a thinking Being, because all
individual thoughts are modes which express God’s nature in a certain
and determinate manner; there pertains therefore to God an attribute the
conception of which all individual thoughts involve, and by means of this
they also are conceived. God is an extended Being for the same reason.”
This means that the same substance, under the attribute of thought, is
the intelligible world, and under the attribute of extension, is nature;
nature and thought thus both express the same Essence of God. Or, as
Spinoza says, “The order and system of natural things is the same as
the order of the thoughts. Thus, for instance, the circle which exists
in nature, and the idea of the existing circle, which is also in God,
are one and the same thing” (they are one and the same content), “which
is” merely “expressed by means of different attributes. If we therefore
regard nature either under the attribute of extension or of thought,
or under any other attribute whatever, we shall find one and the same
connection of causes, _i.e._, the same sequence of things. The formal
Being of the idea of the circle can be conceived only by means of the
mode of thought, as its proximate cause, and this mode again by means of
another, and so on infinitely; so that we must explain the order of the
whole of nature, or the connection of causes, by the attribute of thought
alone, and if things are considered by the attribute of extension, they
must be considered only by the attribute of extension,—and the same holds
good of other causes.”[198] It is one and the same system, which at one
time appears as nature, and at another time in the form of thought.

But Spinoza does not demonstrate how these two are evolved from the
one substance, nor does he prove why there can only be two of them.
Neither are extension and thought anything to him in themselves, or in
truth, but only externally; for their difference is a mere matter of the
understanding, which is ranked by Spinoza only among affections (Eth. P.
I. Prop. XXXI. Demonst. p. 62), and as such has no truth. This has in
recent times been served up again by Schelling in the following form:
In themselves, the intelligent world and the corporeal world are the
same, only under different forms; so that the intelligent universe is in
itself the whole absolute divine totality, and the corporeal universe is
equally this same totality. The differences are not in themselves, but
the different aspects from which the Absolute is regarded are matters
external to it. We take a higher tone in saying that nature and mind
are rational; but reason is for us no empty word, for it means the
totality which develops itself within itself. Again, it is the standpoint
of reflection to regard aspects only, and nothing in itself. This
defect appears in Spinoza and Schelling in the fact that they see no
necessity why the Notion, as the implicit negative of its unity, should
make a separation of itself into different parts; so that out of the
simple universal the real, the opposed, itself becomes known. Absolute
substance, attribute and mode, Spinoza allows to follow one another as
definitions, he adopts them ready-made, without the attributes being
developed from the substance, or the modes from the attributes. And more
especially in regard to the attributes, there is no necessity evident,
why these are thought and extension in particular.

c. When Spinoza passes on to individual things, especially to
self-consciousness, to the freedom of the ‘I,’ he expresses himself in
such a way as rather to lead back all limitations to substance than
to maintain a firm grasp of the individual. Thus we already found the
attributes not to be independent, but only the forms in which the
understanding grasps substance in its differences; what comes third,
the modes, is that under which for Spinoza all difference of things
alone falls. Of the modes he says (Ethic. P. I. Prop. XXXII. Demonst. et
Coroll. II. p. 63): In every attribute there are two modes; in extension,
these are rest and motion, in thought they are understanding and will
(_intellectus et voluntas_). They are mere modifications which only exist
for us apart from God; therefore whatever refers to this difference and
is specially brought about by it, is not absolute, but finite. These
affections Spinoza sums up (Ethices, P. I. Prop. XXIX. Schol. pp. 61, 62)
under the head of _natura naturata_: “_Natura naturans_ is God regarded
as free cause, in so far as He is in Himself and is conceived by Himself:
or such attributes of substance as express the eternal and infinite
essence. By _natura naturata_, I understand all that follows from the
necessity of the divine nature, or from any of the attributes of God,
all modes of the divine attributes, in so far as they are regarded as
things which are in God, and which without God can neither exist nor be
conceived.” From God proceeds nothing, for all things merely return to
the point whence they came, if from themselves the commencement is made.

These then are Spinoza’s general forms, this is his principal idea. Some
further determinations have still to be mentioned. He gives definitions
of the terms modes, understanding, will, and of the affections, such
as joy and sadness.[199] We further find consciousness taken into
consideration. Its development is extremely simple, or rather it is not
developed at all; Spinoza begins directly with mind. “The essence of
man consists of certain modifications of the attributes of God”; these
modifications are only something related to our understanding. “If we,
therefore, say that the human mind perceives this or that, it means
nothing else than that God has this or that idea, not in so far as He
is infinite, but in so far as He is expressed by the idea of the human
mind. And if we say that God has this or that idea, not in so far as
He constitutes the idea of the human mind, but in so far as He has,
along with the human mind, the idea of another thing, then we say that
the human mind perceives the thing partially or inadequately.” Truth
is for Spinoza, on the other hand, the adequate.[200] The idea that
all particular content is only a modification of God is ridiculed by
Bayle,[201] who argues from it that God modified as Turks and Austrians,
is waging war with Himself; but Bayle has not a trace of the speculative
element in him, although he is acute enough as a dialectician, and has
contributed to the intelligent discussion of definite subjects.

The relation of thought and extension in the human consciousness is dealt
with by Spinoza as follows: “What has a place in the object” (or rather
in the objective) “of the idea which constitutes the human mind must be
perceived by the human mind; or there must necessarily be in the mind
an idea of this object. The object of the idea which constitutes the
human mind is body, or a certain mode of extension. If, then, the object
of the idea which constitutes the human mind, is the body, there can
happen nothing in the body which is not perceived by the mind. Otherwise
the ideas of the affections of the body would not be in God, in so far
as He constitutes our mind, but the idea of another thing: that is to
say, the ideas of the affections of our body would not be likewise in
our mind.” What is perplexing to understand in Spinoza’s system is, on
the one hand, the absolute identity of thought and Being, and, on the
other hand, their absolute indifference to one another, because each
of them is a manifestation of the whole essence of God. The unity of
the body and consciousness is, according to Spinoza, this, that the
individual is a mode of the absolute substance, which, as consciousness,
is the representation of the manner in which the body is affected by
external things; all that is in consciousness is also in extension, and
conversely. “Mind knows itself only in so far as it perceives the ideas
of the affections of body,” it has only the idea of the affections of its
body; this idea is synthetic combination, as we shall immediately see.
“The ideas, whether of the attributes of God or of individual things,
do not recognize as their efficient cause their objects themselves, or
the things perceived, but God Himself, in so far as He is that which
thinks.”[202] Buhle (Geschichte der neuern Philos. Vol. III. Section
II. p. 524) sums up these propositions of Spinoza thus: “Thought is
inseparably bound up with extension; therefore all that takes place in
extension must also take place in consciousness.” Spinoza, however, also
accepts both in their separation from one another. The idea of body,
he writes (Epistol. LXVI. p. 673), includes only these two in itself,
and does not express any other attributes. The body which it represents
is regarded under the attribute of extension; but the idea itself is
a mode of thought. Here we see a dividing asunder; mere identity, the
undistinguishable nature of all things in the Absolute, is insufficient
even for Spinoza.

The _individuum_, individuality itself, is thus defined by Spinoza
(Ethic. P. II. Prop. XIII. Defin. p. 92): “When several bodies of the
same or of different magnitudes are so pressed together that they rest on
one another, or when, moving with like or different degrees of rapidity,
they communicate their movement to one another in a certain measure, we
say that such bodies are united to one another, and that all together
they form one body or individuum, which by this union distinguishes
itself from all the other bodies.” Here we are at the extreme limit
of Spinoza’s system, and it is here that his weak point appears.
Individuation, the one, is a mere synthesis; it is quite a different
thing from the Ichts or self-hood of Boehme (_supra_, pp. 205-207), since
Spinoza has only universality, thought, and not self-consciousness. If,
before considering this in reference to the whole, we take it from the
other side, namely from the understanding, the distinction really falls
under that head; it is not deduced, it is found. Thus, as we have already
seen (p. 270) “the understanding in act (_intellectus actu_), as also
will, desire, love, must be referred to _natura naturata_, not to _natura
naturans_. For by the understanding, as recognized for itself, we do not
mean absolute thought, but only a certain mode of thought—a mode which is
distinct from other modes like desire, love, etc., and on that account
must be conceived by means of absolute thought, _i.e._ by means of an
attribute of God which expresses an eternal and infinite essentiality
of thought; without which the understanding, as also the rest of the
modes of thought, could neither be nor be conceived to be.” (Spinoza,
Ethices, P. I. Propos. XXXI. pp. 62, 63). Spinoza is unacquainted with
an infinity of form, which would be something quite different from that
of rigid, unyielding substance. What is requisite is to recognize God as
the essence of essences, as universal substance, identity, and yet to
preserve distinctions.

Spinoza goes on to say: “What constitutes the real (_actuale_) existence
of the human mind is nothing else than the idea of a particular”
(individual) “thing, that actually exists,” not of an infinite thing.
“The essence of man involves no necessary existence, _i.e._ according
to the order of nature a man may just as well be as not be.” For the
human consciousness, as it does not belong to essence as an attribute,
is a mode—a mode of the attribute of thought. But neither is the body,
according to Spinoza, the cause of consciousness, nor is consciousness
the cause of the body, but the finite cause is here only the relation
of like to like; body is determined by body, conception by conception.
“The body can neither determine the mind to thought, nor can the mind
determine the body to motion, or rest, or anything else. For all modes
of thought have God as Cause, in so far as He is a thinking thing, and
not in so far as He is revealed by means of another attribute. What
therefore determines the mind to thought, is a mode of thought and not
of extension; similarly motion and rest of the body must be derived from
another body.”[203] I might quote many other such particular propositions
from Spinoza, but they are very formal, and a continual repetition of one
and the same thing.

Buhle (Gesch. d. neuern Phil. Vol. III. Section 2, pp. 525-528),
attributes limited conceptions to Spinoza: “The soul experiences in the
body all the ‘other’ of which it becomes aware as outside of the body,
and it becomes aware of this ‘other’ only by means of the conceptions
of the qualities which the body perceives therein. If, therefore, the
body can perceive no qualities of a thing, the soul also can come to
no knowledge of it. On the other hand, the soul is equally unable to
arrive at the perception of the body which belongs to it; the soul knows
not that the body is there, and knows itself even in no other way than
by means of the qualities which the body perceives in things which are
outside of it, and by means of the conceptions of the same. For the
body is an individual thing, determined in a certain manner, which can
only gradually, in association with and amidst other individual things,
attain to existence, and can preserve itself in existence only as thus
connected, combined and associated with others,” _i.e._ in infinite
progress; the body can by no means be conceived from itself. “The soul’s
consciousness expresses a certain determinate form of a Notion, as the
Notion itself expresses a determinate form of an individual thing. But
the individual thing, its Notion, and the Notion of this Notion are
altogether and entirely one and the same thing, only regarded under
different attributes. As the soul is nothing else than the immediate
Notion of the body, and is one and the same thing with this, the
excellence of the soul can never be anything else than the excellence
of the body. The capacities of the understanding are nothing but the
capacities of the body, if they are looked at from the corporeal point of
view, and the decisions of the will are likewise determinations of the
body. Individual things are derived from God in an eternal and infinite
manner” (_i.e._ once and for all), “and not in a transitory, finite and
evanescent manner: they are derived from one another merely inasmuch
as they mutually produce and destroy each other, but in their eternal
existence they endure unchangeable. All individual things mutually
presuppose each other; one cannot be thought without the other; that is
to say they constitute together an inseparable whole; they exist side
by side in one utterly indivisible, infinite Thing, and in no other way
whatever.”

3. We have now to speak of Spinoza’s system of morals, and that is
a subject of importance. Its great principle is no other than this,
that the finite spirit is moral in so far as it has the true Idea,
_i.e._ in so far as it directs its knowledge and will on God, for
truth is merely the knowledge of God. It may be said that there is no
morality loftier than this, since its only requisite is to have a clear
idea of God. The first thing Spinoza speaks of in this regard is the
affections: “Everything strives after self-preservation. This striving
is the actual essence of the thing, and involves only indefinite time;
when referred exclusively to mind, it is termed will; when referred to
both mind and body together, it is called desire. Determination of
the will (_volitio_) and Idea are one and the same thing. The sense of
liberty rests on this, that men do not know the determining causes of
their actions. The affection is a confused idea; the more clearly and
distinctly, therefore, we know the affection, the more it is under our
control.”[204] The influence of the affections, as confused and limited
(inadequate) ideas, upon human action, constitutes therefore, according
to Spinoza, human slavery; of the passionate affections the principal are
joy and sorrow; we are in suffering and slavery in so far as we relate
ourselves as a part.[205]

“Our happiness and liberty consist in an enduring and eternal love to
God; this intellectual love follows from the nature of mind, in so far
as it is regarded as eternal truth through the nature of God. The more
a man recognizes God’s existence and loves Him, the less does he suffer
from evil affections and the less is his fear of death.”[206] Spinoza
requires in addition the true kind of knowledge. There are, according to
him, three kinds of knowledge; in the first, which he calls opinion and
imagination, he includes the knowledge which we obtain from an individual
object through the senses—a knowledge fragmentary and ill-arranged—also
knowledge drawn from signs, pictorial conceptions and memory. The second
kind of knowledge is for Spinoza that which we derive from general
conceptions and adequate ideas of the properties of things. The third
is intuitive knowledge (_scientia intuitiva_) which rises from the
adequate idea of the formal essence of certain attributes of God to
the adequate knowledge of the essence of things.[207] Regarding this
last he then says: “The nature of reason is not to contemplate things
as contingent, but as necessary ... to think of all things under a
certain form of eternity (_sub quadam specie œternitatis_);” _i.e._ in
absolutely adequate Notions, _i.e._ in God. “For the necessity of things
is the necessity of the eternal nature of God Himself. Every idea of an
individual thing necessarily includes the eternal and infinite essence of
God in itself. For individual things are modes of an attribute of God;
therefore they must include in themselves His eternal essence. Our mind,
in so far as it knows itself and the body under the form of eternity,
has to that extent necessarily the knowledge of God, and knows that it
is itself in God and is conceived through God. All Ideas, in so far
as they are referable to God, are true.”[208] Man must trace back all
things to God, for God is the One in All; the eternal essence of God is
the one thing that is, the eternal truth is the only thing for man to
aim at in his actions. With Spinoza this is not a knowledge arrived at
through philosophy, but only knowledge of a truth. “The mind can succeed
in tracing back all affections of the body or images of things to God. In
proportion as the mind regards all things as necessary, it has a greater
power over its affections,” which are arbitrary and contingent. This is
the return of the mind to God, and this is human freedom; as mode, on the
other hand, the spirit has no freedom, but is determined from without.
“From the third kind of knowledge there arises the repose of the mind;
the supreme good of the mind is to know God, and this is its highest
virtue. This knowledge necessarily produces the intellectual love of
God; for it produces a joyfulness accompanied by the Idea of God as
cause—_i.e._ the intellectual love of God. God Himself loves Himself with
an infinite intellectual love.”[209] For God can have only Himself as aim
and cause; and the end of the subjective mind is to be directed on Him.
This is therefore the purest, but also a universal morality.

In the thirty-sixth Letter (pp. 581-582) Spinoza speaks of Evil. The
allegation is made that God, as the originator of all things and
everything, is also the originator of evil, is consequently Himself evil;
in this identity all things are one, good and evil are in themselves the
same thing, in God’s substance this difference has disappeared. Spinoza
says in answer to this: “I assert the fact that God absolutely and truly”
(as cause of Himself) “is the cause of everything that has an essential
content” (_i.e._ affirmative reality) “be it what it may. Now if you can
prove to me that evil, error, crime, etc., are something that expresses
an essence, I will freely admit to you that God is the originator of
crime and evil and error. But I have elsewhere abundantly demonstrated
that the form of evil cannot subsist in anything that expresses an
essence, and therefore it cannot be said that God is the cause of evil.”
Evil is merely negation, privation, limitation, finality, mode—nothing
in itself truly real. “Nero’s murder of his mother, in so far as it had
positive content, was no crime. For Orestes did the same external deed,
and had in doing it the same end in view—to kill his mother; and yet he
is not blamed,” and so on. The affirmative is the will, the intention,
the act of Nero. “Wherein then consists Nero’s criminality? In nothing
else but that he proved himself ungrateful, merciless, and disobedient.
But it is certain that all this expresses no essence, and therefore
God was not the cause of it, though He was the cause of Nero’s action
and intention.” These last are something positive, but yet they do not
constitute the crime as such; it is only the negative element, such
as mercilessness, etc. that makes the action a crime. “We know that
whatever exists, regarded in itself and without taking anything else
into consideration, contains a perfection which extends as widely as
the essence of the thing itself extends, for the essence is in no way
different therefrom.”—“Because then,” we find in the thirty-second letter
(pp. 541, 543), “God does not regard things abstractly, or form general
definitions,” (of what the thing ought to be) “and no more reality is
required of things than the Divine understanding and power has given
and actually meted out to them; therefore it clearly follows that such
privation exists only and solely in respect to our understanding, but
not in respect to God;” for God is absolutely real. It is all very well
to say this, but it does not meet the case. For in this way God and
the respect to our understanding are different. Where is their unity?
How is this to be conceived? Spinoza continues in the thirty-sixth
letter: “Although the works of the righteous (_i.e._ of those who have
a clear idea of God, to which they direct all their actions and even
their thoughts), and” also the works “of the wicked (_i.e._ of those
who have no idea of God, but only ideas of earthly things,”—individual,
personal interests and opinions,—“by which their actions and thoughts
are directed), and all whatsoever exists, necessarily proceed from God’s
eternal laws and counsels, and perpetually depend on God, they are
yet not distinguished from one another in degree, but in essence; for
although a mouse as well as an angel depends on God, and sorrow as well
as joy, yet a mouse cannot be a kind of angel, and sorrow cannot be a
kind of joy,”—they are different in essence.

There is therefore no ground for the objection that Spinoza’s philosophy
gives the death-blow to morality; we even gain from it the great result
that all that is sensuous is mere limitation, and that there is only one
true substance, and that human liberty consists in keeping in view this
one substance, and in regulating all our conduct in accordance with the
mind and will of the Eternal One. But in this philosophy it may with
justice be objected that God is conceived only as Substance, and not
as Spirit, as concrete. The independence of the human soul is therein
also denied, while in the Christian religion every individual appears as
determined to salvation. Here, on the contrary, the individual spirit is
only a mode, an accident, but not anything substantial. This brings us to
a general criticism of the philosophy of Spinoza, in the course of which
we shall consider it from three different points of view.

In the first place Spinozism is asserted to be Atheism—by Jacobi, for
instance (Werke, Vol. IV. Section I. p. 216)—because in it no distinction
is drawn between God and the world; it makes nature the real God, or
lowers God to the level of nature, so that God disappears and only nature
is established. But it is not so much God and nature that Spinoza sets up
in mutual opposition, as thought and extension; and God is unity, not One
made up of two, but absolute Substance, in which has really disappeared
the limitation of the subjectivity of thought and nature. Those who
speak against Spinoza do so as if it were on God’s account that they
were interested; but what these opponents are really concerned about is
not God, but the finite—themselves. The relationship between God and the
finite, to which we belong, may be represented in three different ways:
firstly, only the finite exists, and in this way we alone exist, but God
does not exist—this is atheism; the finite is here taken absolutely,
and is accordingly the substantial. Or, in the second place, God alone
exists; the finite has no reality, it is only phenomena, appearance. To
say, in the third place, that God exists and we also exist is a false
synthetic union, an amicable compromise. It is the popular view of the
matter that the one side has as much substantiality as the other; God
is honoured and supreme, but finite things also have Being to exactly
the same extent. Reason cannot remain satisfied with this “also,” with
indifference like this. The philosophic requisite is therefore to
apprehend the unity of these differences in such a way that difference
is not let slip, but proceeds eternally from substance, without being
petrified into dualism. Spinoza is raised above this dualism; religion is
so also, if we turn its popular conceptions into thoughts. The atheism
of the first attitude—when men set up as ultimate the arbitrariness of
the will, their own vanity, the finite things of nature, and the world
dwells for ever in the mind—is not the standpoint of Spinoza, for whom
God is the one and only substance, the world on the contrary being merely
an affection or mode of this substance. In the respect that Spinoza does
not distinguish God from the world, the finite, it is therefore correct
to term his theory atheism, for his words are these: Nature, the human
mind, the individual, are God revealed under particular forms. It has
been already remarked (pp. 257, 258, 280) that undoubtedly Substance
with Spinoza does not perfectly fulfil the conception of God, since
it is as Spirit that He is to be conceived. But if Spinoza is called
an atheist for the sole reason that he does not distinguish God from
the world, it is a misuse of the term. Spinozism might really just as
well or even better have been termed Acosmism, since according to its
teaching it is not to the world, finite existence, the universe, that
reality and permanency are to be ascribed, but rather to God alone
as the substantial. Spinoza maintains that there is no such thing as
what is known as the world; it is merely a form of God, and in and for
itself it is nothing. The world has no true reality, and all this that
we know as the world has been cast into the abyss of the one identity.
There is therefore no such thing as finite reality, it has no truth
whatever; according to Spinoza what is, is God, and God alone. Therefore
the allegations of those who accuse Spinoza of atheism are the direct
opposite of the truth; with him there is too much God. They say: If
God is the identity of mind and nature, then nature or the individual
man is God. This is quite correct, but they forget that nature and the
individual disappear in this same identity: and they cannot forgive
Spinoza for thus annihilating them. Those who defame him in such a way
as this are therefore not aiming at maintaining God, but at maintaining
the finite and the worldly; they do not fancy their own extinction and
that of the world. Spinoza’s system is absolute pantheism and monotheism
elevated into thought. Spinozism is therefore very far removed from being
atheism in the ordinary sense; but in the sense that God is not conceived
as spirit, it is atheism. However, in the same way many theologians are
also atheists who speak of God only as the Almighty Supreme Being, etc.,
who refuse to acknowledge God, and who admit the validity and truth of
the finite. They are many degrees worse than Spinoza.

The second point to be considered is the method adopted by Spinoza for
setting forth his philosophy; it is the demonstrative method of geometry
as employed by Euclid, in which we find definitions, explanations,
axioms, and theorems. Even Descartes made it his starting-point that
philosophic propositions must be mathematically handled and proved, that
they must have the very same evidence as mathematics. The mathematical
method is considered superior to all others, on account of the nature
of its evidence; and it is natural that independent knowledge in its
re-awakening lighted first upon this form, of which it saw so brilliant
an example. The mathematical method is, however, ill-adapted for
speculative content, and finds its proper place only in the finite
sciences of the understanding. In modern times Jacobi has asserted
(Werke, Vol. IV. Section I. pp. 217-223) that all demonstration, all
scientific knowledge leads back to Spinozism, which alone is a logical
method of thought; and because it must lead thither, it is really of
no service whatever, but immediate knowledge is what we must depend on.
It may be conceded to Jacobi that the method of demonstration leads
to Spinozism, if we understand thereby merely the method of knowledge
belonging to the understanding. But the fact is that Spinoza is made a
testing-point in modern philosophy, so that it may really be said: You
are either a Spinozist or not a philosopher at all. This being so, the
mathematical and demonstrative method of Spinoza would seem to be only
a defect in the external form; but it is the fundamental defect of the
whole position. In this method the nature of philosophic knowledge and
the object thereof, are entirely misconceived, for mathematical knowledge
and method are merely formal in character and consequently altogether
unsuited for philosophy. Mathematical knowledge exhibits its proof on
the existent object as such, not on the object as conceived; the Notion
is lacking throughout; the content of Philosophy, however, is simply
the Notion and that which is comprehended by the Notion. Therefore this
Notion as the knowledge of the essence is simply one assumed, which falls
within the philosophic subject; and this is what represents itself to
be the method peculiar to Spinoza’s philosophy. Of this demonstrative
manner we have already seen these examples: (α) The definitions from
which Spinoza takes his start—as in geometry a commencement is made
with the line, triangle, &c.—concern universal determinations, such as
cause of itself, the finite, substance, attribute, mode, and so on,
which are solely and simply accepted and assumed, not deduced, nor
proved to be necessary: for Spinoza is not aware of how he arrives at
these individual determinations. (β) He further speaks of axioms, for
instance (Ethic. P. I. Ax. I. p. 36): “What is, is either in itself or
in another.” The determinations “in itself” and “in another” are not
shown forth in their necessity: neither is this disjunction proved, it
is merely assumed. (γ) The propositions have, as such, a subject and
predicate which are not similar. When the predicate is proved of the
subject and necessarily combined with it, the discrepancy remains that
the one as universal is related to the other as particular: therefore
even although the relation is proved, there is present at the same time
a secondary relation. Mathematical science, in its true propositions
respecting a whole, escapes from the difficulty by proving also the
converse of the propositions, in this way obtaining for them a special
definiteness by proving each proposition in both ways. True propositions
may, therefore, be looked on as definitions, and the conversion is the
proof of the proposition in the form in which it is expressed. But this
means of escaping the difficulty Philosophy cannot well employ, since
the subject of which something is proved is itself only the Notion or
the universal, and the proposition form is therefore quite superfluous
and out of place. What has the form of the subject is in the form of an
existent thing, as contrasted with the universal, the content of the
proposition. The existent thing is taken as signifying existent in the
ordinary sense; it is the word which we use in every-day life, and of
which we have a conception that has nothing of the Notion in it. The
converse of a proposition would simply read like this: The Notion is
that which is thus popularly conceived. This proof from the usage of
language—that we also understand this to be the meaning in every-day
life, or in other words that the name is correct—has no philosophic
significance. But if the proposition is not one like this, but an
ordinary proposition, and if the predicate is not the Notion, but some
general term or other, a predicate of the subject, such propositions are
really not philosophic: we might instance the statement that substance
is one and not several, but only that in which substance and unity are
the same. Or, in other words, this unity of the two moments is the very
thing which the proof has to demonstrate, it is the Notion or the
essence. In this case it looks as if the proposition were the matter
of chief importance, the truth. But if in these really only so-called
propositions, subject and predicate are in truth not alike, because one
is individual and the other universal, their relation is essential,
_i.e._ the reason for which they are one. The proof has here a false
position indeed, as if that subject were implicit or in itself, whereas
subject and predicate are, fundamentally even, moments in separation;
in the judgment “God is One,” the subject itself is universal, since
it resolves itself into unity. On the other side it is implied in this
false position that the proof is brought in from outside merely, as in
mathematics from a preceding proposition, and that the proposition is not
therefore conceived through itself; thus we see the ordinary method of
proof take its middle term, the principle, from anywhere it can, in the
same way as in classification it takes its principle of classification.
The proposition is then, as it were, a secondary affair; but we must
ask if this proposition is true. The result as proposition ought to be
truth, but is only knowledge. The movement of knowledge, as proof, falls
therefore, in the third place, outside of the proposition, which ought
to be the truth. The essential moments of the system are really already
completely contained in the presuppositions of the definitions, from
which all further proofs have merely to be deduced. But whence have we
these categories which here appear as definitions? We find them doubtless
in ourselves, in scientific culture. The existence of the understanding,
the will, extension, is therefore not developed from infinite substance,
but it is directly expressed in these determinations, and that quite
naturally; for of a truth there exists the One into which everything
enters, in order to be absorbed therein, but out of which nothing comes.
For as Spinoza has set up the great proposition, all determination
implies negation (_supra_, p. 267), and as of everything, even of thought
in contrast to extension, it may be shown that it is determined and
finite, what is essential in it rests upon negation. Therefore God alone
is the positive, the affirmative, and consequently the one substance;
all other things, on the contrary, are only modifications of this
substance, and are nothing in and for themselves. Simple determination or
negation belongs only to form, but is quite another thing from absolute
determinateness or negativity, which is absolute form; in this way
of looking at it negation is the negation of negation, and therefore
true affirmation. This negative self-conscious moment, the movement of
knowledge, which pursues its way in the thought which is present before
us, is however certainly lacking to the content of Spinoza’s philosophy,
or at least it is only externally associated with it, since it falls
within self-consciousness. That is to say, thoughts form the content, but
they are not self-conscious thoughts or Notions: the content signifies
thought, as pure abstract self-consciousness, but an unreasoning
knowledge, into which the individual does not enter: the content has
not the signification of ‘I.’ Therefore the case is as in mathematics;
a proof is certainly given, conviction must follow, but yet the matter
fails to be understood. There is a rigid necessity in the proof, to
which the moment of self-consciousness is lacking; the ‘I’ disappears,
gives itself altogether up, merely withers away. Spinoza’s procedure
is therefore quite correct; yet the individual proposition is false,
seeing that it expresses only one side of the negation. The understanding
has determinations which do not contradict one another; contradiction
the understanding cannot suffer. The negation of negation is, however,
contradiction, for in that it negates negation as simple determination,
it is on the one hand affirmation, but on the other hand also really
negation; and this contradiction, which is a matter pertaining to reason,
is lacking in the case of Spinoza. There is lacking the infinite form,
spirituality and liberty. I have already mentioned before this (pp. 93,
94; 129-137) that Lullus and Bruno attempted to draw up a system of form,
which should embrace and comprehend the one substance which organizes
itself into the universe; this attempt Spinoza did not make.

Because negation was thus conceived by Spinoza in one-sided fashion
merely, there is, in the third place, in his system, an utter blotting
out of the principle of subjectivity, individuality, personality, the
moment of self-consciousness in Being. Thought has only the signification
of the universal, not of self-consciousness. It is this lack which has,
on the one side, brought the conception of the liberty of the subject
into such vehement antagonism to the system of Spinoza, because it
set aside the independence of the human consciousness, the so-called
liberty which is merely the empty abstraction of independence, and in
so doing set aside God, as distinguished from nature and the human
consciousness—that is as implicit or in Himself, in the Absolute; for
man has the consciousness of freedom, of the spiritual, which is the
negative of the corporeal, and man has also the consciousness that his
true Being lies in what is opposed to the corporeal. This has been
firmly maintained by religion, theology, and the sound common sense of
the common consciousness, and this form of opposition to Spinoza appears
first of all in the assertion that freedom is real, and that evil exists.
But because for Spinoza, on the other hand, there exists only absolute
universal substance as the non-particularized, the truly real—all that is
particular and individual, my subjectivity and spirituality, has, on the
other hand, as a limited modification whose Notion depends on another,
no absolute existence. Thus the soul, the Spirit, in so far as it is
an individual Being, is for Spinoza a mere negation, like everything
in general that is determined. As all differences and determinations
of things and of consciousness simply go back into the One substance,
one may say that in the system of Spinoza all things are merely cast
down into this abyss of annihilation. But from this abyss nothing comes
out; and the particular of which Spinoza speaks is only assumed and
presupposed from the ordinary conception, without being justified. Were
it to be justified, Spinoza would have to deduce it from his Substance;
but that does not open itself out, and therefore comes to no vitality,
spirituality or activity. His philosophy has only a rigid and unyielding
substance, and not yet spirit; in it we are not at home with ourselves.
But the reason that God is not spirit is that He is not the Three in
One. Substance remains rigid and petrified, without Boehme’s sources or
springs; for the individual determinations in the form of determinations
of the understanding are not Boehme’s originating spirits, which energize
and expand in one another (_supra_, pp. 202, 203). What we find regarding
this particular then is that it is only a modification of absolute
substance, which, however, is not declared to be such; for the moment of
negativity is what is lacking to this rigid motionlessness, whose single
form of activity is this, to divest all things of their determination
and particularity and cast them back into the one absolute substance,
wherein they are simply swallowed up, and all life in itself is utterly
destroyed. This is what we find philosophically inadequate with Spinoza;
distinctions are externally present, it is true, but they remain
external, since even the negative is not known in itself. Thought is the
absolutely abstract, and for that very reason the absolutely negative; it
is so in truth, but with Spinoza it is not asserted to be the absolutely
negative. But if in opposition to Spinozism we hold fast to the assertion
that Spirit, as distinguishing itself from the corporeal, is substantial,
actual, true, and in the same way that freedom is not something merely
privative, then this actuality in formal thought is doubtless correct,
yet it rests only upon feeling; but the further step is that the Idea
essentially includes within itself motion and vitality, and that it
consequently has in itself the principle of spiritual freedom. On the one
hand, therefore, the defect of Spinozism is conceived as consisting in
its want of correspondence with actuality; but on the other side it is to
be apprehended in a higher sense, I mean in the sense that substance with
Spinoza is only the Idea taken altogether abstractly, not in its vitality.

If, in conclusion, we sum up this criticism that we have offered, we
would say that on the one hand with Spinoza negation or privation is
distinct from substance; for he merely assumes individual determinations,
and does not deduce them from substance. On the other hand the negation
is present only as Nothing, for in the absolute there is no mode; the
negative is not there, but only its dissolution, its return: we do not
find its movement, its Becoming and Being. The negative is conceived
altogether as a vanishing moment—not in itself, but only as individual
self-consciousness; it is not like the _Separator_ we met with in
Boehme’s system (_supra_, p. 206). Self-consciousness is born from this
ocean, dripping with the water thereof, _i.e._ never coming to absolute
self-hood; the heart, the independence is transfixed—the vital fire is
wanting. This lack has to be supplied, the moment of self-consciousness
has to be added. It has the following two special aspects, which we
now perceive emerging and gaining acceptance; in the first place the
objective aspect, that absolute essence obtains in self-consciousness
the mode of an object of consciousness for which the “other” exists, or
the existent as such, and that what Spinoza understood by the “modes” is
elevated to objective reality as an absolute moment of the absolute; in
the second place we have the aspect of self-consciousness, individuality,
independence. As was formerly the case with respect to Bacon and Boehme,
the former aspect is here taken up by the Englishman, John Locke, the
latter by the German Leibnitz; in the first case it did not appear
as a moment, nor did it in the second appear as absolute Notion. Now
while Spinoza only takes notice of these ordinary conceptions, and the
highest point of view he reaches in regard to them is that they sink
and disappear in the one Substance, Locke on the contrary examines the
genesis of these conceptions, while Leibnitz opposes to Spinoza the
infinite multiplicity of individuals, although all these monads have one
monad as the basis of their Being. Both Locke and Leibnitz therefore came
forward as opponents of the above-mentioned one-sidedness of Spinoza.


3. MALEBRANCHE.

The philosophy of Malebranche is in point of matter entirely identical
with that of Spinoza, but it has another, a more religious and more
theological form; on account of this form it never encountered the
opposition met with by Spinoza, and for the same reason Malebranche has
never been reproached with Atheism.

Nicholas Malebranche was born at Paris in 1638. He was sickly and
deformed in body, and was hence brought up with great care. He was
diffident and loved solitude; in his twenty-second year he entered the
_congrégation de l’oratoire_, a sort of spiritual order, and devoted
himself to the sciences. In passing a bookseller’s shop he happened
accidentally to see Descartes’ work _De homine_; he read it, and it
interested him greatly—so much so that the reading of it brought on
severe palpitation and he was forced to cease. This decided his future
life; there awoke in him an irrepressible inclination for Philosophy. He
was a man of most noble and gentle character, and of the most genuine and
unswerving piety. He died at Paris in 1715, and in the seventy-seventh
year of his age.[210] His principal work bears the title: _De la
recherche de la vérité_. One part of it is entirely metaphysical, but the
greater part is altogether empirical. For instance, Malebranche in the
first three books treats logically and psychologically of the errors in
sight and hearing, in the imagination and understanding.

a. What is most important in this book is his idea of the origin of our
knowledge. He says: “The essence of the soul is in thought, just as that
of matter is in extension. All else, such as sensation, imagination and
will, are modifications of thought”. He thus begins with two sides,
between which he sets an absolute chasm, and then he follows out in
detail the Cartesian idea of the assistance of God in knowledge. His main
point is that “the soul cannot attain to its conceptions and notions
from external things.” For when I and the thing are clearly independent
of one another and have nothing in common, the two can certainly not
enter into relation with one another nor be for one another. “Bodies are
impenetrable; their images would destroy one another on the way to the
organs.” But further: “The soul cannot beget ideas from itself, nor can
they be inborn,” for as “Augustine has said, ‘Say not that ye yourselves
are your own light.’” But how then comes extension, the manifold, into
the simple, into the spirit, since it is the reverse of the simple,
namely the diverse? This question regarding the association of thought
and extension is always an important one in Philosophy. According to
Malebranche the answer is, “That we see all things in God.” God Himself
is the connection between us and them, and thus the unity between the
thing and thought. “God has in Him the ideas of all things because He has
created all; God is through His omnipresence united in the most intimate
way with spirits. God thus is the place of spirits,” the Universal
of spirit, “just as space” is the universal, “the place of bodies.
Consequently the soul knows in God what is in Him,” bodies, “inasmuch
as He sets forth” (inwardly conceives) “created existence, because all
this is spiritual, intellectual, and present to the soul.”[211] Because
things and God are intellectual and we too are intellectual, we perceive
them in God as they are, so to speak, intellectual in Him. If this be
further analyzed it in no way differs from Spinozism. Malebranche indeed
in a popular way allows soul and things to subsist as independent,
but this independence vanishes away like smoke when the principle is
firmly grasped. The catechism says: “God is omnipresent,” and if this
omnipresence be developed Spinozism is arrived at; and yet theologians
then proceed to speak against the system of identity, and cry out about
Pantheism.

b. We must further remark that Malebranche also makes the universal,
thought, the essential, by placing it before the particular. “The soul
has the Notion of the infinite and universal: it knows nothing excepting
through the Idea which it has of the infinite; this Idea must hence come
first. The universal is not a mere confusion of individual ideas, it is
not a union of individual things.” According to Locke the individual from
which the universal is formed precedes (_infra_, p. 299); according to
Malebranche the universal Idea is what comes first in man. “If we wish
to think of anything particular we think first of the universal;” it is
the principle of the particular, as space is of things. All essentiality
precedes our particular conceptions, and this essentiality comes
first. “All essential existences (_essences_) come before our ordinary
conception; they cannot be such excepting by God’s presence in the mind
and spirit. He it is who contains all things in the simplicity of His
nature. It seems evident that mind would not be capable of representing
to itself the universal Notions of species, kind, and suchlike, if it
did not see all things comprehended in one.” The universal is thus in and
for itself, and it does not take its rise through the particular. “Since
each existent thing is an individual, we cannot say that we see something
actually created when, for example, we see a triangle in general,” for
we see it through God. “No account can be given of how spirit knows
abstract and common truths, excepting through the presence of Him who can
enlighten spirit in an infinite way,” because He is in and for Himself
the universal. “We have a clear idea of God,” of the universal: “We can
have such only through union with Him, for this idea is not a created
one,” but is in and for itself. As with Spinoza, the one universal is
God, and in so far as it is determined, it is the particular; we see
this particular only in the universal, as we see bodies in space. “We
already have a conception of infinite Being, inasmuch as we have a
conception of Being without regard to whether it is finite or infinite.
To know a finite we must limit the infinite; and this last must thus
precede. Thus spirit perceives all in the infinite; this is so far
from being a confused conception of many particular things that all
particular conceptions are merely participations in the universal Idea
of infinitude—in the same way that God does not receive this Being from”
finite “creatures, but,” on the contrary, “all creatures only subsist
through Him.”[212]

c. As regards the turning of the soul to God, Malebranche says what
Spinoza said from his ethical point of view: “It is impossible that God
should have an end other than Himself (the Holy Scriptures place this
beyond doubt);” the will of God can only have the good, what is without
doubt universal as its end. “Hence not only is it essential that our
natural love, _i.e._ the emotion which He brings forth in our spirit,
should strive after Him”—“the will is really love towards God”—“but
it is likewise impossible that the knowledge and the light which He
gives to our spirit should make anything else known than what is in
Him,” for thought only exists in unity with God. “If God were to make
a spirit and give it the sun as an idea or as the immediate object of
its knowledge, God would have made this spirit and the idea of this
spirit for the sun and not for Himself.” All natural love, and still
more knowledge, and the desire after truth, have God as their end. “All
motions of the will as regards the creatures are only determinations of
motion as regards the creator.” Malebranche quotes from Augustine “that
we see God even from the time we first enter upon this life (_dès cette
vie_), through the knowledge that we have of eternal truths. The truth
is uncreated, unchangeable, immeasurable, eternal above all things; it
is true through itself, and has its perfection from no thing. It makes
the creator more perfect, and all spirits naturally seek to know it:
now there is nothing that has these perfections but God, and thus the
truth is God. We perceive these unchangeable and eternal truths, hence
we see God.” “God indeed sees but He does not feel sensuous things. If
we see something sensuous, sensation and pure thought are to be found
in our consciousness. Sensation is a modification of our spirit; God
occasions this because He knows that our soul is capable of it. The Idea
which is bound up with the sensation is in God; we see it, etc. This
relation, this union of our mind and spirit with the Word (_Verbe_) of
God, and of our will with His love, is that we are formed after the
image of God and in His likeness.”[213] Thus the love of God consists in
relating one’s affections to the Idea of God; whoever knows himself and
thinks his affections clearly, loves God. We further find sundry empty
litanies concerning God, a catechism for children of eight years of age
respecting goodness, justice, omnipresence, the moral order of the world;
in all their lifetime theologians do not get any further.

We have given the principal of Malebranche’s ideas; the remainder of his
philosophy is composed partly of formal logic, and partly of empirical
psychology. He passes to the treatment of errors, how they arise, how
the senses, the imagination, the understanding, deceive us, and how we
must conduct ourselves in order to effect a remedy. Then Malebranche goes
on (T. III. L. VI. P. I. chap. i. pp. 1-3) to the rules and laws for
recognizing the truth. Thus here the term Philosophy was even applied
to the manner in which reflections on particular objects are drawn from
formal logic and external facts.


B. SECOND DIVISION.

It was Locke who became the instrument of setting forth this entire
manner of thinking in a systematic way, for he worked out Bacon’s
position more fully. And if Bacon made sensuous Being to be the truth,
Locke demonstrated the universal, Thought, to be present in sensuous
Being, or showed that we obtained the universal, the true, from
experience. From Locke a wide culture proceeds, influencing English
philosophers more especially; the forms adopted by this school were
various, but the principle was the same; it became a general method of
regarding things in a popular way, and calls itself Philosophy, although
the object of Philosophy is not to be met with here.


1. LOCKE.

When experience means that the Notion has objective actuality for
consciousness, it is indeed a necessary element in the totality; but
as this reflection appears in Locke, signifying as it does that we
obtain truth by abstraction from experience and sensuous perception,
it is utterly false, since, instead of being a moment, it is made the
essence of the truth. It is no doubt true that against the hypothesis
of the inward immediacy of the Idea, and against the method of setting
it forth in definitions and axioms, as also against absolute substance,
the demand that ideas should be represented as results, and the claims
of individuality and self-consciousness, assert their rights to
recognition. In the philosophy of Locke and Leibnitz, however, these
necessities make themselves known in an imperfect manner only; the one
fact which is common to both philosophers is that they, in opposition to
Spinoza and Malebranche, take for their principle the particular, finite
determinateness and the individual. According to Spinoza and Malebranche
substance or the universal is the true, the sole existent, the eternal,
that which is in and for itself, without origin, and of which particular
things are only modifications which are conceived through substance. But
hereby Spinoza has done an injury to this negative; he hence arrived at
no immanent determination, for all that is determined and individual
is merely annihilated in his system. Now, on the contrary, the general
inclination of consciousness is to maintain the difference, partly
in order to mark itself out as implicitly free in opposition to its
object—Being, nature, and God, and partly in order to recognize the unity
in this opposition, and from the opposition itself to make the unity
emerge. But those who were the instruments of this tendency comprehended
themselves but little, they had still no clear consciousness of their
task, nor of the manner in which their claims could be satisfied. With
Locke, this principle makes its first entrance into Philosophy in a
manner so completely at variance with the inflexible undifferentiated
identity of the substance of Spinoza, that the sensuous and limited, the
immediate present and existent, is the main and fundamental matter. Locke
does not get beyond the ordinary point of view of consciousness, viz.
that objects outside of us are the real and the true. The finite is thus
not grasped by Locke as absolute negativity, _i.e._ in its infinitude;
this we shall not find until we come to deal in the third place with
Leibnitz. It is in a higher sense that Leibnitz asserts individuality,
the differentiated, to be self-existent and indeed objectless, to be
true Being. That is to say, it is not according to him finite, but is
yet distinguished; thus, each monad is itself the totality. Leibnitz
and Locke hence likewise stand in a position of mutual independence and
antagonism.

John Locke was born in 1632, at Wrington, in England. He studied for
himself the Cartesian philosophy at Oxford, setting aside the scholastic
philosophy which was still in vogue. He devoted himself to the study of
medicine, which, however, on account of his delicate health, he never
really practised. In 1664 he went with an English ambassador for a year
to Berlin. After his return to England, he became acquainted with the
intellectual Earl of Shaftesbury of that time, who availed himself of his
medical advice, and in whose house he lived without requiring to give
himself up to practice. When Lord Shaftesbury became Lord Chancellor
of England, Locke received an office from him, which, however, he soon
lost by a change of ministry. Owing to his dread of falling a prey to
consumption, he betook himself in 1675 to Montpellier for the benefit of
his health. When his patron came into power again he once more recovered
the place he had lost, only to be again deposed on a fresh overthrow of
this minister, and he was now compelled to flee from England. “The act by
means of which Locke was driven from Oxford” (what post he held there we
are not told) “was not an enactment of the University, but of James II.,
by whose express command, and by the peremptory authority of a written
warrant, the expulsion was carried out. From the correspondence that took
place, it is evident that the college submitted itself against its will
to a measure which it could not resist without compromising the peace
and quiet of its members.” Locke went to Holland, which was at that time
the land wherein all who were obliged to effect their escape from any
oppression, whether political or religious, found protection, and in
which the most famous and liberal-minded men were to be met with. The
Court party persecuted him even here, and by royal warrant he was ordered
to be taken prisoner and sent to England; consequently he had to remain
hidden with his friends. When William of Orange ascended the English
throne, after the Revolution of 1688, Locke returned with him to England.
He was there made Commissioner of Trade and Plantations, gave to the
world his famous treatise on the Human Understanding, and finally, having
withdrawn from public office on account of the delicacy of his health,
he spent his remaining years in the country houses of English nobles; he
died on the 28th day of October, 1704, in the seventy-third year of his
life.[214]

The philosophy of Locke is much esteemed; it is still, for the most part,
the philosophy of the English and the French, and likewise in a certain
sense of the Germans. To put it in a few words, it asserts on the one
hand that truth and knowledge rest upon experience and observation; and
on the other the analysis of and abstraction from general determinations
is prescribed as the method of knowledge; it is, so to speak, a
metaphysical empiricism, and this is the ordinary method adopted in the
sciences. In respect of method, Locke thus employs an exactly opposite
system to that of Spinoza. In the methods of Spinoza and Descartes an
account of the origin of ideas may be dispensed with; they are accepted
at once as definitions, such as those of substance, the infinite, mode,
extension, etc., all of which constitute a quite incoherent list. But we
require to show where these thoughts come in, on what they are founded,
and how they are verified. Thus Locke has striven to satisfy a true
necessity. For he has the merit of having deserted the system of mere
definitions, which were before this made the starting point, and of
having attempted to make deduction of general conceptions, inasmuch as
he was, for example, at the pains to show how substantiality arises
subjectively from objects. That is a further step than any reached
by Spinoza, who begins at once with definitions and axioms which are
unverified. Now they are derived, and no longer oracularly laid down,
even if the method and manner whereby this authentication is established
is not the right one. That is to say, here the matter in question is
merely subjective, and somewhat psychological, since Locke merely
describes the methods of mind as it appears to us to be. For in his
philosophy we have more especially to deal with the derivation of the
general conceptions, or ideas, as he called them, that are present in our
knowledge, and with their origin as they proceed from what is outwardly
and inwardly perceptible. Malebranche no doubt likewise asks how we
arrive at conceptions, and thus he apparently has before him the same
subject of investigation as has Locke. But firstly, this psychological
element in Malebranche is merely the later development, and then to him
the universal or God is plainly first, while Locke commences at once with
individual perceptions, and only from them does he proceed to Notions,
to God. The universal to Locke is, therefore, merely a later result,
the work of our minds; it is simply something pertaining to thought,
as subjective. Every man undoubtedly knows that when his consciousness
develops empirically, he commences from feelings, from quite concrete
conditions, and that it is only later on that general conceptions come
in, which are connected with the concrete of sensation by being contained
therein. Space, for example, comes to consciousness later than the
spacial, the species later than the individual; and it is only through
the activity of my consciousness that the universal is separated from
the particular of conception, feeling, etc. Feeling undoubtedly comes
lowest, it is the animal mode of spirit; but in its capacity as thinking,
spirit endeavours to transform feeling into its own form. Thus the course
adopted by Locke is quite a correct one, but all dialectic considerations
are utterly and entirely set aside, since the universal is merely
analyzed from the empirical concrete. And in this matter Kant reproaches
Locke with reason, the individual is not the source of universal
conceptions, but the understanding.

As to Locke’s further reflections, they are very simple. Locke considers
how the understanding is only consciousness, and in being so is something
in consciousness, and he only recognizes the implicit in as far as it is
in the same.

a. Locke’s philosophy is more especially directed against Descartes,
who, like Plato, had spoken of innate ideas. Locke likewise makes
special examination of the “inborn impressions (_notiones communes in
foro interiori descriptæ_)” which Lord Herbert assumes in his work _De
veritate_. In the first book of his work Locke combats the so-called
innate ideas, theoretic as well as practical, _i.e._ the universal,
absolutely existent ideas which at the same time are represented as
pertaining to mind in a natural way. Locke said that we arrive first
at _that_ which we call idea. By this he understands not the essential
determinations of man, but conceptions which we have and which are
present and exist in consciousness as such: in the same way we all have
arms and legs as parts of our bodies, and the desire to eat exists in
everyone. In Locke we thus have the conception of the soul as of a
contentless _tabula rasa_ which is by-and-by filled with what we call
experience.[215] The expression “innate principles” was at that time
common, and these innate principles have sometimes been foolishly spoken
of. But their true signification is that they are implicit, that they are
essential moments in the nature of thought, qualities of a germ, which do
not yet exist: only in relation to this last there is an element of truth
in Locke’s conclusions. As diverse conceptions essentially determined
they are only legitimatized by its being shown that they are implied in
the essential nature of thought; but as propositions which hold good as
axioms, and conceptions which are immediately accepted as laid down in
definitions, they undoubtedly possess the form of that which is present
and inborn. As they are regarded they are bound to have value in and for
themselves; but this is a mere assertion. From the other point of view
the question of whence they come is a futile one. Mind is undoubtedly
determined in itself, for it is the explicitly existent Notion; its
development signifies the coming to consciousness. But the determinations
which it brings forth from itself cannot be called innate, for this
development must be occasioned by an external, and only on that does the
activity of mind react, in order that it may for the first time become
conscious of its reality.

The grounds on which Locke refutes innate ideas are empirical. “There
is nothing more commonly taken for granted than that there are certain
principles, both speculative and practical, universally agreed upon
by all mankind: which therefore, they argue, must needs be constant
impressions which the souls of men receive in their first Beings.”
But this universal consent is not to be found. We may instance the
proposition, “Whatsoever is, is; and It is impossible for the same thing
to be and not to be; which of all others I think have the most allowed
title to innate.” But this proposition does not hold good for the Notion;
there is nothing either in heaven or earth which does not contain Being
and non-Being. Many men, “All children and idiots,” says Locke, “have
not the least apprehension of these propositions.” “No proposition can
be said to be in the mind which it never yet knew, which it was never
yet conscious of.... ’Tis usually answered, That all men know and assent
to them” (the propositions) “when they come to the use of reason....
If it be meant that the use of reason assists us in the knowledge of
these maxims, it would prove them not to be innate.” Reason is said to
be the deriving from principles already known unknown truths. How then
should the application of reason be required to discover supposed innate
principles? This is a weak objection, for it assumes that by innate ideas
we understand those which man possesses in consciousness as immediately
present. But development in consciousness is something altogether
different from any inherent determination of reason, and therefore the
expression innate idea is undoubtedly quite wrong. Innate principles
must be found “clearest and most perspicuous nearest the fountain, in
children and illiterate people, who have received least impression from
foreign opinion.” Locke gives further reasons of a similar nature, more
especially employing those which are of a practical kind—the diversity in
moral judgments, the case of those who are utterly wicked and depraved,
devoid of sense of right or conscience.[216]

b. In the second book Locke goes on to the next stage, to the origin of
ideas, and seeks to demonstrate this process from experience—this is
the main object of his efforts. The reason that the positive point of
view which he opposes to any derivation from within, is so false, is
that he derives his conceptions only from outside and thus maintains
Being-for-another, while he quite neglects the implicit. He says:
“Every man being conscious to himself, that he thinks; and that which
his mind is applied about, while thinking, being the ideas that are
there; ’tis past doubt, that men have in their minds several ideas,
such as those expressed in the words, whiteness, hardness, sweetness,
thinking, motion, man, elephant, army, drunkenness, and others.” Idea
here signifies both the ordinary conception and thought; we understand
something quite different by the word idea. “It is in the first place
then to be inquired, how he comes by them” (these ideas)? Innate ideas
have already been refuted. “Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we
say, white paper, void of all characters, without any ideas; how comes it
to be furnished?... To this I answer in a word, from Experience: in that
all our knowledge is founded.”[217]

As to the question in point we must in the first place say that it is
true that man commences with experience if he desires to arrive at
thought. Everything is experienced, not merely what is sensuous, but
also what excites and stimulates my mind. Consciousness thus undoubtedly
obtains all conceptions and Notions from experience and in experience;
the only question is what we understand by experience. In a usual way
when this is spoken of the idea of nothing particular is conveyed; we
speak of it as of something quite well known. But experience is nothing
more than the form of objectivity; to say that it is something which is
in consciousness means that it has objective form for consciousness or
that consciousness experiences it, it sees it as an objective. Experience
thus signifies immediate knowledge, perception, _i.e._ I myself must
have and be something, and the consciousness of what I have and am is
experience. Now there is no question as to this, that whatever we know,
of whatever kind it may be, must be experienced, that rests in the
conception of the thing. It is absurd to say that one knows anything
which is not in experience. I undoubtedly know men, for instance, from
experience, without requiring to have seen them all, for I have, as man,
activity and will, a consciousness respecting what I am and what others
are. The rational exists, _i.e._ it is as an existent for consciousness,
or this last experiences it; it must be seen and heard, it must be there
or have been there as a phenomenon in the world. This connection of
universal with objective is however in the second place not the only
form, that of the implicit is likewise absolute and essential—that
is, the apprehension of what is experienced or the abrogation of this
apparent other-being and the knowledge of the necessity of the thing
through itself. It is now quite a matter of indifference whether anything
is accepted as something experienced, as a succession of empirical
ideas, if one may so say, or conceptions; or whether the succession is a
succession of thoughts, _i.e._ implicitly existent.

Locke treats of the various kinds of these ideas imperfectly and
empirically merely.

α. According to Locke simple ideas arise partly from outward, and partly
from inward experience. For experiences, he says, are in the first place
sensations; the other side is reflection, the inward determinations
of consciousness.[218] From sensation, from the organs of sight for
instance, the conceptions of colour, light, etc., arise; there further
arises from outward experience the idea of impenetrability, of figure,
rest, motion and such like. From reflections come the ideas of faith,
doubt, judgment, reasoning, thinking, willing, etc.; from both combined,
pleasure, pain, etc. This is a very commonplace account of the matter.

β. After Locke has presupposed experience, he goes on to say that it
is the understanding which now discovers and desires the universal—the
complex ideas. The Bishop of Worcester made the objection that “If
the idea of substance be grounded upon plain and evident reason, then
we must allow an idea of substance which comes not in by sensation or
reflection.” Locke replies: “General ideas come not into the mind
by sensation or reflection, but are the creatures or inventions of
the understanding. The mind makes them from ideas which it has got by
sensation and reflection.” The work of the mind now consists in bringing
forth from several simple so-called ideas a number of new ones, by means
of its working upon this material through comparing, distinguishing and
contrasting it, and finally through separation or abstraction, whereby
the universal conceptions, such as space, time, existence, unity and
diversity, capacity, cause and effect, freedom, necessity, take their
rise. “The mind in respect of its simple ideas is wholly passive, and
receives them all from the existence and operation of things, such as
sensation or reflection offers them, without being able to make any one
idea.” But “the mind often exercises an active power in making these
several combinations. For it being once furnished with simple ideas
it can put them together in several combinations.” According to Locke
therefore thought itself is not the essence of the soul, but one of
its powers and manifestations. He maintains thought to be existent in
consciousness as conscious thought, and thus brings it forward as a fact
in his experience, that we do not always think. Experience demonstrates
dreamless sleep when the sleep is profound. Locke quotes the example of a
man who remembered no dream until he had reached his twenty-fifth year.
It is as in the Xenien,—[219]

  Oft schon war ich, und hab’ wirklich an gar nichts gedacht.

That is to say, my object is not a thought. But sensuous perception and
recollection are thought, and thought is truth.[220] Locke, however,
places the reality of the understanding only in the formal activity of
constituting new determinations from the simple conceptions received
by means of perception, through their comparison and the combination
of several into one; it is the apprehension of the abstract sensations
which are contained in the objects. Locke likewise distinguishes (Bk. II.
chap. xi. § 15-17) between pure and mixed modes. Pure modes are simple
determinations such as power, number, infinitude; in such expressions as
causality we reach, on the other hand, a mixed mode.

Locke now explains in detail the manner in which the mind, from the
simple ideas of experience, reaches more complex ideas; but this
derivation of general determinations from concrete perception is most
unmeaning, trivial, tiresome and diffuse; it is entirely formal, an empty
tautology. For instance we form the general conception of space from the
perception of the distance of bodies by means of sight and feeling.[221]
Or in other words, we perceive a definite space, abstract from it,
and then we have the conception of space generally; the perception of
distances gives us conceptions of space. This however is no deduction,
but only a setting aside of other determinations; since distance itself
is really space, mind thus determines space from space. Similarly we
reach the notion of time through the unbroken succession of conceptions
during our waking moments,[222] _i.e._ from determinate time we
perceive time in general. Conceptions follow one another in a continual
succession; if we set aside the particular element that is present we
thereby receive the conception of time. Substance (which Locke does not
accept in so lofty a sense as Spinoza), a complex idea, hence arises
from the fact that we often perceive simple ideas such as blue, heavy,
etc., in association with one another. This association we represent to
ourselves as something which so to speak supports these simple ideas, or
in which they exist.[223] Locke likewise deduces the general conception
of power.[224] The determinations of freedom and necessity, cause and
effect, are then derived in a similar way. “In the notice that our senses
take of the constant vicissitude of things, we cannot but observe, that
several particulars, both qualities and substance, begin to exist; and
that they receive this their existence from the due application and
operation of some other being. From this observation we get our ideas
of cause and effect,” for instance when wax is melted by the fire.[225]
Locke goes on to say: “Every one, I think, finds in himself a power to
begin or forbear, continue or put an end to several actions in himself.
From the consideration of the extent of this power of the mind over the
actions of the man, which every one finds in himself, arise the ideas of
liberty and necessity.”[226]

We may say that nothing can be more superficial than this derivation of
ideas. The matter itself, the essence, is not touched upon at all. A
determination is brought into notice which is contained in a concrete
relationship; hence the understanding on the one hand abstracts and
on the other establishes conclusions. The basis of this philosophy is
merely to be found in the transference of the determinate to the form
of universality, but it was just this fundamental essence that we had
to explain. As to this Locke confesses of space, for example, that he
does not know what it really is.[227] This so-called analysis by Locke
of complex conceptions, and his so-called explanation of the same, has,
on account of its uncommon clearness and lucidity of expression, found
universal acceptance. For what can be clearer than to say that we have
the notion of time because we perceive time, if we do not actually see
it, and that we conceive of space because we see it? The French have
accepted this most readily and they have carried it further still; their
_Idéologie_ contains nothing more nor less.

γ. When Locke starts by saying that everything is experience and we
abstract for ourselves from this experience general conceptions regarding
objects and their qualities, he makes a distinction in respect of
external qualities which was before this made by Aristotle (De anima,
II. 6), and which we likewise met with in Descartes (_supra_, pp. 245,
246). That is to say, Locke distinguishes between primary and secondary
qualities; the first pertain to the objects themselves in truth, the
others are not real qualities, but are founded on the nature of the
organs of sensation. Primary qualities are mechanical, like extension,
solidity, figure, movement, rest; these are qualities of the corporeal,
just as thought is the quality of the spiritual. But the determinations
of our individual feelings such as colours, sounds, smells, taste, etc.,
are not primary.[228] In Descartes’ case this distinction has however
another form, for the second class of these determinations is defined
by him in such a way as that they do not constitute the essence of
body, while Locke says that they exist for sensation, or fall within
existence as it is for consciousness. Locke, however, no doubt reckons
figure, etc., as still pertaining to reality, but by so doing nothing is
ascertained as to the nature of body. In Locke a difference here appears
between the implicit and being ‘for-another,’ in which he declares the
moment of ‘for-another’ to be unreal—and yet he sees all truth in the
relation of ‘for-another’ only.

c. Since the universal as such, the idea of species, is, according to
Locke, merely a product of our mind, which is not itself objective, but
relates merely to objects which are germane to it, and from which the
particular of qualities, conditions, time, place, etc., are separated,
Locke distinguishes essences into real essences and nominal essences;
the former of these express the true essence of things, while species
on the other hand are mere nominal essences which no doubt express
something which is present in the objects, but which do not exhaust these
objects. They serve to distinguish species for our knowledge, but the
real essence of nature we do not know.[229] Locke gives good reasons
for species being nothing in themselves—for their not being in nature,
or absolutely determined—instancing in exemplification the production
of monstrosities (Bk. III. chap. iii. § 17): were species absolute no
monster would be born. But he overlooks the fact that since it pertains
to species to exist, it thereby likewise enters into relationship with
other determinations; thus that is the sphere in which individual things
operate upon one another, and may hence be detrimental to the existence
of the species. Locke thus argues just as one would who wished to prove
that the good does not exist in itself, because there are likewise evil
men, that the circle does not exist absolutely in nature, because the
circumference of a tree, for example, represents a very irregular circle,
or because I draw a circle badly. Nature just signifies the lack of
power to be perfectly adequate to the Notion; it is only in spirit that
the Notion has its true existence. To say that species are nothing in
themselves, that the universal is not the essential reality of nature,
that its implicit existence is not the object of thought, is tantamount
to saying that we do not know real existence: it is the same litany which
has since been so constantly repeated that we are tired of listening to
it:

  Das Innere der Natur kennt kein erschaffener Geist,

and which goes on until we have perceived that Being-for-another,
perception, is not implicit; a point of view which has not made its way
to the positive position that the implicit is the universal. Locke is far
back in the nature of knowledge, further back than Plato, because of his
insistence on Being-for-another.

It is further noteworthy that from the sound understanding Locke argues
(Vol. III. Bk. IV. chap. vii. § 8-11) against universal propositions
or axioms such as that A = A, _i.e._ if anything is A it cannot be B.
He says they are superfluous, of very little use or of no use at all,
for nobody yet has built up a science on a proposition which asserts a
contradiction. From such the true may be proved as easily as the false;
they are tautological. What Locke has further achieved in respect of
education, toleration, natural rights or universal state-right, does not
concern us here, but has to do with general culture.

This is the philosophy of Locke, in which there is no trace of
speculation. The great end of Philosophy, which is to know the truth,
is in it sought to be attained in an empiric way; it thus indeed serves
to draw attention to general determinations. But such a philosophy not
only represents the standpoint of ordinary consciousness, to which all
the determinations of its thought appear as if given, humble as it is
in the oblivion of its activity, but in this method of derivation and
psychological origination that which alone concerns Philosophy, the
question of whether these thoughts and relationships have truth in and
for themselves, is not present at all, inasmuch as the only object aimed
at is to describe the manner in which thought accepts what is given to
it. It may be held with Wolff that it is arbitrary to begin with concrete
conceptions, as when our conception of identity is made to take its
origin from such things as blue flowers and the blue heavens. One can
better begin directly from universal conceptions and say that we find
in our consciousness the conceptions of time, cause and effect; these
are the later facts of consciousness. This method forms the basis of
the Wolffian system of reasoning, only here we must still distinguish
amongst the different conceptions those that are to be regarded as most
essential; in Locke’s philosophy, this distinction cannot really be said
to come under consideration. From this time, according to Locke, or in
this particular aspect of Philosophy, there is a complete and entire
change in the point of view adopted; the whole interest is limited to the
form in which the objective, or individual sensations, pass into the form
of conceptions. In the case of Spinoza and Malebranche, we undoubtedly
likewise saw that it was made a matter of importance to recognize this
relation of thought to what is sensuously perceived, and thus to know it
as falling into relation, as passing into the relative; the main question
hence was: How are the two related? But the question was answered to the
effect that it is only this relation for itself that constitutes the
point of interest, and this relation itself as absolute substance is thus
identity, the true, God, it is not the related parts. The interest does
not lie in the related parts; the related parts as one-sided are not the
existent, presupposed and permanently established, they are accidental
merely. But here the related sides, the things and the subject, have
their proper value, and they are presupposed as having this value.
Locke’s reasoning is quite shallow; it keeps entirely to the phenomenal,
to that which is, and not to that which is true.

There is another question however: Are these general determinations
absolutely true? And whence come they not alone into my consciousness,
into my mind and understanding, but into the things themselves? Space,
cause, effect, etc., are categories. How do these categories come into
the particular? How does universal space arrive at determining itself?
This point of view, the question whether these determinations of the
infinite, of substance, etc., are in and for themselves true, is quite
lost sight of. Plato investigated the infinite and the finite, Being and
the determinate, etc., and pronounced that neither of these opposites is
of itself true; they are so only as together constituting an identity,
wherever the truth of this content may come from. But here the truth
as it is in and for itself is entirely set aside and the nature of the
content itself is made the main point. It does not matter whether the
understanding or experience is its source, for the question is whether
this content is in itself true. With Locke, the truth merely signifies
the harmony of our conceptions with things; here relation is alone in
question, whether the content is an objective thing or a content of
the ordinary conception. But it is quite another matter to investigate
the content itself, and to ask, “Is this which is within us true?” We
must not dispute about the sources, for the Whence, the only important
point to Locke, does not exhaust the whole question. The interest of the
content in and for itself wholly disappears when that position is taken
up, and thereby the whole of what is aimed at by Philosophy is given up.
On the other hand, when thought is from the beginning concrete, when
thought and the universal are synonymous with what is set before us, the
question of the relation of the two which have been separated by thought
is destitute of interest and incomprehensible. How does thought overcome
the difficulties which itself has begotten? Here with Locke none at all
have been begotten and awakened. Before the need for reconciliation can
be satisfied, the pain of disunion must be excited.

The philosophy of Locke is certainly very comprehensible, but for that
very reason it is likewise a popular philosophy to which the whole of
the English philosophy as it exists at this day is allied; it is the
thinking method of regarding things which is called philosophy carried
to its perfection, the form which was introduced into the science which
then took its rise in Europe. This is an important moment in culture;
the sciences in general and specially the empiric sciences have to
ascribe their origin to this movement. To the English, Philosophy has
ever signified the deduction of experiences from observations; this
has in a one-sided way been applied to physical and economic subjects.
General principles of political economy such as free-trade in the present
day, and all matters which rest on thinking experience, the knowledge of
whatever reveals itself in this sphere as necessary and useful, signifies
philosophy to the English (Vol. I. pp. 57, 58). The scholastic method
of starting from principles and definitions has been rejected. The
universal, laws, forces, universal matter, etc., have in natural science
been derived from perceptions; thus to the English, Newton is held to
be the philosopher κατ’ ἐξοχήν. The other side is that in practical
philosophy regarding society or the state, thought applies itself to
concrete objects such as the will of the prince, subjects and their ends
and personal welfare. Inasmuch as we have an object such as that before
us, the indwelling and essential universal is made evident; it must,
however, be made clear which conception is the one to which the others
must yield. It is in this way that rational politics took their rise in
England, because the institutions and government peculiar to the English
led them specially and in the first place to reflection upon their inward
political and economic relationships. Hobbes must be mentioned as an
exemplification of this fact. This manner of reasoning starts from the
present mind, from what is our own, whether it be within or without us,
since the feelings which we have, the experiences which fall directly
within us, are the principles. This philosophy of reasoning thought
is that which has now become universal, and through which the whole
revolution in the position taken up by mind has come to pass.


2. HUGO GROTIUS.

Hugo Grotius was studying the laws of nations at the same time as
Locke; and in him the very same methods may be found as those already
mentioned, inasmuch as he also falls into a quite empirical system
of associating nations with one another, combining with that an
empirical mode of reasoning. Hugo van Groot, born 1583 at Delft, was a
lawyer, fiscal general, and council pensionary; in 1619, however, he
was implicated in the Barneveldt trial, and was compelled to fly the
country. For a long time he remained in France, but in 1634 he entered
the service of Queen Christina of Sweden. In 1635 he was made Swedish
ambassador in Paris, and in 1645 he died at Rostock, while on a journey
from Stockholm to Holland.[230] His principal work, _De jure belli et
pacis_, he composed in 1625; now it is not read, but at one time it
exercised a very great and important influence. In it Grotius presented a
comparative historical account, the material of which was partly derived
from the Old Testament, of the manner in which nations in the various
relationships of war and peace have acted towards one another, and what
usages they held to be binding. The following may serve as an example of
his empirical method of reasoning: Prisoners ought not to be killed; for
the object is to disarm the enemy, and if this end be attained nothing
further should be done.[231] This empirical way of connecting facts had
the effect of bringing general comprehensible and rational principles
into consciousness, of making them recognized, and of causing them to be
more or less acceptable. Thus we see principles set forth, respecting
the righteousness of a king’s power for instance; for thought applied
itself to everything. We are unsatisfied by such proofs and deductions,
but we must not overlook what is thereby accomplished; and this is the
establishment of principles which have their ultimate confirmation in the
objects themselves, in mind and thought.


3. THOMAS HOBBES.

Hobbes, who was celebrated and distinguished on account of the
originality of his views, was tutor to the Earl of Devonshire; he was
born in 1588 at Malmesbury, and died in 1679.[232] As a contemporary
of Cromwell, he found in the events of that time, in the Revolution
which then took place in England, an occasion for reflecting on the
principles of state and law, and in fact he succeeded in making his way
to quite original conceptions. He wrote much, including a treatise on
Philosophy, entitled “The Elements of Philosophy.” The first section
(_Sectio_) of this work, _De corpore_, appeared in London in 1655; in it
he first of all treats of Logic (_Pars_ I.), and secondly of _philosophia
prima_ (_Pars_ II.); this last is an ontology and metaphysic. The
next sub-division (_Pars_ III.), “On the relation between motion and
magnitude,” is a system of mechanism, a quite popular system of physics;
and a study of the human organs. The second section was to treat of the
nature of man (_De homine_), and the third of the state (_De cive_), but
the intellectual sections of the work Hobbes did not entirely finish.
He says in his preface that Copernicus first opened up astronomy, and
Galileo physics, before them there was nothing certain in either science.
Harvey worked out the science of the human body, and physics generally
as well as astronomy were perfected by Keppler. All this was termed
Philosophy, in accordance with the point of view which has been already
given (p. 313), since in it the reflective understanding desires to know
the universal. Hobbes further says concerning the philosophy of the state
(_philosophia civilis_), that it only dates from the publication of his
book _De cive_.[233] This work, which appeared at Paris in 1642,[234]
is, like his Leviathan, a much decried book; the second mentioned writing
was forbidden to be circulated, and is hence very rare. Both works
contain sounder reflections on the nature of society and government than
many now in circulation. Society, the state, is to Hobbes absolutely
pre-eminent, it is the determining power without appeal as regards law
and positive religion and their external relations; and because he placed
these in subjection to the state, his doctrines were of course regarded
with the utmost horror. But there is nothing speculative or really
philosophic in them, and there is still less in Hugo Grotius.

Before this ideals were set before us, or Holy Scripture or positive law
was quoted as authoritative. Hobbes, on the contrary, sought to derive
the bond which holds the state together, that which gives the state
its power, from principles which lie within us, which we recognize as
our own. In this way two opposite principles arise. The first is the
passive obedience of subjects, the divine authority of rulers, whose
will is absolute law, and is itself elevated above all other law. All
this is represented in close connection with religion, and proved by
examples from the Old Testament, by such stories as those of Saul and
David. Criminal and marriage laws, too, for long derived their character
from the Mosaic laws, or, speaking generally, from those the provisions
of which possessed their value by the fact of being established by
express divine command. On the other hand we have in the second place
the reasoning wherein we ourselves are the determining agents, and which
was called sound reason. In the movement which Cromwell made use of
there was allied with this a fanaticism, which from the written letter
drew opposite conclusions to the above, and this we see exemplified in
the equality of property, for instance. Hobbes, it is true, likewise
maintained passive obedience, the absolute freedom of the royal will
and power; but at the same time he sought to derive the principles of
monarchical power, etc., from universal determinations. The views that
he adopts are shallow and empirical, but the reasons he gives for them,
and the propositions he makes respecting them, are original in character,
inasmuch as they are derived from natural necessities and wants.

Hobbes maintained that “The origin of all society is to be found in
the mutual fear of all its members;” it is hence a phenomenon in
consciousness. “Each association is thus formed in its own interest or
for its own renown, that is, from selfish motives.” All such matters as
security of life, property, and enjoyment, are not to be found outside
it. “But men have in all dissimilarity of strength a natural similarity
as well.” This Hobbes proves by a characteristic reason, viz. that “each
individual can make away with the other,” each is the ultimate power
over the others. “Each can be supreme.”[235] Thus their similarity is
not derived from the greatest strength; it is not, as in modern times,
founded on the freedom of the spirit, or on an equality of merit and
independence, but on the equal weakness of mankind; each man is weak as
regards others.

b. Hobbes further takes up the position that this natural condition is
of such a nature that all possess the desire to rule over one another.
“All in their natural condition are possessed of the will to injure
others,” to tyrannize over other men; each has thus to fear the other.
Hobbes looks at this condition in its true light, and we find in him
no idle talk about a state of natural goodness; the natural condition
is really far more like that of the animals—a condition in which there
is an unsubdued individual will. All thus wish to “secure themselves
against the pretensions of others, to acquire for themselves advantages
and superior rights. Opinions, religions, desires, arouse strife; the
stronger bears away the victory. The natural condition is consequently
a condition of mistrust on the part of all towards all; it is a war of
all against all (_bellum omnium in omnes_),” and the endeavour of one to
overreach another. The expression nature has a double significance: In
the first place the nature of man signifies his spiritual and rational
Being; but his natural condition indicates quite another condition,
wherein man conducts himself according to his natural impulses. In this
way he conducts himself in conformity with his desires and inclinations,
while the rational, on the contrary, is the obtaining supremacy over the
immediately natural. “In the condition of nature a certain irresistible
power grants the right to rule over those who cannot resist; it is absurd
to leave those whom we have in our power to become free and strong
again.” From this Hobbes draws the conclusion that “man must go forth
from the natural condition.”[236] This is true; the natural condition is
not what it should be, and must hence be cast off.

c. Hobbes finally passes to the laws of reason which preserve
tranquillity. This condition of law is the subjection of the natural,
particular will of the individual to the universal will, which, however,
is not that of all individuals, but is the will of the ruler; this is
consequently not responsible to individuals, but is directed against this
private will, and to it all must be obedient.[237] Thus the whole matter
is now placed on quite another footing. But because the universal will is
made to reside in the will of one monarch, there nevertheless proceeds
from this point of view, which is really correct, a condition of absolute
rule, of perfect despotism. The condition of law does not, however,
mean that the arbitrary will of one man constitutes absolute law, for
the universal will is no despotism, being rational, inasmuch as it is
consistently expressed and determined in laws.

Rixner (Handbuch der Geschichte der Philosophie, Vol. III. p. 30) says:
“Law to him is nothing but the sum of the conditions of peace extorted
by iron necessity from the original wickedness of mankind.” We might add
that in Hobbes we at least find this, that the nature and organism of the
State is established on the principle of human nature, human desire, &c.
The English concerned themselves greatly with that principle of passive
obedience, in accordance with which it is said that kings receive their
power from God. This, in one aspect, is quite true, but in another it is
falsely taken to mean that they have no responsibility, that their blind
desires, their merely subjective will, is what must be obeyed.


4. CUDWORTH, CLARKE, WOLLASTON.

Cudworth wished to revive Plato in England, but to do this after the
manner of the demonstrations which we met with in Descartes, and through
a trivial metaphysic of the understanding. He wrote a celebrated work:
“The true intellectual System of the Universe,” but the Platonic ideas
expressed are often in a clumsy form and mingled with the Christian
conceptions of God and angels—all regarded as particular existent things.
What in Plato is mythical, is here taken as reality in the form of
existence; this is reasoned about just as we reason respecting a matter
of ordinary fact, such as whether it is probable that the French seek to
effect a landing in England, and if so, whether they will successfully
accomplish it. The Christian intellectual world is dragged down to the
form of ordinary actuality, and consequently it is ruined.

The name of Clarke is likewise famous in connection with his proof
of the existence of God. There were quite a number of other English
philosophers, whom we do not, however, require to notice; for Clarke,
Wollaston, and others carry on their speculations within forms such
as belong to a very commonplace metaphysic of the understanding.
The manifold systems of moral philosophy which we find taking their
rise in England are drawn up from this same mental standpoint; in
them the implicitude of mind appears in a form of natural existence,
namely, of desires and feelings. Their principles are found in moral
sentiments, benevolent desires, sympathy, &c. That form alone is
worthy of notice which, on the one hand, represents duty as something
which is not foreign, given, commanded, but as clearly belonging to
self-consciousness, even while, on the other hand, it represents
this property as a natural, unconscious, unspiritual, and irrational
existence. Impulse is blind, a solid existence which cannot get beyond
itself like thinking self-consciousness. It is indeed true of impulse
that its pure activity or its process, and the content, are, as in
thought, immediately posited as the same; it has its content in itself,
and this is not dead and passive, but self-acting and impelling. But that
unity has the form of immediacy only as existent; in the first place
it is not a knowledge, it is not necessary, for it is only taken from
inward perception; in the second place, it is a determinate which does
not abrogate itself, beyond which we cannot get, and which thus is not a
universal. Impulse is no more an infinite than is the fixed category of
force. Such reasoning takes the impulses in their determinate character
from experience, and expresses the appearance of necessity in the same
as an inward existence, as a force. For instance, the social instinct is
a moment which is found in experience, because man derives all manner
of utility from society. Wherein does the necessity of the State, of
society, find its basis? In a social desire. This is cause, just as in
the physical world a formal interpretation such as this is always to
be found. The necessity of any existent fact, such as what pertains to
electrical phenomena, finds its basis in a force which brings it forth;
it is merely the form of returning from the external to an inward, of
passing from the existent to what is thought, which is again in turn
represented as an existent. Force is necessitated by reason of the
manifestation, we must argue from the latter to the former. On the other
hand, the manifestation takes place through the force, for it is the
cause of the manifestation; we hence have force in one place as reason,
and in another as cause. But in all this there is no realization of
the fact that in respect of form there is a transition from the Notion
into Being and the other way, while in respect of content there is a
perfect contingency of manifestation; we look at electricity in the same
way as we look at the fact that men have social instincts, sympathetic
inclinations, and so on.


5. PUFFENDORF.

In the struggle to give to just and equitable relations in the State
an independent basis of their own, and to found a judicial system of
government, reflective thought put forth its efforts; and this became to
it a real interest and concern. And, as in the case of Grotius, it was
also true of Puffendorf, that the instinct of mankind—that is, the social
instinct, &c.—was made the principle. Samuel von Puffendorf was born
in 1632 in Saxony; he studied public law, philosophy, and mathematics
at Leipzig and Jena; in 1661, as a professor at Heidelberg, he made
natural and civil law for the first time academic studies; in 1668 he
became tutor in a Swedish family, which office he later on exchanged
for the service of the House of Brandenburg, and in 1694 he died at
Berlin as a privy councillor. He wrote several works on political law
and history; we must specially mention his work, _De jure naturæ et
gentium_, Libr. viii., Londin. Scan. 1672, 4; and also his compendium _De
officio hominis_, published at the same place in 1673, 8, and _Elementa
jurisprudentiæ universalis_.[238] While the divine right of kings was
here still recognized—whereby they rendered account to God alone, or, at
all events, were still bound to take counsel of the Church—the impulses
and necessities present in mankind were now considered as well. These
were regarded as the inward principles for private and political law, and
from them the duties both of the government and of rulers were deduced,
so that the freedom of mankind might not be interfered with. The basis
of the state in Puffendorf’s view is the social instinct: the highest
end of the state is the peace and security of social life through the
transformation of inward duties as prescribed by conscience into external
duties as compelled by law.[239]


6. NEWTON.

The other side is that thought likewise applied itself to nature, and
in this connection Isaac Newton is famous by reason of his mathematical
discoveries and his work in physics. He was born in 1642 at Cambridge,
made a special study of mathematics, and became professor of the same at
Cambridge; later on he was made president of the Royal Society in London,
and he died in 1727.[240]

Newton was indisputably the chief contributor to the popularity of the
philosophy of Locke, or the English method of treating of Philosophy,
and more especially did he promote its application to all the physical
sciences. “Physics, beware of metaphysics,” was his maxim,[241] which
signifies, Science, beware of thought; and all the physical sciences,
even to the present day, have, following in his wake, faithfully
observed this precept, inasmuch as they have not entered upon an
investigation of their conceptions, or thought about thoughts. Physics
can, however, effect nothing without thought; it has its categories and
laws through thought alone, and without thought it does not effect any
progress. Newton was mainly instrumental in introducing to physics the
determinations respecting forces, which pertain to reflection; he raised
science to the standpoint of reflection, and set the laws of forces
in the place of the laws of phenomena. Regarding matters as he did,
Newton derived his conclusions from his experiences; and in physics and
the theory of colour-vision, he made bad observations and drew worse
conclusions. He passed from experiences to general points of view,
again made them fundamental, and from them constructed the individual;
this is how his theories are constructed. The observation of things,
the discovery of the law immanent therein, and the universal which is
found within them, has become the real point of interest. In this way,
Newton is so complete a barbarian as regards his conceptions that his
case is like that of another of his countrymen who was surprised and
rejoiced to learn that he had talked prose all his life, not having
had any idea that he was so accomplished. This Newton, like all the
Physicists, indeed, never learned; he did not know that he thought in,
and had to deal with Notions, while he imagined he was dealing with
physical facts: and he presented the extremest contrast to Boehme, who
handled sensuous things as Notions, and, by sheer force of mind, obtained
entire possession of their actuality and subjugated them. Instead of
this Newton treated Notions like sensuous things, and dealt with them
just as men deal with wood and stone. And this is even now the case. In
the beginnings of physical science we read of the power of inertia, for
instance, of the force of acceleration, of molecules, of centripetal and
centrifugal force, as of facts which definitely exist; what are really
the final results of reflection are represented as their first grounds.
If we ask for the cause of there being no advance made in such sciences,
we find that it is because men do not understand that they should
apply themselves to Notions, but make up their minds to adopt these
determinations without sense or understanding. Hence in Newton’s Optics,
for instance, there are conclusions derived from his experience which
are so untrue and devoid of understanding, that while they are set forth
as the finest example of how men can learn to know nature by means of
experiments and conclusions derived from experiments, they may also serve
as an example of how we should neither experiment nor draw conclusions,
of how nothing at all can be learned. A miserable kind of experience
like this itself contradicts itself through nature, for nature is more
excellent than it appears in this wretched experience: both nature itself
and experience, when carried a little further, contradict it. Hence,
of all the splendid discoveries of Newton in optics, none now remain
excepting one—the division of light into seven colours. This is partly
because the conception of whole and part come into play, and partly from
an obdurate closing of the eyes to the opposite side. From this empirical
method in Philosophy, we shall now pass on to Leibnitz.


C. THIRD SECTION.

The third development of the philosophy of the understanding is that
represented by Leibnitz and Wolff. If Wolff’s metaphysics is divested of
its rigid form, we have as a result the later popular philosophy.


1. LEIBNITZ.

As in other respects Leibnitz represents the extreme antithesis to
Newton, so in respect of philosophy he presents a striking contrast to
Locke and his empiricism, and also to Spinoza. He upholds thought as
against the perception of the English school, and in lieu of sensuous
Being he maintains Being for thought to be the essence of truth, just as
Boehme at an earlier time upheld implicit Being. While Spinoza asserted
the universality, the oneness of substance merely, and while with Locke
we saw infinite determinations made the basis, Leibnitz, by means of
his fundamental principle of individuality, brings out the essentiality
of the opposite aspect of Spinoza’s philosophy, existence for self, the
monad, but the monad regarded as the absolute Notion, though perhaps
not yet as the “I.” The opposed principles, which were forced asunder,
find their completion in each other, since Leibnitz’s principle of
individuation completed Spinoza’s system as far as outward aspect goes.

Gottfried Wilhelm, Baron von Leibnitz, was born in 1646 at Leipzig, where
his father was professor of Philosophy. The subject that he studied in
view of a profession was jurisprudence, but first, in accordance with the
fashion of the day, he made a study of Philosophy, and to it he devoted
particular attention. To begin with, he picked up in Leipzig a large
and miscellaneous stock of knowledge, then he studied Philosophy and
mathematics at Jena under the mathematician and theosophist Weigel, and
took his degree of Master of Philosophy in Leipzig. There also, on the
occasion of his graduation as Doctor of Philosophy, he defended certain
philosophical theses, some of which discourses are still contained in
his works (ed. Dutens, T. II. P. I. p. 400). His first dissertation, and
that for which he obtained the degree of doctor of philosophy, was: _De
principio individui_,—a principle which remained the abstract principle
of his whole philosophy, as opposed to that of Spinoza. After he had
acquired a thorough knowledge of the subject, he wished to graduate also
as Doctor of Laws. But though he died an imperial councillor, it was his
ill fortune to receive from the Faculty at Leipzig a refusal to confer
the doctorate upon him, his youth being the alleged reason. Such a thing
could scarcely happen now-a-days. It may be that it was done because of
his over-great philosophical attainments, seeing that lawyers are wont
to hold the same in horror. He now quitted Leipzig, and betook himself
to Altdorf, where he graduated with distinction. Shortly afterwards he
became acquainted in Nürnberg with a company of alchemists, with whose
ongoings he became associated. Here he made extracts from alchemistic
writings, and studied the mysteries of this occult science. His activity
in the pursuit of learning extended also to historical, diplomatic,
mathematical and philosophical subjects. He subsequently entered the
service of the Elector of Mayence, becoming a member of council, and in
1672 he was appointed tutor to a son of Von Boineburg, Chancellor of
State to the Elector. With this young man he travelled to Paris, where
he lived for four years. He at this time made the acquaintance of the
great mathematician Huygens, and was by him for the first time properly
introduced into the domain of mathematics. When the education of his
pupil was completed, and the Baron Von Boineburg died, Leibnitz went on
his own account to London, where he became acquainted with Newton and
other scholars, at whose head was Oldenburg, who was also on friendly
terms with Spinoza. After the death of the Elector of Mayence, the salary
of Leibnitz ceased to be paid; he therefore left England and returned to
France. The Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg then took him into his service,
and gave him the appointment of councillor and librarian at Hanover, with
permission to spend as much time as he liked in foreign countries. He
therefore remained for some time longer in France, England, and Holland.
In the year 1677 he settled down in Hanover, where he became busily
engaged in affairs of state, and was specially occupied with historical
matters. In the Harz Mountains he had works constructed for carrying
off the floods which did damage to the mines there. Notwithstanding
these manifold occupations he invented the differential calculus in
1677, on occasion of which there arose a dispute between him and Newton,
which was carried on by the latter and the Royal Society of London in
a most ungenerous manner. For it was asserted by the English, who gave
themselves the credit of everything, and were very unfair to others, that
the discovery was really made by Newton. But Newton’s _Principia_ only
appeared later, and in the first edition indeed Leibnitz was mentioned
with commendation in a note which was afterwards omitted. From his
headquarters in Hanover, Leibnitz, commissioned by his prince, made
several journeys through Germany, and also went to Italy in order to
collect historical evidence relative to the House of Este, and for the
purpose of proving more clearly the relationship between this princely
family and that of Brunswick-Lüneburg. At other times he was likewise
much occupied with historical questions. Owing to his acquaintance with
the consort of Frederick I. of Prussia, Sophia Charlotte, a Hanoverian
princess, he was enabled to bring about the foundation of an Academy of
Science in Berlin, in which city he lived for a considerable time. In
Vienna he also became acquainted with Prince Eugène, which occasioned his
being appointed finally an Imperial Councillor. He published several very
important historical works as the result of this journey. His death took
place at Hanover in 1716, when he was seventy years of age.[242]

It was not only on Philosophy, but also on the most varied branches of
science that Leibnitz expended toil and trouble and energy; it was to
mathematics, however, that he specially devoted his attention, and he is
the inventor of the methods of the integral and differential calculus.
His great services in regard to mathematics and physics we here leave out
of consideration, and pay attention to his philosophy alone. None of his
books can be exactly looked on as giving a complete systematic account of
his philosophy. To the more important among them belongs his work on the
human understanding (_Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement humain_) in reply
to Locke; but this is a mere refutation. His philosophy is therefore
scattered through various little treatises which were written in very
various connections, in letters, and replies to objections which caused
him to bring out one aspect of the question more strongly than another;
we consequently find no elaborated systematic whole, superintended or
perfected by him. The work which has some appearance of being such, his
_Théodicée_, better known to the public than anything else he wrote, is
a popular treatise which he drew up for Queen Sophia Charlotte in reply
to Bayle, and in which he took pains not to present the matter in very
speculative form. A Wurtemberg theologian, Pfaff by name, and others who
were correspondents of Leibnitz and were themselves only too well versed
in philosophy, brought it as a charge against Leibnitz—a charge which he
never denied—that his philosophy was written in popular form.[243] They
laughed very much afterwards at Wolff, who had taken them to be quite
in earnest; his opinion was that if Leibnitz were not perfectly serious
in this sense with his _Théodicée_, yet he had unconsciously written
his best therein. Leibnitz’s _Théodicée_ is not what we can altogether
appreciate; it is a justification of God in regard to the evil in the
world. His really philosophic thoughts are most connectedly expressed in
a treatise on the principles of Grace (_Principes de la Nature et de la
Grace_),[244] and especially in the pamphlet addressed to Prince Eugène
of Savoy.[245] Buhle (Geschichte der neuern Philosophie, vol. iv. section
1, p. 131) says: “His philosophy is not so much the product of free,
independent, original speculation, as the result of well-tested earlier”
and later “systems, an eclecticism whose defects he tried to remedy in
his own way. It is a desultory treatment of Philosophy in letters.”

Leibnitz followed the same general plan in his philosophy as the
physicists adopt when they advance a hypothesis to explain existing data.
He has it that general conceptions of the Idea are to be found, from
which the particular may be derived; here, on account of existing data,
the general conception, for example the determination of force or matter
furnished by reflection, must have its determinations disposed in such a
way that it fits in with the data. Thus the philosophy of Leibnitz seems
to be not so much a philosophic system as an hypothesis regarding the
existence of the world, namely how it is to be determined in accordance
with the metaphysical determinations and the data and assumptions of the
ordinary conception, which are accepted as valid[246]—thoughts which
are moreover propounded without the sequence pertaining to the Notion
and mainly in narrative style, and which taken by themselves show no
necessity in their connection. Leibnitz’s philosophy therefore appears
like a string of arbitrary assertions, which follow one on another like
a metaphysical romance; it is only when we see what he wished thereby
to avoid that we learn to appreciate its value. He really makes use of
external reasons mainly in order to establish relations: “Because the
validity of such relations cannot be allowed, nothing remains but to
establish the matter in this way.” If we are not acquainted with these
reasons, this procedure strikes us as arbitrary.

a. Leibnitz’s philosophy is an idealism of the intellectuality of the
universe; and although from one point of view he stands opposed to Locke,
as from another point of view he is in opposition to the Substance of
Spinoza, he yet binds them both together again. For, to go into the
matter more particularly, on the one hand he expresses in the many
monads the absolute nature of things distinguished and of individuality;
on the other hand, in contrast to this and apart from it, he expresses
the ideality of Spinoza and the non-absolute nature of all difference,
as the idealism of the popular conception. Leibnitz’s philosophy is a
metaphysics, and in sharp contrast to the simple universal Substance of
Spinoza, where all that is determined is merely transitory, it makes
fundamental the absolute multiplicity of individual substances, which
after the example of the ancients he named monads—an expression already
used by the Pythagoreans. These monads he then proceeds to determine as
follows.

Firstly “Substance is a thing that is capable of activity, it is compound
or simple, the compound cannot exist without the simple. The monads are
simple substances.” The proof that they constitute the truth in all
things is very simple, it is a superficial reflection. For instance,
one of Leibnitz’s maxims is “Because there are compound things, the
principles of the same must be simple, for the compound consists of
the simple.”[247] This proof is poor enough, it is an example of the
favourite way of starting from something definite, say the compound, and
then drawing conclusions therefrom as to the simple. It is quite light
in a way, but really it is tautology. Of course, if the compound exists,
so does the simple, for the compound means something in itself manifold
whose connection or unity is external. From the very trivial category
of the compound it is easy to deduce the simple. It is a conclusion
drawn from a certain premiss, but the question is whether the premiss is
true. These monads are not, however, something abstract and simple in
itself, like the empty Epicurean atoms, which, as they were in themselves
lacking in determination, drew all their determination from their
aggregation alone. The monads are, on the contrary, substantial forms, a
good expression, borrowed from the Scholastics (_supra_, p. 71), or the
metaphysical points of the Alexandrian School (Vol II. p. 439), they are
the entelechies of Aristotle taken as pure activity, which are forms in
themselves (Vol II. pp. 138, 182, 183). “These monads are not material
or extended, nor do they originate or decay in the natural fashion, for
they can begin only by a creative act of God, and they can end only
by annihilation.”[248] Thereby they are distinguished from the atoms,
which are regarded simply as principles. The expression creation we are
familiar with from religion, but it is a meaningless word derived from
the ordinary conception; in order to be a thought and to have philosophic
significance, it must be much more closely defined.

Secondly: “On account of their simplicity the monads are not susceptible
of alteration by another monad in their inner essence; there is no
causal connection between them.” Each of them is something indifferent
and independent as regards the rest, otherwise it would not be an
entelechy. Each of them is so much for itself that all its determinations
and modifications go on in itself alone, and no determination from
without takes place. Leibnitz says: “There are three ways in which
substances are connected: (1) Causality, influence; (2) The relation of
assistance; (3) The relation of harmony. The relation of influence is a
relation pertaining to a commonplace or popular philosophy. But as it is
impossible to understand how material particles or immaterial qualities
can pass from one substance into another, such a conception as this must
be abandoned.” If we accept the reality of the many, there can be no
transition at all; each is an ultimate and absolutely independent entity.
“The system of assistance,” according to Descartes, “is something quite
superfluous, a _Deus ex machina_, because continual miracles in the
things of nature are assumed.” If we, like Descartes, assume independent
substances, no causal nexus is conceivable; for this presupposes an
influence, a bearing of the one upon the other, and in this way the
other is not a substance. “Therefore there remains only harmony, a unity
which is in itself or implicit. The monad is therefore simply shut up in
itself, and cannot be determined by another; this other cannot be set
into it. It can neither get outside itself, nor can others get inside
it.”[249] That is also Spinoza’s way of regarding matters: each attribute
entirely represents the essence of God for itself, extension and thought
have no influence on each other.

In the third place, “however, these monads must at the same time have
certain qualities or determinations in themselves, inner actions,
through which they are distinguished from others. There cannot be two
things alike, for otherwise they would not be two, they would not be
different, but one and the same.”[250] Here then Leibnitz’s axiom of the
undistinguishable comes into words. What is not in itself distinguished
is not distinguished. This may be taken in a trivial sense, as that there
are not two individuals which are alike. To such sensuous things the
maxim has no application, it is _prima facie_ indifferent whether there
are things which are alike or not; there may also be always a difference
of space. This is the superficial sense, which does not concern us. The
more intimate sense is, however, that each thing is in itself something
determined, distinguishing itself from others implicitly or in itself.
Whether two things are like or unlike is only a comparison which we
make, which falls within our ken. But what we have further to consider
is the determined difference in themselves. The difference must be a
difference in themselves, not for our comparison, for the subject must
have the difference as its own peculiar characteristic or determination,
_i.e._ the determination must be immanent in the individual. Not only
do we distinguish the animal by its claws, but it distinguishes itself
essentially thereby, it defends itself, it preserves itself. If two
things are different only in being two, then each of them is one; but the
fact of their being two does not constitute a distinction between them;
the determined difference in itself is the principal point.

Fourthly: “The determinateness and the variation thereby established
is, however, an inward implicit principle; it is a multiplicity of
modifications, of relations to surrounding existences, but a multiplicity
which remains locked up in simplicity. Determinateness and variation
such as this, which remains and goes on in the existence itself, is a
perception;” and therefore Leibnitz says all monads perceive or represent
(for we may translate _perceptio_ by representation [Vorstellung]).
In other words, they are in themselves universal, for universality is
just simplicity in multiplicity, and therefore a simplicity which is
at the same time change and motion of multiplicity. This is a very
important determination; in substance itself there is negativity,
determinateness, without its simplicity and its implicitude being given
up. Further, in it there is this idealism, that the simple is something
in itself distinguished, and in spite of its variation, that it yet
remains one, and continues in its simplicity. An instance of this is
found in “I,” my spirit. I have many conceptions, a wealth of thought
is in me, and yet I remain one, notwithstanding this variety of state.
This identity may be found in the fact that what is different is at the
same time abrogated, and is determined as one; the monads are therefore
distinguished by modifications in themselves, but not by external
determinations. These determinations contained in the monads exist in
them in ideal fashion; this ideality in the monad is in itself a whole,
so that these differences are only representations and ideas. This
absolute difference is what is termed the Notion; what falls asunder
in the mere representation is held together. This is what possesses
interest in Leibnitz’s philosophy. Such ideality in the same way pertains
to the material, which is also a multiplicity of monads; therefore the
system of Leibnitz is an intellectual system, in accordance with which
all that is material has powers of representation and perception. As
thus representing, the monad, says Leibnitz, possesses activity; for
activity is to be different, and yet to be one, and this is the only
true difference. The monad not only represents, it also changes; but in
doing so, it yet remains in itself absolutely what it is. This variation
is based on activity. “The activity of the inner principle, by means of
which it passes from one perception to another, is desire (_appetitus_).”
Variation in representation is desire, and that constitutes the
spontaneity of the monad; all is now complete in itself, and the category
of influence falls away. Indeed, this intellectuality of all things is a
great thought on the part of Leibnitz: “All multiplicity is included in
unity;”[251] determination is not a difference in respect of something
else, but reflected into itself, and maintaining itself. This is one
aspect of things, but the matter is not therein complete; it is equally
the case that it is different in respect of other things.

Fifthly: These representations and ideas are not necessarily conscious
representations and ideas, any more than all monads as forming
representations are conscious. It is true that consciousness is itself
perception, but a higher grade of the same; perceptions of consciousness
Leibnitz calls apperceptions. The difference between the merely
representing and the self-conscious monads Leibnitz makes one of degrees
of clearness. The expression representation has, however, certainly
something awkward about it, since we are accustomed to associate it only
with consciousness, and with consciousness as such; but Leibnitz admits
also of unconscious representation. When he then adduces examples of
unconscious representations, he appeals to the condition of a swoon or
of sleep, in which we are mere monads: and that representations without
consciousness are present in such states he shows from the fact of our
having perceptions immediately after awakening out of sleep, which shows
that others must have been there, for one perception arises only out of
others.[252] That is a trivial and empirical demonstration.

Sixthly: These monads constitute the principle of all that exists. Matter
is nothing else than their passive capability. This passive capability it
is which constitutes the obscurity of the representations, or a confusion
which never arrives at distinction, or desire, or activity.[253] That
is a correct definition of the conception; it is Being, matter, in
accordance with the moment of simplicity. This is implicitly activity;
“mere implicitness without actualization” would therefore be a better
expression. The transition from obscurity to distinctness Leibnitz
exemplifies by the state of swooning.

Seventhly: Bodies as bodies are aggregates of monads: they are mere heaps
which cannot be termed substances, any more than a flock of sheep can
bear this name.[254] The continuity of the same is an arrangement or
extension, but space is nothing in itself;[255] it is only in another,
or a unity which our understanding gives to that aggregate.[256]

b. Leibnitz goes on to determine and distinguish more clearly as the
principal moments, inorganic, organic, and conscious monads, and he does
it in the following way.

α. Such bodies as have no inner unity, whose elements are connected
merely by space, or externally, are inorganic; they have not an entelechy
or one monad which rules over the rest.[257] The continuity of space as a
merely external relation has not the Notion in itself of the likeness of
these monads in themselves. Continuity is in fact to be regarded in them
as an arrangement, a similarity in themselves. Leibnitz therefore defines
their movements as like one another, as a harmony in themselves;[258]
but again, this is as much as saying that their similarity is not in
themselves. In fact continuity forms the essential determination of
the inorganic; but it must at the same time not be taken as something
external or as likeness, but as penetrating or penetrated unity, which
has dissolved individuality in itself like a fluid. But to this point
Leibnitz does not attain, because for him monads are the absolute
principle, and individuality does not annul itself.

β. A higher degree of Being is found in bodies with life and soul, in
which one monad has dominion over the rest. The body which is bound up
with the monad, of which the one monad is the entelechy or soul, is
with this soul named a living creature, an animal. One such entelechy
rules over the rest, yet not really, but formally: the limbs of this
animal, however, are again themselves such living things, each of which
has in its turn its ruling entelechy within it.[259] But ruling is
here an inappropriate expression. To rule in this case is not to rule
over others, for all are independent; it is therefore only a formal
expression. If Leibnitz had not helped himself out with the word rule,
and developed the idea further, this dominant monad would have abrogated
the others, and put them in a negative position; the implicitness of the
other monads, or the principle of the absolute Being of these points or
individuals would have disappeared. Yet we shall later on come across
this relation of the individuals to one another.

γ. The conscious monad distinguishes itself from the naked (material)
monads by the distinctness of the representation. But this is of course
only an indefinite word, a formal distinction; it indicates that
consciousness is the very thing that constitutes the distinction of the
undistinguished, and that distinction constitutes the determination
of consciousness. Leibnitz more particularly defined the distinction
of man as that “he is capable of the knowledge of necessary and
eternal truths,”—or that he conceives the universal on the one hand,
and on the other what is connected with it; the nature and essence of
self-consciousness lies in the universality of the Notions. “These
eternal truths rest on two maxims; the one is that of contradiction,
the other is that of sufficient reason.” The former of these is unity
expressed in useless fashion as a maxim, the distinction of the
undistinguishable, A = A; it is the definition of thinking, but not a
maxim which could contain a truth as content, or it does not express
the Notion of distinction as such. The other important principle
was, on the other hand: What is not distinguished in thought is
not distinguished (p. 333). “The maxim of the reason is that
everything has its reason,”[260]—the particular has the universal
as its essential reality. Necessary truth must have its reason in
itself in such a manner that it is found by analysis, _i.e._ through
that very maxim of identity. For analysis is the very favourite
plan of resolving into simple ideas and principles: a resolution
which annihilates their relation, and which therefore in fact
forms a transition into the opposite, though it does not have the
consciousness of the same, and on that account also excludes the
Notion; for every opposite it lays hold of only in its identity.
Sufficient reason seems to be a pleonasm; but Leibnitz understood by
this aims, final causes (_causæ finales_), the difference between
which and the causal nexus or the efficient cause he here brings under
discussion.[261]

c. The universal itself, absolute essence, which with Leibnitz is
something quite different from the monads, separates itself also into two
sides, namely universal Being and Being as the unity of opposites.

α. That universal is God, as the cause of the world, to the consciousness
of whom the above principle of sufficient reason certainly forms the
transition. The existence of God is only an inference from eternal
truths; for these must as the laws of nature have a universal sufficient
reason which determines itself as none other than God. Eternal truth is
therefore the consciousness of the universal and absolute in and for
itself; and this universal and absolute is God, who, as one with Himself,
the monad of monads, is the absolute _Monas_. Here we again have the
wearisome proof of His existence: He is the fountain of eternal truths
and Notions, and without Him no potentiality would have actuality; He
has the prerogative of existing immediately in His potentiality.[262]
God is here also the unity of potentiality and actuality, but in an
uncomprehending manner; what is necessary, but not comprehended, is
transferred to Him. Thus God is at first comprehended chiefly as
universal, but already in the aspect of the relation of opposites.

β. As regards this second aspect, the absolute relation of opposites, it
occurs in the first place in the form of absolute opposites of thought,
the good and the evil. “God is the Author of the world,” says Leibnitz;
that refers directly to evil. It is round this relation that philosophy
specially revolves, but to the unity of which it did not then attain;
the evil in the world was not comprehended, because no advance was made
beyond the fixed opposition. The result of Leibnitz’s Théodicée is an
optimism supported on the lame and wearisome thought that God, since a
world had to be brought into existence, chose out of infinitely many
possible worlds the best possible—the most perfect, so far as it could
be perfect, considering the finite element which it was to contain.[263]
This may very well be said in a general way, but this perfection is no
determined thought, but a loose popular expression, a sort of babble
respecting an imaginary or fanciful potentiality; Voltaire made merry
over it. Nor is the nature of the finite therein defined. Because the
world, it is said, has to be the epitome of finite Beings, evil could
not be separated from it, since evil is negation, finitude.[264] Reality
and negation remain standing in opposition to one another exactly in the
same way as before. That is the principal conception in the Théodicée.
But something very like this can be said in every-day life. If I have
some goods brought to me in the market at some town, and say that they
are certainly not perfect, but the best that are to be got, this is quite
a good reason why I should content myself with them. But comprehension
is a very different thing from this. Leibnitz says nothing further than
that the world is good, but there is also evil in it; the matter remains
just the same as it was before. “Because it had to be finite” is then a
mere arbitrary choice on the part of God. The next question would be: Why
and how is there finitude in the Absolute and His decrees? And only then
should there be deduced from the determination of finitude the evil which
no doubt exists therein.

It is true that Leibnitz has a reply to the above question: “God does
not will what is evil; evil comes only indirectly into the results”
(blind), “because oftentimes the greater good could not be achieved if
evils were not present. Therefore they are means to a good end.” But why
does not God employ other means? They are always external, not in and
for themselves. “A moral evil may not be regarded as a means, nor must
we, as the apostle says, do evil that good may come; yet it has often
the relation of a _conditio sine qua non_ of the good. Evil is in God
only the object of a permissive will (_voluntatis permissivæ_);” but
everything that is wrong would be such. “God has therefore among the
objects of His will the best possible as the ultimate object, but the
good as a matter of choice (_qualemcunque_), also as subordinate; and
things indifferent and evils often as means. Evil is, however, an object
of His will only as the condition of something otherwise necessary (_rei
alioqui debitæ_), which without it could not exist; in which sense Christ
said it must needs be that offences come.”[265]

In a general sense we are satisfied with the answer: “In accordance
with the wisdom of God we must accept it as a fact that the laws of
nature are the best possible,” but this answer does not suffice for a
definite question. What one wishes to know is the goodness of this or
that particular law; and to that no answer is given. If, for example, it
is said that “The law of falling bodies, in which the relation of time
and space is the square, is the best possible,” one might employ, as far
as mathematics are concerned, any other power whatever. When Leibnitz
answers: “God made it so,” this is no answer at all. We wish to know the
definite reason of this law; such general determinations sound pious, but
are not satisfying.

γ. He goes on to say that the sufficient reason has reference to the
representation of the monads. The principles of things are monads, of
which each is for itself, without having influence on the others. If
now the Monad of monads, God, is the absolute substance, and individual
monads are created through His will, their substantiality comes to
an end. There is therefore a contradiction present, which remains
unsolved in itself—that is between the one substantial monad and the
many monads for which independence is claimed, because their essence
consists in their standing in no relation to one another. Yet at the same
time, in order to show the harmony that exists in the world, Leibnitz
understands the relation of monads to monads more generally as the
unity of contrasted existences, namely of soul and body. This unity he
represents as a relation without difference, and notionless, _i.e._ as a
pre-established harmony.[266] Leibnitz uses here the illustration of two
clocks, which are set to the same hour, and keep the same time;[267] in
the same way the movement of the kingdom of thought goes on, determined
in accordance with ends, and the movement onward of the corporeal
kingdom which corresponds with it, proceeds according to a general
causal connection.[268] The case is the same as with Spinoza, that these
two sides of the universe have no connection with each other, the one
does not influence the other, but both are entirely indifferent to one
another; it is really the differentiating relation of the Notion that is
lacking. In abstract thought that is without Notion, that determination
now receives the form of simplicity, of implicitude, of indifference
with regard to what is other, of a self-reflection that has no movement:
in this way red in the abstract is in a position of indifference as
regards blue, &c. Here, as before, Leibnitz forsakes his principle of
individuation; it has only the sense of being exclusively one, and of not
reaching to and including what is other; or it is only a unity of the
popular conception, not the Notion of unity. The soul has thus a series
of conceptions and ideas which are developed from within it, and this
series is from the very first placed within the soul at its creation,
_i.e._ the soul is in all immediacy this implicit determination;
determination is, however, not implicit, but the reflected unfolding of
this determination in the ordinary conception is its outward existence.
Parallel with this series of differentiated conceptions, there now runs a
series of motions of the body, or of what is external to the soul.[269]
Both are essential moments of reality; they are mutually indifferent, but
they have also an essential relation of difference.

Since now every monad, as shut up within itself, has no influence upon
the body and its movements, and yet the infinite multitude of their
atoms correspond with one another, Leibnitz places this harmony in God;
a better definition of the relation and the activity of the Monad of
monads is therefore that it is what pre-establishes harmony in the
changes of the monads.[270] God is the sufficient reason, the cause of
this correspondence; He has so arranged the multitude of atoms that the
original changes which are developed within one monad correspond with
the changes of the others. The pre-established harmony is to be thought
of somewhat in this style; when a dog gets a beating, the pain develops
itself in him, in like fashion the beating develops itself in itself, and
so does the person who administers the beating: their determinations all
correspond with one another, and that not by means of their objective
connection, since each is independent.[271] The principle of the harmony
among the monads does not consequently belong to them, but it is in God,
who for that very reason is the Monad of monads, their absolute unity.
We saw from the beginning how Leibnitz arrived at this conception. Each
monad is really possessed of the power of representation, and is as such
a representation of the universe, therefore implicitly the totality of
the whole world. But at the same time this representation is not in
consciousness; the naked monad is implicitly the universe, and difference
is the development of this totality in it.[272] What develops itself
therein is at the same time in harmony with all other developments; all
is one harmony. “In the universe all things are closely knit together,
they are in one piece, like an ocean: the slightest movement transmits
its influence far and wide all around.”[273] From a single grain of
sand, Leibnitz holds, the whole universe might be comprehended in its
entire development—if we only knew the sand grain thoroughly. There is
not really much in all this, though it sounds very fine; for the rest of
the universe is considerably more than a grain of sand, well though we
knew it, and considerably different therefrom. To say that its essence
is the universe is mere empty talk: for the fact is that the universe
as essence is not the universe. To the sand grain much must be added
which is not present; and since thought adds more than all the grains
of sand that exist, the universe and its development may in this way
certainly be comprehended. Thus according to Leibnitz every monad has
or is the representation of the entire universe, which is the same as
saying that it is really representation in general; but at the same time
it is a determinate representation, by means of which it comes to be
this particular monad, therefore it is representation according to its
particular situation and circumstances.[274]

The representations of the monad in itself, which constitute its
universe, develop themselves from themselves, as the spiritual element
in it, according to the laws of their own activity and desire, just as
the movements of their outer world do according to laws of bodies; hence
liberty is nothing other than this spontaneity of immanent development,
but as in consciousness. The magnetic needle, on the contrary, has only
spontaneity without consciousness, and consequently without freedom.
For, says Leibnitz, the nature of the magnetic needle is to turn to
the north; if it had consciousness it would imagine that this was
its self-determination; it would thus have the will to move round in
accordance with its nature.[275] But it is clear that in the course of
conscious representations there is involved no necessary connection, but
contingency and want of sequence are to be found, the reason of this
according to Leibnitz (Oper. T. II P. I. p. 75) being “because the nature
of a created substance implies that it changes incessantly according to
a certain order, which order guides it spontaneously (_spontanément_)
in all the circumstances which befall it; so that one who sees all
things recognizes in the present condition of substance the past also
and the future. The law of order, which determines the individuality of
the particular substance, has an exact reference to what takes place in
every other substance and in the whole universe.” The meaning of this is
that the monad is not a thing apart, or that there are two views of it,
the one making it out as spontaneously generating its representations,
so far as form is concerned, and the other making it out to be a moment
of the whole of necessity; Spinoza would call this regarding it from
both sides. An organic whole, a human being, is thus for instance the
assertion of his aim from out of himself: at the same time the being
directed on something else is involved in his Notion. He represents
this and that to himself, he wills this and that; his activity employs
itself and brings about changes. His inward determination thus becomes
corporeal determination, and then change going beyond himself; he appears
as cause, influencing other monads. But this Being-for-another is only
an appearance. For the other, _i.e._ the actual, in so far as the monad
determines it or makes it negative, is the passive element which the
monad has in itself: all moments are indeed contained therein, and for
that very reason it has no need of other monads, but only of the laws of
the monads in itself. But if the Being-for-another is mere appearance,
the same may be said of Being-for-self; for this has significance only in
reference to Being-for-another.

The important point in Leibnitz’s philosophy is this intellectuality
of representation which Leibnitz, however, did not succeed in carrying
out; and for the same reason this intellectuality is at the same time
infinite multiplicity, which has remained absolutely independent,
because this intellectuality has not been able to obtain mastery over
the One. The separation in the Notion, which proceeds as far as release
from itself, or appearance in distinct independence, Leibnitz did not
succeed in bringing together into unity. The harmony of these two
moments, the course of mental representations and the course of things
external, appearing mutually as cause and effect, is not brought by
Leibnitz into relation in and for themselves; he therefore lets them
fall asunder, although each is passive as regards the other. He moreover
considers both of them in one unity, to be sure, but their activity
is at the same time not for themselves. Every forward advance becomes
therefore incomprehensible when taken by itself, because the course
of the representation as through aims in itself, requires this moment
of Other-Being or of passivity; and again the connection of cause and
effect requires the universal: each however lacks this its other moment.
The unity which according to Leibnitz is to be brought about by the
pre-established harmony, namely that the determination of the will of man
and the outward change harmonize, is therefore brought about by means of
another, if not indeed from without, for this other is God. Before God
the monads are not to be independent, but ideal and absorbed in Him.

At this point the demand would come in that in God Himself there should
be comprehended the required unity of that which before fell asunder;
and God has the special privilege of having laid on Him the burden of
what cannot be comprehended. The word of God is thus the makeshift which
leads to a unity which itself is only hypothetical; for the process of
the many out of this unity is not demonstrated. God plays therefore in
the later philosophy a far greater part than in the early, because now
the comprehension of the absolute opposition of thought and Being is
the chief demand. With Leibnitz the extent to which thoughts advance is
the extent of the universe; where comprehension ceases, the universe
ceases, and God begins: so that later it was even maintained that to be
comprehended was derogatory to God, because He was thus degraded into
finitude. In that procedure a beginning is made from the determinate,
this and that are stated to be necessary; but since in the next place the
unity of these moments is not comprehended, it is transferred to God. God
is therefore, as it were, the waste channel into which all contradictions
flow: Leibnitz’s Théodicée is just a popular summing up such as this.
There are, nevertheless, all manner of evasions to be searched out—in the
opposition of God’s justice and mercy, that the one tempers the other;
how the fore-knowledge of God and human freedom are compatible—all manner
of syntheses which never come to the root of the matter nor show both
sides to be moments.

These are the main moments of Leibnitz’s philosophy. It is a metaphysic
which starts from a narrow determination of the understanding, namely,
from absolute multiplicity, so that connection can only be grasped
as continuity. Thereby absolute unity is certainly set aside, but
all the same it is presupposed; and the association of individuals
with one another is to be explained only in this way, that it is God
who determines the harmony in the changes of individuals. This is an
artificial system, which is founded on a category of the understanding,
that of the absoluteness of abstract individuality. What is of importance
in Leibnitz lies in the maxims, in the principle of individuality and the
maxim of indistinguishability.


2. WOLFF.

The philosophy of Wolff is directly connected with that of Leibnitz,
for really it is a pedantic systematization of the latter, for which
reason it is likewise called the Leibnitz-Wolffian system of philosophy.
Wolff attained to great distinction in mathematics and made himself
famous by his philosophy as well; the latter was for long predominant
in Germany. In Wolff, as a teacher dealing with the understanding, we
find a systematic exposition of the philosophic element present in human
conceptions as a whole. As regards his connection with German culture
generally, great and immortal praise is more especially due to him;
before all others he may be termed the teacher of the Germans. We may
indeed say that Wolff was the first to naturalize philosophy in Germany.
Tschirnhausen and Thomasius likewise participated in this honour,
for the special reason that they wrote upon Philosophy in the German
language. In regard to the matter of the philosophy of Tschirnhausen and
Thomasius we have not much to say; it is so-called healthy reason—there
is in it the superficial character and the empty universality always
to be found where a beginning is made with thought. In this case the
universality of thought satisfies us because everything is present
there, just as it is present in a moral maxim which has, however, no
determinate content in its universality. Wolff, then, was the first to
make, not exactly Philosophy, but thoughts in the form of thought, into
a general possession, and he substituted this in Germany for mere talk
originating from feeling, from sensuous perception, and from the ordinary
conception. This is most important from the point of view of culture,
and yet it does not really concern us here, excepting in so far as the
content in this form of thought has caused itself to be recognized as
Philosophy. This philosophy, as a philosophy of the understanding, became
the ordinary culture of the day; in it determinate, intelligent thought
is the fundamental principle, and it extends over the whole circle of
objects which fall within the region of knowledge. Wolff defined the
world of consciousness for Germany, and for the world in general, in the
same wide sense in which we may say that this was done by Aristotle. What
distinguishes him from Aristotle is that in so doing the point of view
that he adopted was that of the understanding merely, while Aristotle
treated the subject speculatively. The philosophy of Wolff is hence no
doubt built on foundations laid by Leibnitz, but yet in such a manner
that the speculative interest is quite eliminated from it. The spiritual
philosophy, substantial in a higher sense, which we found emerging first
in Boehme, though still in a peculiar and barbarous form, has been quite
lost sight of, and has disappeared without leaving any traces or effects
in Germany; his very language was forgotten.

The principal events in Christian Wolff’s life are these: He was the son
of a baker, and was born at Breslau in 1679. He first studied Theology
and then Philosophy, and in 1707 he became Professor of Mathematics
and Philosophy at Halle. Here the pietistic theologians, and more
especially Lange, treated him in the basest manner. Piety did not trust
this understanding; for piety, if it is true, embodies a content which
is speculative in nature, and which passes beyond the understanding. As
his opponents could make no headway by their writings, they resorted to
intrigues. They caused it to be conveyed to King Frederick William I.,
the father of Frederick II., a rough man who took an interest in nothing
but soldiers, that according to the determinism of Wolff, free will was
impossible, and that soldiers could not hence desert of their own free
will, but by a special disposition of God (pre-established harmony)—a
doctrine which, if disseminated amongst the military, would be extremely
dangerous. The king, much enraged by this, immediately issued a decree
that within forty-eight hours Wolff should leave Halle and the Prussian
States, under penalty of the halter. Wolff thus left Halle on the 23rd
of November, 1723. The theologians added to all this the scandal of
preaching against Wolff and his philosophy, and the pious Franke thanked
God on his knees in church for the removal of Wolff. But the rejoicings
did not last long. Wolff went to Cassel, was there immediately installed
first professor in the philosophic faculty at Marburg, and at the same
time made a member of the Academies of Science of London, Paris, and
Stockholm. By Peter the First of Russia he was made Vice-President of
the newly instituted Academy in St. Petersburg. Wolff was also summoned
to Russia, but this invitation he declined; he received, however, an
honorary post, he was made a Baron by the Elector of Bavaria, and, in
short, loaded with public honours which, more especially at that time,
though even now it is the case, were very much thought of by the general
public, and which were too great not to make a profound sensation in
Berlin. In Berlin a commission was appointed to pass judgment on the
Wolffian philosophy—for this it had not been possible to eradicate—and it
declared the same to be harmless, that is to say, free from all danger
to state and religion; it also forbade the theologians to make it a
subject of dispute, and altogether put an end to their clamour. Frederick
William now issued a recall in very respectful terms to Wolff, who,
however, hesitated to comply with it owing to his lack of confidence in
its sincerity. On the accession of Frederick II. in 1740 he was again
recalled in terms of the highest honour (Lange had meanwhile died), and
only then did he comply. Wolff became Vice-Chancellor of the University,
but he outlived his repute, and his lectures at the end were very poorly
attended. He died in 1754.[276]

Like Tschirnhausen and Thomasius, Wolff wrote a great part of his works
in his mother tongue, while Leibnitz for the most part wrote only in
Latin or French. This is an important matter, for, as we have already
noticed (pp. 114 and 150), it is only when a nation possesses a science
in its own language that it can really be said to belong to it; and in
Philosophy most of all this is requisite. For thought has in it this
very moment of pertaining to self-consciousness or of being absolutely
its own; when one’s own language is the vehicle of expression, as when
we talk of “Bestimmtheit” instead of “Determination,” and “Wesen”
instead of “Essenz,” it is immediately present to our consciousness
that the conceptions are absolutely its own; it has to deal with these
at all times, and they are in no way foreign to it. The Latin language
has a phraseology, a definite sphere and range of conception; it is
at once taken for granted that when men write in Latin they are at
liberty to be dull; it is impossible to read or write what men permit
themselves to say in Latin. The titles of Wolff’s philosophic works
are perpetually of this nature: “Rational thoughts on the powers of
the human understanding and their right uses in the knowledge of the
truth,” Halle, 1712, 8vo; “Rational thoughts on God, the world, and the
soul of man, likewise on all things generally,” Frankfort and Leipzig,
1719; “On the action and conduct of men,” Halle, 1720; “On Social Life,”
Halle, 1720; “On the operations of Nature,” Halle, 1723, and so on.
Wolff wrote German and Latin quartos on every department of Philosophy,
even on economics—twenty-three thick volumes of Latin, or about forty
quartos altogether. His mathematical works make a good many more quartos.
He brought into general use the differential and integral calculus of
Leibnitz.

It is only in its general content and taken as a whole that Wolff’s
philosophy is the philosophy of Leibnitz, that is to say, only in
relation to the fundamental determinations of monads and to the
theodicy—to these he remained faithful; any other content is empiric,
derived from our feelings and desires. Wolff likewise accepted in their
entirety all the Cartesian and other definitions of general ideas. Hence
we find in him abstract propositions and their proofs mingled with
experiences, on the indubitable truth of which he builds a large part
of his propositions; and he must so build and derive his foundations if
a content is to result at all. With Spinoza, on the contrary, no content
is to be found excepting absolute substance and a perpetual return into
the same. The greatness of Wolff’s services to the culture of Germany,
which now appeared quite independently and without any connection with
an earlier and profounder metaphysical standpoint (_supra_, p. 350), are
in proportion to the barrenness and inward contentless condition into
which Philosophy had sunk. This he divided into its formal disciplines,
spinning it out into determinations of the understanding with a pedantic
application of geometric methods; and, contemporaneously with the
English philosophers, he made the dogmatism of the metaphysics of the
understanding fashionable, that is a philosophizing which determines the
absolute and rational by means of self-exclusive thought-determinations
and relationships (such as one and many, simple and compound, finite
and infinite, causal connection, &c.). Wolff entirely displaced the
Aristotelian philosophy of the schools, and made Philosophy into an
ordinary science pertaining to the German nation. But besides this he
gave Philosophy that systematic and requisite division into sections
which has down to the present day served as a sort of standard.

In theoretic philosophy Wolff first treats of Logic purified from
scholastic interpretations or deductions; it is the logic of the
understanding which he has systematized. The second stage is Metaphysics,
which contains four parts: first there is Ontology, the treatment of
abstract and quite general philosophic categories, such as Being (ὄν) and
its being the One and Good; in this abstract metaphysic there further
comes accident, substance, cause and effect, the phenomenon, &c. Next
in order is Cosmology, a general doctrine of body, the doctrine of the
world; here we have abstract metaphysical propositions respecting the
world, that there is no chance, no leaps or bounds in nature—the law
of continuity. Wolff excludes natural science and natural history. The
third part of the metaphysic is rational psychology or pneumatology, the
philosophy of the soul, which deals with the simplicity, immortality,
immateriality of the soul. Finally, the fourth is natural theology, which
sets forth the proofs of the existence of God.[277] Wolff also inserts
(chap. iii.) an empirical psychology. Practical philosophy he divides
into the Rights of Nature, Morality, the Rights of Nations or Politics,
and Economics.

The whole is propounded in geometric forms such as definitions, axioms,
theorems, scholia, corollaries, &c. In mathematics the understanding is
in its proper place, for the triangle must remain the triangle. Wolff on
the one hand started upon a large range of investigation, and one quite
indefinite in character, and on the other, held to a strictly methodical
manner with regard to propositions and their proofs. The method is really
similar to that of Spinoza, only it is more wooden and lifeless than his.
Wolff applied the same methods to every sort of content—even to that
which is altogether empirical, such as his so-called applied mathematics,
into which he introduces many useful arts, bringing the most ordinary
reflections and directions into the geometric form. In many cases this
undoubtedly gives his work a most pedantic aspect, especially when the
content directly justifies itself to our conception without this form at
all. For Wolff proceeds by first laying down certain definitions, which
really rest upon our ordinary conceptions, since these he translated
into the empty form of determinations of the understanding. Hence the
definitions are merely nominal definitions, and we know whether they are
correct only by seeing whether they correspond to conceptions which are
referred to their simple thoughts. The syllogism is the form of real
importance in this mode of reasoning, and with Wolff it often attains to
its extreme of rigidity and formalism.

Under mathematics, which is the subject of four small volumes, Wolff also
treats of architecture and military science. One of the propositions in
Architecture is this: “Windows must be wide enough for two persons.” The
making of a door is also propounded as a task, and the solution thereof
given. The next best example comes from the art of warfare. The “Fourth
proposition. The approach to the fortress must always be harder for
the enemy the nearer he comes to it.” Instead of saying, because the
danger is greater, which would be trivial, there follows the “Proof.
The nearer the enemy comes to the fortress, the greater the danger. But
the greater the danger the greater the resistance that must be offered
in order to defy the attacks, and, so far as may be, avert the danger.
Hence the nearer the enemy is to the fort the harder must the approach
be made for him. Q.E.D.”[278] Since the increase of the danger is given
as the reason, the whole is false, and the contrary may be said with
equal truth. For if at the beginning all possible resistance is offered
to the enemy, he cannot get nearer the fortress at all, and thus the
danger cannot become greater. The greater resistance has a real cause,
and not this foolish one—namely, that because the garrison is now at
closer quarters, and consequently operates in a narrow field, it can
offer a greater resistance. In this most trivial way Wolff proceeds
with every sort of content. This barbarism of pedantry, or this pedantry
of barbarism, represented as it is in its whole breadth and extent,
necessarily brought itself into disrepute; and without there being a
definite consciousness of the reason why the geometric method is not
the only and ultimate method of knowledge, instinct and an immediate
consciousness of the foolishness of its applications caused this method
to be set aside.


3. THE POPULAR PHILOSOPHY OF GERMANY.

Popular philosophy flatters our ordinary consciousness, makes it the
ultimate standard. Although with Spinoza we begin with presupposed
definitions, the content is still profoundly speculative in nature,
and it is not derived from the ordinary consciousness. In Spinoza
thinking is not merely the form, for the content belongs to thinking
itself; it is the content of thought in itself. In the speculative
content the instinct of reason satisfies itself on its own account,
because this content, as a totality which integrates itself within
itself, at once in itself justifies itself to thought. The content in
Spinoza is only without ground in so far as it has no external ground,
but is a ground in itself. But if the content is finite, a demand for
an external ground is indicated, since in such a case we desire to
have a ground other than this finite. In its matter the philosophy of
Wolff is indeed a popular philosophy, even if in form it still makes
thought authoritative. Until the time of Kant the philosophy of Wolff
was thus pre-eminent. Baumgarten, Crusius, and Moses Mendelssohn worked
each of them independently on the same lines as Wolff; the philosophy
of the last-mentioned was popular and graceful in form. The Wolffian
philosophy was thus carried on, although it had cast off its pedantic
methods: no further progress was however made. The question dealt with
was how perfection could be attained—what it is possible to think
and what not; metaphysic was reduced to its slightest consistency and
to its completest vacuity, so that in its texture not a single thread
remained secure. Mendelssohn considered himself, and was considered, the
greatest of philosophers, and was lauded as such by his friends. In his
“Morgenstunden” we really find a dry Wolffian philosophy, however much
these gentlemen endeavoured to give their dull abstractions a bright
Platonic form.

The forms of Philosophy which we have considered bear the character
which pertains specially to metaphysics, of proceeding from general
determinations of the understanding, but of combining therewith
experience and observation, or the empiric method in general. One side
of this metaphysic is that the opposites of thought are brought into
consciousness, and that attention is directed upon the solution of this
contradiction. Thought and Being or extension, God and the world, good
and evil, the power and prescience of God on the one side, and the evil
in the world and human freedom on the other: these contradictions, the
opposites of soul and spirit, things conceived and things material, and
their mutual relation, have occupied all men’s attention. The solution
of these opposites and contradictions has still to be given, and God is
set forth as the One in whom all these contradictions are solved. This is
what is common to all these philosophies as far as their main elements
are concerned. Yet we must likewise remark that these contradictions are
not solved in themselves, _i.e._ that the nullity of the supposition is
not demonstrated in itself, and thereby a true concrete solution has not
come to pass. Even if God is recognized as solving all contradictions,
God as the solution of these contradictions is a matter of words rather
than something conceived and comprehended. If God is comprehended in His
qualities, and prescience, omnipresence, omniscience, power, wisdom,
goodness justice, &c., are considered as qualities of God Himself,
they simply lead to contradictions; and these contradictions, Leibnitz
(_supra_, p. 348) sought to remove by saying that the qualities temper
one another, _i.e._ that they are combined in such a way that one annuls
the other. This, however, is no real comprehension of such contradiction.

This metaphysic contrasts greatly with the old philosophy of a Plato or
an Aristotle. To the old philosophy we can always turn again and admit
its truth; it is satisfying in the stage of development it has reached—a
concrete centre-point which meets all the problems set by thought as
these are comprehended. In this modern metaphysic, however, the opposites
are merely developed into absolute contradictions. God is indeed given as
their absolute solution, but only as an abstract solution, as a Beyond;
on this side all contradictions are, as regards their content, unsolved
and unexplained. God is not comprehended as the One in whom these
contradictions are eternally resolved; He is not comprehended as Spirit,
as the Trinity. It is in Him alone as Spirit, and as Spirit which is
Three in One, that this opposition of Himself and His Other, the Son, is
contained, and with it the resolution of the same; this concrete Idea of
God as reason, has not as yet found an entrance into Philosophy.

In order that we may now cast a retrospective glance over the philosophic
efforts of other nations, we shall apply ourselves to the further
progress of Philosophy. Once more we see Scepticism making its way
into this arid philosophy of the understanding. But this time it is,
properly speaking, in the form of Idealism, or the determinations are
subjective determinations of self-consciousness. In the place of thought
we consequently find the Notion now making its appearance. Just as with
the Stoics determinateness is held to be an object of thought, we have in
modern times this same manifestation of thought as the unmoved form of
simplicity. Only here the image or inner consciousness of totality is
present, the absolute spirit which the world has before it as its truth
and to whose Notion it makes its way—this is another inward principle,
another implicitude of mind which it endeavours to bring forth from
itself and for itself, so that reason is a comprehension of the same, or
has the certitude of being all reality. With the ancients reason (λόγος),
as the implicit and explicit Being of consciousness, had only an ethereal
and formal existence as language, but here it has certainty as existent
substance. Hence with Descartes there is the unity of the Notion and
Being, and with Spinoza the universal reality. The first commencement
of the Notion of the movement of fixed thoughts in themselves is found
in this, that the movement which, as method, simply falls outside
its object, comes within it, or that self-consciousness comes within
thought. Thought is implicitude without explicitude, an objective
mode bearing no resemblance to a sensuous thing; and yet it is quite
different from the actuality of self-consciousness. This Notion which
we now find entering into thought, has the three kinds of form which we
still have to consider; in the first place it has that of individual
self-consciousness or the formal conception generally; secondly, that of
universal self-consciousness, which applies itself to all objects whether
they be objects of thought, determinate conceptions, or have the form
of actuality—that is to say it applies itself to what is established in
thought, to the intellectual world with the riches of its determinations
and looked on as a Beyond, or to the intellectual world in as far as it
is its realization, the world here and around us. It is in those two
ways, and in those ways alone, that the actual Notion is present in the
succeeding chapter; for not as yet is it in the third place to be found
as taken back into thought, or as the self-thinking or thought-of Notion.
While that universal self-consciousness is, on the whole, a thought which
grasps and comprehends, this third kind of thought is the Notion itself
recognized as constituting reality in its essence, that is to say as
Idealism. These three aspects again divide themselves as before into the
three nations which alone count in the civilized world. The empirical and
perfectly finite form of Notion pertains to the English; to the French
belongs its form as making an attempt at everything, as establishing
itself in its reality, abolishing all determination, and therefore being
universal, unlimited, pure self-consciousness; and, lastly, to the German
pertains the entering into itself of this implicitude, the thought of the
absolute Notion.




