CHAPTER II

TRANSITION PERIOD


The decadence which we find in thought until the philosophy of Kant is
reached, is manifested in what was at this time advocated in opposition
to the metaphysic of the understanding, and which may be called a general
popular philosophy, a reflecting empiricism, which to a greater or less
extent becomes itself a metaphysic; just as, on the other hand, that
metaphysic, in as far as it extended to particular sciences, becomes
empiricism. As against these metaphysical contradictions, as against the
artificialities of the metaphysical synthesis, as against the assistance
of God, the pre-established harmony, the best possible world, &c., as
against this merely artificial understanding, we now find that fixed
principles, immanent in mind, have been asserted or maintained respecting
what is felt, intuitively perceived and honoured in the cultured human
breast. And in distinction to the assertion that we only find the
solution in the Beyond, in God, these concrete principles of a fixed
and permanent content form a reconciliation here and now, they adopt a
position of independence, and assume an intellectual standing-ground
which they find in what has generally been termed the healthy human
understanding. Such determinations may indeed be found to be perfectly
good and valid if the feelings, intuitions, heart and understanding of
man be morally and intellectually fashioned; for in that case better
and more noble feelings and desires may rule in men and a more universal
content may be expressed in these principles. But when men make what we
call sound reason—that which is by nature implanted in man’s breast—into
the content and the principle, the healthy human understanding discovers
itself to be identical with a feeling and knowledge belonging to nature.
The Indians who worship a cow, and who expose or slay new-born children,
and commit all sorts of barbarous deeds, the Egyptians who pray to a
bird, the apis, &c., and the Turks as well, all possess a healthy human
understanding similar in nature. But the healthy human understanding
and the natural feeling of rude and barbarous Turks, when taken as a
standard, result in shocking principles. When we speak of healthy human
understanding, however, of natural feelings, we always have before our
eyes a cultured mind; and those who make the healthy human reason, the
natural knowledge, the immediate feelings and inspirations found in
themselves, into a rule and standard, do not know that when religion,
morality, and rectitude are discovered to be present in the human breast,
this is due to culture and education, which are the first to make
such principles into natural feelings. Here natural feelings and the
healthy human understanding are thus made the principle; and much may be
recognized as coming under these heads. This then is the form taken by
Philosophy in the eighteenth century. Taken as a whole, three points of
view have to be considered; in the first place, Hume must be regarded on
his own account, then the Scottish, and, thirdly, the French philosophy.
Hume is a sceptic; the Scottish philosophy opposes the scepticism of
Hume, the French philosophy has in the “enlightenment” of Germany (by
which expression is indicated that form of German philosophy which is
not Wolffian metaphysics) an appendage of a feebler form. Since from the
metaphysical God we can make no further progress in the concrete, Locke
grounds his content on experience. But that empiricism leads thought to
no fixed standpoint, Hume demonstrates by denying every universal; the
Scottish philosophers, on the contrary, undoubtedly maintain universal
propositions and truths, but not through thought. Hence in empiricism
itself the fixed standpoint has now to be adopted; thus the French find
the universal in the actuality which they call _réalité_. They do not,
however, find its content in and from thought, but as living substance,
as nature and matter. All this is a further working out of reflecting
empiricism, and some more details respecting it must still be given.


A. IDEALISM AND SCEPTICISM.

Thought generally is simple, universal self-identity, but in the form
of negative movement, whereby the determinate abrogates itself. This
movement of Being-for-self is now an essential moment of thought,
while hitherto it was outside it; and thus grasping itself as movement
in itself, thought is self-consciousness—at first indeed formal, as
individual self-consciousness. Such a form it has in scepticism, but
this distinction marks it off from the older scepticism, that now the
certainty of reality is made the starting point. With the ancients, on
the contrary, scepticism is the return into individual consciousness in
such a way that to it this consciousness is not the truth, in other words
that scepticism does not give expression to the results arrived at, and
attains no positive significance. But since in the modern world this
absolute substantiality, this unity of implicitude and self-consciousness
is fundamental—that is, this faith in reality generally—scepticism has
here the form of idealism, _i.e._ of expressing self-consciousness or
certainty of self as all reality and truth. The crudest form of this
idealism is when self-consciousness, as individual or formal, does not
proceed further than to say: All objects are our conceptions. We find
this subjective idealism in Berkeley,[279] and another form of the same
in Hume.


1. BERKELEY.

This idealism, in which all external reality disappears, has before it
the standpoint of Locke, and it proceeds directly from him. For we saw
that to Locke the source of truth is experience, or Being as perceived.
Now since this sensuous Being, as Being, has in it the quality of being
for consciousness, we saw that it necessarily came to pass that in
Locke’s case some qualities, at least, were so determined that they were
not in themselves, but only for another; and that colour, figure, &c.,
had their ground only in the subject, in his particular organization.
This Being-for-another, however, was not by him accepted as the Notion,
but as falling within self-consciousness—i.e. self-consciousness not
looked on as universal,—not within mind, but within what is opposed to
the implicit.

George Berkeley was born in 1684 at Kilcrin, near Thomastown, in the
county of Kilkenny, Ireland: in 1754 he died as an English Bishop.[280]
He wrote the “Theory of Vision,” 1709; “A Treatise concerning the
principles of human knowledge,” 1710; “Three Dialogues between Hylas and
Philonous,” 1713. In 1784 his collected works were published in London in
two quarto volumes.

Berkeley advocated an idealism which came very near to that of
Malebranche. As against the metaphysic of the understanding, we have
the point of view that all existence and its determinations arise from
feeling, and are constituted by self-consciousness. Berkeley’s first
and fundamental thought is consequently this: “The Being of whatever is
called by us a thing consists alone in its being perceived,” _i.e._ our
determinations are the objects of our knowledge. “All objects of human
knowledge are ideas” (so called by Berkeley as by Locke), “which arise
either from the impressions of the outward senses, or from perceptions
of the inward states and activities of the mind, or finally, they are
such as are constituted by means of memory and imagination through their
separation and rearrangement. A union of different sensuous feelings
appears to us to be a particular thing, _e.g._ the feeling of colour,
taste, smell, figure, &c.; for by colours, smells, sounds, something of
which we have a sensation is always understood.”[281] This is the matter
and the object of knowledge; the knower is the percipient “I,” which
reveals itself in relation to those feelings in various activities, such
as imagination, remembrance, and will.

Berkeley thus indeed acknowledges the distinction between Being-for-self
and Other-Being, which in his case, however, itself falls within the
“I.” Of the matter on which activity is directed, it is no doubt in
regard to one portion allowed that it does not exist outside of mind—that
is to say, so far as our thoughts, inward feelings and states, or the
operations of our imaginary powers are concerned. But in like manner the
manifold sensuous conceptions and feelings can only exist in a mind.
Locke certainly distinguished extension and movement, for example, as
fundamental qualities, _i.e._ as qualities which pertain to the objects
in themselves. But Berkeley very pertinently points out inconsistency
here from the point of view that great and small, quick and slow, hold
good as something relative; thus were extension and movement to be
inherent or implicit, they could not be either large or small, quick or
slow; that is, they could not be, for these determinations rest in the
conception[282] of such qualities. In Berkeley the relation of things
to consciousness is alone dealt with, and beyond this relationship
they do not in his view come. From this it follows that it is only
self-consciousness that possesses them; for a perception which is not in
a conceiving mind is nothing: it is a direct contradiction. There can
be no substance, he says, which neither conceives nor perceives, and
which is yet the substratum of perceptions and conceptions. If it is
represented that there is something outside of consciousness which is
similar to the conceptions, this is likewise contradictory; a conception
can alone be similar to a conception, the idea to the idea alone.[283]

Thus, while Locke’s ultimate point is abstract substance, Being generally
with the real determination of a substratum of accidents, Berkeley
declares this substance to be the most incomprehensible assumption
of all; but the incomprehensibility does not make this Being into an
absolute nullity, nor does it make it in itself incomprehensible.[284]
For Berkeley brings forward against the present existence of external
objects only the inconceivability of the relation of a Being to mind.
This inconceivability, however, is destroyed in the Notion, for the
Notion is the negative of things; and this moved Berkeley and Leibnitz
to shut up the two sides in themselves. There nevertheless remains a
relationship of what is “other” to us; these feelings do not develop from
us as Leibnitz represents, but are determined through somewhat else.
When Leibnitz speaks of development within the monads, it is nothing but
empty talk; for the monads as they follow in succession have no inward
connection. Each individual is thus determined through another, and
not through us; and it does not matter what this external is, since it
remains a contingent. Now in relation to the two sides of Leibnitz which
are indifferent to one another, Berkeley says that such an “other” is
quite superfluous. Berkeley calls the other the objects; but these, he
says, cannot be what we call matter, for spirit and matter cannot come
together.[285] But the necessity of conceptions directly contradicts
this Being-within-self of the conceiver; for the Being-within-self is
the freedom of the conceiver; the latter does not, however, produce the
conceptions with freedom; they have for him the form and determinateness
of an independent “other.” Berkeley likewise does not accept idealism
in the subjective sense, but only in respect that there are spirits
which impart themselves (in the other case the subject forms his own
conceptions), and consequently that it is God alone who brings to
pass such conceptions; thus the imaginations or conceptions which are
produced by us with our individual activity remain separate from these
others,[286] _i.e._ from the implicit.

This conception gives an instance of the difficulties which appear in
regard to these questions, and which Berkeley wished to escape from in
a quite original way. The inconsistency in this system God has again
to make good; He has to bear it all away; to Him the solution of the
contradiction is left. In this idealism, in short, the common sensuous
view of the universe and the separation of actuality, as also the system
of thought, of judgments devoid of Notion, remain exactly as before;
plainly nothing in the content is altered but the abstract form that all
things are perceptions only.[287] Such idealism deals with the opposition
between consciousness and its object merely, and leaves the extension
of the conceptions and the antagonisms of the empirical and manifold
content quite untouched; and if we ask what then is the truth of these
perceptions and conceptions, as we asked formerly of things, no answer
is forthcoming. It is pretty much a matter of indifference whether we
believe in things or in perceptions, if self-consciousness remains
possessed entirely by finalities; it receives the content in the ordinary
way, and that content is of the ordinary kind. In its individuality it
stumbles about amid the conceptions of an entirely empirical existence,
without knowing and understanding anything else about the content: that
is to say in this formal idealism reason has no content of its own.

As to what Berkeley further states in respect of the empirical content,
where the object of his investigation becomes entirely psychological, it
relates in the main to finding out the difference between the sensations
of sight and feeling, and to discovering which kind of sensations
belong to the one and which to the other. This kind of investigation
keeps entirely to the phenomenal, and only therein distinguishes the
various sorts of phenomena; or comprehension only reaches as far as to
distinctions. The only point of interest is that these investigations
have in their course chiefly lighted on space, and a dispute is carried
on as to whether we obtain the conception of distance and so on, in short
all the conceptions relating to space, through sight or feeling. Space
is just this sensuous universal, the universal in individuality itself,
which in the empirical consideration of empirical multiplicity invites
and leads us on to thought (for it itself is thought), and by it this
very sensuous perception and reasoning respecting perception is in its
action confused. And since here perception finds an objective thought,
it really would be led on to thought or to the possession of a thought,
but at the same time it cannot arrive at thought in its completion, since
thought or the Notion are not in question, and it clearly cannot come
to the consciousness of true reality. Nothing is thought in the form of
thought, but only as an external, as something foreign to thought.


2. HUME.

We must add to what has preceded an account of the Scepticism of Hume,
which has been given a more important place in history than it deserves
from its intrinsic nature; its historic importance is due to the fact
that Kant really derives the starting point of his philosophy from Hume.

David Hume was born in 1711 at Edinburgh and died there in 1776. He
held a librarian’s post in that town for some time, then he became
secretary to the Embassy in Paris; for quite a long period, indeed,
he moved in diplomatic circles. In Paris he came to know Jean Jacques
Rousseau and invited him to England, but Rousseau’s terribly distrustful
and suspicious nature very soon estranged the two.[288] Hume is more
celebrated as a writer of history than through his philosophic works.
He wrote: “A Treatise of human nature,” 3 vols., 1739, translated into
German by Jacob, Halle, 1790, 8vo; likewise “Essays and Treatises on
several subjects,” 2 vols. (Vol. I. containing “Essays moral, political
and literary,” printed for the first time in Edinburgh, 1742; Vol.
II. containing an “Inquiry concerning human understanding,” a further
development of the Treatise, and first printed separately in London,
1748, 8vo). In his “Essays,” which contributed most to his fame as far
as the philosophic side is concerned, he treated philosophic subjects as
an educated, thoughtful man of the world would do—not in a systematic
connection, nor showing the wide range which his thoughts should properly
have been able to attain; in fact in some of his treatises he merely
dealt with particular points of view.

We must shortly deal with the main aspects of Hume’s philosophy. He
starts directly from the philosophic standpoint of Locke and Bacon,
which derives our conceptions from experience, and his scepticism
has the idealism of Berkeley as its object. The sequence of thought
is this: Berkeley allows all ideas to hold good as they are; in Hume
the antithesis of the sensuous and universal has cleared and more
sharply defined itself, sense being pronounced by him to be devoid of
universality. Berkeley does not make any distinction as to whether in his
sensations there is a necessary connection or not. Formerly experience
was a mixture of the two elements. Hume tells us that all perceptions of
the mind may be divided into two classes or species, that of impressions,
_i.e._ sensuous perceptions, and thoughts or ideas; the latter are
similar in content to the former, but less forcible and lively. All
objects of reason are consequently either relations of thoughts such as
mathematical axioms, or facts of experience.[289] Since Hume makes these
into the content he naturally rejects innate ideas.[290]

Now when Hume goes on to consider more closely what is subsumed under
experience, he finds categories of the understanding present there, and
more especially the determination of the universal and of universal
necessity; he took under his consideration more particularly the
category of cause and effect, and in it set forth the rational element,
inasmuch as in this causal relationship necessity is especially
contained. Here Hume really completed the system of Locke, since he
consistently drew attention to the fact that if this point of view be
adhered to, experience is indeed the principle of whatever one knows, or
perception itself contains everything that happens, but nevertheless the
determination of universality and necessity are not contained in, nor
were they given us by experience. Hume has thus destroyed the objectivity
or absolute nature of thought-determinations. “Our conviction of the
truth of a fact rests on feeling, memory, and the reasonings founded on
the causal connection, _i.e._ on the relation of cause and effect. The
knowledge of this relation is not attained by reasonings _a priori_, but
arises entirely from experience; and we draw inferences, since we expect
similar results to follow from similar causes, by reason of the principle
of the custom or habit of conjoining different manifestations, _i.e._ by
reason of the principle of the association of ideas. Hence there is no
knowledge and no metaphysics beyond experience.”[291]

The simple thought we have here is exactly what Locke says, that we must
receive the conception of cause and effect, and thus of a necessary
connection, from experience; but experience, as sensuous perception,
contains no necessity, has no causal connection. For in what we term
such, that which we properly speaking perceive is merely the fact that
something first of all happens and that then something else follows.
Immediate perception relates only to a content of conditions or things
which are present alongside of and in succession to one another, but not
to what we call cause and effect; in time-succession there is thus no
relation of cause and effect, and consequently no necessity either.[292]
When we say the pressure of the water is the cause of the destruction of
this house, that is no pure experience. We have merely seen the water
pressing or moving along in this direction, and subsequently the house
falling down; and so with other examples. Necessity is thus not justified
by experience, but we carry it into experience; it is accidentally
arrived at by us and is subjective merely. This kind of universality
which we connect with necessity, Hume calls custom. Because we have
often seen results to follow we are accustomed to regard the connection
as a necessary one; the necessity to him is thus a quite contingent
association of ideas, which is custom.

It is the same thing in respect of the universal. What we perceive are
individual phenomena and sensations in which we see that this is now
one thing and now another. It may likewise be that we perceive the same
determination frequently repeated and in manifold ways. But this is
still far removed from universality; universality is a determination
which is not given to us through experience. It may be said that this is
quite a correct remark on Hume’s part, if by experience we understand
outward experience. Experience is sensible that something exists, but
nevertheless the universal is not as yet present in it. Indeed, sensuous
existence as such is something which is set forth as indifferent, not
differentiated from anything else; but sensuous existence is likewise
universal in itself, or the indifference of its determinateness is not
its only determinateness. But since Hume regards necessity, the unity of
opposites, as resting quite subjectively on custom, we cannot get any
deeper in thought. Custom is indeed so far a necessity in consciousness,
and to this extent we really see the principle of this idealism in it;
but in the second place this necessity is represented as something quite
devoid of thought or Notion.

This custom obtains both in our perception which relates to sensuous
nature, and in relation to law and morality. The ideas of justice
and morality rest upon an instinct, on a subjective, but very often
deceptive moral feeling.[293] From a sceptical point of view the opposite
may likewise be demonstrated. From this side Hume considers justice,
morality, religious determinations, and disputes their absolute validity.
That is to say when it is assumed that our knowledge arises from
experience, and that we must consider only what we obtain thereby to be
the truth, we find indeed in our feeling, the sentiment _e.g._ that the
murderer, the thief, &c., must be punished; and because this is likewise
felt by others it is universally allowed. But Hume, like the sceptics of
former days, appeals to the various opinions of various nations: amongst
different nations and in different times various standards of right have
been held.[294] There are those who in this case do not have the feeling
of wrong-doing in respect of stealing, _e.g._ the Lacedæmonians or the
so-called innocent inhabitants of the South Sea Islands. What is by
one nation called immoral, shameful and irreligious, is by another not
considered so at all. Thus because such matters rest upon experience,
one subject has such and such an experience, finds, for instance, in his
religious feelings this determination which inclines him to God, while
another subject has different experiences altogether. We are in the
habit of allowing one thing to be just and moral, others have another
mode of regarding it. Hence if the truth depends upon experience, the
element of universality, of objectivity, &c., comes from elsewhere,
or is not justified by experience. Hume thus declared this sort of
universality, as he declared necessity, to be rather subjectively than
objectively existent; for custom is just a subjective universality of
this kind. This is an important and acute observation in relation to
experience looked at as the source of knowledge; and it is from this
point that the Kantian reflection now begins.

Hume (Essays and Treatises on several subjects, Vol. III. Sect. 8, 11)
then extended his scepticism to the conceptions and doctrines of freedom
and necessity, and to the proofs of the existence of God; and in fact
scepticism here possesses a wide field. To such a system of reasoning
from thoughts and possibilities another method of reasoning may again be
opposed, and this reasoning is no better than the other. What is said to
be metaphysically established regarding immortality, God, nature, &c.,
lacks a real ground for resting upon, such as is professed to be given;
for the inferences on which men ground their proofs are subjectively
formed conceptions. But where a universality is found, it does not rest
in the matter in itself, but is simply a subjective necessity which is
really mere custom. Hence the result which Hume arrives at is necessarily
astonishment regarding the condition of human knowledge, a general state
of mistrust, and a sceptical indecision—which indeed does not amount
to much. The condition of human knowledge regarding which Hume so much
wonders, he further describes as containing an antagonism between reason
and instinct; this instinct, it is said, which embraces many sorts of
powers, inclinations, &c., deceives us in many different ways, and reason
demonstrates this. But on the other side it is empty, without content
or principles of its own; and if a content is in question at all, it
must keep to those inclinations. In itself reason thus has no criterion
whereby the antagonism between individual desires, and between itself and
the desires, may be settled.[295] Thus everything appears in the form of
an irrational existence devoid of thought; the implicitly true and right
is not in thought, but in the form of an instinct, a desire.


B. SCOTTISH PHILOSOPHY.

In Scotland quite another school of thought developed, and the Scotch
are the foremost of Hume’s opponents; in German philosophy, on the other
hand, we have to recognize in Kant another opposing force to that of
Hume. To the Scottish school many philosophers belong; English philosophy
is now restricted to Edinburgh and Glasgow, in which places a number
of professors belonging to this school succeeded one another. To the
scepticism of Hume they oppose an inward independent source of truth for
all that pertains to religion and morality. This coincides with Kant, who
also maintains an inward source or spring as against external perception;
but in the case of Kant this has quite another form than that which it
possesses with the Scottish philosophers. To them this inward independent
source is not thought or reason as such, for the content which comes to
pass from this inwardness is concrete in its nature, and likewise demands
for itself the external matter of experience. It consists of popular
principles, which on the one hand are opposed to the externality of the
sources of knowledge, and, on the other, to metaphysics as such, to
abstract thought or reasoning on its own account. This sort of reasoning
understanding applied itself to ethics and to politics—sciences which
have been much developed by German, French, and above all by Scottish
philosophers (_supra_, p. 320): they regarded morality as cultured men
would, and sought to bring moral duties under a principle. Many of their
works are translated into German; several of these on ethics or morality
are translated by Garve, for instance, who also translated Cicero _De
Officiis_, and they are written in a manner similar to that of Cicero
when he uses the expression _Insitum est a natura_ (Vol. I. p. 93). This
moral sentiment and the ordinary human understanding hereafter formed the
common principle to a whole succession of Scots, such as Thomas Reid,
Beattie, Oswald, and others; in this way they frequently made sagacious
observations, but with them speculative philosophy quite disappears. One
special characteristic of these Scottish philosophers is that they have
sought accurately to define the principle of knowledge; but on the whole
they start from the same point as that which was in Germany likewise
accepted as the principle. That is to say they represented the so-called
healthy reason, or common-sense (_sensus communis_), as the ground of
truth. The following are the principal members of this school, each of
whom has some special feature distinguishing him from the rest.


1. THOMAS REID.

Thomas Reid, born in 1710, died as a professor in Glasgow in 1796.[296]
He maintained the principle of common-sense. His endeavour was to
discover the principles of knowledge, and the following are his
conclusions: “(a) There are certain undemonstrated and undemonstrable
fundamental truths which common-sense begets and recognizes as
immediately conclusive and absolute.” This hence constitutes an immediate
knowledge; in it an inward independent source is set forth which is
hereby opposed to religion as revealed. “(b) These immediate truths
require no support from any elaborated science, nor do they submit to
its criticism;” they cannot be criticized by philosophy. “(c) Philosophy
itself has no root other than that of an immediate, self-enlightening
truth; whatever contradicts such truth is in itself false, contradictory,
and absurd.” This is true for knowledge and “(d) Morality; the individual
is moral if he acts in accordance with the perfect principles of the
perfection of the whole and with his own duty as it is known to him.”[297]


2. JAMES BEATTIE.

James Beattie, born 1735, was a professor of moral philosophy in
Edinburgh and Aberdeen, and died in 1803. He likewise made common-sense
the source of all knowledge. “The common-sense of the plain human
understanding is the source of all morality, of all religion, and
all certainty. The confirmation of common-sense must be added to the
testimony of our senses. The truth is what the necessities of my
nature call upon me to believe. Belief signifies conviction in the
case of truths which are certain, in that of those which are probable,
approbation. The truth which is certain is known by means of intuition,
the probable truth by means of proofs.”[298] Such convictions as are
quite certain form the basis of actions.


3. JAMES OSWALD.

James Oswald, a Scottish clergyman, made use of an expression which
indicates that we have the principles just mentioned as facts existing
within us.[299] “The existence of the Divine Being is (according to
him) a fact absolutely raised above all reasoning and all doubt, and
immediately certain for the common-sense of morality.”[300] The same
principle was likewise established in Germany at this time—an inward
revelation, a knowledge of the conscience, and specially of God and His
Being.


4. DUGALD STEWART.

To this school also belong Dugald Stewart, Edward Search,[301] Ferguson,
and Hutcheson, most of whom have written on morals. The political
economist Adam Smith from this point of view is likewise a philosopher,
and the best known of them all. This Scottish philosophy is now given
forth in Germany as something new. It is a popular philosophy, which,
on the one hand, has the great merit of seeking in man, and in his
consciousness, for the source of all that should be held by him as
true, the immanence of what should be by him esteemed. The content is
at the same time a concrete content; in a certain degree, it is the
antithesis of metaphysics proper, of the wandering about in abstract
determinations of the understanding. Of these Scots, Dugald Stewart, who
is living still,[302] appears to be the last and least significant; in
them all there is the same ground-work to be found, the same circle of
reflection, namely, an _a priori_ philosophy, though not one which is to
be pursued in a speculative way. The general idea which pervades their
principle is that of the healthy human understanding; to this they have
added benevolent desires, sympathy, a moral sense, and from such grounds
composed very excellent moral writings. That is certainly all very well
in order to understand approximately, up to a certain degree of culture,
what universal thoughts are, in order to narrate their history, to appeal
to examples, and to explain them; but further it does not extend.

In more recent times this Scottish philosophy has passed to France,
and Professor Royer-Collard, now president of the Second Chamber,[303]
as also his disciple, Jouffroy, in conformity with it, pass from the
facts of consciousness through cultured reasoning and experience, to a
further stage in development. What by the French is called _Idéologie_
(_supra_, p. 308) has also its place here; it is abstract metaphysics,
in so far as it is an enumeration and analysis of the most simple
thought-determinations. They are not treated dialectically, but from our
reflection, from our thoughts, the material is derived, and in this the
determinations therein contained are demonstrated.


C. FRENCH PHILOSOPHY.

We pass on to the French philosophy; the relation it bears to
metaphysics is this, that while man as a metaphysician stands to
himself in the attitude of a layman or outsider, French philosophy does
away with the lay or outside position in regard alike to politics,
religion, and philosophy. Two forms have to be mentioned which are of
the greatest importance in respect to culture—French philosophy and
the _Aufklärung_. With the English we saw a certain idealism only:
this was either formal, as the mere general translation of Being
into Being-for-another, _i.e._ into perceptibility, or else what is
implicit in this perceptibility, instincts, impulses, habits, &c.—blind
determinate forces; a return into self-consciousness, which itself
appears as a physical thing. In that first idealism the whole finitude
and extension of appearances, of sensations, and likewise of thoughts
and determinate fixed conceptions, remain just what they are in the
unphilosophic consciousness. The scepticism of Hume makes all that is
universal sink into habits and instincts, _i.e._ it consists in a more
simple synthesis of the phenomenal world; but these simpler elements,
these instincts, impulses, and forces, are just as much a fixed present
existence in self-consciousness, unspiritual, and without movement. The
French philosophy has more life, more movement, more spirit; it would
perhaps be more correct to describe it as full of life and spirit. It
is the absolute Notion, which revolts against the whole reigning system
of prevalent conceptions and established ideas, which overthrows all
that has settled into fixity, and acquires the consciousness of perfect
liberty. At the root of this idealistic activity lies the certainty that
whatever is, whatever counts for anything in itself, is all a matter of
self-consciousness; and as to Notions (individual and isolated existences
ruling actual self-consciousness), such as the Notions of good and evil,
of power and riches, and the fixed conceptions regarding faith in God
and His relation to the world, His mode of government and, further, the
duties of self-consciousness towards Him—that all these are not truths
in themselves, having validity beyond the bounds of self-consciousness.
All these forms, the real implicitude of the actual world and also of the
supersensuous world, are therefore set aside in this spirit conscious of
itself. It does not trouble itself seriously about those who admit the
validity of these conceptions just as they are, and accept them as true,
respecting them as independent and free apart from self-consciousness,
but it speaks of such conceptions with intelligence and spirit, that is
to say, it asserts that self-consciousness by its activity is the first
to make anything of them, and to make that a something very different
from what they profess to be; for the self-conscious spirit only
intellectual relations, these processes of formation and movement by
means of its self-consciousness, possess validity and interest. This is
the character of the Notion in its actuality; what has reality for this
all-perceiving and all-comprehending consciousness is held to be valid.

We must now consider what form existence takes for this absolutely
comprehending self-consciousness. In the first place this Notion is
fixed as the negative movement of the Notion only; the positive and
simple, or existence, falls outside of this movement. There remains to
the Notion no distinction, no content; for all determinate content is
lost in that negativity. This empty existence is for us pure thought
generally, what the French call _être suprême_, or if represented
objectively as existent, and as in opposition to consciousness, it
is matter. Absolute Being is therefore determined as matter, as
empty objectivity, through a Notion which destroys all content and
determination, and has as its object this universal alone. It is a Notion
which acts only destructively, and does not again construct itself
out of this matter or pure thought or pure substantiality. We here
see so-called materialism and atheism freely emerge, as the necessary
result of the pure comprehending self-consciousness. From one point
of view there perishes in this negative movement all determination
which represents spirit as something beyond self-consciousness, and
more especially all determinations within the spirit, and also those
which express it as spirit, indeed all the conceptions formed of it
by faith, for which it has validity as an existent self-consciousness
beyond self-consciousness—in short, all that is traditional or
imposed by authority. There remains only a present, actual Being, for
self-consciousness recognizes implicit existence only in the form which
it has for self-consciousness, and in which it is actually known to
itself; in matter, and matter as actively extending and realizing itself
in multiplicity, _i.e._ as nature. In the present I am conscious to
myself of my reality, and consequently self-consciousness finds itself as
matter, finds the soul to be material, and conceptions to be movements
and changes in the inner organ of the brain, which result from external
impressions on the senses. Thought is therefore a mode of the existence
of matter. The One Substance of Spinoza, to which French materialism
as naturalism is parallel, really finds its accomplishment here in
this object as in all respects the ultimate; but while in Spinoza this
category is a possession which we find ready to hand, here it appears
as the result of the abstraction of the understanding proceeding from
empiricism.

The other form of the _Aufklärung_ is, on the contrary, when absolute
Being is set forth as something beyond self-consciousness, so that
of itself, of its implicit Being, nothing whatever can be known. It
bears the empty name of God. For though God may be determined in any
way whatever, all these determinations fall away; He is, like _x_,
the altogether unknown quantity. This view is not therefore to be
termed atheism, in the first place because it still employs the empty,
meaningless name, and in the second place because it expresses the
necessary relations of self-consciousness, duties, &c., not as necessary
in an absolute sense, but as necessary through relation to another,
namely to the unknown—although there can be no positive relation to
an unknown except by abrogating the self as particular. Yet it is not
matter, because this simple and empty something is negatively defined as
non-existent for self-consciousness. This all comes to the same thing,
however, for matter is the universal, and is Being-for-self represented
as abrogated. But the true reflection on that unknown is this, that it
exists for self-consciousness simply as a negative of the same, _i.e._
as matter, reality, the present; it is this negative for me, this is its
Notion. The difference distinguishing this from what appears to be in its
entirety something “other,” and in which any one side is not permitted
to say that what it thinks is such is that particular thing, is the
difference which rests on this last abstraction.

Since then the Notion is present only in its negative form, positive
extension remains without a Notion; it has the form of nature, of an
existent, both in the physical and in the moral sphere. The knowledge
of nature remains the ordinary, scientifically unspeculative knowledge,
and as to its essence, in so far as it claims to be philosophy, it is a
general way of speaking that plays with the words, “forces, relations,
manifold connections,” but arrives at nothing definite. Similarly, in
the spiritual sphere, it is so far true that the metaphysic of the
spirit is of such a nature that it is nothing more nor less than a
particular organization by means of which the powers which are termed
sensation, perception, &c., come into existence; but this is a wearisome
way of talking, which can make nothing intelligible, which accepts
appearances and perceptions and reasons about them, but none the less
reduces their implicit existence to certain determinate forces, of the
inward nature of which we know nothing further. The determination and
knowledge of the moral sphere has similarly for its object to bring
man back to his so-called natural promptings; its essence has the form
of a natural impulse, and this natural impulse is termed self-love,
selfishness, or benevolence. It is required that man should live in
conformity with nature; but this nature does not reach further than
general expressions and descriptions, such as the state of nature we
find depicted by Rousseau. What is called the metaphysic of ordinary
conceptions is the empiricism of Locke, which seeks to show their origin
to be in consciousness, in as far as it is individual consciousness;
which, when born into the world, emerges out of unconsciousness in order
to acquire knowledge as sensuous consciousness. This external origin
they confound with the Becoming and Notion of the matter in point. If
one were to ask vaguely what is the origin and genesis of water, and
the answer were to be given that it comes from the mountains or from
rain, this would be a reply in the spirit of the above philosophy. In
short, it is only the negative aspect that is interesting, and as for
this positive French philosophy, it is out of the question. But even the
negative side of it belongs properly to culture mainly, with which we
have here nothing to do, and the _Aufklärung_ likewise belongs to the
same. In the French philosophic writings, which in this respect are of
importance, what is worthy of admiration is the astonishing energy and
force of the Notion as directed against existence, against faith, against
all the power of authority that had held sway for thousands of years.
On the one hand we cannot help remarking the feeling of utter rebellion
against the whole state of affairs at present prevailing, a state which
is alien to self-consciousness, which would fain dispense with it, and
in which self-consciousness does not find itself; there is a certainty
of the truth of reason, which challenges the whole intellectual world
as it stands aloof, and is confident of destroying it. French atheism,
materialism, or naturalism has overcome all prejudices, and has been
victorious over the senseless hypotheses and assumptions of the positive
element in religion, which is associated with habits, manners, opinions,
determinations as to law and morality and civil institutions. With the
healthy human understanding and earnestness of spirit, and not with
frivolous declamations, it has rebelled against the condition of the
world as legally established, against the constitution of the state, the
administration of justice, the mode of government, political authority,
and likewise against art.

Contrasting with this barren content there is the other and fertile
side. The positive is in its turn constituted by so-called immediately
enlightening truths of the healthy human understanding, which contains
nothing except this truth and the claim to find itself, and beyond
this form does not pass. But in so doing there arises the endeavour
to grasp the absolute as something present, and at the same time as
an object of thought and as absolute unity: an endeavour which, as it
implies denial of the conception of design both in the natural and in
the spiritual sphere—the former involving the idea of life, and the
latter that of spirit and freedom—only reaches to the abstraction of a
nature undetermined in itself, to sensation, mechanism, self-seeking,
and utility. It is this then that we shall have to make evident in the
positive side of French philosophy. In their political constitutions
the French have, it is true, started from abstractions, but they have
done so as from universal thoughts, which are the negative of reality;
the English, on the other hand, proceed from concrete reality, from the
unwieldy structure of their constitution; just as their writers even have
not attained to universal principles. What Luther began in the heart
only and in the feelings—the freedom of spirit which, unconscious of its
simple root, does not comprehend itself, and yet is the very universal
itself, for which all content disappears in the thought that fills itself
with itself—these universal determinations and thoughts the French
asserted and steadfastly adhered to: they are universal principles, in
the form of the conviction of the individual in himself. Freedom becomes
the condition of the world, connects itself with the world’s history and
forms epochs in the same; it is the concrete freedom of the spirit, a
concrete universality; fundamental principles as regards the concrete
now take the place of the abstract metaphysic of Descartes. Among the
Germans we find mere chatter; they would have liked to offer explanations
also, but all they have to give is in the form of miserable phenomena
and individualism. The French, from their starting-point of the thought
of universality, and the German liberty of conscience starting from
the conscience which teaches us to “Prove all things,” to “hold fast
that which is good,” have, however, joined hands with one another, or
they follow the same path. Only the French, as though they were without
conscience, have made short work of everything, and have systematically
adhered to a definite thought—the physiocratic system; while the Germans
wish to leave themselves a free retreat, and examine from the standpoint
of conscience whether a certain course is permissible. The French warred
against the speculative Notion with the spirit, the Germans did so with
the understanding. We find in the French a deep all-embracing philosophic
need, different from anything in the English and Scotch and even in the
Germans, and full of vitality: it is a universal concrete view of all
that exists, with entire independence both of all authority and of all
abstract metaphysics. The method employed is that of development from
perception, from the heart; it is a comprehensive view of the entire
matter, which keeps the whole ever in sight, and seeks to uphold and
attain to it.

This healthy human understanding, this sound reason, with its content
taken from the human breast, from natural feeling, has directed itself
against the religious side of things in various moments: on the one hand
and first of all, as French philosophy, it did so against the Catholic
religion, the fetters of superstition and of the hierarchy; on the other
hand, in less pronounced form, as the German “illumination,” against the
Protestant religion, in as far as it has a content which it has derived
from revelation, from ecclesiastical authority in general. On the one
hand the form of authority in general was challenged, and on the other
hand its matter. The content can be easily enough disposed of by this
form of thought, which is not what we understand by reason, but which
must be termed understanding; it is easy for the understanding to show
objections to the ultimate principles of what can be comprehended only
by means of speculation. The understanding has thus tried the content
of religion by its standard, and has condemned it; the understanding
proceeds in the same way against a concrete philosophy. What of religion
has in many theologies been very commonly left remaining is what is
termed theism, faith in general; this is the same content which is
found also in Mohammedanism. But along with this attack upon religion
on the part of the reasoning understanding there has been also a
movement towards materialism, atheism and naturalism. It is true that we
should not make the charge of atheism lightly, for it is a very common
occurrence that an individual whose ideas about God differ from those
of other people is charged with lack of religion, or even with atheism.
But here it really is the case that this philosophy has developed into
atheism, and has defined matter, nature, &c., as that which is to be
taken as the ultimate, the active, and the efficient. Some Frenchmen,
Rousseau for instance, are not, however, to be included with the rest;
one of this author’s works, “The Confession of Faith of a Vicar,”[304]
contains the very same theism which is found in German theologians.
Thus French metaphysics finds a parallel not only in Spinoza (_supra_,
p. 382) but also in the German metaphysics of Wolff. Other Frenchmen
have confessedly gone over to naturalism; among them is specially to be
mentioned Mirabaud, to whom the _Système de la Nature_ is attributed.

In what has been termed French philosophy, represented by Voltaire,
Montesquieu, Rousseau, d’Alembert, Diderot, and in what subsequently
appeared in Germany as the _Aufklärung_, and has been also stigmatized as
atheism, we may now distinguish three aspects, first, the negative side,
to which most exception has been taken; secondly, the positive side;
thirdly, the philosophical, metaphysical side.


1. THE NEGATIVE ASPECT.

Justice must be done even to this negative side, as to everything else;
what is substantial in it is the attack of the reasoning instinct
against a condition of degeneracy, I may even say of utter and universal
falsehood; for instance, against the positive side of a religion that
has become wooden and lifeless. What we call religion is firm faith,
conviction that there is a God; if this is faith in the doctrines of
Christianity, it is more or less abstracted from. But in this attack
against religion we have to think of something quite different from the
above; in what we find here, the positive of religion is the negative
of reason. If we would understand the feeling of indignation to which
these writers give utterance, we must keep before our eyes the state of
religion in those days, with its might and magnificence, the corruption
of its manners, its avarice, its ambition, its luxury, for which
nevertheless reverence was claimed—a state of contradiction present and
existent. We perceive into what a frightful condition of formalism and
deadness positive religion had sunk, as had the bonds of society as
well, the means employed for the administration of justice, the power of
the state. This French philosophy also attacked the state; it assailed
prejudices and superstition, especially the depravity of civic life, of
court manners and of Government officials; it laid hold of and brought to
light the evil, the ridiculous, the base, and exposed the whole tissue
of hypocrisy and unjust power to the derision, the contempt and the
hatred of the world at large, and thus brought men’s minds and hearts
into a state of indifference to the idols of the world and indignation
against them. Old institutions, which in the sense of self-conscious
freedom and humanity that had developed, no longer found a place, and
which had formerly been founded and upheld by mutual good feeling and the
obtuseness of a consciousness unconscious of self, institutions which
were no longer in harmony with the spirit that had established them,
and now, in consequence of the advance that had been made in scientific
culture, were bound to make good to reason their claim to be sacred and
just,—this was the formalism that those philosophers overthrew. In making
their attacks, they wrote sometimes with reasoned argument, sometimes
satirically, sometimes in the language of plain common-sense, and they
did not wage war on what we call religion; that was left quite unharmed,
and its claims were urged with words of choicest eloquence. Those who
enforced these views were therefore agents of destruction against that
alone which was in itself already destroyed. We place it to our credit
when we reproach the French for their attacks upon religion and on the
state. We must represent to ourselves the horrible state of society, the
misery and degradation in France, in order to appreciate the services
that these writers rendered. Hypocrisy and cant, imbecility of mind
and the tyranny which sees itself robbed of its prey, may say that
attacks were made on religion, on the state, and on manners. But what a
religion! Not the religion that Luther purified, but the most wretched
superstition, priestly domination, stupidity, degradation of mind, and
more especially the squandering of riches and the revelling in temporal
possessions in the midst of public misery. And what a state! The blindest
tyranny of ministers and their mistresses, wives and chamberlains; so
that a vast army of petty tyrants and idlers looked upon it as a right
divinely given them to plunder the revenues of the state and lay hands
upon the product of the nation’s sweat. The shamelessness, the dishonesty
were past belief; and morals were simply in keeping with the corruptness
of the institutions. We see the law defied by individuals in respect to
civil and political life; we see it likewise set at nought in respect to
conscience and thought.

In regard to practical politics, the writers in question never even
thought of a revolution, but desired and demanded reforms alone, and
that these should be subjective mainly; they called on the Government to
sweep away abuses, and appoint honourable men as ministers. The positive
recommendations made by them as to the course to be pursued were, for
example, that the royal children should receive a good upbringing, that
princes should be of frugal habits, &c. The French Revolution was forced
on by the stiff-necked obstinacy of prejudices, by haughtiness, utter
want of thought, and avarice. The philosophers of whom we are speaking
were able to give only a general idea of what ought to be done; they
could not indicate the mode in which the reforms were to be carried
out. It was the Government’s business to make arrangements and carry
out reforms in concrete shape; but it did not perceive this. What the
philosophers brought forward and maintained as a remedy for this horrible
state of disorder was, speaking generally, that men should no longer be
in the position of laymen, either with regard to religion or to law; so
that in religious matters there should not be a hierarchy, a limited and
selected number of priests, and in the same way that there should not
be in legal matters an exclusive caste and society (not even a class
of professional lawyers), in whom should reside, and to whom should be
restricted, the knowledge of what is eternal, divine, true, and right,
and by whom other men should be commanded and directed; but that human
reason should have the right of giving its assent and its opinion. To
treat barbarians as laymen is quite as it should be—barbarians are
nothing but laymen; but to treat thinking men as laymen is very hard.
This great claim made by man to subjective freedom, perception and
conviction, the philosophers in question contended for heroically and
with splendid genius, with warmth and fire, with spirit and courage,
maintaining that a man’s own self, the human spirit, is the source from
which is derived all that is to be respected by him. There thus manifests
itself in them the fanaticism of abstract thought. We Germans were
passive at first with regard to the existing state of affairs, we endured
it; in the second place, when that state of affairs was overthrown, we
were just as passive: it was overthrown by the efforts of others, we let
it be taken away from us, we suffered it all to happen.

In Germany, Frederick II. allied himself with this culture, a rare
example in those days. French court manners, operas, gardens, dresses,
were widely adopted in Germany, but not French philosophy; yet in the
form of wit and jest much of it found its way into this upper world,
and much that was evil and barbarous was driven away. Frederick II.,
without having been brought up on melancholy psalms, without having had
to learn one or two of them every day by heart, without the barbarous
metaphysics and logic of Wolff (for what did he find to admire in Germany
except Gellert?), was well acquainted with the great, although formal and
abstract principles of religion and the state, and governed in accordance
therewith, as far as circumstances allowed. Nothing else was at that time
required in his nation; one cannot ask that he should have reformed and
revolutionized it, since not a single person yet demanded representative
government and the publicity of courts of justice. He introduced what
there was need of, religious tolerance, legislation, improvements in
the administration of justice, economy in the revenues of state; of the
wretched German law there remained no longer in his states even the
merest phantom. He showed what was the object and purpose of the state,
and at the same time cast down all privileges, the private rights which
pertained to Germans, and arbitrary statute laws. It is foolish when
cant and German pseudo-patriotism pounce down upon him now, and try to
disparage the greatness of a man whose influence was so enormous, and
would even detract from his fame by a charge of vanity and wickedness.
What German patriotism aims at should be reasonable.


2. THE POSITIVE ASPECT.

The affirmative content of this philosophy certainly does not satisfy
the requirements of profundity. A leading characteristic of its
teaching, which is found also with the Scottish philosophers and with
ourselves, is the assumption of primitive feelings of justice which man
has in himself, as for example benevolence and social instincts which
should be cultivated. The positive source of knowledge and of justice
is placed in human reason and the common consciousness of mankind, in
the healthy human reason, and not in the form of the Notion. It is
certainly wonderful to find truths expressed in the form of universal
thoughts, respecting which it is of infinite importance that they should
be assumptions present in the human mind: that man has in his heart the
feeling of right, of love to his fellow-creatures: that religion and
faith are not matters of compulsion; that merit, talent, virtue are the
true nobility, &c. An important question, especially among the Germans,
was what is the end and character of man, by which was meant the nature
of his mind and spirit; and certainly, as far as the spiritual is
concerned, it is to this point that we must return. But in order to find
the nature of spirit, to discover what this determination is, a return
was made to perception, observation, experience, to the existence of
certain impulses. These are certainly determinations in ourselves, but
we have not known them in their necessity. Such an impulse is besides
taken as natural, and thus it is here indeterminate in itself, it has
its limitation only as a moment of the whole. In regard to knowledge,
very abstract thoughts are to be found—though of a truth they are quite
as good as ours, and more ingenious—which according to their content
ought to be concrete, and also were so. But so superficially were they
comprehended that they soon showed themselves far from sufficient for
what had to be derived from them. They said, for instance, that Nature
is a whole, that all is determined by laws, through a combination of
different movements, through a chain of causes and effects, and so on;
the various properties, materials, connections of things bring everything
to pass. These are general phrases, with which one can fill whole books.


a. SYSTÈME DE LA NATURE.

To this philosophy belongs the _Système de la Nature_, the leading work
on the subject, written in Paris by a German, Baron von Hollbach, who was
the central figure of all those philosophers. Montesquieu, d’Alembert,
Rousseau, were for a time in his circle; however much these men were
moved to indignation at the existing state of things, they were yet
in other respects very different from one another. The _Système de la
Nature_ may very easily be found tiresome to read, because it treats
discursively of general conceptions, which are often repeated; it is not
a French book, for vivacity is lacking and the mode of presentation is
dull.

The great Whole of Nature (_le grand tout de la nature_) is the ultimate:
“The universe displays nothing but an immense collection of matter and
motion” (as with Descartes), “an unbroken chain of causes and effects, of
which causes some directly affect our senses, while others are unknown
to us, because their effects, which we perceive, are too remote from
their causes. The different qualities of these materials, their manifold
connections, and the effects which result therefrom, constitute essences
for us. From the diversity of these essences arise the different orders,
species, systems, under which things fall, and whose sum total, the great
whole, is what we call Nature.”[305] It is like what Aristotle (_vide_
Vol. I. p. 241) says of Xenophanes, that he gazed into the blue, _i.e._
into Being. According to Hollbach all is movement, matter moves itself:
beer ferments, the soul is moved by its passions.[306] “The manifold
variety of natural phenomena, and their incessant rise and disappearance,
have their sole ground in the variety of motions and of their material.”
Through different combinations and modifications, through a different
arrangement, another thing is originated. “Material substances have
either a tendency to combine with one another, or else they are incapable
of so combining. Upon this are based by physical scientists the forces of
attraction and repulsion, sympathy and antipathy, affinity and relation;
and the moralists base thereon hatred and love, friendship and enmity.”
Spirit, the incorporeal, contradicts or opposes itself to motion, to a
change of the relations of a body in space.[307]


b. ROBINET.

Another work of importance is the still more “dangerous” treatise, _De la
Nature_, by Robinet. In it there reigns quite a different and a deeper
spirit; one is frequently struck by the depth of earnestness which the
writer displays. He begins thus: “There is a God, _i.e._ a cause of the
phenomena of that Whole which we call Nature. Who is God? We know not,
and we are so constituted that we can never know in what order of things
we have been placed. We cannot know God perfectly, because the means of
doing so will always be lacking to us. We too might write over the doors
of our temples the words which were to be read upon the altar which the
Areopagite raised, ‘To the unknown God.’” The very same thing is said
now-a-days: there can be no transition from the finite to the infinite.
“The order which reigns in the universe is just as little the visible
type of His wisdom, as our weak mind is the image of His intelligence.”
But this First Cause, God, is according to Robinet a creative God, He
has brought Nature into existence; so that for him the only possible
knowledge is that of Nature. “There is only One Cause. The eternal Cause,
who so to speak had sown (_engrainé_) events one in the other, in order
that they might without fail follow one upon another as He chose, in
the beginning set in motion the endless chain of things. Through this
permanent impression the Universe goes on living, moving and perpetuating
itself. From the unity of cause there follows the unity of activity, for
even it does not appear as something to be more or less admitted. By
virtue of this single act all things come to pass. Since man has made
Nature his study, he has found no isolated phenomenon, and no independent
truth, because there are not and cannot be such. The whole sustains
itself through the mutual correspondence of its parts.”[308] The activity
of Nature is one, as God is One.

This activity, more particularly regarded, signifies that germs unfold
themselves in everything: everywhere there are organic Beings which
produce themselves; nothing is isolated, everything is combined and
connected and in harmony. Robinet here goes through the plants, the
animals, and also the metals, the elements, air, fire, water, &c.; and
seeks from them to demonstrate the existence of the germ in whatever has
life, and also how metals are organized in themselves. “The example of
the polypus is convincing as to the animal nature (_animalité_) of the
smallest portions of organized matter; for the polypus is a group of
associated polypi, each of which is as much a true polypus as the first.
It stands proved that from the same point of view the living consists
only of the living, the animals of minute animals, every animal in
particular of minute animals of the same kind, a dog of dog-germs, man of
human germs.” In proof of this Robinet states in a “Recapitulation” that
“animal sperm swarms with spermatic animalcules.” Since he then connects
every propagation properly so-called with the co-operation of both sexes,
he alleges that every individual is inwardly or also in the external
organs a hermaphrodite. Of the minerals he says: “Are we not compelled
to regard as organic bodies all those in which we meet with an inward
structure such as this? It presupposes throughout a seed, seed-granules,
germs, of which they are the development.” In the same way the air must
have its germ, which does not come to reality until it is nourished by
water, fire, &c. “The air, as principle, is only the germ of the air;
as it impregnates or saturates itself in varying degrees with water and
fire, it will gradually pass through different stages of growth: it will
become first embryo, then perfect air.”[309] Robinet gives the name of
germ to the simple form in itself, the substantial form, the Notion.
Although he seeks to prove this too much from the sensuous side, he yet
proceeds from principles in themselves concrete, from the form in itself.

He speaks also of the evil and good in the world. The result of his
observation is that good and evil balance each other; this equilibrium
constitutes the beauty of the world. In order to refute the assertion
that there is more good than evil in the world, he says that everything
to which we reduce the good consists only in an enjoyment, a pleasure,
a satisfaction; but this must be preceded by a want, a lack, a pain,
the removal of which constitutes satisfaction.[310] This is not only a
correct thought empirically, but it also hints at the deeper idea that
there is no activity except through contradiction.


3. IDEA OF A CONCRETE UNIVERSAL UNITY.

The result of the French philosophy is that it insisted on maintaining
a general unity, not abstract, but concrete. Thus Robinet now
propounded the theory of a universal organic life, and a uniform mode
of origination; this concrete system he called Nature, over which God
was set, but as the unknowable; all predicates which could be expressed
of Him contained something inapplicable. We must admit that grand
conceptions of concrete unity are to be found here, as opposed to the
abstract metaphysical determinations of the understanding, _e.g._ the
fruitfulness of Nature. But, on the other hand, the point of most
importance with these philosophers is that what is to be accepted as
valid must have presence, and that man in all knowledge must be himself
the knower; for, as we may see, those philosophers made war on all
external authority of state and church, and in particular on abstract
thought which has no present meaning in us. Two determinations found
in all philosophy are the concretion of the Idea and the presence of
the spirit in the same; my content must at the same time be something
concrete, present. This concrete was termed Reason, and for it the
more noble of those men contended with the greatest enthusiasm and
warmth. Thought was raised like a standard among the nations, liberty of
conviction and of conscience in me. They said to mankind, “In this sign
thou shalt conquer,” for they had before their eyes what had been done in
the name of the cross alone, what had been made a matter of faith and
law and religion—they saw how the sign of the cross had been degraded.
For in the sign of the cross lying and deceit had been victorious, under
this seal institutions had become fossilized, and had sunk into all
manner of degradation, so that this sign came to be represented as the
epitome and root of all evil. Thus in another form they completed the
Reformation that Luther began. This concrete had manifold forms; social
instincts in the practical sphere, laws of nature in the theoretical.
There is present the absolute impulse to find a compass immanent
in themselves, _i.e._ in the human mind. For the human mind it is
imperative to have a fixed point such as this, if, indeed, it is to be
within itself, if it is to be free in its own world at least. But this
striving after really present vitality took forms which as by-paths were
themselves one-sided. In this striving after unity, which was, however,
concrete unity, the further varieties of the content likewise lie.

On the theoretic side of their philosophy, therefore, the French
proceeded to materialism or naturalism, because the requirements of the
understanding, as abstract thought, which from a firmly fixed principle
allows the most monstrous consequences to be drawn, drove them to set up
one principle as ultimate, and that a principle which had at the same
time to be present and to lie quite close to experience. Hence they
accept sensation and matter as the only truth, to which must be reduced
all thought, all morality, as a mere modification of sensation. The
unities which the French propounded were in this way one-sided.


a. OPPOSITION OF SENSATION AND THOUGHT.

To this one-sidedness belongs the opposition between _sentir_ and
_penser_, or else, if you like, their identity, making the latter
only a result of the former; there is not, however, any speculative
reconciliation of this opposition in God, such as we find in Spinoza and
Malebranche. This reduction of all thought to sensation, which in certain
respects took place with Locke, becomes a widely extended theory. Robinet
(_De la Nature_, T. I. P. IV. chap. iii. pp. 257-259) lights also on this
opposition, beyond which he does not get, that mind and body are not
separate, but that the manner in which they are united is inexplicable.
The _Système de la Nature_ (T. I. chap. x. p. 177) is marked by an
especially plain reduction of thought to sensation. The leading
thought is this: “Abstract thoughts are only modes in which our inmost
organ views its own modifications. The words goodness, beauty, order,
intelligence, virtue, &c., have no meaning for us if we do not refer and
apply them to objects which our senses have shown to be capable of these
qualities, or to modes of being and acting which are known to us.” Thus
even psychology passed into materialism, as for instance we may find in
La Mettrie’s work _L’homme Machine_: All thought and all conception have
meaning only if they are apprehended as material; matter alone exists.


b. MONTESQUIEU.

Other great writers have opposed to the above the feeling in the breast,
the instinct of self-preservation, benevolent dispositions towards
others, the impulse to fellowship, which last Puffendorf also made the
foundation of his system of law (_supra_, p. 321). From this point of
view much that is excellent has been said. Thus Montesquieu, in his
charming book, _L’Esprit des Lois_, of which Voltaire said it was an
_esprit sur les lois_, regarded the nations from this important point of
view, that their constitution, their religion, in short, everything that
is to be found in a state, constitutes a totality.


c. HELVETIUS.

This reduction of thought to feeling in the case of Helvetius takes
the form that if in man as a moral being a single principle is sought,
this ought to be called self-love, and he endeavoured to demonstrate by
ingenious analysis that whatever we term virtue, all activity and law and
right, has as its foundation nothing but self-love or selfishness, and is
resolvable thereinto.[311] This principle is one-sided, although the “I
myself” is an essential moment. What I will, the noblest, the holiest, is
_my_ aim; I must take part in it, I must agree to it, I must approve of
it. With all self-sacrifice there is always conjoined some satisfaction,
some finding of self; this element of self, subjective liberty, must
always be present. If this is taken in a one-sided sense, there may be
consequences drawn from it which overthrow all that is sacred; but it is
found in equal degree in a morality as noble as any possibly can be.


d. ROUSSEAU.

In connection with the practical side of things this particular must also
be noted, that when the feeling of right, the concrete practical mind,
and, speaking generally, humanity and happiness were made the principle,
this principle, universally conceived, had certainly the form of thought;
but in the case of such concrete content derived from our impulse or
inward intuition, even though that content were religious, the thought
itself was not the content. But now this further phase appeared, that
pure thought was set up as the principle and content, even if again there
was lacking to this content the true consciousness of its peculiar
form; for it was not recognized that this principle was thought. We see
it emerge in the sphere of will, of the practical, of the just, and so
apprehended that the innermost principle of man, his unity with himself,
is set forth as fundamental and brought into consciousness, so that man
in himself acquired an infinite strength. It is this that Rousseau from
one point of view said about the state. He investigated its absolute
justification, and inquired as to its foundation. The right of ruling and
associating, of the relation of order, of governing and being governed,
he apprehends from his own point of view, so that it is made to rest
historically on power, compulsion, conquest, private property, &c.[312]

Rousseau makes free-will the principle of this justification, and without
reference to the positive right of states he made answer to the above
question (chap. iv. p. 12), that man has free-will, because “liberty is
the distinguishing feature of man. To renounce his liberty signifies to
renounce his manhood. Not to be free is therefore a renunciation of a
man’s rights as a human being, and even of his duties.” The slave has
neither rights nor duties. Rousseau therefore says (chap. vi. p. 21):
“The fundamental task is to find a form of association which will shield
and protect with the power of the whole commonwealth combined the person
and property of every one of its members, and in which each individual,
while joining this association, obeys himself only, and thus remains
as free as before. The solution is given by the Social Contract;” this
is the association of which each is a member by his own will. These
principles, thus abstractly stated, we must allow to be correct, yet
the ambiguity in them soon begins to be felt. Man is free, this is
certainly the substantial nature of man; and not only is this liberty
not relinquished in the state, but it is actually in the state that it
is first realized. The freedom of nature, the gift of freedom, is not
anything real; for the state is the first realization of freedom.

The misunderstanding as to the universal will proceeds from this, that
the Notion of freedom must not be taken in the sense of the arbitrary
caprice of an individual, but in the sense of the rational will, of
the will in and for itself. The universal will is not to be looked on
as compounded of definitively individual wills, so that these remain
absolute; otherwise the saying would be correct: “Where the minority must
obey the majority, there is no freedom.” The universal will must really
be the rational will, even if we are not conscious of the fact; the
state is therefore not an association which is decreed by the arbitrary
will of individuals. The wrong apprehension of these principles does
not concern us. What does concern us is this, that thereby there should
come into consciousness as content the sense that man has liberty in his
spirit as the altogether absolute, that free-will is the Notion of man.
Freedom is just thought itself; he who casts thought aside and speaks of
freedom knows not what he is talking of. The unity of thought with itself
is freedom, the free will. Thought, as volition merely, is the impulse
to abrogate one’s subjectivity, the relation to present existence, the
realizing of oneself, since in that I am endeavouring to place myself as
existent on an equality with myself as thinking. It is only as having
the power of thinking that the will is free. The principle of freedom
emerged in Rousseau, and gave to man, who apprehends himself as infinite,
this infinite strength. This furnishes the transition to the Kantian
philosophy, which, theoretically considered, made this principle its
foundation; knowledge aimed at freedom, and at a concrete content which
it possesses in consciousness.


D. THE GERMAN ILLUMINATION.

The Germans were at this time quietly drifting along in their
Leibnitzo-Wolffian philosophy, in its definitions, axioms and proofs.
Then they were gradually breathed upon by the spirit of foreign lands,
they made acquaintance with all the developments which there came to
pass, and took very kindly to the empiricism of Locke; on the other hand
they at the same time laid aside metaphysical investigations, turned
their attention to the question of how truths can be grasped by the
healthy human understanding, and plunged into the _Aufklärung_ and into
the consideration of the utility of all things—a point of view which
they adopted from the French. Utility as the essence of existent things
signifies that they are determined as not being in themselves, but for
another: this is a necessary moment, but not the only one. The German
_Aufklärung_ warred against ideas, with the principle of utility as its
weapon. Philosophic investigations on this subject had degenerated into
a feeble popular treatment of it which was incapable of going deeper;
they displayed a rigid pedantry and an earnestness of the understanding,
but were unspiritual. The Germans are busy bees who do justice to all
nations, they are old-clothesmen for whom anything is good enough, and
who carry on their haggling with everyone. Picked up as it was from
foreign nations, all this had lost the wit and life, the energy and
originality which with the French had made the content to be lost sight
of in the form. The Germans, who honestly sift a matter to its root, and
who would put rational arguments in the place of wit and vivacity, since
wit and vivacity really prove nothing, in this way reached a content
which was utterly empty, so much so that nothing could be more wearisome
than this profound mode of treatment; such was the case with Eberhard,
Tetens, and those like them.

Others, like Nicolai, Sulzer and their fellows, were excellent in
their speculations on questions of taste and the liberal sciences;
for literature and art were also to flourish among the Germans.
But with all this they only arrived at a most trivial treatment of
æsthetics—Lessing[313] called it shallow chatter. As a matter of fact,
indeed, the poems of Gellert, Weisse and Lessing sank almost, if not
quite as much into the same poetic feebleness. Moreover, previous to
the philosophy of Kant, the general principle was really the theory
of happiness, which we have already met with in the philosophy of
the Cyrenaics (Vol. I. p. 477), and the point of view of pleasant or
unpleasant sensations held good among the philosophers of that time as an
ultimate and essential determination. Of this manner of philosophizing
I will quote an example which Nicolai gives in the account of a
conversation which he had with Mendelssohn: what is in question is the
pleasure in tragic subjects which is held to be awakened even by means of
the unpleasant emotions depicted in a tragedy:

                            HERR MOSES.

  “The power of having an inclination for perfections and of
  shunning imperfections is a reality.” Therefore the exercise
  of this power brings a pleasure with it, which, however, is in
  nature comparatively less than the displeasure which arises from
  the contemplation of the object.

                                 I.

  Yet even then, when the violence of passion causes us unpleasant
  sensations, the movement (what else is this movement than the
  power of loving perfections, &c.?) which it brings with it has
  still delights for us. It is the strength of the movement which
  we enjoy, even in spite of the painful sensations which oppose
  what is pleasant in the passion, and in a short time obtain the
  victory.

                            HERR MOSES.

  In a stage play, on the contrary, as the imperfect object is
  absent, pleasure must gain the upper hand and eclipse the small
  degree of displeasure.

                                 I.

  A passion therefore which is not followed by these results must
  be altogether pleasant. Of this sort are the imitations of the
  passions which the tragedy affords.”[314]

With such vapid and meaningless drivel they rambled on. In addition to
these, the eternity of punishment in hell, the salvation of the heathen,
the difference between uprightness and godliness, were philosophic
matters on which much labour was expended among the Germans, while the
French troubled themselves little about them. Finite determinations
were made to hold good against the infinite; against the Trinity it was
asserted that One cannot be Three; against original sin, that each must
bear his own guilt, must have done his own deeds of himself, and must
answer for them; in the same way against redemption, that another cannot
take upon himself punishment that is due; against forgiveness of sin,
that what is done cannot be rendered undone; to sum up generally, the
incommensurability of the human nature with the divine. On the one side
we see healthy human understanding, experience, facts of consciousness,
but on the other side there was still in vogue the Wolffian metaphysics
of the dry, dead understanding; thus we see Mendelssohn take his stand by
the healthy human understanding, and make it his rule.

Some movement was brought into this authority, which had settled into
perfect peace and security and let no dreams of other matters cross its
path, by the chance dispute of Mendelssohn with Jacobi, first as to
whether Lessing had been a disciple of Spinoza, and then regarding the
doctrines of Spinoza himself. On this occasion it came to light how much
Spinoza was really forgotten, and in what horror Spinozism was held. But
while Jacobi in this way once more unexpectedly brought to remembrance
in connection with Spinozism a quite different content of philosophy,
faith, _i.e._ the simply immediate certainty of external, finite things,
as well as of the divine (which faith in the divine he called reason)
was certainly placed by him, as an independent thinker, in opposition to
mediating knowledge, which he apprehended as mere understanding. This
continued until Kant gave a new impulse in Germany to philosophy, which
had died out in the rest of Europe.

As far as the transition to modern German philosophy is concerned, it
is from Hume and Rousseau, as we have said (pp. 369, 374, 402), that
it took its start. Descartes opposes extension to thought, as what is
simply one with itself. He is charged with dualism, but, like Spinoza
and Leibnitz, he did away with the independence of the two sides, and
made supreme their unity, God. But, as this unity, God is first of all
only the Third; and He is further determined in such a way that no
determination pertains to Him. Wolff’s understanding of the finite, his
school metaphysics generally, his science of the understanding, and his
divergence into the observation of nature, after it has grown strong
in its conformity with law and in its finite knowledge, turns against
the infinite and the concrete determinations of religion, and comes to
a standstill with abstractions in his _theologia naturalis_; for the
determinate is his domain. But from this time an utterly different point
of view is introduced. The infinite is transported into abstraction
or incomprehensibility. This is an incomprehensible position to adopt.
Nowadays it is looked on as most pious, most justifiable. But as we see
the third, the unity of differences, defined as something which cannot
be thought or known, this unity is not one of thought, for it is above
all thought, and God is not simply thought. Nevertheless this unity
is defined as the absolutely concrete, _i.e._ as the unity of thought
and Being. Now we have come so far that this unity is a unity simply
in thought, and pertaining to consciousness, so that the objectivity
of thought—reason—comes forth as One and All. This is dimly conceived
by the French. Whether the highest Being, this Being divested of all
determination, is elevated above nature, or whether nature or matter is
the highest unity, there is always present the establishing of something
concrete, which at the same time belongs to thought. Since the liberty of
man has been set up as an absolutely ultimate principle, thought itself
has been set up as a principle. The principle of liberty is not only
in thought but the root of thought; this principle of liberty is also
something in itself concrete, at least in principle it is implicitly
concrete. Thus far have general culture and philosophic culture advanced.
Since what is knowable has now been placed entirely within the sphere of
consciousness, and since the liberty of the spirit has been apprehended
as absolute, this may be understood to mean that knowledge has entered
altogether into the realm of the finite. The standpoint of the finite
was at the same time taken as ultimate, and God as a Beyond outside
consciousness; duties, rights, knowledge of nature, are finite. Man
has thereby formed for himself a kingdom of truth, from which God is
excluded; it is the kingdom of finite truth. The form of finitude may
here be termed the subjective form; liberty, self-consciousness [Ichheit]
of the mind, known as the absolute, is essentially subjective—in fact it
is the subjectivity of thought. The more the human reason has grasped
itself in itself, the more has it come down from God and the more has it
increased the field of the finite. Reason is One and All, which is at the
same time the totality of the finite; reason under these conditions is
finite knowledge and knowledge of the finite. The question is, since it
is this concrete that is established (and not metaphysical abstractions),
how it constitutes itself in itself; and then, how it returns to
objectivity, or abrogates its subjectivity, _i.e._ how by means of
thought God is to be again brought about, who at an earlier time and
at the beginning of this period was recognized as alone the true. This
is what we have to consider in the last period, in dealing with Kant,
Fichte, and Schelling.




SECTION THREE

RECENT GERMAN PHILOSOPHY


In the philosophy of Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, the revolution to which
in Germany mind has in these latter days advanced, was formally thought
out and expressed; the sequence of these philosophies shows the course
which thought has taken. In this great epoch of the world’s history,
whose inmost essence is laid hold of in the philosophy of history,
two nations only have played a part, the German and the French, and
this in spite of their absolute opposition, or rather because they are
so opposite. The other nations have taken no real inward part in the
same, although politically they have indeed so done, both through their
governments and their people. In Germany this principle has burst forth
as thought, spirit, Notion; in France, in the form of actuality. In
Germany, what there is of actuality comes to us as a force of external
circumstances, and as a reaction against the same. The task of modern
German philosophy is, however, summed up in taking as its object the
unity of thought and Being, which is the fundamental idea of philosophy
generally, and comprehending it, that is, in laying hold of the inmost
significance of necessity, the Notion (_supra_, p. 360). The philosophy
of Kant sets forth, in the first place, the formal aspect of the task,
but it has the abstract absoluteness of reason in self-consciousness
as its sole result, and, in one respect, it carried with it a certain
character of shallowness and want of vigour, in which an attitude of
criticism and negativity is retained, and which, as far as any positive
element is concerned, adheres to the facts of consciousness and to mere
conjecture, while it renounces thought and returns to feeling. On the
other hand, however, there sprang from this the philosophy of Fichte,
which speculatively grasps the essence of self-consciousness as concrete
egoism, but which does not reach beyond this subjective form pertaining
to the absolute. From it again comes the philosophy of Schelling, which
subsequently rejects Fichte’s teaching and sets forth the Idea of the
Absolute, the truth in and for itself.


A. JACOBI.

In connection with Kant we must here begin by speaking of Jacobi, whose
philosophy is contemporaneous with that of Kant; in both of these the
advance beyond the preceding period is very evident. The result in the
two cases is much the same, although both the starting point and the
method of progression are somewhat different. In Jacobi’s case the
stimulus was given mainly by French philosophy, with which he was very
conversant, and also by German metaphysics, while Kant began rather from
the English side, that is, from the scepticism of Hume. Jacobi, in that
negative attitude which he preserved as well as Kant, kept before him the
objective aspect of the method of knowledge, and specially considered it,
for he declared knowledge to be in its content incapable of recognizing
the Absolute: the truth must be concrete, present, but not finite.
Kant does not consider the content, but took the view of knowledge
being subjective; and for this reason he declared it to be incapable of
recognizing absolute existence. To Kant knowledge is thus a knowledge of
phenomena only, not because the categories are merely limited and finite,
but because they are subjective. To Jacobi, on the other hand, the chief
point is that the categories are not merely subjective, but that they
themselves are conditioned. This is an essential difference between the
two points of view, even if they both arrive at the same result.

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, born at Düsseldorf in 1743, held office first
in the Duchy of Berg, and then in Bavaria. He studied in Geneva and
Paris, associating in the former place with Bonnet and in the latter
with Diderot. Jacobi was a man of the highest character and culture.
He was long occupied with State affairs, and in Düsseldorf he held a
public office which was connected with the administration of the finance
department in the State. At the time of the French Revolution he was
obliged to retire. As a Bavarian official he went to Munich, there became
President of the Academy of Sciences in 1804, which office he, however,
resigned in 1812; for in the Napoleonic period Protestants were decried
as demagogues. He lived at Munich till the end of his life, and died at
the same place on the 10th of March, 1819.[315]

In the year 1785, Jacobi published Letters on Spinoza, which were written
in 1783, on the occasion of the dispute with Mendelssohn above-mentioned
(p. 406); for in none of his writings did Jacobi develop his philosophy
systematically, he set it forth in letters only. When Mendelssohn wished
to write a life of Lessing, Jacobi sent to ask him if he knew that
“Lessing was a Spinozist” (Jacobi’s Werke, Vol. IV. Sec. 1, pp. 39,
40). Mendelssohn was displeased at this, and it was the occasion of the
correspondence. In the course of the dispute it was made evident that
those who held themselves to be professed philosophers and possessed of
a monopoly of Lessing’s friendship, such as Nicolai, Mendelssohn, &c.,
knew nothing about Spinozism; not only was there manifested in them the
superficial character of their philosophic insight, but ignorance as
well; with Mendelssohn, for instance, this was shown respecting even the
outward history of the Spinozistic philosophy, and much more regarding
the inward (Jacobi’s Werke, Vol. IV. Sec. 1, p. 91). That Jacobi asserted
Lessing to be a Spinozist, and gave a high place to the French—this
serious statement came to these good men as a thunderbolt from the blue.
They—the self-satisfied, self-possessed, superior persons—were quite
surprised that he also made pretensions to knowledge, and of such a “dead
dog” as Spinoza (_ibidem_, p. 68). Explanations followed upon this, in
which Jacobi further developed his philosophic views.

Mendelssohn is directly opposed to Jacobi, for Mendelssohn took his
stand on cognition, placed true existence immediately in thought and
conception, and maintained: “What I cannot think as true does not trouble
me as doubt. A question which I do not understand, I cannot answer, it
is for me as good as no question at all.”[316] He continued to argue on
these same lines. His proof of the existence of God thus carries with
it this necessity of thought, viz. that actuality must plainly be in
thought, and a thinker must be presupposed, or the possibility of the
actual is in the thinker. “What no thinking Being conceives as possible
is not possible, and what is thought by no thinking creature as actual
cannot be actual in fact. If we take away from anything whatsoever the
conception formed by a thinking Being that that thing is possible or
actual, the thing itself is done away with.” The Notion of the thing
is thus to man the essence of the same. “No finite Being can think the
actuality of a thing in its perfection as actual, and still less can
he perceive the possibility and actuality of all present things. There
must thus be a thinking Being or an understanding which in the most
perfect way thinks the content of all possibilities as possible, and the
content of all actualities as actual; _i.e._ there must be an infinite
understanding, and this is God.”[317] Here on the one hand we see a
unity of thought and Being, on the other the absolute unity as infinite
understanding—the former is the self-consciousness which is apprehended
as finite merely. Actuality, Being, has its possibility in thought, or
its possibility is thought; it is not a process from possibility to
actuality, for the possibility remains at home in the actuality.

Jacobi maintains against these demands of thought—and this in one
view is the chief thought in his philosophy—that every method of
their demonstration leads to fatalism, atheism, and Spinozism,[318]
and presents God as derived and founded upon something else; for
comprehending Him signifies demonstrating His dependence. Jacobi thus
asserts that mediate knowledge consists in giving a cause of something
which has in its turn a finite effect, and so on; so that a knowledge
such as this can all through relate to the finite only.

Jacobi further states upon this subject, in the first place, that
“Reason”—later on when he distinguished reason and understanding (of
which more hereafter[319]), he altered it to understanding[320]—“can
never bring to light more than the conditions of what is conditioned,
natural laws and mechanism. We comprehend a thing when we can deduce it
from its proximate causes,” and not from the remoter causes; the most
remote and quite universal cause is always God. “Or” we know the thing
if we “perceive its immediate conditions as they come in due succession.
Thus, for instance, we comprehend a circle when we can clearly represent
to ourselves the mechanism of its origination or its physical conditions;
we know the syllogistic formulæ when we have actually come to know
the laws to which the human understanding is subject in judgment and
conclusion, its physical nature and its mechanism. For this reason we
have no conceptions of qualities as such, but only intuitions. Even
of our present existence we have a feeling only, but no conceptions.
Genuine conceptions we have merely of figure, number, position, movement
and the forms of thought; qualities are known and understood, if they
are traced back to these and objectively annulled.” This is undoubtedly
really finite knowledge, which is to give the determinate conditions
of anything determinate, to demonstrate it as resulting from another
cause, in such a way that each condition is again conditioned and finite.
Jacobi continues: “The business of reason is really progressive union
and connection, and its speculative business is union and connection
in accordance with the known laws of necessity, _i.e._ of identity.
Everything that reason can bring forth by means of analysis, combination,
judgment, conclusion, and re-conception, consists in nothing but things
of nature” (_i.e._ finite things), “and reason itself, as a limited
existence, belongs to these things. But the whole of nature, the sum
of all conditioned existence, cannot reveal more to the investigating
understanding than what is contained in it, namely, manifold existence,
changes, a succession of forms” (the conditioned), “and not an actual
beginning” (of the world), “nor a real principle of any objective
existence.”[321]

But Jacobi in the second place here accepts reason in a wider sense and
says: “If we understand by reason the principle of knowledge generally,
it is the mind from which the whole living nature of man is constituted;
through it man arises; he is a form which it has adopted.” With this
Jacobi’s view of the attempt to know the unconditioned is connected. “I
take the whole human being, and find that his consciousness is composed
of two original conceptions, the conceptions of the conditioned and the
unconditioned. Both are inseparably bound up with one another, and yet
in such a way that the conception of the conditioned presupposes the
conception of the unconditioned, and can be given in this alone. We
are just as certain of its existence as we are of our own conditioned
existence, or even more so. Since our conditioned existence rests on
an infinitude of mediations, there is opened up to our investigation a
vast field which, for the sake of our preservation even, we are forced
to work upon.” It would, however, be quite another thing to wish to know
the unconditioned apart from this practical end. However Jacobi here
remarks, “To try to discover the conditions of the unconditioned, to find
a possibility for absolute necessity, and to construct this last in order
to be able to comprehend it, is what we undertake when we endeavour to
make nature an existence comprehensible to us, _i.e._ a merely natural
existence, and to bring the mechanism of the principle of mechanism into
the light of day. For if everything which can be said to arise and be
present in a way comprehensible to us, must arise and be present in a
conditioned way, we remain, so long as we continue to comprehend, in a
chain of conditioned conditions. Where this chain breaks off, we cease
to comprehend, and there the connection which we call nature likewise
ceases. The conception of the possibility of the outward existence of
nature would thus be the conception of an absolute beginning or origin
of nature; it would be the conception of the unconditioned itself in so
far as it is a conditioning of nature not naturally connected, _i.e._
a conditioning of nature unconnected and unconditioned for us. Now
should a conception of what is thus unconditioned and unconnected, and
consequently supernatural, be possible, the unconditioned must cease
to be unconditioned, it must itself receive conditions; and absolute
necessity must commence to be possibility in order that it may allow
itself to be constructed.”[322] This is contradictory.

Jacobi then passes on from this point to the second of his main
propositions, “The unconditioned is called the supernatural. Now since
everything which lies outside the connection of what is conditioned, of
what is naturally mediated, also lies outside the sphere of our clear
and certain knowledge, and cannot be understood through conceptions,
the supernatural cannot be accepted in any other way by us than that
in which it is given to us—namely as a fact. It is! This supernatural,
this essence of all essence, all tongues join in proclaiming to be
God.”[323] God as the universal, the true, is here taken in the sense
of a spiritual generally, in the sense of power, wisdom, &c. That
God is, however, is to Jacobi not absolutely true; for to knowledge
pertains His objective absolute existence, but He cannot be said to be
known. It is thus merely a fact of my consciousness that God exists
independently apart from my consciousness; this, however, is itself
maintained through my consciousness; the subjective attitude of thought
is thus to Jacobi the element of most importance. The consciousness of
God, which is in our consciousness, is, however, of such a nature that
along with the thought of God we have immediately associated the fact
that He is. The existence of the supernatural and supersensuous, to
which the thought of man regarding the natural and finite passes on, is
just as certain to Jacobi as he is himself. This certainty is identical
with his self-consciousness; as certainly as I am, so certainly is
God (Jacobi’s Werke, Vol. III. p. 35). Since he thus passes back into
self-consciousness, the unconditioned is only for us in an immediate way;
this immediate knowledge Jacobi calls Faith, inward revelation (Werke,
Vol. II. pp. 3, 4); to this appeal can be made in man. God, the absolute,
the unconditioned, cannot, according to Jacobi, be proved. For proof,
comprehension, means to discover conditions for something, to derive it
from conditions; but a derived absolute, God, &c., would thus not be
absolute at all, would not be unconditioned, would not be God (Jacobi’s
Werke, Vol. III. p. 7). This immediate knowledge of God is then the point
which is maintained in the philosophy of Jacobi. The faith of Kant and
of Jacobi are, however, different. To Kant it is a postulate of reason,
it is the demand for the solution of the contradiction between the world
and goodness; to Jacobi it is represented on its own account as immediate
knowledge.

Everything which has been written upon God since Jacobi’s time, by
philosophers such as Fries and by theologians, rests on this conception
of immediate intellectual knowledge, and men even call this revelation,
though in another sense than the revelation of theology. Revelation as
immediate knowledge is in ourselves, while the Church holds revelation
to be something imparted from without.[324] In the theological sense,
faith is faith in something which is given to us through teaching. It
is a sort of deception when faith and revelation are spoken of and
represented as if faith and revelation in the theological sense were
here in question; for the sense in which they are used, and which may be
termed philosophic, is quite a different one, however pious an air may be
assumed in using the terms. This is Jacobi’s standpoint, and whatever is
by philosophers and theologians said against it, this teaching is eagerly
accepted and disseminated. And nowhere is there anything to be found
but reflections originating from Jacobi, whereby immediate knowledge
is opposed to philosophic knowledge and to reason; and people speak
of reason, philosophy, &c., as a blind man speaks of colours. It is,
indeed, allowed that a man cannot make shoes unless he is a shoemaker,
even although he have the measure and foot, and also the hands. But when
Philosophy is concerned, immediate knowledge signifies that every man
as he walks and stands is a philosopher, that he can dogmatize as he
chooses, and that he is completely acquainted with Philosophy.

By reason, however, mediate knowledge merely is on the one hand
understood, and on the other the intellectual perception which speaks of
facts (_supra_, pp. 413-415). In this respect it is true that reason is
the knowledge and revelation of absolute truth, since the understanding
is the revelation of the finite (Jacobi’s Werke, Vol. II. pp. 8-14,
101). “We maintained that two different powers of perception in man have
to be accepted: a power of perception through visible and tangible and
consequently corporeal organs of perception, and another kind of power,
viz. through an invisible organ which in no way represents itself to
the outward senses, and whose existence is made known to us through
feeling alone. This organ, a spiritual eye for spiritual objects, has
been called by men—generally speaking—reason. He whom the pure feelings
of the beautiful and good, of admiration and love, of respect and awe,
do not convince that in and with these feelings he perceives something
to be present which is independent of them, and which is unattainable by
the outward senses or by an understanding directed upon their perceptions
alone—such an one cannot be argued with” (Jacobi’s Werke, Vol. II. pp.
74, 76). But by faith Jacobi likewise understands all that has immediacy
of Being for me: “Through faith we know that we have a body, we become
aware of other actual things, and that indeed with the same certainty
with which we are aware of ourselves. We obtain all conceptions through
the qualities which we receive and accept, and there is no other way
of attaining real knowledge; for reason, when it begets objects, begets
phantoms of the brain. Thus we have a revelation of nature.”[325] Hence
the expression faith, which had a deep significance in religion, is made
use of for different contents of every kind; this in our own time is the
point of view most commonly adopted.

Jacobi here brings faith into opposition with thought. Let us compare the
two, and discover whether they are separated by so great a chasm as those
who thus oppose them think. On the one hand absolute existence is to
faith immediate; believing consciousness feels itself penetrated by this
as by its essence: that existence is its life, believing consciousness
asserts itself to be in direct unity with it. Thought thinks the
absolute existence; such existence is to it absolute thought, absolute
understanding, pure thought; but that signifies that it is likewise
immediate itself. On the other hand to faith the immediacy of absolute
existence has also the significance of a Being: it _is_, and is another
than ‘I.’ And the same is true of the thinker; to him it is absolute
Being, actual in itself, and different from self-consciousness or thought
as finite understanding, to use the common term. Now what is the reason
that faith and thought do not understand one another, and each recognize
itself in the other? In the first place faith has no consciousness of
being a thought, inasmuch as it asserts absolute consciousness to be
identical with it as self-consciousness, and has direct inward knowledge
of the same. But it expresses this simple unity; in its consciousness
it is only immediacy so to speak in the signification of Being, a unity
of its unconscious substance. In the second place Being-for-self is
contained in thought; to this faith opposes the immediacy of Being.
Thought, on the contrary, has the immediate as absolute potentiality,
as absolutely a thing of thought: and the immediacy belonging to this
thing of thought is without the determination of Being, of life. On
the heights of this abstraction the two stand opposed to each other,
as the _Aufklärung_ which asserts absolute existence to be a Beyond of
self-consciousness, and as the materialism which makes it so to speak
present matter (_supra_, pp. 382, 383). In the one case it is in faith
and thought as positive existence or thought, and in the other it is the
negative of self-consciousness, which is thus either only determined as
negative, as a Beyond, or likewise as existent for self-consciousness.
Hence faith and thought are both of them knowledge. We call universal
knowledge thought, particular knowledge we call sensuous perception;
and we term the introduction of external determinations understanding.
The universal element in man is thought, but to it likewise appertains
religious feeling for instance; the animal does not possess it, for it
has no human feeling; and in so far as this feeling is religious, it is
the feeling of a thinker, and what determines this feeling is not the
determination of natural desire, &c., but a universal determination. Thus
God, even though He is only felt and believed in, is yet the universal
taken quite abstractly—even in His personality He is the absolutely
universal personality.

As thought and faith are thus one, the same is true of the antithesis
between mediated and immediate knowledge. We must, it is true, keep
before our eyes the fact that what is revealed in immediate knowledge
is the universal. But abstract immediate knowledge is natural, sensuous
knowledge; the immediate man in his natural condition, in his desires,
does not know this universal. Children, the Esquimaux, &c., know nothing
of God; or what the natural man knows of Him is not a real knowledge
of Him. Thus the intuitive knowledge of the Egyptians told them that
God was an ox or a cat, and the Indians still possess similar sorts of
knowledge. On the other hand when man has come so far as to know God
as merely an object of the mind, _i.e._ as spiritual, it is easy to
perceive that this knowledge which is asserted to be immediate is really
a result mediated through instruction, through a long continued culture.
It is only by means of being elevated above nature that man arrives at
a consciousness of what is higher, and at a knowledge of the universal;
there indeed his knowledge is immediate, but he has only arrived at this
through mediation. I think, and thus I know the universal immediately,
but this very thought is just process in itself, movement and life. All
life is process within itself, is mediated, and this is all the more
true of spiritual life; for it is the passing from one to the other,
that is, from the merely natural and sensuous to the spiritual. It thus
indicates a deficiency in the most simple reflection not to know that the
universal is not in immediate knowledge, but is a result of the culture,
the education, and the self-revelation of the human race. If immediate
knowledge is to be allowed, everyone will be responsible merely to
himself: this man knows this, another that, and consequently everything
is justified and approved, however contrary to right and religion. This
opposition between immediacy and mediacy is thus a very barren and quite
empty determination; it is a platitude of the extremest type to consider
anything like this to be a true opposition; it proceeds from a most
wooden understanding, which thinks that an immediacy can be something on
its own account, without a mediation within itself. If Philosophy were
to result in this it would be a poor affair; these determinations are
merely forms, none of which has intrinsic truth. The form into which
Philosophy has in Jacobi’s case finally fallen, which is that immediacy
is grasped as absolute, manifests a lack of all critical faculty, of
all logic. The Kantian philosophy is critical philosophy, but from it
the fact has been omitted that we cannot constitute the infinite with
finite categories—and immediacy is such an one. When we regard this
opposition more closely all knowledge may be termed immediate, but all
immediate knowledge is likewise mediated in itself. This we know within
our consciousness, and we may see it in the most general phenomena. I
know, for example, of America immediately, and yet this knowledge is very
much mediated. If I stand in America and see its soil, I must first of
all have journeyed to it, Columbus must first have discovered it, ships
must have been built, &c.; all these discoveries and inventions pertain
to it. That which we now know immediately is consequently a result of
infinitely many mediations. Likewise when I see a right-angled triangle
I know that the squares of the two sides are equal to the square of the
hypotenuse: I know this immediately, and yet I have merely learned it and
am convinced of it through the mediation of proof. Immediate knowledge
is thus everywhere mediated, and Philosophy does nothing but bring this
to consciousness—demonstrating the mediation which in point of fact is
already present there, _e.g._ in religion, &c.

The philosophy of Jacobi, inasmuch as it says: “Thought cannot proceed
further than to the feeling of God,” has been accepted _utiliter_; it
was more easily arrived at than in the case of Kant. Knowledge, however,
is something very different from what Jacobi calls such; against finite
knowledge his arguments are quite correct. Immediate knowledge is not
knowledge, comprehension, for that implies that the content is determined
in itself, _i.e._ is grasped as concrete. But in immediate knowledge
it is the case that the only fact known of God is that He exists. For
should there be determinations respecting God, they must, according to
Jacobi, be grasped as a finite, and the knowledge of them would again
merely be a progression from finite to finite. There thus remains only
the indeterminate conception of God, an “Above me,” an indeterminate
Beyond. This gives accordingly the same result as does the _Aufklärung_,
viz. that the highest reality is ultimate: we find the same in French
philosophy and in Kant—only here we still have the opinion that this
emptiness is the highest philosophy possible. But if each standpoint has
an aspect wherein it is justified, there always rests in the proposition
that the human mind knows God immediately, the important consideration
that we have here a recognition of the freedom of the human spirit: in
it we have the source of the knowledge of God, and all externality of
authority is thus abrogated in this principle. The principle is hereby
gained, but only the principle of freedom of spirit; and the greatness of
our time rests in the fact that freedom, the peculiar possession of mind
whereby it is at home with itself in itself, is recognized, and that mind
has this consciousness within itself. This however is merely abstract,
for the next step is that the principle of freedom is again purified
and comes to its true objectivity, so that not everything which strikes
me or springs up within me must, because it is manifested in me, hold
good as true. It is only through thought, which casts off the particular
and accidental, that the principle receives this objectivity which is
independent of mere subjectivity and in and for itself—though in such a
way that the freedom of mind still remains respected. One’s own spirit
must bear witness to spirit that God is Spirit; the content must be true.
But this does not give authenticity to itself by its being revealed
with certainty to me. This is the standpoint, and we have thus seen its
deficiency and the greatness of the principle which is involved in it.


B. KANT.

The philosophy of Kant, which we have now more particularly to consider,
made its appearance at the same time as the above. While Descartes
asserted certainty to be the unity of thought and Being, we now have the
consciousness of thought in its subjectivity, _i.e._ in the first place,
as determinateness in contrast with objectivity, and then as finitude
and progression in finite determinations. Abstract thought as personal
conviction is that which is maintained as certain; its contents are
experience, but the methods adopted by experience are once more formal
thought and argument. Kant turns back to the standpoint of Socrates;
we see in him the freedom of the subject as we saw it with the Stoics,
but the task in respect of content is now placed on a higher level. An
endless aiming at the concrete is required for thought, a filling up in
accordance with the rule which completion prescribes, which signifies
that the content is itself the Idea as the unity of the Notion and
reality. With Jacobi thought, demonstration, does not in the first
place reach beyond the finite and conditioned, and in the second place,
even when God is likewise the metaphysical object, the demonstration is
really the making Him conditioned and finite; in the third place the
unconditioned, what is then immediately certain, only exists in faith, a
subjectively fixed point of view but an unknowable one, that is to say
an undetermined, indeterminable, and consequently an unfruitful one. The
standpoint of the philosophy of Kant, on the contrary, is in the first
place to be found in the fact that thought has through its reasoning
got so far as to grasp itself not as contingent but rather as in itself
the absolute ultimate. In the finite, in connection with the finite,
an absolute standpoint is raised which acts as a connecting bond; it
binds together the finite and leads up to the infinite. Thought grasped
itself as all in all, as absolute in judgment; for it nothing external
is authoritative, since all authority can receive validity only through
thought. This thought, determining itself within itself and concrete,
is, however, in the second place, grasped as subjective, and this
aspect of subjectivity is the form which from Jacobi’s point of view is
predominant; the fact that thought is concrete Jacobi has on the other
hand for the most part set aside. Both standpoints remain philosophies
of subjectivity; since thought is subjective, the capacity of knowing the
absolute is denied to it. To Kant God cannot on the one hand be found
in experience; He can neither be found in outward experience—as Lalande
discovered when he swept the whole heavens and found no God—nor can He be
discovered within; though no doubt mystics and enthusiasts can experience
many things in themselves, and amongst these God, _i.e._ the Infinite.
On the other hand Kant argues to prove the existence of God, who is to
him an hypothesis necessary for the explanation of things, a postulate
of practical reason. But in this connection another French astronomer
made the following reply to the Emperor Napoleon: “_Je n’ai pas eu
besoin de cette hypothèse._” According to this the truth underlying
the Kantian philosophy is the recognition of freedom. Even Rousseau
represented the absolute to be found in freedom; Kant has the same
principle, but taken rather from the theoretic side. The French regard
it from the side of will, which is represented in their proverb: “_Il a
la tête près du bonnet._” France possesses the sense of actuality, of
promptitude; because in that country conception passes more immediately
into action, men have there applied themselves more practically to the
affairs of actuality. But however much freedom may be in itself concrete,
it was as undeveloped and in its abstraction that it was there applied
to actuality; and to make abstractions hold good in actuality means to
destroy actuality. The fanaticism which characterized the freedom which
was put into the hands of the people was frightful. In Germany the same
principle asserted the rights of consciousness on its own account, but
it has been worked out in a merely theoretic way. We have commotions of
every kind within us and around us, but through them all the German head
quietly keeps its nightcap on and silently carries on its operations
beneath it.

Immanuel Kant was born at Königsberg in 1724, and there studied theology
to begin with; in the year 1755 he entered upon his work as an academic
teacher; in 1770 he became professor of logic, and in 1804 he died at
Königsberg on the 12th of February, having almost attained his eightieth
year (Tennemann’s Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie by Wendt, §
380, pp. 465, 466), without ever having left his native town.

While to Wolff thought as thought was merely positive self-identity
and grasped itself as such, we saw the negative self-moving thought,
the absolute Notion, appear in all its power in France; and in the
_Aufklärung_ it likewise made its way to Germany in such a manner
that all existence, all action, was called upon to serve a useful
purpose, _i.e._ the implicit was done away with and everything had
to be for another; and that for which everything had to be is man,
self-consciousness, taken, however, as signifying all men generally. The
consciousness of this action in abstract form is the Kantian philosophy.
It is thus the self-thinking absolute Notion that passes into itself
which we see making its appearance in Germany through this philosophy,
in such a way that all reality falls within self-consciousness; it
is the idealism which vindicates all moments of the implicit to
self-consciousness, but which at first itself remains subject to a
contradiction, inasmuch as it still separates this implicit from itself.
In other words the Kantian philosophy no doubt leads reality back to
self-consciousness, but it can supply no reality to this essence of
self-consciousness, or to this pure self-consciousness, nor can it
demonstrate Being in the same. It apprehends simple thought as having
difference in itself, but does not yet apprehend that all reality rests
on this difference; it does not know how to obtain mastery over the
individuality of self-consciousness, and although it describes reason
very well, it does this in an unthinking empiric way which again robs
it of the truth it has. Theoretically the Kantian philosophy is the
“Illumination” or _Aufklärung_ reduced to method; it states that nothing
true can be known, but only the phenomenal; it leads knowledge into
consciousness and self-consciousness, but from this standpoint maintains
it to be a subjective and finite knowledge. Thus although it deals with
the infinite Idea, expressing its formal categories and arriving at
its concrete claims, it yet again denies this to be the truth, making
it a simple subjective, because it has once for all accepted finite
knowledge as the fixed and ultimate standpoint. This philosophy made an
end of the metaphysic of the understanding as an objective dogmatism,
but in fact it merely transformed it into a subjective dogmatism, _i.e._
into a consciousness in which these same finite determinations of the
understanding persist, and the question of what is true in and for itself
has been abandoned. Its study is made difficult by its diffuseness and
prolixity, and by the peculiar terminology found in it. Nevertheless this
diffuseness has one advantage, that inasmuch as the same thing is often
repeated, the main points are kept before us, and these cannot easily be
lost from view.

We shall endeavour to trace the lines which Kant pursued. The philosophy
of Kant has in the first place a direct relation to that of Hume as
stated above (p. 370). That is to say, the significance of the Kantian
philosophy, generally expressed, is from the very beginning to allow
that determinations such as those of universality and necessity are
not to be met with in perception, and this Hume has already shown in
relation to Locke. But while Hume attacks the universality and necessity
of the categories generally, and Jacobi their finitude, Kant merely
argues against their objectivity in so far as they are present in
external things themselves, while maintaining them to be objective in
the sense of holding good as universal and necessary, as they do, for
instance, in mathematics and natural science.[326] The fact that we
crave for universality and necessity as that which first constitutes
the objective, Kant thus undoubtedly allows. But if universality and
necessity do not exist in external things, the question arises “Where are
they to be found?” To this Kant, as against Hume, maintains that they
must be _a priori_, _i.e._ that they must rest on reason itself, and on
thought as self-conscious reason; their source is the subject, “I” in my
self-consciousness.[327] This, simply expressed, is the main point in the
Kantian philosophy.

In the second place the philosophy of Kant is likewise called a critical
philosophy because its aim, says Kant, is first of all to supply a
criticism of our faculties of knowledge; for before obtaining knowledge
we must inquire into the faculties of knowledge. To the healthy human
understanding that is plausible, and to it this has been a great
discovery. Knowledge is thereby represented as an instrument, as a method
and means whereby we endeavour to possess ourselves of the truth. Thus
before men can make their way to the truth itself they must know the
nature and function of their instrument. They must see whether it is
capable of supplying what is demanded of it—of seizing upon the object;
they must know what the alterations it makes in the object are, in order
that these alterations may not be mixed up with the determinations of
the object itself.[328] This would appear as though men could set forth
upon the search for truth with spears and staves. And a further claim is
made when it is said that we must know the faculty of knowledge before
we can know. For to investigate the faculties of knowledge means to know
them; but how we are to know without knowing, how we are to apprehend the
truth before the truth, it is impossible to say. It is the old story of
the σχολαστικός who would not go into the water till he could swim. Thus
since the investigation of the faculties of knowledge is itself knowing,
it cannot in Kant attain to what it aims at because it is that already—it
cannot come to itself because it is already with itself; the same thing
happens as happened with the Jews, the Spirit passes through the midst of
them and they know it not. At the same time the step taken by Kant is a
great and important one—that is, the fact that he has made knowledge the
subject of his consideration.

On the one hand this critique of knowledge applies to the empirical
knowledge of Locke, which asserts itself to be grounded on experience,
and, on the other hand, it also deals with what claims to be on the whole
a more metaphysical kind of philosophy—the Wolffian and German—which
had also taken up the line of proceeding on the more empiric method
which has been depicted. But this last has at the same time kept itself
separate from the merely empiric method, inasmuch as its main efforts
have been directed towards making such categories of thought as those of
potentiality, actuality, God, &c., have as their foundation categories of
the understanding, and then reasoning from them. The Kantian philosophy
is in the first instance directed against both. Kant takes away the
objective significance of the determinations of the Wolffian metaphysics,
and shows how they must be ascribed to subjective thought alone. At the
same time Jacobi likewise declared himself against this metaphysic, but
since he started more especially from the standpoint of the French and
Germans, his point of view was different: he asserts that our finite
thought can set forth finite determinations alone, and thus can only
consider God and Spirit in accordance with finite relationships. On
the practical side there reigned at that time the so-called happiness
theory, since man’s inherent Notion and the way to realize this Notion
was apprehended in morality as a satisfaction of his desires. As against
this Kant has very rightly shown that it involves a heteronomy and not
an autonomy of reason—a determination through nature and consequently
an absence of freedom. But because the rational principle of Kant was
formal, and his successors could not make any further progress with
reason, and yet morality had to receive a content, Fries and others must
still be called Hedonists though they avoid giving themselves the name.

In the third place, as regards the relation of the categories to the
material which is given through experience, there is according to
Kant already inherent in the subjective determinations of thought,
_e.g._ in those of cause and effect, the capacity of themselves to
bind together the differences which are present in that material. Kant
considers thought as in great measure a synthetic activity, and hence
he represents the main question of Philosophy to be this, “How are
synthetic judgments _a priori_ possible?”[329] Judgment signifies the
combination of thought-determinations as subject and predicate. Synthetic
judgments _a priori_ are nothing else than a connection of opposites
through themselves, or the absolute Notion, _i.e._ the relations of
different determinations such as those of cause and effect, given
not through experience but through thought. Space and time likewise
form the connecting element; they are thus _a priori_, _i.e._ in
self-consciousness. Since Kant shows that thought has synthetic judgments
_a priori_ which are not derived from perception, he shows that thought
is so to speak concrete in itself. The idea which is present here is a
great one, but, on the other hand, quite an ordinary signification is
given it, for it is worked out from points of view which are inherently
rude and empirical, and a scientific form is the last thing that
can be claimed for it. In the presentation of it there is a lack of
philosophical abstraction, and it is expressed in the most commonplace
way; to say nothing more of the barbarous terminology, Kant remains
restricted and confined by his psychological point of view and empirical
methods.

To mention one example only of his barbarous expressions, Kant calls
his philosophy (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, p. 19) a Transcendental
philosophy, _i.e._ a system of principles of pure reason which
demonstrate the universal and necessary elements in the self-conscious
understanding, without occupying themselves with objects or inquiring
what universality and necessity are; this last would be transcendent.
Transcendent and transcendental have accordingly to be clearly
distinguished. Transcendent mathematics signifies the mathematics in
which the determination of infinitude is made use of in a pre-eminent
degree: in this sphere of mathematics we say, for instance, that the
circle consists of an infinitude of straight lines; the periphery
is represented as straight, and since the curve is represented as
straight this passes beyond the geometric category and is consequently
transcendent. Kant, on the contrary, defines the transcendental
philosophy as not a philosophy which by means of categories passes beyond
its own sphere, but one which points out in subjective thought, in
consciousness, the sources of what may become transcendent. Thought would
thus be transcendent if the categories of universality, of cause and
effect, were predicated of the object, for in this way men would from the
subjective element ‘transcend’ into another sphere. We are not justified
in so doing as regards the result nor even to begin with, since we
merely contemplate thought within thought itself. Thus we do not desire
to consider the categories in their objective sense, but in so far as
thought is the source of such synthetic relationships; the necessary and
universal thus here receive the significance of resting in our faculties
of knowledge. But from this faculty of knowledge Kant still separates the
implicit, the thing-in-itself, so that the universality and necessity are
all the time a subjective conditionment of knowledge merely, and reason
with its universality and necessity does not attain to a knowledge of
the truth.[330] For it requires perception and experience, a material
empirically given in order, as subjectivity, to attain to knowledge.
As Kant says, these form its “constituent parts”; one part it has in
itself, but the other is empirically given.[331] When reason desires to
be independent, to exist in itself and to derive truth from itself, it
becomes transcendent; it transcends experience because it lacks the other
constituent, and then creates mere hallucinations of the brain. It is
hence not constitutive in knowledge but only regulative; it is the unity
and rule for the sensuous manifold. But this unity on its own account
is the unconditioned, which, transcending experience, merely arrives at
contradictions. In the practical sphere alone is reason constitutive. The
critique of reason is consequently not the knowing of objects, but of
knowledge and its principles, its range and limitations, so that it does
not become transcendent.[332] This is an extremely general account of
what we shall now consider in its separate details.

In dealing with this matter Kant adopts the plan of first considering
theoretic reason, the knowledge which relates to outward objects. In the
second place he investigates the will as self-actualization; and, in the
third place, the faculty of judgment, the special consideration of the
unity of the universal and individual; how far he gets in this matter we
shall likewise see. But the critique of the faculty of knowledge is the
matter of main importance.

1. In the first place, as to the theoretic philosophy, Kant in the
Critique of Pure Reason sets to work in a psychological manner, _i.e._
historically, inasmuch as he describes the main stages in theoretic
consciousness. The first faculty is sensuousness generally, the second
understanding, the third reason. All this he simply narrates; he accepts
it quite empirically, without developing it from the Notion or proceeding
by necessity.

a. The _a priori_ fact of sensuous existence, the forms of sensuous
existence, constitute the beginning of this transcendentalism. Kant
calls the judgment of the same the transcendental æsthetic. Nowadays
æsthetic signifies the knowledge of the beautiful. But here the doctrine
of intuition or perception is taken from the point of view of its
universality, _i.e._ from what in it pertains to the subject as such.
Perception, says Kant, is the knowledge of an object given to us through
the senses; sensuousness, however, is the capacity of being affected by
conceptions as external. Now, according to Kant, in perception there
are to be found all manner of contents, and in dealing with this he
first of all distinguishes feeling as external, such as redness, colour,
hardness, &c., and then as internal, such as justice, wrath, love, fear,
pleasurable and religious feelings, &c. He says content such as this
forms the one constituent and pertains to feeling; all this is subjective
and merely subjective. In this sensuous element there is, however, a
universal sensuous element likewise contained, which as such does not
belong to feeling in so far as it is immediately determined; in such a
content this ‘other’ consists in the categories of space and time, which
of themselves are void and empty. The filling in is performed by the
content, by colour, softness, hardness, &c., as regards space; while as
regards time, the same content, so soon as it is something transient,
or again some other content, and in particular inward feelings are what
causes the determination. Space and time are consequently pure, _i.e._
abstract perceptions in which we place outside of us the content of
individual sensations, either in time as succeeding one another, or in
space as separate from one another. Here we thus meet with the division
between subjectivity and objectivity, for if we isolate the ‘alongside
of’ and ‘after’ we have space and time. It is the act of _a priori_
sensuousness to project the content; the forms of intuition or perception
constitute this pure perception.[333] Now everything indeed is termed
perception, even thought and consciousness; God, who certainly pertains
to thought alone, is said to be comprehended by perception or intuition,
the so-called immediate consciousness.

Kant further remarks in this regard, (1) “Space is no empirical Notion
which has been derived from outward experiences.” But the Notion is
never really anything empiric: it is in barbarous forms like this that
Kant, however, always expresses himself: “For in order that I may relate
my sensations to something outside of me, I must presuppose space.” Of
time Kant speaks in similar terms: “In order that something outside of
me may be represented in separate space or time, the conception of space
and time must come first, or it cannot be derived from experience, for
experience first becomes possible through this antecedent conception.”
That is to say, time and space which may appear as objective, since their
particular filling in certainly belongs to subjective feeling, are not
empirical; for consciousness has time and space first of all in itself.
(2) “Space is a necessary conception which lies at the basis of all
external perceptions. Space and time are conceptions _a priori_, because
we cannot represent things without space and time. Time is a necessary
basis for all phenomena.” As _a priori_, space and time are universal
and necessary, that is to say we find this to be the case; but it does
not follow that they must be previously present as conceptions. They
are fundamental indeed, but they are likewise an external universal.
Kant however places the matter somewhat in this fashion: there are
things-in-themselves outside, but devoid of time and space; consciousness
now comes, and it has time and space beforehand present in it as the
possibility of experience, just as in order to eat it has mouth and
teeth, &c., as conditions necessary for eating. The things which are
eaten have not the mouth and teeth, and as eating is brought to bear
on things, so space and time are also brought to bear on them; just as
things are placed in the mouth and between the teeth, so is it with space
and time. (3) “Space and time are not general Notions of the relations
of things, but pure intuitive perceptions. For we can only represent
to ourselves one space; there are not different component parts of
space.” The same is the case with time. The abstract conception tree,
for example, is in its actuality a number of individual and separate
trees, but spaces are not such particulars, nor are they parts; for
one immediate continuity remains, and hence a simple unity. Ordinary
perception has always something individual before it; space or time are
always however one only, and therefore _a priori_. It might however be
replied to Kant: The nature of space and time undoubtedly involves their
being an abstract universal; but there is in like manner only one blue.
(4) “Each Notion or conception certainly comprises an infinite number
of conceptions under itself, but not within itself; nevertheless this
last is the case in space and time, and they are therefore intuitive
perceptions and not Notions or conceptions.”[334] Space and time, then,
are certainly not thought-determinations, if no thoughts are there
present, but a Notion, so soon as we have a Notion of them.

From the transcendental point of view it is likewise maintained that
this conception of space and time contains synthetic propositions _a
priori_, connected with the consciousness of its necessity. Examples of
these synthetic propositions are sought in statements such as that of
space having three dimensions, or in the definition of a straight line,
that it is the shortest distance between two points, and likewise in
the statement that 5 + 7 = 12.[335] All these propositions are however
very analytic. Kant nevertheless in the first place holds that such
propositions do not take their rise from experience, or, as we might
better express it, are not an individual contingent perception; this
is very true, the perception is universal and necessary. In the second
place he states that we acquire them from pure sensuous perception, and
not through the understanding or Notion. But Kant does not grasp the
two together, and yet this comprehension of them is involved in such
propositions being immediately certain even in ordinary perception.
When Kant then expresses himself (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, p. 49)
to the effect that we have many sensations which constitute “the real
matter,” with which we externally and inwardly “occupy our minds,” and
that the mind has in itself in space and time “formal conditions of the
mode in which we place them” (those manifold feelings) “in our mind,”
the question of how mind arrives at having just these special forms now
forces itself upon us. But what the nature of time and space is, it does
not occur to the Kantian philosophy to inquire. To it what space and time
are in themselves does not signify ‘What is their Notion,’ but ‘Are they
external things or something in the mind?’

b. The second faculty, the understanding, is something very different
from sensuousness; the latter is Receptivity, while Kant calls thought
in general Spontaneity—an expression which belongs to the philosophy
of Leibnitz. The understanding is active thought, I myself; it “is the
faculty of thinking the object of sensuous perception.” Yet it has
thoughts merely without real content: “Thoughts without content are
void and empty, sensuous perceptions without Notions are blind.” The
understanding thus obtains from the sensuous its matter, both empirical
and _a priori_, time and space; and it thinks this matter, but its
thoughts are very different from this matter. Or it is a faculty of
a particular kind, and it is only when both occur, when the sensuous
faculty has supplied material and the understanding has united to
this its thoughts, that knowledge results.[336] The thoughts of the
understanding as such are thus limited thoughts, thoughts of the finite
only.

Now logic, as transcendental logic, likewise sets forth the conceptions
which the understanding has _a priori_ in itself and “whereby it thinks
objects completely _a priori_.” Thoughts have a form which signifies
their being the synthetic function which brings the manifold into a
unity. _I_ am this unity, the transcendental apperception, the pure
apperception of self-consciousness. I = I; _I_ must ‘accompany’ all
our conceptions.[337] This is a barbarous exposition of the matter.
As self-consciousness I am the completely void, general I, completely
indeterminate and abstract; apperception is determination generally,
the activity whereby I transplant an empirical content into my simple
consciousness, while perception rather signifies feeling or conceiving.
In order that a content may enter this One, it must be infected by its
simplicity; it is thus that the content first becomes my content. The
comprehending medium is ‘I’; whatever I have to do with must allow
itself to be forced into these forms of unity. This is a great fact, an
important item of knowledge; what thought produces is unity; thus it
produces itself, for it is the One. Yet the fact that I am the one and,
as thinking, the simplifier, is not by Kant satisfactorily set forth. The
unity may likewise be called relation; for in so far as a manifold is
presupposed, and as this on the one side remains a manifold while on the
other side it is set forth as one, so far may it be said to be related.

Now as ‘I’ is the universal transcendental unity of self-consciousness
which binds together the empirical matter of conception generally,
there are various modes in this relationship, and here we
have the transcendental nature of the categories or universal
thought-determinations. But Kant (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, pp. 70,
77) approaches these modes of simplicity by accepting them as they
are classified in ordinary logic. For he says that in common logic
particular kinds of judgment are brought forward; and since judgment is
a special kind of relationship of the manifold, the various functions
of thought which ‘I’ has in it are shown therein. But the following
kinds of judgment have been noticed, viz. Universal, Particular and
Singular; Affirmative, Negative, Infinite; Categorical, Hypothetical,
Disjunctive; Assertoric, Problematic and Apodictic judgments. These
particular modes of relationship now brought forward are the pure forms
of the understanding. There are thus, according to Kant (Kritik der
reinen Vernunft, pp. 75, 76, 78-82), twelve fundamental categories,
which fall into four classes; and it is noteworthy, and deserves to be
recognized, that each species of judgment again constitutes a triad.
(1) The first kind of categories are those of Quantity, viz. Unity,
Plurality and Totality. Plurality is negation of the one, the assertion
of difference; and the third, the bringing of the other two into one,
plurality circumscribed, the indeterminate plurality comprehended as
one, is the Totality. (2) In the second series are the categories of
Quality: Reality, Negation, Limitation. Limitation is as real or positive
as negation. (3) The third series comprises the categories of relation,
of connection; and first of all, indeed, the relation of Substantiality,
Substance and Accident: then the relation of Causality, the relation
of Cause and Effect, and finally Reciprocity. (4) The categories of
Modality, of the relation of the objective to our thought, come fourth,
viz. Possibility, Existence (actuality) and Necessity. Possibility should
come second; in abstract thought, however, the empty conception comes
first. It betrays a great instinct for the Notion when Kant says that the
first category is positive, the second the negative of the first, the
third the synthesis of the two. The triplicity, this ancient form of the
Pythagoreans, Neo-Platonists and of the Christian religion, although it
here reappears as a quite external _schema_ only, conceals within itself
the absolute form, the Notion. But since Kant says that a conception can
determine itself in me as accidental, as cause, effect, unity, plurality,
&c., we thereby have the whole of the metaphysics of the understanding.
Kant does not follow up further the derivation of these categories,
and he finds them imperfect, but he says that the others are derived
from them. Kant thus accepts the categories in an empiric way, without
thinking of developing of necessity these differences from unity. Just
as little did Kant attempt to deduce time and space, for he accepted
them likewise from experience—a quite unphilosophic and unjustifiable
procedure.

Thinking understanding is thus indeed the source of the individual
categories, but because on their own account they are void and empty,
they only have significance through their union with the given, manifold
material of perception, feeling, &c. Such connection of sensuous material
with categories now constitutes the facts of experience, _i.e._ the
matter of sensation after it is brought under the categories; and this
is knowledge generally.[338] The matter of perception which pertains to
the feelings or sensuous perception is not left in the determination of
individuality and immediacy, but I am active in relation to it, inasmuch
as I bring it into connection through the categories and elevate it into
universal species, natural laws, &c. The question of whether a completed
sensuousness or the Notion is the higher may accordingly be easily
decided. For the laws of the heavens are not immediately perceived, but
merely the change in position on the part of the stars. It is only when
this object of immediate perception is laid hold of and brought under
universal thought-determinations that experience arises therefrom, which
has a claim to validity for all time. The category which brings the unity
of thought into the content of feeling is thus the objective element in
experience, which receives thereby universality and necessity, while that
which is perceived is rather the subjective and contingent. Our finding
both these elements in experience demonstrates indeed that a correct
analysis has been made. Kant (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, pp. 119, 120)
however connects with this the statement that experience grasps phenomena
only, and that by means of the knowledge which we obtain through,
experience we do not know things as they are in themselves, but only as
they are in the form of laws of perception and sensuousness. For the
first component part of experience, sensation, is doubtless subjective,
since it is connected with our organs. The matter of perception is only
what it is in my sensation. I know of this sensation only and not of the
thing. But, in the second place, the objective, which ought to constitute
the opposite to this subjective side, is itself subjective likewise: it
does not indeed pertain to my feeling, but it remains shut up in the
region of my self-consciousness; the categories are only determinations
of our thinking understanding. Neither the one nor the other is
consequently anything in itself, nor are both together, knowledge,
anything in itself, for it only knows phenomena—a strange contradiction.

The transition of the category to the empiric is made in the following
way: “Pure conceptions of the understanding are quite of a different
nature from empiric, indeed from any sensuous perceptions;” we have
thus “to show how pure conceptions of the understanding can be applied
to phenomena.” This is dealt with by the transcendental faculty of
judgment. For Kant says that in the mind, in self-consciousness, there
are pure conceptions of the understanding and pure sensuous perceptions;
now it is the schematism of the pure understanding, the transcendental
faculty of the imagination, which determines the pure sensuous perception
in conformity with the category and thus constitutes the transition to
experience.[339] The connection of these two is again one of the most
attractive sides of the Kantian philosophy, whereby pure sensuousness and
pure understanding, which were formerly expressed as absolute opposites,
are now united. There is thus here present a perceptive understanding
or an understanding perception; but Kant does not see this, he does not
bring these thoughts together: he does not grasp the fact that he has
here brought both sides of knowledge into one, and has thereby expressed
their implicitude. Knowledge itself is in fact the unity and truth of
both moments; but with Kant the thinking understanding and sensuousness
are both something particular, and they are only united in an external,
superficial way, just as a piece of wood and a leg might be bound
together by a cord. Thus, for example, the conception of substance in the
_schema_ becomes permanent in time,[340] _i.e._ the pure conception of
the understanding, the pure category, is brought into unity with the form
of pure sensuous perception.

In as far as we have to deal with our own determinations only and as we
do not reach the implicit, the true objective, the Kantian philosophy
called itself Idealism. But in this connection Kant (Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, pp. 200, 201) brings forward a refutation of empirical or
material idealism, thus: “I am conscious of my existence as determined
in time. But all time-determination presupposes something permanent in
perception. This permanence cannot be” a sensuous perception “in me.”
For all the determining grounds of my existence which are met with in
me are conceptions, and as such themselves require a constant element
different from them, and in relation to which the change taking place
in them—consequently “my existence in time,” in which they change, “may
be determined.” Or I am conscious of my existence as of an empirical
consciousness which is only capable of being determined in relation to
something which is outside of me; _i.e._ I am conscious of something
external to me. Conversely it may be said: I am conscious of external
things as determined in time and as changing; these hence presuppose
something constant which is not in them but outside of them. And this is
‘I,’ the transcendental ground of their universality and necessity, of
their implicitude, the unity of self-consciousness. On another occasion
Kant regards it thus (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, p. 101): These moments
confuse themselves, because the constant element is itself a category.
Idealism, when we regard it as signifying that nothing exists outside of
my individual self-consciousness as individual, as also the refutation of
this, the assertion that things exist outside of my self-consciousness
as individual, are the one as bad as the other. The former is the
idealism of Berkeley, in which self-consciousness as individual is alone
in question, or the world of self-consciousness appears as a number of
limited, sensuous, individual conceptions, which are as completely devoid
of truth as though they were called things. The truth or untruth does not
rest in their being things or conceptions, but in their limitation and
contingency, whether as conceptions or things. The refutation of this
idealism is nothing more than calling attention to the fact that this
empirical consciousness does not exist in itself—just as those empiric
things do not exist in themselves. But the knowing subject does not
with Kant really arrive at reason, for it remains still the individual
self-consciousness as such, which is opposed to the universal. As a
matter of fact there is described in what we have seen only the empirical
finite self-consciousness which requires a material from outside, or
which is limited. We do not ask whether these facts of knowledge are
in and for themselves true or untrue; the whole of knowledge remains
within subjectivity, and on the other side there is the thing-in-itself
as an external. This subjectivity is however concrete in itself; even
the determinate categories of the thinking understanding are concrete,
and much more is experience so—the synthesis of the sensation and the
category.[341]

c. The third faculty Kant finds in reason, to which he advances from
the understanding after the same psychological method; that is to say,
he hunts through the soul’s sack to see what faculties are still to be
found there; and thus by merest chance he lights on Reason. It would
make no difference if there had been no Reason there, just as with
physicists it is a matter of perfect indifference whether, for instance,
there is such a thing as magnetism or not. “All our knowledge begins
from the senses, thence proceeds to the understanding, and finishes
up with reason; nothing higher than this is to be found in us, for
it signifies the working up of the material of perception, and the
reducing of it to the highest unity of thought.” Reason is therefore,
according to Kant, the power of obtaining knowledge from principles,
that is, the power of knowing the particular in the universal by means
of Notions; the understanding, on the contrary, reaches its particular
by means of perception. But the categories are themselves particular.
The principle of reason, according to Kant, is really the universal,
inasmuch as it finds the unconditioned involved in the conditioned
knowledge of the understanding. Understanding is hence for him thought
in finite relations; reason, on the contrary, is thought which makes
the unconditioned its object. Since Kant’s time it has become customary
in the language of philosophy to distinguish understanding and reason,
while by earlier philosophers this distinction was not drawn. The product
of reason is, according to Kant, the Idea—a Platonic expression—and he
understands by it the unconditioned, the infinite.[342] It is a great
step forward to say that reason brings forth Ideas; with Kant, however,
the Idea is merely the abstract universal, the indeterminate.

This, the unconditioned, must now be grasped as concrete, and therein
lies the main difficulty. For to know the unconditioned means to
determine it and to deduce its determinations. Much has been written and
said on the subject of knowledge, without a definition of it ever having
been offered. But it is the business of Philosophy to see that what is
taken for granted as known is really known. Now on this point Kant says
that reason has certainly the desire to know the infinite, but has not
the power. And the reason which Kant gives for this (Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, pp. 277, 278), is on the one hand that no psychologically
sensuous intuition or perception corresponds with the infinite, that it
is not given in outward or inward experience; to the Idea “no congruent
or corresponding object can be discovered in the sensuous world.” It
depends, however, on how the world is looked at; but experience and
observation of the world mean nothing else for Kant than a candlestick
standing here, and a snuff-box standing there. It is certainly
correct to say that the infinite is not given in the world of sensuous
perception; and supposing that what we know is experience, a synthesis
of what is thought and what is felt, the infinite can certainly not be
known in the sense that we have a sensuous perception of it. But no one
wishes to demand a sensuous proof in verification of the infinite; spirit
is for spirit alone. The second reason for considering that the infinite
cannot be known, lies in this, that Reason has no part in it except
as supplying the forms of thought which we call categories; and these
doubtless afford what Kant calls objective determinations, but in such
a way that in themselves they are still only subjective. If therefore
for the determination of the infinite we employ these categories which
are applicable only to phenomena, we entangle ourselves in false
arguments (paralogisms) and in contradictions (antinomies); and it is an
important point in the Kantian philosophy that the infinite, so far as
it is defined by means of categories, loses itself in contradictions.
Although reason, says Kant, becomes transcendent by the exhibition of
these contradictions, it still retains its claim to trace perception,
experience, and knowledge pertaining to the understanding, back to the
infinite. This union of the infinite, the unconditioned, with the finite
and conditioned as existing in the knowledge given by the understanding,
or even in perception, would signify that the acme of concreteness had
been reached.

Of this Unconditioned there are several kinds, objects having special
features of their own and proceeding from reason, transcendental Ideas;
they are thus themselves particular in their nature. The manner in which
Kant arrives at these Ideas is again derived from experience, from formal
logic, according to which there are various forms of the syllogism.
Because, says Kant, there are three forms of the syllogism, categorical,
hypothetical, and disjunctive, the Unconditioned is also three-fold in
its nature: “Firstly, an Unconditioned of the categorical synthesis in a
subject.” Synthesis is the concrete; but the expression is ambiguous,
since it indicates an external association of independent elements. “In
the second place, an Unconditioned of the hypothetical synthesis of
the members of a series will have to be looked for; and in the third
place, an Unconditioned of the disjunctive synthesis of the parts in a
system.” We make the first connection, expressed as object of Reason or
transcendental Idea, when we conceive “the thinking subject;” the second
“is the sum total of all phenomena, the world;” and the third is “the
thing which contains the supreme condition of the possibility of all that
can be thought, the Being of all Beings,” _i.e._ God. When brought to an
ultimate point, the question which meets us is whether Reason can bring
these objects to reality, or whether they remain confined to subjective
thought. Now, according to Kant, Reason is not capable of procuring
reality for its Ideas—otherwise it would be transcendent, its limits
would be overstepped; it produces only paralogisms, antinomies, and an
ideal without reality.[343]

α. “A. paralogism is a syllogism false in its form.” Since Reason
credits with reality that mode of the Unconditioned which constitutes
the categorical synthesis in a subject, and therefore the thinking
subject, it is termed substance. Now is the thinking ego a substance,
a soul, a soul-thing? Further questions are whether it is permanent,
immaterial, incorruptible, personal and immortal, and such as to have
a real community with the body. The falsity of the syllogism consists
in this, that the idea of the unity of the transcendental subject
essential to Reason is expressed as a thing; for it is only in this way
that the permanency of the same becomes substance. Otherwise I find
myself permanent in my thought, of course, but only within perceiving
consciousness, not outside of that. The ego is therefore the empty,
transcendental subject of our thoughts, that moreover becomes known only
through its thoughts; but of what it is in itself we cannot gather the
least idea. (A horrible distinction! For thought is nothing more or less
than the “in-itself” or implicit.) We cannot assert of it any present
Being, because thought is an empty form, we have a conception of what
thinking Beings are through no outward experience, but only by means of
self-consciousness,—_i.e._ because we cannot take the “I” in our hands,
nor see it, nor smell it. We therefore know very well that the ego is a
subject, but if we pass beyond self-consciousness, and say that it is
substance, we go farther than we are entitled to do. I cannot therefore
assign any reality to the subject.[344]

We here see Kant fall into contradiction, what with the barbarity of the
conceptions which he refutes, and the barbarity of his own conceptions
which remain behind when the others are refuted. In the first place, he
is perfectly correct when he maintains that the ego is not a soul-thing,
a dead permanency which has a sensuous present existence; indeed, were
it to be an ordinary thing, it would be necessary that it should be
capable of being experienced. But, in the second place, Kant does not
assert the contrary of this, namely that the ego, as this universal or
as self-thinking, has in itself the true reality which he requires as an
objective mode. For he does not get clear of the conception of reality in
which reality consists in the possession of a sensuous present existence;
accordingly, because the ego is given in no outward experience, it is
not real. For self-consciousness, the ego as such, is not, according to
Kant, reality; it is only _our_ thought, or in other words he regards
self-consciousness as being itself simply and entirely sensuous. The form
which Kant accordingly bestows on Being, thing, substance, would seem
to indicate that these categories of the understanding were too high for
the subject, too high to be capable of being predicated of it. But really
such determinations are too poor and too mean, for what possesses life is
not a thing, nor can the soul, the spirit, the ego, be called a thing.
Being is the least or lowest quality that one can assign to spirit, its
abstract, immediate identity with itself; Being thus no doubt pertains
to spirit, but it must be considered as a determination scarcely worth
applying to it.

β. In the second place we have the antinomy, _i.e._ the contradiction in
Reason’s Idea of the Unconditioned, an Idea applied to the world in order
to represent it as a complete summing-up of conditions. That is to say,
in the given phenomena Reason demands the absolute completeness of the
conditions of their possibility, so far as these constitute a series, so
that the unconditioned is contained in the world, _i.e._ the totality
of the series. If now this completeness is expressed as existing, an
antinomy is alone presented, and Reason is presented only as dialectic:
_i.e._ in this object there is on every side a perfect contradiction
found.[345] For phenomena are a finite content, and the world is a
conjunction of the limited; if this content is now thought by Reason, and
therefore subsumed under the unconditioned and the unlimited, we have two
determinations, finite and infinite, which contradict each other. Reason
demands a perfectly complete synthesis, an absolute beginning; but in
phenomena we have, on the contrary, a succession of causes and effects,
which never come to an end. Kant here points out four contradictions
(Kritik der reinen Vernunft, p. 320), which, however, is not enough; for
in each Notion there are antinomies, since it is not simple but concrete,
and therefore contains different determinations, which are direct
opposites.

αα. These antinomies in the first place involve our making the one
determination, limitation, just as valid as non-limitation. “Thesis: The
world has a beginning and an end in time, and it is limited in regard to
space. Antithesis: It has no beginning and no end in time, and also no
limits in space.” The one, says Kant, can be proved just as easily as
the other; and indeed he does prove each indirectly, though his are not
“advocate’s proofs.”[346] The world, as the universe, is the whole; it
is thus a universal idea, and therefore unlimited. The completion of the
synthesis in progression as regards time and space is, however, a first
beginning of time and space. If therefore the categories of limited and
unlimited are applied to the world in order to attain to a knowledge
of it, we fall into contradictions, because the categories are not
applicable to things-in-themselves.

ββ. The second antinomy is that atoms, from which substance is composed,
must necessarily be admitted to exist, therefore simplicity can be
proved; but just as easy is it to prove incompleteness, the endless
process of division. The thesis is accordingly stated thus: “Every
compound substance consists of simple parts,” and the antithesis is as
follows: “There exists nothing simple.”[347] The one is here the limit,
a material self-existence, the point which is likewise the enclosing
surface; the other is divisibility _ad infinitum_.

γγ. The third antinomy is the opposition between freedom and necessity.
The first is the self-determining, the point of view pertaining to
infinity: causality according to the laws of freedom is the only
causality. The other is: Determinism alone is to be found: everything is
determined by means of an external ground or reason.[348]

δδ. The fourth antinomy rests on what follows: On the one hand totality
completes itself in freedom as a first beginning of action, or in
an absolutely necessary Being, as the cause of the world, so that
the process is interrupted: but there is opposed to that freedom the
necessity of a process according to conditions of causes and effects,
and to the necessity of a Being is opposed the consideration that
everything is contingent. The absolute necessity of the conditioned world
is therefore on the one hand maintained thus: “To the world belongs an
absolutely necessary Being.” The opposite to this is, “There exists no
absolutely necessary Being, either as part of the world or outside of the
world.”[349]

One of these opposites is just as necessary as the other, and it
is superfluous to carry this further here. The necessity of these
contradictions is the interesting fact which Kant (Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, p. 324) has brought to consciousness; in ordinary metaphysics,
however, it is imagined that one of these contradictions must hold good,
and the other be disproved. The most important point involved in this
assertion of Kant’s is, however, unintentional on his part. For he indeed
solves these antinomies (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, pp. 385, 386), but
only in the particular sense of transcendental idealism, which does not
doubt or deny the existence of external things (_supra_, p. 442), but
“allows that things are perceived in space and time” (which is the case,
whether it allows it or not): for transcendental idealism, however,
“space and time in themselves are not things at all,” and therefore “do
not exist apart from our mind;” _i.e._ all these determinations of a
beginning in time, and so on, do not really belong to things, to the
implicitude of the phenomenal world, which has independent existence
outside of our subjective thought. If such determinations belonged
to the world, to God, to free agents, there would be an objective
contradiction; but this contradiction is not found as absolute, it
pertains only to us. Or, in other words, this transcendental idealism
lets the contradiction remain, only it is not Being in itself that
is thus contradictory, for the contradiction has its source in our
thought alone. Thus the same antinomy remains in our mind; and as it was
formerly God who had to take upon Himself all contradictions, so now
it is self-consciousness. But the Kantian philosophy does not go on to
grapple with the fact that it is not things that are contradictory, but
self-consciousness itself. Experience teaches that the ego does not melt
away by reason of these contradictions, but continues to exist; we need
not therefore trouble ourselves about its contradictions, for it can
bear them. Nevertheless Kant shows here too much tenderness for things:
it would be a pity, he thinks, if they contradicted themselves. But that
mind, which is far higher, should be a contradiction—that is not a pity
at all. The contradiction is therefore by no means solved by Kant; and
since mind takes it upon itself, and contradiction is self-destructive,
mind is in itself all derangement and disorder. The true solution
would be found in the statement that the categories have no truth in
themselves, and the Unconditioned of Reason just as little, but that it
lies in the unity of both as concrete, and in that alone.

γ. Kant now goes on to the Idea of God; this third idea is the Being of
Beings, which the other ideas presupposed. Kant says (Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, pp. 441-452), that according to the definition of Wolff, God is
the most real of all Beings; the object then comes to be to prove that
God is not only Thought, but that He is, that He has reality, Being.
This Kant calls the Ideal of Reason, to distinguish it from the Idea,
which is only the sum of all possibility. The Ideal is thus the Idea as
existent; just as in art we give the name of ideal to the Idea realized
in a sensuous manner. Here Kant takes into consideration the proof of
the existence of God, as he asks whether reality can be assigned to this
Ideal.

The ontological proof proceeds from the absolute Notion, in order from it
to argue up to Being. With Anselm, Descartes, and Spinoza the transition
to Being is thus made; and all of them assume in so doing the unity
of Being and thought. But Kant says (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, pp.
458-466): To this Ideal of Reason just as little reality can be assigned:
there is no transition from the Notion to Being. “Being is not a real
predicate,” like any other, “a Notion of something which might be added
to the Notion of a thing. A hundred real dollars do not contain in the
very least more than a hundred possible dollars,” they are the same
content, _i.e._ the same Notion; they are also a hundred exactly. The one
is the Notion, or rather the conception, the other is the object; Being
is no new determination of the Notion, otherwise my Notion of a hundred
real dollars would contain something different from a hundred real
dollars. But “the object, as real, is not contained in my Notion alone;
or to my Notion the real hundred dollars are synthetically added.” Being
cannot therefore be derived from the Notion, because it is not contained
therein, but must be added to it. “We must go out of the Notion in order
to arrive at existence. With regard to objects of pure thought, there are
no means of coming to know of their existence, because it had to be known
_a priori_; but our consciousness of all existence belongs entirely to
experience.” That is to say, Kant does not attain to the comprehension of
that very synthesis of Notion and Being, or in other words, he does not
comprehend existence, _i.e._ he does not attain to the establishment of
it as Notion; existence remains for him something absolutely different
from a Notion. The content is no doubt the same for him in what exists
and in the Notion: but since Being is not involved in the Notion, the
attempt to derive the one from the other is unavailing.

Of course the determination of Being is not found as positive and
ready-made in the Notion; the Notion is something different from reality
and objectivity. If we therefore abide by the Notion, we abide by Being
as something different from the Notion, and adhere to the separation of
the two; we then have conception, and not Being at all. That a hundred
possible dollars are something different from a hundred actual ones is
a reflection of a very popular nature, so much so that no proposition
has been so well received as the assertion that no transition can be
made from the Notion to Being; for though I imagine to myself a hundred
dollars, I do not possess them for all that. But in a like popular
fashion it might be said that one must leave off imagining, for that is
mere conception: _i.e._ what is merely imaginary is untrue, the hundred
imaginary dollars are and remain imaginary. Therefore to believe in them
is a proof of an unsound understanding, and is of no manner of use;
and he is a foolish fellow who indulges in such fancies and wishes.
One possesses a hundred dollars, when they are real only; if a man has
therefore so great a desire to possess a hundred dollars, he must put
his hand to work in order to obtain them: _i.e._ he must not come to
a standstill at the imagination of them, but pass out beyond it. This
subjective side is not the ultimate or the absolute; the true is that
which is not merely subjective. If I possess a hundred dollars, I have
them actually, and at the same time I form a conception of them to
myself. But according to Kant’s representation we come to a deadlock
at the difference; dualism is ultimate, and each side has independent
validity as an absolute. Against this false idea of what is to be
absolute and ultimate, the healthy human understanding is directed; every
ordinary consciousness rises above it, every action aims at setting aside
a subjective conception and making it into something objective. There
is no man so foolish as that philosophy; when a man feels hungry, he
does not call up the imagination of food, but sets about satisfying his
hunger. All activity is a conception which does not yet exist, but whose
subjectivity is abrogated. Moreover the imaginary hundred dollars become
real, and the real ones imaginary: this is a frequent experience, this
is their fate; it depends on circumstances entirely outward whether a
hundred dollars become my property or not. Of course the mere conception
is of no good, if I obstinately hold by it: for I can imagine what I
will, but that does not make it exist. The only important point is what I
conceive to myself, and then whether I think or comprehend the subjective
and Being; by means of this each passes into the other. Thought, the
Notion, of necessity implies that the Notion does not remain subjective;
this subjective is on the contrary abrogated and reveals itself as
objective. Now that unity is expressly affirmed by Descartes solely in
reference to the Notion of God, for it is just that which is God; he
speaks of no hundred dollars, as these are not an existence which has
a Notion in itself. That opposition does away with itself absolutely
and entirely, _i.e._ the finite passes away; it holds good only in the
philosophy of finitude. If, therefore, there is not a Notion of existence
formed, we have in it a notionless, sensuous object of perception; and
what is notionless is certainly not a Notion,—therefore sensation,
handling, are not Notions. Such existence has of course no Absolute, no
real essence: or such existence has no truth, it is only a vanishing
moment. This useless thrashing of the empty grainless straw of the common
logic is termed philosophizing: it is like Issachar the strong ass, which
could not be made to move from the spot where it was (Gen. xlix. 14).
People of this kind say: We are good for nothing, and because we are good
for nothing, we are good for nothing, and wish to be good for nothing.
But it is a very false idea of Christian humility and modesty to desire
through one’s abjectness to attain to excellence; this confession of
one’s own nothingness is really inward pride and great self-conceit. But
for the honour of true humility we must not remain in our misery, but
raise ourselves above it by laying hold of the Divine.

The fact to which Kant clings most strongly (Kritik der reinen Vernunft,
p. 467) is this, that Being cannot be extracted from the Notion. The
result of this is the proposition that to have the thought of the
Infinite is certainly Reason; but that from the Idea of Reason is
separated determination in general, and especially the determination
which is known as Being. The Ideas of Reason cannot be proved from
experience, or obtain from it their verification: if they are defined
by means of categories, contradictions arise. If the Idea in general
is to be defined as existent only, it is nothing more or less than the
Notion; and the Being of the existent is still distinguished from it.
This result, however, so highly important with reference to knowledge of
the understanding, Kant does not, with reference to Reason, carry further
than to say that Reason has on its own account nothing but formal unity
for the methodical systematization of the knowledge of the understanding.
Abstract thinking is adhered to; it is said that the understanding
can only bring about order in things; but order is nothing in and for
itself, it is only subjective. There therefore remains nothing for Reason
except the form of its pure identity with itself, and this extends no
further than to the arranging of the manifold laws and relations of the
understanding, the classes, kinds and species which the understanding
discovers.[350] I, as Reason or conception, and the things external to
me, are both absolutely different from one another; and that, according
to Kant, is the ultimate standpoint. The animal does not stop at this
standpoint, but practically brings about unity. This is the critique
of theoretical Reason which Kant gives, and in which he states the _a
priori_ and determinate character of Reason in itself, without bringing
it to the determinateness of individuality.[351]

Mention should still be made of the positive philosophy or metaphysics,
which Kant sets _a priori_ above objective existence, the content of the
object of experience, nature; we have here his natural philosophy, which
is a demonstration of the universal conceptions of Nature. But this is
on the one hand very scanty and restricted in content, containing as
it does sundry general qualities and conceptions of matter and motion,
and with regard to the scientific side or the _a priori_, as Kant calls
it, it is likewise altogether unsatisfactory. For Kant assumes all such
conceptions as that matter has motion and also a power of attraction and
repulsion,[352] instead of demonstrating their necessity. The “Principles
of Natural Philosophy” have nevertheless been of great service, inasmuch
as at the commencement of a philosophy of nature, attention was called
to the fact that physical science employs thought-determinations without
further investigation; and these determinations constitute the real
foundations of its objects. Density, for instance, is looked on by
physical science as a variable quantity, as a mere _quantum_ in space:
instead of this Kant asserted it to be a certain degree of occupation
of space, _i.e._ energy, intensity of action. He demands accordingly
(Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft, pp. 65-68) a
construction of matter from powers and activities, not from atoms; and
Schelling still holds to this without getting further. Kant’s work is an
attempt to think, _i.e._ to demonstrate the determinations of thought,
whose product consists of such conceptions as matter; he has attempted
to determine the fundamental Notions and principles of this science, and
has given the first impulse to a so-called dynamic theory of Nature.

“Religion within pure Reason” is also a demonstration of dogmas as
aspects of Reason, just as in Nature. Thus in the positive dogmas of
religion, which the Aufklärung (the clearing-up)—or the Ausklärung (the
clearing-out)—made short work of, Kant called to remembrance Ideas of
Reason, asking what rational and, first of all, what moral meaning lies
in that which men call dogmas of religion, _e.g._ original sin.[353] He
is much more reasonable than the _Ausklärung_, which thinks it beneath
its dignity to speak of such matters. These are the principal points in
respect to the theoretical part of Kant’s philosophy.

2. The second subject of review in Kant’s philosophy is the practical
sphere, the nature and principle of the will; this subject is dealt with
in the Critique of Practical Reason, in which Kant accepted Rousseau’s
conclusion that the will is absolutely free. Kant’s idea of theoretic
Reason is that when Reason relates itself to an object, this object must
be given to it; but when the object is given by Reason to itself, it
has no truth; and Reason in knowledge of this kind does not arrive at
independence. As practical, on the contrary, Reason is independent in
itself; as a moral Being man is free, raised above all natural law and
above all phenomena. As the theoretic Reason had in itself categories,
_a priori_ distinctions, so practical Reason has in turn the moral law
in general, the further determinations of which are constituted by the
notions of duty and right, lawful and unlawful; and here Reason disdains
all the given material which was necessary to it on the theoretic side.
The will determines itself within itself; all that is right and moral
rests on freedom; in this man has his absolute self-consciousness.[354]
On this side self-consciousness finds essential reality in itself, as
theoretical Reason found it in an “other”; and in the first place,
indeed, the ego in its individuality is immediate reality, universality,
objectivity; in the second place subjectivity strives after reality, but
not after sensuous reality such as we had before, for here Reason holds
itself to be the real. Here we have the Notion which is sensible of its
own deficiency; this theoretic Reason could not be, as in it the Notion
had to remain the Notion. Thus we have the standpoint of absoluteness
revealed, since there is an infinite disclosed within the human breast.
The satisfying part in Kant’s philosophy is that the truth is at least
set within the heart; and hence I acknowledge that, and that alone, which
is in conformity with my determined nature.

a. Kant divides will into lower and higher faculties of desire; this
expression is not inapt. The lower faculties of desire are impulses,
inclinations, etc.; the higher faculty is the will as such, which has
not external, individual aims, but universal. To the question what the
principle of will that should determine man in his actions is, all
sorts of answers have been given; for instance, self-love, benevolence,
happiness, etc. Such material principles of action, Kant now says, are
all reducible to impulses, to happiness; but the rational in itself
is purely formal, and consists in the maxim that what is to hold good
as law, must be capable of being thought of as a law of universal
application, without destroying itself. All morality of action now rests
upon the conviction that the act is done with consciousness of the law,
for the sake of the law and out of respect for the law and for itself,
without any regard to what makes for happiness. As a moral Being man has
the moral law in himself, the principle of which is freedom and autonomy
of the will; for the will is absolute spontaneity. Determinations which
are taken from the inclinations are heterogeneous principles as regards
the will; or the will is heteronomy if it takes such determinations
as its end and aim; for in that case it takes its determinations from
something else than itself. But the essence of the will is to determine
itself from itself; for practical Reason gives itself laws. But the
empirical will is heteronomous, for it is determined by desires; and they
belong to our nature, not to the realm of freedom.[355]

It is a highly important point in the Kantian philosophy that what
self-consciousness esteems reality, law, and implicit Being, is brought
back within itself. While a man is striving after this aim and that,
according as he judges the world or history in one way or the other,
what is he to take as his ultimate aim? For the will, however, there is
no other aim than that derived from itself, the aim of its freedom. It
is a great advance when the principle is established that freedom is the
last hinge on which man turns, a highest possible pinnacle, which allows
nothing further to be imposed upon it; thus man bows to no authority, and
acknowledges no obligations, where his freedom is not respected. Great
popularity has from one point of view been won for Kantian philosophy by
the teaching that man finds in himself an absolutely firm, unwavering
centre-point; but with this last principle it has come to a standstill.
While the highest pinnacle of the theoretic Reason is abstract
identity, because it can furnish only a canon, a rule for abstract
classifications,[356] practical Reason, as law-giving, is immediately
regarded as concrete; the law which it gives to itself is the moral law.
But even if it is stated that it is concrete in itself, there is the
further consideration that this freedom is at first only the negative of
everything else; no bond, nothing external, lays me under an obligation.
It is to this extent indeterminate; it is the identity of the will with
itself, its at-homeness with itself. But what is the content of this
law? Here we at once come back to the lack of content. For the sole form
of this principle is nothing more or less than agreement with itself,
universality; the formal principle of legislation in this internal
solitude comes to no determination, or this is abstraction only. The
universal, the non-contradiction of self, is without content, something
which comes to be reality in the practical sphere just as little as in
the theoretical. The universal moral law Kant therefore expresses thus
(and the setting up of such a universal form was at all times the demand
of the abstract understanding): “Act from maxims” (the law is also to be
my particular law), “which are capable of becoming universal laws.”[357]

Thus for the determination of duty (for the question which meets us is,
what is duty for the free will) Kant has contributed nothing but the
form of identity, which is the law of abstract Understanding. To defend
one’s fatherland, to promote the happiness of another, is a duty, not
because of the content, but because it is duty; as with the Stoics, what
was thought was true for the very reason that, and in so far as it was
thought (Vol. II., pp. 254, 260, 263). The content as such is indeed not
what holds good universally in the moral law, because it contradicts
itself. For benevolence, for instance, enjoins: “Give your possessions to
the poor,” but if all give away what they have, beneficence is done away
with (Vol. I., pp. 417, 418). Even with abstract identity, however, we do
not get a step further, for every content which is put into this form is
by being so put freed from self-contradiction. But nothing would be lost
if it were not put into this form at all. With regard to property, for
instance, the law of my actions is this: Property ought to be respected,
for the opposite of this cannot be universal law. That is correct, but
it is quite a formal determination: If property is, then it is. Property
is here presupposed, but this determination may also in the same way be
omitted, and then there is no contradiction involved in theft: If there
is no such thing as property, then it is not respected. This is the
defect in the principle of Kant and Fichte, that it is really formal;
chill duty is the final undigested lump left within the stomach, the
revelation given to Reason.

The first postulate in practical Reason is thus free, independent will
which determines itself, but this concrete is still abstract. The second
and third are forms which remind us that the will is concrete in a higher
sense.

b. The second point is the connection of the Notion of the will with the
particular will of the individual; the concrete is here the fact that
my particular will and the universal will are identical, or that I am a
moral human being. The unity, that man should be moral, is postulated;
but beyond the “should” and this talk of morality, no advance is made.
It is not said what is moral; and no thought is given to a system of the
self-realizing spirit. For really, as theoretic Reason stands opposed to
the objective of the senses, so practical Reason stands opposed to the
practical sensuousness, to impulses and inclinations. Perfected morality
must remain a Beyond; for morality presupposes the difference of the
particular and universal will. It is a struggle, the determination of
the sensuous by the universal; the struggle can only take place when
the sensuous will is not yet in conformity with the universal. The
result is, therefore, that the aim of the moral will is to be attained
in infinite progress only; on this Kant founds (Kritik der prakt.
Vernunft, pp. 219-223) the postulate of the immortality of the soul, as
the endless progress of the subject in his morality, because morality
itself is incomplete, and must advance into infinitude. The particular
will is certainly something other than the universal will; but it is not
ultimate or really permanent.

c. The third point is the highest concrete, the Notion of the freedom
of all men, or the natural world has to be in harmony with the Notion
of freedom. That is the postulate of the existence of God, whom Reason,
however, does not recognize. Will has the whole world, the whole of the
sensuous, in opposition to it, and yet Reason insists on the unity of
Nature or the moral law, as the Idea of the Good, which is the ultimate
end of the world. Since, however, it is formal, and therefore has no
content on its own account, it stands opposed to the impulses and
inclinations of a subjective and an external independent Nature. Kant
reconciles the contradiction of the two (Kritik der prakt. Vernunft,
pp. 198-200) in the thought of the highest Good, in which Nature is
conformed to rational will, and happiness to virtue;—a harmony which does
not enter into the question at all, although practical reality consists
therein. For happiness is only one’s own sensuous consciousness, or the
actuality of a particular individual, not universal reality in itself.
The unification spoken of itself therefore remains only a Beyond, a
thought, which is not actually in existence, but only ought to be. Kant
(Kritik der prakt. Vernunft, pp. 205-209) thus agrees entirely with
the talk which alleges that in this world it often fares ill with the
good, and well with the wicked, and so on; and he postulates further the
existence of God as the Being, the causality, through whom this harmony
comes to pass, on behalf both of the sanctity of the moral law, and of
the rational end to be attained in Nature, but only in infinite progress;
which postulate, like that of the immortality of the soul, allows the
contradiction to remain as it is all the time, and expresses only in
the abstract that the reconciliation ought to come about. The postulate
itself is always there, because the Good is a Beyond with respect to
Nature; the law of necessity and the law of liberty are different from
one another, and placed in this dualism. Nature would remain Nature no
longer, if it were to become conformed to the Notion of the Good; and
thus there remains an utter opposition between the two sides, because
they cannot unite. It is likewise necessary to establish the unity of
the two; but this is never actual, for their separation is exactly what
is presupposed. Kant employs popular language thus: evil ought to be
overcome, but yet must not have been overcome. God is to him, therefore,
only a faith, an opinion, which is only subjectively, and not absolutely
true.[358] This result is also of a very popular character.

These postulates express nothing but the synthesis, devoid of thought, of
the different moments which contradict each other on every hand; they are
therefore a “nest”[359] of contradictions. For instance, the immortality
of the soul is postulated on account of imperfect morality, _i.e._
because it is infected with sensuousness. But the sensuous is implied in
moral self-consciousness; the end, perfection, is what really destroys
morality as such. Similarly the other aim, the harmony of the sensuous
and the rational, to an equal extent abrogates morality; for that
consists in this very opposition of Reason to the sensuous. The actuality
of the God who produces harmony is of such a character that it does not
enter into consciousness at all; it is accepted by consciousness for the
sake of harmony, just as children make some kind of scarecrow, and then
agree with each other to pretend to be afraid of it. The ground on which
God is accepted—that by the conception of a holy law-giver the moral
law may acquire additional reverence—contradicts the fact that morality
really consists in reverence for the law simply for its own sake.[360]
In Practical Reason self-consciousness esteems itself to be implicit
Being, as contrasted with theoretic Reason, which assigns implicitude to
objective existence, but the one, we see, attains just as little as the
other to unity and actuality in itself. It is hard for man to believe
that Reason actually exists: but there is nothing real except Reason; it
is the absolute power. The vanity of man aspires to have an ideal before
him, in order to be able to find fault with everything alike. We possess
all wisdom, it is within us, but is not forthcoming. That is the ultimate
standpoint; it is a high standpoint, no doubt, but in it the truth is
never reached. The absolute Good remains “what ought to be,” or without
objectivity; and there it has to remain.

3. There is still left for us to consider the third side in Kant’s
philosophy, the Critique of the Faculty of Judgment, in which the demand
for the concrete comes in, the demand that the Idea of unity spoken of
before should be established not as a Beyond, but as present; and this
side is of special importance. Kant says that the understanding no doubt
regulates in the theoretic sphere and produces categories; but these
remain mere general determinations, beyond which lies the particular
(the other element which belongs to every item of knowledge). The two
are distinguished from one another for the understanding; for its
distinctions remain in universality. In the practical sphere Reason is
certainly the implicit, but its free independence, its law-giving freedom
in higher form, is opposed to Nature in its freedom or to Nature’s own
laws. “In the theoretic sphere Reason can draw conclusions from given
laws through syllogisms, only by means of the understanding, and these
conclusions never get beyond Nature; it is only in the practical sphere
that Reason itself gives laws. Understanding and” (practical) “Reason
have two different regulative systems on one and the same ground of
experience, without the one being detrimental to the other. For if the
Notion of Nature has but little influence on the giving of laws by the
Notion of Freedom, just as little does the latter interfere with the
legislation of Nature. The possibility of the existence side by side
of the two regulative systems and of the powers belonging to them was
proved in the Critique of pure Reason.” (!?) “Now if a unity is not
constituted by these two different spheres, which certainly do not put
a limit on each other in their regulative action, but do so incessantly
in their operations in the sensuous world” (_i.e._ where they encounter
each other), “the reason is this, that the Notion of Nature represents
its objects in perception, not as things in themselves, but as mere
phenomena, while the Notion of Freedom, on the other hand, represents
in its object a thing in itself, no doubt, but not in perception.
Consequently neither of them can attain to a theoretic knowledge of its
object (and even of the thinking subject) as a thing-in-itself, which
last would be the supersensuous, an unlimited and inaccessible realm
for our whole faculty of knowledge. Now truly there is fixed a gulf
over which the eye cannot reach, between the realm of the Notion of
Nature, as the sensuous, and the realm of the Notion of Freedom, as the
supersensuous, so that it is not possible to pass from the one to the
other, since it is just as if there were two different worlds, the first
of which could have no influence on the second. Nevertheless the latter
is conceived as having an influence on the former, or, in other words,
freedom is conceived as having for its mission the realization in the
sensuous world of the end indicated by the laws of freedom. Consequently
Nature must be so conceived that, while in form it realizes its own laws,
there may yet be a possibility of ends being realized in it according
to the laws of freedom. Therefore there must surely be some ground for
the unity of the supersensuous which lies at the foundation of Nature
with that which the Notion of Freedom practically contains, the Notion
of which ground of unity, although it attains neither theoretically nor
practically to a knowledge of the same, and consequently has no peculiar
province, yet makes possible the transition from the mode of thought in
accordance with the principles of the one, to the mode of thought in
accordance with the principles of the other. Between Understanding and
Reason there now comes the Faculty of Judgment, as between the powers
of knowledge and desire there come pleasure and its opposite; in this
faculty must therefore lie the transition from the province of the
Notions of Nature to the province of the Notion of Freedom.”[361]

Adaptation to ends has its place here, _i.e._ a particular reality, which
is determined only through the universal, the end. The understanding
is the ground of this unity of the manifold; the sensuous is therefore
here determined by means of the supersensuous. This idea of a universal
which implicitly contains the particular is according to Kant the
precise object of the faculty of judgment, which he divides as
follows:—“If the universal (the rule, principle, law) is given, the
faculty of judgment which subsumes the particular under that universal,
is determinative,”—the immediate faculty of judgment. But here there
is also a particular which is not determined by species. “If, however,
only the particular is given, for which the faculty of judgment has to
find the universal, it is reflective.” The reflective judgment has as
its principle the unity of particularity and the abstract universal of
the understanding, the idea of a legal necessity which is at the same
time free, or of a freedom which is directly one with its content.
“This principle can be no other but the fact that since universal laws
of Nature have their foundation in our understanding, which prescribes
them to nature, although only according to their general conception,
the particular, empirical laws, in so far as they are undetermined by
universal laws, must be viewed as containing that unity which they
would contain if they had been given by some intelligence—other, it may
be, than our own—with express reference to our cognitive faculties, in
order to render possible a system of experience according to particular
natural laws. It is not as if such an intelligence must be assumed (for
it is only the reflective faculty of judgment to which this idea serves
as principle): this faculty gives a law only to itself, not to Nature
in addition. Now the conception of an object (if it at the same time
contains the ground of the reality of this object), the end, and the
harmony of a thing with that quality of things which is only possible
in conformity with ends, are termed the adaptation to purpose of the
form; therefore the principle of the faculty of judgment in respect to
the form of the things of Nature under empirical laws in general is the
adaptability to purpose of Nature in its multiplicity. That is to say,
Nature is represented by this Notion as if an intelligence contained the
ground of the unity in multiplicity of Nature’s empirical laws.”[362]

Aristotle already regarded Nature as in itself showing this adaptation
to end, and as having in itself νοῦς, intelligence, the Universal, so
that in undivided unity one element is moment of another (_v._ Vol.
II. pp. 156-162). Purpose is the Notion, and immanent; not external
form and abstraction as distinguished from a fundamental material,
but penetrating, so that all that is particular is determined by this
universal itself. According to Kant this is Understanding: no doubt the
laws of the Understanding, which it implicitly has in knowledge, leave
the objective still undetermined, but because this manifold itself
must have a connection in itself, which is yet contingent for human
intelligence, “the faculty of judgment must assume as a principle for
its own use that what is contingent for us contains a unity, which
for us indeed is not knowable, but yet thinkable, in the connection
of the manifold with an implicitly possible experience.”[363] This
principle hereby at once falls back again into the subjectivity of a
thought, and is only a maxim of our reflection, by which nothing is to
be expressed regarding the objective nature of the object,[364] because
Being-in-itself is once for all fixed outside of self-consciousness, and
the Understanding is conceived only in the form of the self-conscious,
not in its becoming another.

Now this principle of the reflective faculty of judgment is in itself a
two-fold adaptation to end, the formal and the material; the faculty of
judgment is thus either æsthetic or teleological: of these the former has
to do with subjective, the latter with objective, logical adaptation to
end. There are thus two objects of the faculty of judgment—the beautiful
in works of art and the natural products of organic life—which make known
to us the unity of the Notion of Nature and the Notion of Freedom.[365]
The consideration of these works involves the fact, that we see a unity
of the Understanding and the particular. But as this consideration is
only a subjective manner of representing such products, and does not
contain the truth of the same, such things are regarded only according to
this unity, and they are not in themselves of this nature; what they are
in themselves lies beyond.

a. The Beautiful of the æsthetic faculty of judgment consists in the
following: “Pleasure and displeasure are something subjective, which
can in no way become a part of knowledge. The object has adaptation
to end only to the extent that its conception is directly bound up
with the feeling of pleasure; and this is an æsthetic conception.
The taking up of forms into the imaginative faculty can never occur
without the reflecting faculty of judgment at least comparing them,
even unintentionally, by means of its power of relating perceptions
to Notions.” Now if in this comparison the imaginative faculty (as
a faculty of perceptions _a priori_?) “is, by means of a conception
given”—something beautiful,—“unintentionally placed in agreement with
the Understanding, as the faculty of Notions, and thereby a feeling of
pleasure is awakened, the object must then be looked on as in conformity
with end for the reflecting faculty of judgment. Such a judgment
regarding the adaptability to end of the object, a judgment which is
grounded on no previous Notion of the object, and furnishes no Notion
of it, is an æsthetic judgment. An object whose form (not the material
of its conception as sensation) is judged to be a cause of the pleasure
which springs from the conception of such an object, is beautiful,”—the
first reasonable thing said about beauty. The sensuous is one moment
of the Beautiful, but it must also express the spiritual, a Notion.
“The Beautiful is what is conceived without” subjective “interest,” but
similarly also “without Notions” (_i.e._ determinations of reflection,
laws) “as object of a universal pleasure. It is related to no
inclination, therefore the subject feels itself quite free therein. It is
not beautiful _for me_. The end is the object of a Notion, so far as the
latter is looked on as the cause of the former” (the object); “and the
causality of a Notion in respect to its object is adaptation to end.” To
the ideal belongs “the Idea of reason, which makes the aims of humanity,
as far as they cannot be sensuously conceived, the principle of judgment
of a form through which these aims reveal themselves as their effect in
the phenomenon. The ideal we may expect to find revealed only in human
form.”

The sublime is the effort to give sensuous expression to an Idea in
which the inconceivability of the Idea, and the impossibility of finding
an adequate expression of it by means of the sensuous, are clearly
evidenced.[366] Here in the æsthetic faculty of judgment we see the
immediate unity of the universal and the particular; for the Beautiful
is this very unity, without Notion and immediate. Because Kant, however,
places it in the subject, it is limited, and as æsthetic it also ranks
lower, inasmuch as it is not the unity as Notion.

b. The other manner of bringing harmony to pass is the teleological
way of regarding Nature, which is found in the objective and material
adaptation to end. Here the immediate unity of the Notion and reality is
looked upon as objective in the organic products of Nature—this being
the purpose of Nature, containing in its universality the particular,
in its particularity the species. But such a mode of consideration
must be practised not externally, but in conformity with internal
teleology. In external adaptation to end one thing has its end in
another: “Snow protects the sown crops in cold lands from frost, and
facilitates the intercourse of men by permitting of sleighing.”[367]
Internal adaptation to end signifies, on the contrary, that a thing is
in itself end and means, its end is not therefore beyond itself. In the
contemplation of the living creature we do not remain at the point of
having something sensuous before us, which according to the categories of
the Understanding is only brought into relation to something other than
itself; for we regard it as cause of itself, as producing itself. This
is the self-preservation of the living creature; as an individual it is
no doubt perishable, but in living it produces itself, although for that
purpose certain conditions are requisite. The end or purpose of Nature
is therefore to be sought for in matter, to the extent that matter is an
inwardly organized product of nature, “in which all is end, and all in
turn is means;”[368] because all the members of the organism are at the
same time means and end, it is an end in itself. That is the Aristotelian
Notion—the infinite that returns into itself, the Idea.

Kant at this point calls to mind the following: “We should find no
difference between natural mechanism and the technique of Nature, _i.e._
the connection of ends in the same, were our Understanding not of such
a kind that it must pass from the universal to the particular, and the
faculty of judgment can therefore pronounce no determining sentences,
without having a universal law under which it may subsume the particular.
Now the particular as such contains a contingent element in regard to the
universal, but nevertheless Reason also demands unity in the connection
of particular laws of Nature, and consequently a regulative character,
which character when found in the contingent is termed adaptation to end:
and the derivation of particular laws from universal is, in regard to the
element of contingency which those particular laws contain, _a priori_
impossible through the determination of the Notion of the object; the
Notion of the adaptation to end of Nature in its products becomes thus
a Notion necessary for the human faculty of judgment, but not affecting
the determination of the objects themselves, and therefore a subjective
principle.”[369] An organic Being is therefore, according to Kant (Kritik
der Urtheilskraft, p. 354) one in which natural mechanism and end are
identical. We regard it as if there dwelt in the sensuous a Notion
which brings the particular into conformity with itself. In the organic
products of Nature we perceive this immediate unity of the Notion and
reality; for in a living creature there is perceived in one unity the
soul, or the universal, and existence or particularity, which is not the
case with inorganic Nature. Thus there enters into the Kantian philosophy
the conception of the concrete, as that the universal Notion determines
the particular. But Kant took these Ideas again in a subjective sense
only, as guiding thoughts for the faculty of judgment, by which no
Being-in-itself can be expressed; and thus, although he expresses the
unity of the Notion and reality, he yet lays fresh emphasis on the side
of the Notion. He will not therefore throw off his limitations in the
moment in which he assumes them as limitations. This is the perpetual
contradiction in Kant’s philosophy: Kant exhibited the extremes of
opposition in their one-sidedness, and expressed also the reconciliation
of the contradiction; Reason postulates unity, and this we have also in
the faculty of judgment. Kant, however, says (Kritik der Urtheilskraft,
pp. 355-363): This is only a mode of our reflecting faculty of judgment,
life itself is not so; we are merely accustomed so to regard it. In art
it is thus certainly the sensuous mode which gives us the conception of
the Idea; reality and ideality are here directly in one. But at this
point also Kant says that we must remain at what is one-sided, at the
very moment when he is passing out beyond it. The wealth of thought
therefore still unfolds itself with Kant in subjective form alone; all
fulness, all content, concentrates in conceiving, thinking, postulating.
The objective, according to Kant, is only what is in itself; and we know
not what Things-in-themselves are. But Being-in-itself is only the _caput
mortuum_, the dead abstraction of the “other,” the empty, undetermined
Beyond.

The reason why that true Idea should not be the truth is therefore that
the empty abstractions of an understanding which keeps itself in the
abstract universal, and of a sensuous material of individuality standing
in opposition to the same, are presupposed as the truth. Kant no doubt
expressly advances to the conception of an intuitive or perceiving
understanding, which, while it gives universal laws, at the same time
determines the particular; and the determination thus given is deep; it
is the true concrete, reality determined by the indwelling Notion, or,
as Spinoza says, the adequate Idea. For “to knowledge there also belongs
intuitive perception, and the possession of a perfect spontaneity of
intuition would be a faculty of knowledge” specifically “distinct from
the sensuous, and quite independent thereof, and therefore it would be
understanding in the most universal sense. Consequently it is possible
to think of an intuitive understanding which does not pass from the
universal to the particular, and thus proceed through conceptions to the
individual—an understanding in which we do not meet with the contingency
of the harmony of Nature in her products, according to particular
laws, with the understanding, a contingency which makes it so hard for
our understanding to bring” together “into the unity of knowledge the
manifold of Nature.” But that this “_intellectus archetypus_” is the
true Idea of the understanding, is a thought which does not strike Kant.
Strange to say, he certainly has this idea of the intuitive; and he does
not know why it should have no truth—except because our understanding is
otherwise constituted, namely such “that it proceeds from the analytic
universal to the particular.”[370] But absolute Reason and Understanding
in itself, as we have already seen (pp. 432, 461), are, in Kant’s
view, of such a nature that they have no reality in themselves: the
Understanding requires material to work upon, theoretic Reason spins
cobwebs of the brain, practical Reason has to allow its reality to come
to an end with its postulates. In spite of their directly and definitely
expressed non-absoluteness, they are yet looked on as true knowledge; and
intuitive Understanding, which holds Notion and sensuous perception in
one unity, is looked on as a mere thought which we make for ourselves.

c. The highest form in which the conception of the concrete comes
into Kant’s philosophy is this, that the end is grasped in its entire
universality; and thus it is the Good. This Good is an Idea; it is my
thought; but there exists the absolute demand that it should be realized
also in the world, that the necessity of Nature should correspond with
the laws of freedom, not as the necessity of an external Nature, but
through what is right and moral in human life, through life in the
State,—or in other words that the world in general should be good. This
identity of the Good and reality is the demand of practical Reason; but
subjective Reason cannot realize this. In every good action a man no
doubt accomplishes something good, but this is only limited; universal
Good, as the final object of the world, can be attained to only through
a third. And this power over the world, which has as its final object
the Good in the world, is God.[371] Thus the Critique of the Faculty
of Judgment also ends with the postulate of God. Now, although the
particular laws of Nature, as independent individual relations, have no
relation to the Good, Reason consists in having and desiring unity as the
essential or substantial in itself. The opposition of these two, the Good
and the world, is contrary to that identity; Reason must therefore demand
that this contradiction should be abrogated, that there should be a power
which is good on its own account, and is a Power over Nature. This is the
position which God assumes in Kant’s philosophy: no proof is possible,
he says, of God’s existence, but the demand is there. The deficiency
here is the impossibility of proving God’s existence, and it consists in
this, that if we admit Kant’s dualism, it cannot be shown how the Good
as abstract Idea in itself is the abrogating of its Idea as abstract; and
how the world in itself is the abrogating of itself in its externality,
and in its diversity from the Good—this being done in order that both may
reveal themselves to be their truth, which in respect to them appears
as the Third, but is at the same time determined as the First. Thus,
therefore, according to Kant (Kritik der Urtheilskraft, pp. 460, 461),
God can only be believed in. We associate the faith of Jacobi with this;
for in this point Kant agrees with Jacobi.[372]

If now, in accordance with this standpoint of Kant and Jacobi, God is
believed in, and we admit this standpoint for an instant, there is
certainly a return to the Absolute. But the question remains: What is
God? To define Him as supersensuous is not much, nor is it more to say
He is universal, abstract, absolute. What then is His determination?
Were we here, however, to pass over to determinations of the Absolute,
the evil result would follow, as far as this standpoint is concerned,
that we should pass over to knowledge; for this signifies knowledge of
an object which is in itself concrete, _i.e._ determined. But here the
furthest point reached is the general statement that God exists with the
determination of being infinite, universal, indeterminate. God cannot be
known in this way; for in order to be known He must as concrete possess
at least two determinations. In this way mediation would be established,
for a knowledge of the concrete is at once a mediate knowledge. But
this standpoint lacks mediation, and thus remains at the immediate.
Paul, in speaking to the Athenians, appeals to the altar which they had
dedicated to the Unknown God, and declares to them what God is; but the
standpoint indicated here takes us back to the Unknown God. All the life
of Nature, as of Spirit, is mediation in itself; and to this mediation
the philosophy of Schelling now passed on.

If we sum up the Kantian philosophy, we find on all hands the Idea of
Thought, which is in itself the absolute Notion, and has in itself
difference, reality. In the theoretic and practical Reason it has only
abstract difference, but in the Faculty of Judgment, as the unity of
the two, Kant goes so far as to establish the difference as actual,
establishing not only particularity, but also individuality. But, to
be sure, this Philistine conception proceeds from our human faculty of
knowledge, which is valid for him in its empirical form, notwithstanding
his statement that it does not know the truth, and his further
description of the true idea of the same as being merely a thought which
we possess. Therefore actuality counts as something sensuous, empirical,
for the comprehension of which Kant takes the categories of the
Understanding, giving them the same validity as they have in every-day
life. This is a complete philosophy of the Understanding, which renounces
Reason: the reason why it became so popular was the negative one, that
men were once for all free from the old metaphysic. According to Kant
something sensuous is produced, having thought-determinations, which,
however, is not the thing, for if a man, for instance, feels something
hard, Kant says: “I feel hardness, but I do not feel Something.”
Kant’s philosophy thus ends with a dualism, with the relation which is
a plainly essential “ought,” with the unreconciled contradiction. It
is otherwise with Jacobi’s faith; he finds the conception of God as
immediate existence, and all mediation is untrue for him. With Kant,
therefore, the result is: “We know only phenomena;” with Jacobi, on the
other hand, it is: “We know only the finite and conditioned.” Over these
two results there has been unmingled joy among men, because the sloth of
Reason (Heaven be praised!) considered itself liberated from every call
to reflect, and now, being saved the trouble of penetrating to its own
inward meaning and exploring the depths of Nature and Spirit, it could
very well leave itself alone. The further result attending this is the
autocracy of the subjective Reason, which, seeing that it is abstract and
without knowledge, has only subjective certainty and not objective truth.
The second cause of rejoicing was the concession to freedom of a perfect
right, which I can neither understand nor justify, and need not do so; my
subjective liberty of conviction and certainty holds good all round. The
third cause of joy was added by Jacobi, who said that it amounted even to
a crime to seek to know the truth, because the infinite was thereby only
rendered finite. Truth is in a bad way, when all metaphysic is done away
with, and the only philosophy acknowledged is not a philosophy at all!

But besides the general idea of synthetic judgments _a priori_, a
universal which has difference in itself, Kant’s instinct carried this
out in accordance with the scheme of triplicity, unspiritual though
that was, in the whole system into which for him the entire universe
was divided. This he not only practised in the three critiques, but he
also followed it out in most of the sub-divisions under the categories,
the ideas of Reason, &c. Kant has therefore set forth as a universal
scheme the rhythm of knowledge, of scientific movement; and has
exhibited on all sides thesis, antithesis and synthesis, modes of the
mind by means of which it is mind, as thus consciously distinguishing
itself. The first is existence, but in the form of Other-Being for
consciousness; for what is only existence is object. The second is
Being-for-self, genuine actuality; here the reverse relation enters in,
for self-consciousness, as the negative of Being-in-itself, is itself
reality. The third is the unity of the two; the absolute, self-conscious
actuality is the sum of true actuality, into which are re-absorbed both
the objective and the independently existent subjective. Kant has
thus made an historical statement of the moments of the whole, and has
correctly determined and distinguished them: it is a good introduction
to Philosophy. The defect of Kant’s philosophy consists in the falling
asunder of the moments of the absolute form; or, regarded from the
other side, our understanding, our knowledge, forms an antithesis to
Being-in-itself: there is lacking the negative, the abrogation of the
“ought,” which is not laid hold of. But thought and thinking had become
once for all an absolute requisite that could no longer be set aside.
It was consequently in the first place demanded by consistency that
particular thoughts should appear as if produced of necessity from
the original unity of the ego, and in that way justified. But, in the
second place, thought had spread itself over the world, had attached
itself to everything, investigated everything, introduced its forms
into everything, and systematized everything, so that on every hand
thought-determinations had to be followed, instead of any mere feeling
or routine or practical common-sense, or what is evidenced in the
extraordinary lack of understanding on the part of so-called practical
men. And therefore in theology, in governments and their legislation,
in the object aimed at by the state, in trades and in mechanics, it
is said that men ought to act according to universal determinations,
_i.e._ rationally: and men even talk of a rational brewery, a rational
brick-kiln, etc. This is the requisite of concrete thought; while in the
Kantian result, which is that of phenomenon, an empty thought was alone
present. It is verily also the essence of revealed religion to know what
God is. There was, therefore, to be found a yearning desire for content,
for truth, since man could not possibly return to the condition of a
brute, nor yet sink to the form of sensation, so that this yearning
was for him the only thing that held good with regard to the higher
life. The first requirement—consistency—Fichte sought to satisfy; the
other—content—Schelling strove to fulfil.


C. FICHTE.

Fichte created a great sensation in his time; his philosophy is the
Kantian philosophy in its completion, and, as we must specially notice,
it is set forth in a more logical way. He does not pass beyond the
fundamentals of Kant’s philosophy, and at first regarded his own
philosophy as no more than a systematic working out of the other.[373]
In addition to these systems of philosophies, and that of Schelling,
there are none. Any that pretend to be such merely pick out something
from these, and over this they fight and wrangle among themselves. _Ils
se sont battus les flancs, pour être de grands hommes._ For in those
times there were in Germany many systems of philosophy, such as those of
Reinhold, Krug, Bouterweck, Fries, Schulze, &c.; but in them there is
only an extremely limited point of view, combined with boastfulness—a
strange medley of stray thoughts and conceptions or facts which I find
within me. But their thoughts are all derived from Fichte, Kant, or
Schelling—that is in so far as there are thoughts there present at all.
Or else some slight modification is added, and this for the most part
merely consists in making the great principles barren, what points in
them were living are destroyed, or else subordinate forms are changed,
whereby another principle is said to be set forth, though when we
look closer we find that these principles are but the principles of
one of those philosophies that have gone before. This may serve as a
justification for my not speaking further of all these philosophies;
any exposition of them would be no more than a demonstration that
everything in them is taken from Kant, Fichte, or Schelling, and that the
modification in form is only the semblance of a change, while really it
indicates a deterioration in the principles of those philosophies.

Johann Gottlieb Fichte was born on the 19th of May, 1762, at Rammenau,
near Bischoffswerda, in Upper Lusatia. He studied at Jena, and for some
time was a private tutor in Switzerland. He wrote a treatise on Religion,
termed a “Critique of all Revelation,” where the Kantian phraseology is
employed throughout—so much so that it was thought to be the work of
Kant. After this he was in 1793 summoned to Jena by Goethe as Professor
of Philosophy, which appointment he, however, resigned in the year 1799,
on account of an unpleasantness which had arisen through his essay “On
the ground of our Belief in a Divine Government of the World.” For Fichte
published a journal in Jena, and a paper in it which was by someone else
was regarded as atheistical. Fichte might have kept silence, but he
published the above-mentioned essay as an introduction to the article.
The authorities wished an investigation to be made into the matter. Then
Fichte wrote a letter which contained threats, and respecting it Goethe
said that a Government ought not to allow itself to be threatened. Fichte
now taught privately for some time in Berlin; in 1805 he became professor
at Erlangen, and in 1809 at Berlin, at which place he died on the 27th
January, 1814.[374] We cannot here deal more particularly with the
details of his life.

In what is termed the philosophy of Fichte a distinction must be made
between his properly-speaking speculative philosophy, in which the
argument is most consistently worked out, and which is less well known,
and his popular philosophy, to which belong the lectures delivered
in Berlin before a mixed audience, and, for example, the work termed
a “Guidance to a Blessed Life.” These last have much in them that is
affecting and edifying—many who call themselves the disciples of Fichte
know this side alone—and they are expressed in language most impressive
to a cultured, religious temperament. In the history of Philosophy,
however, such cannot be taken into consideration, although through their
matter they may have the highest possible value; the content has to be
speculatively developed, and that is done in Fichte’s earlier philosophic
works alone.[375]


1. THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF FICHTE’S PHILOSOPHY.

As we mentioned above (p. 478), the shortcoming in the Kantian philosophy
was its unthinking inconsistency, through which speculative unity was
lacking to the whole system; and this shortcoming was removed by Fichte.
It is the absolute form which Fichte laid hold of, or in other words, the
absolute form is just the absolute Being-for-self, absolute negativity,
not individuality, but the Notion of individuality, and thereby the
Notion of actuality; Fichte’s philosophy is thus the development of form
in itself. He maintained the ego to be the absolute principle, so that
from it, the direct and immediate certainty of self, all the matter
in the universe must be represented as produced; hence, according to
Fichte, reason is in itself a synthesis of Notion and actuality. But this
principle he once more in an equally one-sided manner set aside; it is
from the very beginning subjective, conditioned by an opposite, and its
realization is a continual rushing onward in finitude, a looking back
at what has gone before. The form in which it is presented has also the
disadvantage, and indeed, the real drawback of bringing the empiric ego
ever before one’s eyes, which is absurd, and quite distracting to one’s
point of view.

The claims of Philosophy have advanced so far that in the first place
self-consciousness refuses any longer to regard absolute essence as
immediate substance which does not in itself possess difference, reality,
and actuality. Against this substance self-consciousness ever struggled,
for it does not find its explicit Being there, and consequently feels
the lack of freedom. But besides this it demanded that this essence,
objectively presented, should be personal, living, self-conscious,
actual, and not shut up in abstract metaphysical thoughts alone. On the
other hand consciousness, for which the other is, demanded the moment of
external actuality, Being as such, into which thought must pass, truth
in objective existence; and this is what we more especially noticed in
connection with the English. This Notion, which is immediately actuality,
and this actuality which is immediately its Notion, and that indeed in
such a way that there neither is a third thought above this unity, nor
is it an immediate unity which does not possess difference, separation,
within it, is the ego; it is the self-distinction of opposites within
itself. That whereby it distinguishes itself from the simplicity of
thought, and distinguishes this other, is likewise immediately for it; it
is identical with, or not distinguished from it.[376] Hence it is pure
thought, or the ego is the true synthetic judgment _a priori_, as Kant
called it. This principle is apprehended actuality, for the taking back
of the other-Being into self-consciousness is just apprehension. The
Notion of the Notion is from this point of view found in the fact that in
what is apprehended self-consciousness has the certainty of itself; what
is not apprehended is something foreign to it. This absolute Notion or
this absolutely existent infinitude it is which has to be developed in
knowledge, and its distinction as the whole distinction of the universe
has to be represented from itself, and this has in its distinction to
remain reflected within itself in equal absoluteness. Nothing other than
the ego anywhere exists, and the ego is there because it is there; what
is there is only in the ego and for the ego.[377]

Now Fichte merely set forth this Notion; he did not bring it to a
scientific realization from itself. For to him this Notion maintains
and asserts itself as this Notion; it has absoluteness for him in so
far as it is merely the unrealized Notion, and thus indeed comes once
more into opposition with reality. The Fichtian philosophy has the great
advantage of having set forth the fact that Philosophy must be a science
derived from one supreme principle, from which all determinations are
necessarily derived. The important point is this unity of principle and
the attempt to develop from it in a scientifically consistent way the
whole content of consciousness, or, as has been said, to construct the
whole world.[378] Beyond this no progress was made.[379] But the great
necessity in Philosophy is to possess one living Idea; the world is a
flower which is eternally produced from one grain of seed. Thus Fichte
does not, like Kant, throw his work into narrative form because he begins
with the ego; but he has proceeded further, inasmuch as he sought to
bring about a construction of determinations of knowledge from the ego.
The whole extent of knowledge in all the world must be developed, and
further this knowledge must be the consequence of the development of
determinations; but because Fichte says that what is not for us does not
concern us, he has not grasped this principle of the ego as Idea, but
solely in the consciousness of the activity which we exercise in knowing,
and consequently it is still laid hold of in the form of subjectivity.

Thus as Kant treats of cognition [Erkennen], so Fichte sets forth real
knowledge [Wissen]. Fichte states that the task of Philosophy is to
find a theory of knowledge; universal knowledge is both the object
and the starting-point of Philosophy. Consciousness knows, that is
its nature; the end of philosophic learning is the knowledge of this
knowledge. Hence Fichte called his philosophy the Theory of Knowledge
(Begriff der Wissenschaftslehre, p. 18), the science of knowledge.
That is to say ordinary consciousness as the active ego finds this and
that, occupies itself, not with itself, but with other objects and
interests, but the necessity that I bring forth determinations, and
which determinations—cause and effect, for example,—lies beyond my
consciousness: I bring them forth instinctively and cannot get behind my
consciousness. But when I philosophize, I make my ordinary consciousness
itself my object, because I make a pure category my consciousness: I know
what my ego is doing, and thus I get behind my ordinary consciousness.
Fichte thus defines Philosophy as the artificial consciousness, as the
consciousness of consciousness.[380]

a. Where Fichte in his system has attained the highest degree of
determinateness, he begins, as we saw Kant did before (pp. 437, 438),
from the transcendental unity of self-consciousness; in it I—as this—am
one, this unity is to Fichte the same and the original. Ego is there
a fact, says Fichte, but not yet a proposition. As proposition, as
principle, the ego must not remain barren, nor be accepted as one,
for to a proposition pertains a synthesis. Now Fichte proceeds in his
system from the fact that Philosophy must begin with an absolutely
unconditioned, certain principle, with something indubitably certain in
ordinary knowledge. “It cannot be proved or defined, because it must
be absolutely the first principle.”[381] According to Wendt’s account
(Tennemann’s Grundriss, § 393, pp. 494, 495) Fichte gives an exposition
of the necessity of such a principle as follows: “Scientific knowledge
is a system of cognition obtained through a supreme principle which
expresses the content and form of knowledge. The theory of knowledge is
the science of knowledge which sets forth the possibility and validity of
all knowledge, and proves the possibility of principles in reference to
form and content, the principles themselves, and thereby the connection
existing in all human knowledge. It must have a principle which can
neither be proved from it nor from another science; for it is supreme.
If there is a theory of knowledge there also is a system; if there is
a system there is also a theory of knowledge and an absolute first
principle—and so on through an inevitable circle.”[382]

The simple principle of this knowledge is certainty of myself, which is
the relation of me to myself; what is in me, that I know. The supreme
principle, as immediate and not derived, must be certain on its own
account; that is, a determination of the ego only, for it is only from
the ego that I cannot abstract.[383] Fichte thus begins, like Descartes,
with ‘I think, therefore I am,’ and he expressly brings this proposition
to mind. The Being of the ego is not a dead, but a concrete Being;
but the highest Being is thought. Ego, as an explicitly self-existent
activity of thought, is thus knowledge, even if it is only abstract
knowledge, as in the beginning at least it cannot help being. At the
same time Fichte begins from this absolute certainty with quite other
necessities and demands; for from this ego not only Being but also the
larger system of thought has to be derived (_supra_, p. 230). According
to Fichte, the ego is the source of the categories and ideas, but all
conceptions and thoughts are a manifold reduced to a synthesis through
Thought. Thus while with Descartes in connection with the ego other
thoughts appear which we simply find already in us, such as God, nature,
&c., Fichte sought for a philosophy entirely of a piece, in which nothing
empiric was to be admitted from without. With this reflection a false
point of view was at once introduced, namely that contained in the old
conception of knowledge, of commencing with principles in this form and
proceeding from them; so that the reality which is derived from such
a principle is brought into opposition with it, and hence in truth is
something different, _i.e._ it is not derived: or that principle for this
same reason expresses only the absolute certainty of itself and not the
truth. The ego is certain, it cannot be doubted; but Philosophy desires
to reach the truth. The certainty is subjective, and because it is made
to remain the basis, all else remains subjective also without there being
any possibility of this form being removed. Fichte now analyzes the ego,
reducing it to three principles from which the whole of knowledge has to
be evolved.

α. The first proposition must be simple, in it predicate and subject must
be alike; for were they unlike, their connection—since in accordance
with their diversity the determinations are not directly one—would have
to be first of all proved by means of a third. The first principle
must thus be identical. Fichte now proceeds further to distinguish in
this first principle the form and content; but in order that this same
may be immediately true through itself, form and content must be again
the same, and the principle conditioned by neither. It signifies
A = A, the abstract undetermined identity; that is the proposition of
contradiction, wherein A is an indifferent content. Fichte says, “Thought
is by no means essence, but only a particular determination of Being;
there are outside of it many other determinations of our Being. I merely
remark this, that when ‘I am’ is overstepped, Spinozism is necessarily
reached. Its unity is something which ought to be produced through
us, but which cannot be so; it is not anything that is.” The first
proposition is then that I am identical with myself, Ego = Ego;[384] that
undoubtedly is the definition of the ego. The subject and the predicate
are the content; and this content of the two sides is likewise their
relation, _i.e._ form. Relation requires two sides; the relating and the
related are here, however, the same; for on account of the simplicity of
the ego, there is nothing but a relation of the ego to the ego. I have
knowledge of myself; but in so far as I am consciousness, I know of an
object which is different from me, and which is then likewise _mine_.
But the ego is in such a way identical with its difference that what is
different is immediately the same, and what is identical is likewise
different; we have a difference without a difference. Self-consciousness
is not dead identity, or non-Being, but the object which is identical
with me. This is immediately certain; all else must be as certain to
me, inasmuch as it must be my relation to myself. The content must
be transformed into the ego, so that in it I have _my_ determination
alone. This principle is at first abstract and deficient, because in
it no difference, or a formal difference only is expressed; whereas
the principle should possess a content: a subject and a predicate are
indeed distinguished in it, but only for us who reflect upon it, _i.e._
in itself there is no difference, and consequently no true content. In
the second place, this principle is indeed the immediate certainty of
self-consciousness, but self-consciousness is likewise consciousness,
and in it there is likewise the certainty that other things exist to
which it stands in an attitude of opposition. In the third place, that
principle has not the truth in it, for the very reason that the certainty
of itself possessed by the ego has no objectivity; it has not the form of
the differentiated content within it—or it stands in opposition to the
consciousness of an “other”.

β. Now in order that determination should come to pass, _i.e._ a content
and difference, it is essential for Fichte that a second principle should
be established, which in regard to form is unconditioned, but the content
of which is conditioned, because it does not belong to the ego. This
second principle, set forth under the first, is, “I assert a non-ego
in opposition to the ego,” and in this something other than absolute
self-consciousness is set forth.[385] To this pertains the form therein
present, relation; but the content is the non-ego, another content
from the ego. We might say that through this content the proposition
is independent, since the negative therein is an absolute, as truly as
the reverse—that it is independent through the form of opposition which
cannot be derived from the original. Here, then, we have no more to do
with derivation, although this derivation of opposition from the first
proposition was all the same demanded. Inasmuch as I posit another in
opposition to the ego, I posit myself as not posited; this non-ego is
the object generally, _i.e._ that which is opposed to me. This other is
the negative of the ego; thus when Fichte called it the non-ego he was
expressing himself in a very happy, suitable, and consistent manner.
There has been a good deal of ridicule cast on the ego and non-ego;
the expression is new, and therefore to us Germans it seems strange at
first. But the French say _Moi_ and _Non-moi_, without finding anything
laughable in it. In this principle the positing belongs, however, to
the ego; but because the non-ego is independent of the ego, we have two
sides, and self-consciousness relates itself to another. This second
proposition thus signifies that I posit myself as limited, as non-ego;
but non-ego is something quite new to be added. On the one side we thus
have before us a field which is merely appropriated from the ego; and in
this way we have before us the non-ego as our object.

γ. To these is added yet a third proposition, in which I now make this
division into ego and non-ego: it is the synthetic principle, the
proposition of ground, which in content is unconditioned, just as in the
second was the case in regard to form. This third proposition is the
determination of the first two through one another, in such a way that
the ego limits the non-ego. “In and through the ego both the ego and the
non-ego are posited as capable of being mutually limited by means of
one another, _i.e._ in such a way that the reality of the one abrogates
the reality of the other.” In limitation both are negated, but “only
in part”; only thus are synthesis and deduction possible. I posit the
non-ego, which is for me, in myself, in my identity with myself; thus I
take it from its non-identity, its not-being-I, that is to say I limit
it. This limitation of the non-ego Fichte expresses thus: “I place in
opposition to the ego,” and indeed “to the divisible ego, a divisible
non-ego.” The non-ego I destroy as a complete sphere, which it was
according to the second principle, and posit it as divisible; I likewise
posit the ego as divisible in so far as the non-ego is present in it. The
whole sphere which I have before me is supposed indeed to be the ego,
but in it I have not one but two. The proposition of ground is thus the
relation of reality and negation, _i.e._ it is limitation; it contains
the ego limited by the non-ego, and the non-ego limited by the ego.[386]
Of this synthesis there is nothing, properly speaking, contained in the
two earlier propositions. Even this first presentation of the three
principles does away with the immanence of real knowledge. Thus the
presentation is here also subject to an opposite from the first, as it is
with Kant, even if these are two acts of the ego merely, and we remain
entirely in the ego.

Now that limitation may take place for me in two different ways: at
one time the one is passive, at another time the other is so. In this
limitation the ego may posit the non-ego as limiting and itself as
limited, in such a way that the ego posits itself as requiring to have
an object; I know myself indeed as ego, but determined by the non-ego;
non-ego is here active and ego passive. Or, on the other hand, the ego,
as abrogating other-being, is that which limits, and non-ego is the
limited. I know myself then as clearly determining the non-ego, as the
absolute cause of the non-ego as such, for I can think. The first is
the proposition of the theoretic reason, of intelligence: the second
the proposition of practical reason, of will.[387] The will is this,
that I am conscious of myself as limiting the object; thus I make myself
exercise activity upon the object and maintain myself. The theoretic
proposition is that the object is before me and it determines me. The ego
is, since I perceive, a content, and I have this content in me, which is
thus outside of me. This is on the whole the same thing as we meet with
in the experience of Kant: it comes to the same thing whether it is by
matter or the non-ego that the ego is here determined.

b. In the theoretic consciousness the ego, although the assertive
generally, finds itself limited by the non-ego. But it is identical
with itself; hence its infinite activity ever sets itself to abrogate
the non-ego and to bring forth itself. Now the different methods whereby
the ego sets forth itself are the different methods of its activity;
these we have to understand in their necessity. But since philosophic
knowledge is the consideration of consciousness itself (_supra_, p. 483),
I can only know knowledge, the act of the ego. Fichte thus appeals to
consciousness, postulates ego and non-ego in their abstraction, and since
philosophic knowledge is the consciousness of consciousness, it is not
sufficient that I should find its determinations in consciousness, for I
produce them with consciousness. Common consciousness, indeed, likewise
brings forth all the determinations of the ordinary conception and of
thought, but without—on the theoretic side at least—having any knowledge
of it; for it is the fact of being limited alone that is present to it.
Thus, when I see a large square object, such as a wall, my ordinary
consciousness accepts these determinations as they are given to it; the
object _is_. In so doing I do not think of seeing, but of the object;
seeing, however, is my activity, the determinations of my faculty of
sensation are thus posited through me.[388] The ego as theoretic is,
indeed, aware in philosophic consciousness that it is the ego which
posits; but here it posits that the non-ego posits somewhat in me. The
ego thus posits itself as that which is limited by the non-ego. I make
this limitation mine; thus is it for me in me, this passivity of the ego
is itself the activity of the ego. As a matter of fact, all reality which
appears in the object for the ego is a determination of the ego,[389]
just as the categories and other determinations were in Kant’s case. Thus
it is here more especially that we should expect Fichte to demonstrate
the return of other-Being into absolute consciousness. However, because
after all the other-Being was regarded as unconditioned, as implicit,
this return does not come to pass. The ego determines the ‘other,’
indeed, but this unity is an altogether finite unity; non-ego has thus
immediately escaped from determination once more and gone forth from this
unity. What we find is merely an alternation between self-consciousness
and the consciousness of another, and the constant progression of this
alternation, which never reaches any end.[390]

The development of theoretic reason is the following-out of the manifold
relationships between the ego and non-ego; the forms of this limitation
which Fichte now goes through are the determinations of the object.
These particular thought-determinations he calls categories, and he
seeks to demonstrate them in their necessity; from the time of Aristotle
onwards no one had thought of so doing. The first of these forms is the
determination of reciprocity, which we already met with in the third
proposition: “By the determination of the reality or negation of the
ego, the negation or reality of the non-ego is equally determined;” the
two in one is reciprocal action. In the second place, “Causality is the
same degree of activity in the one as of passivity in the other.” In so
far as something is considered as the reality of the non-ego, the ego is
considered as passive, and, on the other hand, in so far as ‘I’ am real,
the object is passive; this relation, that the passivity of the object is
my activity or reality, and the opposite, is the conception of Causality.
“As many parts of negation as the ego posits in itself, so many parts
of reality it posits in the non-ego; it therefore posits itself as
self-determining in so far as it is determined, and as suffering
determination in so far as it determines itself. In so far,” in the
third place, “as the ego is regarded as embracing the whole absolutely
determined realm of all reality, it is substance; on the other hand when
it is posited in a not absolutely determined sphere of this realm, in so
far there is an accidence in the ego.”[391] That is the first rational
attempt that has ever been made to deduce the categories; this progress
from one determination to another is, however, only an analysis from the
standpoint of consciousness, and is not in and for itself.

The ego is so far the ideal ground of all conceptions of the object;
all determination of this object is a determination of the ego. But in
order that it may be object, it must be placed in opposition to the ego,
_i.e._ the determinations set forth through the ego are another, the
non-ego; this placing of the object in opposition is the real ground
of conceptions. The ego is, however, likewise the real ground of the
object; for it is likewise a determination of the ego that the non-ego
as object is set in opposition to the ego. Both, the real ground and the
ideal ground of the conception, are thus one and the same.[392] Regarding
the ego as ideal principle and the non-ego as real principle, Krug has
likewise talked a great deal of nonsense. Regarded from the one point
of view, the ego is active and the non-ego purely passive; while from
the other side the ego is passive and the object active and operative.
But since the ego in the non-philosophic consciousness does not have
the consciousness of its activity in the conception of the object, it
represents to itself its own activity as foreign, _i.e._ as belonging to
the non-ego.

We here see the opposition adopting various forms: ego, non-ego;
positing, setting in opposition; two sorts of activity of the ego, &c.
The fact that I represent is undoubtedly my activity, but the matter
of main importance is the content of the positing and its necessary
connection through itself. If one occupies oneself only with this
content, that form of subjectivity which is dominant with Fichte, and
which remains in his opposition, disappears. As the ego is affirmative
and determining, there now is in this determination a negative likewise
present; I find myself determined and at the same time the ego is like
itself, infinite, _i.e._ identical with itself. This is a contradiction
which Fichte indeed endeavours to reconcile, but in spite of it all he
leaves the false basis of dualism undisturbed. The ultimate, beyond
which Fichte does not get, is only an ‘ought,’ which does not solve
the contradiction; for while the ego should be absolutely at home with
itself, _i.e._ free, it should at the same time be associated with
another. To Fichte the demand for the solution of this contradiction thus
adopts the attitude of being a demanded solution only, of signifying that
I ever have to destroy the barriers, that I ever have to reach beyond
the limitation into utter infinitude, and that I ever find a new limit;
a continual alternation takes place between negation and affirmation,
an identity with self which again falls into negation, and from this
negation is ever again restored. To speak of the bounds of human reason
is, however, an unmeaning form of words. That the reason of the subject
is limited is comprehensible from the nature of the case, but when we
speak of Thought, infinitude is none other than one’s own relation to
self, and not to one’s limit; and the place in which man is infinite is
Thought. Infinitude may then be likewise very abstract, and in this way
it is also once more finite; but true infinitude remains in itself.

Fichte further deduces the ordinary conception thus: the fact that the
ego in going forth at once finds its activity checked by a limitation,
and returns once more into itself, brings about two opposite tendencies
in me, between which I waver, and which I try to unite in the faculty
of imagination. In order that a fixed determination may exist between
the two, I have to make the limit a permanent one, and we have that in
the understanding. All further determinations of the object are, as
categories of the understanding, modes of synthesis; but each synthesis
is a new contradiction. New mediations are thus once more necessary, and
these are new determinations. Thus Fichte says: I can always continue to
determine the non-ego, to make it my conception, _i.e._ to take from it
its negation as regards me. I have to deal with my activity alone; but
there is always an externality therein present which still remains, and
which is not explained by my activity. This Beyond which alone remains
to the undetermined ego Fichte calls the infinite check upon the ego,
with which it ever has to deal, and beyond which it cannot get; thus the
activity which proceeds into infinitude finds itself checked and driven
back by this repulsive force, and then it reacts upon itself. “The ego
in its self-determination has been considered both as determining and
determined; if we reflect on the fact that the absolutely determined
determining power must be an absolutely indeterminate, and further, that
ego and non-ego are absolutely opposed to one another, in the one case
ego is the indeterminate and in the other case non-ego.”[393]

Inasmuch as the ego here makes the object its conception and negates it,
this philosophy is Idealism, in which philosophy all the determinations
of the object are ideal. Everything determinate which the ego possesses
it has through its own positing; I even make a coat or a boot because I
put them on. There remains only the empty repulsive force, and that is
the Kantian Thing-in-itself, beyond which even Fichte cannot get, even
though the theoretic reason continues its determination into infinitude.
“The ego as intelligence” ever “remains dependent on an undetermined
non-ego; it is only through this that it is intelligence.”[394] The
theoretic side is thus dependent. In it we have not therefore to deal
with the truth in and for itself, but with a contingent, because ego
is limited, not absolute, as its Notion demands: intelligence is not
here considered as spirit which is free. This is Fichte’s standpoint as
regards the theoretic side.

c. Practical reason comes next; the point of view from which it starts
is that “The ego posits itself as determining the non-ego.” Now the
contradiction has thus to be solved of ego being at home with itself,
since it determines its Beyond. The ego is thus infinite activity, and,
as ego = ego, the absolute ego, it is undoubtedly abstract. But in order
to have a determination, a non-ego must exist; ego is thus activity,
causality, the positing of the non-ego. But as with Kant sensuousness and
reason remain opposed, the same contradiction is present here, only in a
more abstract form, and not in the rude empiricism of Kant. Fichte here
turns and twists in all sorts of ways, or he gives the opposition many
different forms; the crudest form is that ego is posited as causality,
for in it another is necessitated on which it exercises its activity.
“The absolute ego has accordingly to be” now “the cause of the non-ego,
_i.e._ only of that in the non-ego which remains when we abstract from
all demonstrable forms of representation or conception—of that to
which is ascribed the check given to the infinitely operative activity
of the ego; for the fact that the intelligent ego is, in accordance
with the necessary laws of the conception, the cause of the particular
determinations of that which is conceived as such, is demonstrated in
the theoretic science of knowledge.”[395] The limits of intelligence
must be broken through, the ego must alone be active; the other side,
the infinite repulsion, must be removed, in order that the ego may be
liberated.

“According to our hypothesis the ego must now posit a non-ego absolutely,
and without any ground, _i.e._ absolutely and without any ground it must
limit or in part not posit itself.” This, indeed, it already does as
intelligent. “It must therefore have the ground of not positing itself”
only “in itself.” The ego is, however, just the ego, it posits itself,
“it must” therefore “have the principle of positing itself within it,
and also the principle of not positing itself. Hence the ego in its
essence would be contradictory and self-repellent; there would be in it a
two-fold or contradictory principle, which assumption contradicts itself,
for in that case there would be no principle within it. The ego would”
consequently “not exist, for it would abrogate itself. All contradictions
are reconciled through the further determination of contradictory
propositions. The ego must be posited in one sense as infinite, and in
another as finite. Were it to be posited as infinite and finite in one
and the same sense, the contradiction would be insoluble; the ego would
not be one but two. In so far as the ego posits itself as infinite, its
activity is directed upon itself and on nothing else but itself. In so
far as the ego posits limits, and itself in these limits, its activity is
not exercised directly on itself, but on a non-ego which has to be placed
in opposition,” upon another and again upon another, and so on into
infinitude; that is the object, and the activity of the ego “is objective
activity.”[396] In this way Fichte in the practical sphere also remains
at opposition, only this opposition now has the form of two tendencies in
the ego, both of which are said to be one and the same activity of the
ego. I am called upon to proceed to determine the other in relation to
which I am negative, the non-ego, in accordance with my freedom; it has
indeed all determinations through the activity of the ego, but beyond my
determination the same non-ego ever continues to appear. The ego clearly
posits an object, a point of limitation, but where the limitation is, is
undetermined. I may transfer the sphere of my determination, and extend
it to an infinite degree, but there always remains a pure Beyond, and the
non-ego has no positive self-existent determination.

The last point in respect of the practical sphere is hence this, that
the activity of the ego is a yearning or striving[397]—like the Kantian
“ought”; Fichte treats this with great prolixity. The Fichtian philosophy
consequently has the same standpoint as the Kantian; the ultimate is
always subjectivity, as existent in and for itself. Yearning, according
to Fichte, is divine; in yearning I have not forgotten myself, I have
not forgotten that I possess a superiority in myself; and therefore it
is a condition of happiness and satisfaction. This infinite yearning
and desire has then been regarded as what is highest and most excellent
in the Beautiful, and in religious feelings likewise; and with it
is connected the irony of which we have spoken before (Vol. I. pp.
400, 401). In this return the ego is merely an effort, on its side
it is fixed, and it cannot realize its endeavours. Striving is thus
an imperfect or implicitly limited action. The ultimate result is
consequently a “circle” which cannot be broken through, so that “the
finite spirit must necessarily posit an absolute outside itself (a
thing-in-itself), and yet on the other hand it must recognize that
this same is only there for it (a necessary noumenon).”[398] To put it
otherwise, we see the ego absolutely determined in opposition only, we
see it only as consciousness and self-consciousness which does not get
beyond this, and which does not reach so far as to Spirit. The ego is the
absolute Notion in so far as it does not yet reach the unity of thought,
or in this simplicity does not reach difference, and in motion does not
have rest; that is to say, in so far as positing, or the pure activity
of the ego, and setting in opposition, are not by it comprehended as the
same. Or the ego does not comprehend the infinite repulsion, the non-ego;
self-consciousness determines the non-ego, but does not know how to make
this Beyond its own.

The deficiency in the Fichtian philosophy is thus firstly that the ego
retains the significance of the individual, actual self-consciousness,
as opposed to that which is universal or absolute, or to the spirit in
which it is itself a moment merely; for the individual self-consciousness
simply signifies standing apart as far as another is concerned. Hence,
if the ego was ever called absolute existence, the most terrible offence
was given, because really the ego only came before us as signifying the
individual subject as opposed to the universal.

In the second place, Fichte does not attain to the idea of Reason as the
perfected, real unity of subject and object, or of ego and non-ego; it is
only, as with Kant, represented as the thought of a union in a belief or
faith, and with this Fichte likewise concludes (Grundlage der gesammten
Wissenschaftslehre, p. 301). This he worked out in his popular writings.
For because the ego is fixed in its opposition to the non-ego, and _is_
only as being opposed, it becomes lost in that unity. The attainment of
this aim is hence sent further and further back into the false, sensuous
infinitude: it is a progression implying just the same contradiction as
that found in Kant, and having no present actuality in itself; for the
ego has all actuality in its opposition only. The Fichtian philosophy
recognizes the finite spirit alone, and not the infinite; it does not
recognize spirit as universal thought, as the Kantian philosophy does not
recognize the not-true; or it is formal. The knowledge of absolute unity
is apprehended as faith in a moral disposition of the world, an absolute
hypothesis in accordance with which we have the belief that every moral
action that we perform will have a good result.[399] As in Kant’s case,
this Idea belongs to universal thought. “In a word, when anything is
apprehended it ceases to be God; and every conception of God that is set
up is necessarily that of a false God. Religion is a practical faith
in the moral government of the world; faith in a supersensuous world
belongs, according to our philosophy, to the immediate verities.”[400]
Fichte thus concludes with the highest Idea, with the union of freedom
and nature, but a union of such a nature that, immediately regarded,
it is not known; the opposition alone falls within consciousness. This
union of faith he likewise finds in the Love of God. As believed and
experienced, this form pertains to Religion, and not to Philosophy,
and our only possible interest is to know this in Philosophy. But with
Fichte it is still associated with a most unsatisfying externality of
which the basis is the non-Idea, for the one determination is essential
only because the other is so, and so on into infinitude. “The theory
of knowledge is realistic—it shows that the consciousness of finite
beings can only be explained by presupposing an independent and wholly
opposite power, on which, in accordance with their empirical existence,
they themselves are dependent. But it asserts nothing more than this
opposed power, which by finite beings can merely be _felt_ and not known.
All possible determinations of this power or of this non-ego which can
come forth into infinity in our consciousness, it pledges itself to
deduce from the determining faculties of the ego, and it must actually
be able to deduce these, so certainly as it is a theory of knowledge.
This knowledge, however, is not transcendent but transcendental. It
undoubtedly explains all consciousness from something independent of all
consciousness, but it does not forget that this independent somewhat is
again a product of its own power of thought, and consequently something
dependent on the ego, in so far as it has to be there for the ego. Every
thing is, in its ideality, dependent upon the ego; but in its reality
even the ego is dependent. The fact that the finite spirit must posit
for itself somewhat outside of itself, which last exists only for it, is
that circle which it may infinitely extend but never break through.” The
further logical determination of the object is that which in subject and
object is identical, the true connection is that in which the objective
is the possession of the ego; as thought, the ego in itself determines
the object. But Fichte’s theory of knowledge regards the struggle of the
ego with the object as that of the continuous process of determining the
object through the ego as subject of consciousness, without the identity
of the restfully self-developing Notion.[401]

Thirdly, because the ego is thus fixed in its one-sidedness, there
proceeds from it, as representing one extreme, the whole of the progress
that is made in the content of knowledge; and the deduction of the
philosophy of Fichte, cognition in its content and form, is a progression
from certain determinations to others which do not turn back into
unity, or through a succession of finitenesses which do not have the
Absolute in them at all. The absolute point of view, like an absolute
content, is wanting. Thus the contemplation of nature, for instance, is
a contemplation of it as of pure finitenesses from the point of view of
another, as though the organic body were regarded thus: “Consciousness
requires a sphere entirely its own for its activity. This sphere is
posited through an original, necessary activity of the ego, in which
it does not know itself as free. It is a sensuous perception, a drawing
of lines; the sphere of activity thereby becomes something extended in
space. As quiescent, continuous, and yet unceasingly changing, this
sphere is matter, which, as body, has a number of parts which in relation
to one another are called limbs. The person can ascribe to himself no
body without positing it as being under the influence of another person.
But it is likewise essential that I should be able to check this same
influence, and external matter is also posited as resisting my influences
on it, _i.e._ as a tough, compact matter.”[402] These tough matters must
further be separated from one another—the different persons cannot hold
together like one mass of dough. For “my body is my body and not that of
another; it must further operate and be active without my working through
it. It is only through the operation of another that I can myself be
active and represent myself as a rational being who can be respected by
him. But the other being should treat me immediately as a rational being,
I should be for him a rational being even before my activity begins.
Or my form must produce an effect through its mere existence in space,
without my activity, _i.e._ it must be visible. The reciprocal operation
of rational beings must take place without activity; thus a subtle matter
must be assumed in order that it may be modified by means of the merely
quiescent form. In this way are deduced first Light and then Air.”[403]
This constitutes a very external manner of passing from one step to
another, resembling the method of the ordinary teleology, which makes
out, for instance, that plants and animals are given for the nourishment
of mankind. This is how it is put: Man must eat, and thus there must be
something edible—consequently plants and animals are at once deduced;
plants must have their root in something, and consequently the earth is
forthwith deduced. What is altogether lacking is any consideration of the
object as what it is in itself; it is plainly considered only in relation
to another. In this way the animal organism appears as a tough, tenacious
matter which is “articulated” and can be modified; light is a subtle
matter which is the medium of communication of mere existence, &c.—just
as in the other case plants and animals are merely edible. As regards a
philosophic consideration of the content there is nothing at all to be
found.

Fichte likewise wrote both a Science of Morals and of Natural Rights,
but he treats them as sciences pertaining to the understanding only, and
his method of procedure is destitute of ideas and carried on by means of
a limited understanding. The Fichtian deduction of the conceptions of
justice and morality thus remains within the limitations and rigidity of
self-consciousness, as against which Fichte’s popular presentations of
religion and morality present inconsistencies. The treatise on Natural
Rights is a special failure, _e.g._ where he, as we have just seen (p.
502), deduces even nature just as far as he requires it. The organization
of the state which is described in Fichte’s Science of Rights is
furthermore as unspiritual as was the deduction of natural objects just
mentioned, and as were many of the French constitutions which have
appeared in modern times—a formal, external uniting and connecting, in
which the individuals as such are held to be absolute, or in which Right
is the highest principle. Kant began to ground Right upon Freedom, and
Fichte likewise makes freedom the principle in the Rights of Nature; but,
as was the case with Rousseau, it is freedom in the form of the isolated
individual. This is a great commencement, but in order to arrive at the
particular, they have to accept certain hypotheses. The universal is
not the spirit, the substance of the whole, but an external, negative
power of the finite understanding directed against individuals. The
state is not apprehended in its essence, but only as representing a
condition of justice and law, _i.e._ as an external relation of finite
to finite. There are various individuals; the whole constitution of the
state is thus in the main characterized by the fact that the freedom of
individuals must be limited by means of the freedom of the whole.[404]
The individuals always maintain a cold attitude of negativity as regards
one another, the confinement becomes closer and the bonds more stringent
as time goes on, instead of the state being regarded as representing the
realization of freedom.

This philosophy contains nothing speculative, but it demands the presence
of the speculative element. As the philosophy of Kant seeks in unity its
Idea of the Supreme Good, wherein the opposites have to be united, so
the Fichtian philosophy demands union in the ego and in the implicitude
of faith; in this self-consciousness in all its actions makes its
starting-point conviction, so that in themselves its actions may bring
forth the highest end and realize the good. In the Fichtian philosophy
nothing can be seen beyond the moment of self-consciousness, of
self-conscious Being-within-self, as in the philosophy of England we find
expressed—in just as one-sided a way—the moment of Being-for-another, or
of consciousness, and that not as a moment simply, but as the principle
of the truth; in neither of the two is there the unity of both—or spirit.

Fichte’s philosophy constitutes a significant epoch in Philosophy
regarded in its outward form. It is from him and from his methods that
abstract thought proceeds, deduction and construction. Hence with the
Fichtian philosophy a revolution took place in Germany. The public had
penetrated as far as the philosophy of Kant, and until the Kantian
philosophy was reached the interest awakened by Philosophy was general;
it was accessible, and men were curious to know about it, it pertained to
the ordinary knowledge of a man of culture (_supra_, p. 218). Formerly
men of business, statesmen, occupied themselves with Philosophy; now,
however, with the intricate idealism of the philosophy of Kant, their
wings droop helpless to the ground. Hence it is with Kant that we first
begin to find a line of separation which parts us from the common modes
of consciousness; but the result, that the Absolute cannot be known, has
become one generally acknowledged. With Fichte the common consciousness
has still further separated itself from Philosophy, and it has utterly
departed from the speculative element therein present. For Fichte’s
ego is not merely the ego of the empiric consciousness, since general
determinations of thought such as do not fall within the ordinary
consciousness have likewise to be known and brought to consciousness;
in this way since Fichte’s time few men have occupied themselves with
speculation. Fichte, it is true, in his later works especially, wrote
with a view to meeting the popular ear as we may see in the “Attempt to
force the reader into comprehension,” but this end was not accomplished.
The public was through the philosophy of Kant and Jacobi strengthened in
its opinion—one which it accepted _utiliter_—that the knowledge of God is
immediate, and that we know it from the beginning and without requiring
to study, and hence that Philosophy is quite superfluous.


2. FICHTE’S SYSTEM IN A RE-CONSTITUTED FORM.

The times called for life, for spirit. Now since mind has thus retreated
within self-consciousness, but within self-consciousness as a barren ego,
which merely gives itself a content or a realization through finitenesses
and individualities which in and for themselves are nothing, the next
stage is found in knowing this realization of self-consciousness in
itself, in knowing the content in itself as a content which, penetrated
throughout by spirit, is self-conscious and spiritual, or a spirit full
of content. In his later popular works Fichte thus set forth faith, love,
hope, religion, treating them without philosophic interest, and as for
a general public: it was a philosophy calculated to suit enlightened
Jews and Jewesses, councillors and Kotzebues. He places the matter in a
popular form: “It is not the finite ego that is, but the divine Idea is
the foundation of all Philosophy; everything that man does of himself
is null and void. All existence is living and active in itself, and
there is no other life than Being, and no other Being than God; God is
thus absolute Being and Life. The divine essence likewise comes forth,
revealing and manifesting itself—the world.”[405] This immediate unity
of the self-conscious ego and its content, or spirit, which merely
has an intuition of its self-conscious life and knows it as the truth
immediately, manifested itself subsequently in poetic and prophetic
tendencies, in vehement aspirations, in excrescences which grew out of
the Fichtian philosophy.


3. THE MORE IMPORTANT OF THE FOLLOWERS OF FICHTE.

On the one hand, in respect of the content which the ego reaches in
the philosophy of Fichte, the complete absence of spirituality, the
woodenness, and, to put it plainly, the utter foolishness therein
evidenced, strike us too forcibly to allow us to remain at his
standpoint; our philosophic perception likewise tells us of the
one-sidedness and deficiencies of the principle, as also of the
evident necessity that the content should prove to be what it is. But
on the other hand self-consciousness was therein posited as reality
or essence—not as a foreign, alien self-consciousness, but as ego—a
signification which all possess, and which finds an answer in the
actuality of all. The Fichtian standpoint of subjectivity has thus
retained its character of being unphilosophically worked out, and arrived
at its completion in forms pertaining to sensation which in part remained
within the Fichtian principle, while they were in part the effort—futile
though it was—to get beyond the subjectivity of the ego.


a. FRIEDRICH VON SCHLEGEL.

In Fichte’s case the limitation is continually re-appearing; but because
the ego feels constrained to break through this barrier, it reacts
against it, and gives itself a resting-place within itself; this last
ought to be concrete, but it is a negative resting-place alone. This
first form, Irony, has Friedrich von Schlegel as its leading exponent.
The subject here knows itself to be within itself the Absolute, and
all else to it is vain; all the conclusions which it draws for itself
respecting the right and good, it likewise knows how to destroy again.
It can make a pretence of knowing all things, but it only demonstrates
vanity, hypocrisy, and effrontery. Irony knows itself to be the master
of every possible content; it is serious about nothing, but plays with
all forms. The other side is this, that subjectivity has cast itself
into religious subjectivity. The utter despair in respect of thought, of
truth, and absolute objectivity, as also the incapacity to give oneself
any settled basis or spontaneity of action, induced the noble soul to
abandon itself to feeling and to seek in Religion something fixed and
steadfast; this steadfast basis, this inward satisfaction, is to be found
in religious sentiments and feelings. This instinct impelling us towards
something fixed has forced many into positive forms of religion, into
Catholicism, superstition and miracle working, in order that they may
find something on which they can rest, because to inward subjectivity
everything fluctuates and wavers. With the whole force of its mind
subjectivity tries to apply itself to what is positively given, to bend
its head beneath the positive, to cast itself, so to speak, into the arms
of externality, and it finds an inward power impelling it so to do.


b. SCHLEIERMACHER.

On the other hand the ego finds in the subjectivity and individuality
of the personal view of things the height of all its vanity—its
Religion. All the various individualities have God within themselves.
Dialectic is the last thing to arise and to maintain its place. As
this is expressed for philosophic self-consciousness, the foreign
intellectual world has lost all significance and truth for ordinary
culture; it is composed of three elements, a deity pertaining to a time
gone by, and individualized in space and existence, a world which is
outside the actuality of self-consciousness, and a world which had yet
to appear, and in which self-consciousness would first attain to its
reality. The spirit of culture has deserted it, and no longer recognizes
anything that is foreign to self-consciousness. In accordance with this
principle, the spiritual living essence has then transformed itself into
self-consciousness, and it thinks to know the unity of spirit immediately
from itself, and in this immediacy to be possessed of knowledge in a
poetic, or at least a prophetic manner. As regards the poetic manner, it
has a knowledge of the life and person of the Absolute immediately, by an
intuition, and not in the Notion, and it thinks it would lose the whole
as whole, as a self-penetrating unity, were it not to express the same
in poetic form; and what it thus expresses poetically is the intuition
of the personal life of self-consciousness. But the truth is absolute
motion, and since it is a motion of forms and figures [Gestalten], and
the universe is a kingdom of spirits, the Notion is the essence of this
movement, and likewise of each individual form; it is its ideal form
[Form] and not the real one, or that of figure [Gestalt]. In the latter
case necessity is lost sight of; individual action, life and heart,
remain within themselves, and undeveloped; and this poetry vacillates
betwixt the universality of the Notion and the determinateness and
indifference of the figure; it is neither flesh nor fish, neither poetry
nor philosophy. The prophetic utterance of truths which claim to be
philosophical, thus belongs to faith, to self-consciousness, which indeed
perceives the absolute spirit in itself, but does not comprehend itself
as self-consciousness, since it places absolute reality above Knowledge,
beyond self-conscious reason, as was done by Eschenmayer and Jacobi.
This uncomprehending, prophetic manner of speech affirms this or that
respecting absolute existence as from an oracle, and requires that each
man should find the same immediately in his own heart. The knowledge of
absolute reality becomes a matter pertaining to the heart; there are a
number of would-be inspired speakers, each of whom holds a monologue and
really does not understand the others, excepting by a pressure of the
hands and betrayal of dumb feeling. What they say is mainly composed of
trivialities, if these are taken in the sense in which they are uttered;
it is the feeling, the gesture, the fulness of the heart, which first
gives them their significance; to nothing of more importance is direct
expression given. They outbid one another in conceits of fancy, in ardent
poetry. But before the Truth vanity turns pale, spitefully sneering
it sneaks back into itself. Ask not after a criterion of the truth,
but after the Notion of the truth in and for itself; on that fix your
gaze. The glory of Philosophy is departed, for it presupposes a common
ground of thoughts and principles—which is what science demands—or at
least of opinions. But now particular subjectivity was everything,
each individual was proud and disdainful as regards all others. The
conception of independent thought—as though there could be a thought
which was not such (Vol. I. p. 60)—is very much the same; men have, it is
said, to bring forth a particularity of their own, or else they have not
thought for themselves. But the bad picture is that in which the artist
shows himself; originality is the production of what is in its entirety
universal. The folly of independent thought is that it results in each
bringing forth something more preposterous than another.


c. NOVALIS.

Subjectivity signifies the lack of a firm and steady basis, but likewise
the desire for such, and thus it evermore remains a yearning. These
yearnings of a lofty soul are set forth in the writings of Novalis.
This subjectivity does not reach substantiality, it dies away within
itself, and the standpoint it adopts is one of inward workings and fine
distinctions; it signifies an inward life and deals with the minutiæ
of the truth. The extravagances of subjectivity constantly pass into
madness; if they remain in thought they are whirled round and round
in the vortex of reflecting understanding, which is ever negative in
reference to itself.


d. FRIES, BOUTERWECK, KRUG.

Yet a last form of subjectivity is the subjectivity of arbitrary will and
ignorance. It maintained this, that the highest mode of cognition is an
immediate knowledge as a fact of consciousness; and that is so far right.
The Fichtian abstraction and its hard understanding has a repellent
effect on thought; slothful reason allowed itself to be told the result
of the philosophy of Kant and Jacobi, and renounced all consistent
thought, all construction. This arbitrariness gave itself entire
liberty—the liberty of the _Tabagie_—but in doing so it regarded itself
from a poetic or prophetic point of view, as we have just seen (pp. 508,
509). Then it was both more sober and more prosaic, and thus brought
the old logic and metaphysic once more into evidence, though with this
modification that they are made facts of consciousness. Thus Fries turns
back to the faith of Jacobi in the form of immediate judgments derived
from reason, and dark conceptions incapable of utterance.[406] He wished
to improve the critique of pure reason by apprehending the categories
as facts of consciousness; anything one chooses can in such a case be
introduced. Bouterweck speaks of “The virtue, the living nature of power;
the fact that subject and object are regarded as one, that is as absolute
virtue. With this absolute virtue we have all Being and action, namely
the eternal, absolute and pure unity; in one word we have grasped the
world within us and we have grasped ourselves in the world, and that
indeed not through conceptions and conclusions, but directly through the
power which itself constitutes our existence and our rational nature. To
know the All, or indeed to know God in any way, is, however, impossible
for any mortal.”[407] Krug wrote a “Groundwork of Philosophy,” setting
forth a “Transcendental Synthesis—that is a transcendental realism and a
transcendental idealism inseparably bound together,” It is an “original,
transcendental synthesis of the real and the ideal, the thinking subject
and the corresponding outer world;” this transcendental synthesis must
“be recognized and asserted without any attempt being made at explaining
it.”[408]


D. SCHELLING.

It was Schelling, finally, who made the most important, or, from
a philosophic point of view, the only important advance upon the
philosophy of Fichte; his philosophy rose higher than that of Fichte,
though undoubtedly it stood in close connection with it; indeed, he
himself professes to be a Fichtian. Now the philosophy of Schelling
from the first admitted the possibility of a knowledge of God, although
it likewise started from the philosophy of Kant, which denies such
knowledge. At the same time Schelling makes Jacobi’s principle of
the unity of thought and Being fundamental, although he begins to
determine it more closely.[409] To him concrete unity is this, that
the finite is no more true than the infinite, the subjective idea no
more than objectivity, and that combinations in which both untruths are
brought together in their independence in relation to one another, are
likewise combinations of untruths merely. Concrete unity can only be
comprehended as process and as the living movement in a proposition. This
inseparability is in God alone; the finite, on the other hand, is that
which has this separability within it. In so far as it is a truth it is
likewise this unity, but in a limited sphere, and for that reason in the
separability of both moments.

Frederick Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, born on the 27th January, 1775, at
Schorndorf,[410] in Wurtemberg, studied in Leipzig and Jena, where he
came to be on terms of great intimacy with Fichte. In the year 1807 he
became secretary of the Academy of Science in Munich. We cannot with
propriety deal fully with his life, for he is still living.[411]

Schelling worked out his philosophy in view of the public. The series of
his philosophic writings also represents the history of his philosophic
development and the gradual process by which he raised himself above
the Fichtian principle and the Kantian content with which he began. It
does not thus contain a sequence of separately worked out divisions of
Philosophy, but only successive stages in his own development. If we
ask for a final work in which we shall find his philosophy represented
with complete definiteness none such can be named. Schelling’s first
writings are still quite Fichtian, and it is only by slow degrees that
he worked himself free of Fichte’s form. The form of the ego has the
ambiguity of being capable of signifying either the absolute Ego or
God, or ego in my particularity;[412] this supplied the first stimulus
to Schelling. His first and quite short work of four sheets which he
wrote in 1795 at Tubingen, while still at the university, was called,
“On the Possibility of any Form of Philosophy”; it contains propositions
respecting the Fichtian philosophy only. The next work, “On the Ego as
principle of Philosophy, or on the Unconditioned in Human Knowledge”
(Tubingen, 1795), is likewise quite Fichtian; in this case, however,
it is from a wider and more universal point of view, since the ego is
therein grasped as an original identity.[413] We find, however, a summary
of the Fichtian principle and the Kantian mode of presentation: “It is
only by something being originally set in opposition to the ego, and
by the ego being itself posited as the manifold (in time), that it is
possible for the ego to get beyond the unity which belongs to it of
merely being posited, and that, for example, it posits the same content
on more than one occasion.”[414] Schelling then passed on to natural
philosophy, adopted Kantian forms and reflective determinations, such as
those of repulsion and attraction, from Kant’s “Metaphysics of Nature,”
and likewise dealt with quite empirical phenomena in expressions taken
from Kant. All his first works on this subject come under this category,
viz.: “Ideas towards a Philosophy of Nature,” 1797; “On the World-Soul,”
1798, the second edition of which possesses appendices which are entirely
inconsistent with what goes before. In the writings of Herder and
Kielmeyer[415] we find sensibility, irritability, and reproduction dealt
with, as also their laws, such as that the greater the sensibility the
less the irritability, &c.—just as the powers or potencies were dealt
with by Eschenmayer. It was only later on in relation to these that
Schelling first apprehended nature in the categories of thought, and made
general attempts of a more definite character in the direction of greater
scientific development. It was only through what had been accomplished by
these men that he was enabled to come into public notice so young. The
spiritual and intellectual side, morality and the state, he represented
on the other hand purely in accordance with Kantian principles: thus in
his “Transcendental Idealism,” although it was written from a Fichtian
point of view, he goes no further than Kant did in his “Philosophy
of Rights” and his work “On Eternal Peace.” Schelling, indeed, later
on published a separate treatise on Freedom, deeply speculative in
character; this, however, remains isolated and independent, and deals
with this one point alone; in Philosophy, however, nothing isolated can
be worked out or developed. In the various presentations of his views
Schelling on each occasion began again from the beginning, because, as we
may see, what went before did not satisfy him; he has ever pressed on to
seek a new form, and thus he has tried various forms and terminologies
in succession without ever setting forth one complete and consistent
whole. His principal works in this connection are the “First Sketch of
a System of Natural Philosophy,” 1799; the “System of Transcendental
Idealism,” 1800, one of his most carefully thought-out works; “Bruno, a
Dialogue on the Divine and Natural Principle of Things,” 1802; “Journal
of Speculative Physics,” 1801; “New Journal of Speculative Physics,”
1802 _et_ In the second number of the second volume of his “Journal of
Speculative Physics,” Schelling made the commencement of a detailed
treatment of the whole of his philosophy. Here he likewise starts to
a certain measure, though unconsciously, from the Fichtian form of
construction; but the idea is already present that nature equally with
knowledge is a system of reason.

It is not feasible here to go into details respecting what is called the
philosophy of Schelling, even if time permitted. For it is not yet a
scientific whole organized in all its branches, since it rather consists
in certain general elements which do not fluctuate with the rest of his
opinions. Schelling’s philosophy must still be regarded as in process of
evolution, and it has not yet ripened into fruit;[416] we can hence give
a general idea of it only.

When Schelling made his first appearance the demands put forward by
Philosophy were as follows. With Descartes thought and extension were
in some incomprehensible way united in God, with Spinoza it was as
motionless substance; and beyond this point of view neither of them
ever passed. Later on we saw the form develop, partly in the sciences
and partly in the Kantian philosophy. Finally, in the Fichtian
philosophy, the form was subjectivity on its own account, from which
all determinations were held to develop. What is thus demanded is that
this subjectivity of infinite form which we saw dying into irony or
arbitrariness (pp. 507-510) should be delivered from its one-sidedness
in order to be united with objectivity and substantiality. To put it
otherwise, the substance of Spinoza should not be apprehended as the
unmoved, but as the intelligent, as a form which possesses activity
within itself of necessity, so that it is the forming power of nature,
but at the same time knowledge and comprehension. This then is the object
of Philosophy; it is not the formal union of Spinoza that is demanded,
nor the subjective totality of Fichte, but totality with the infinite
form. We see this developing in the philosophy of Schelling.

1. In one of his earlier writings, the “System of Transcendental
Idealism,” which we shall consider first of all, Schelling represented
transcendental philosophy and natural philosophy as the two sides of
scientific knowledge. Respecting the nature of the two, he expressly
declared himself in this work, where he once more adopts a Fichtian
starting-point: “All knowledge rests on the harmony of an objective with
a subjective.” In the common sense of the words this would be allowed;
absolute unity, where the Notion and the reality are undistinguished in
the perfected Idea, is the Absolute alone, or God; all else contains an
element of discord between the objective and subjective. “We may give
the name of nature to the entire objective content of our knowledge;
the entire subjective content, on the other hand, is called the ego
or intelligence.” They are in themselves identical and presupposed as
identical. The relation of nature to intelligence is given by Schelling
thus: “Now if all knowledge has two poles which mutually presuppose
and demand one another, there must be two fundamental sciences, and it
must be impossible to start from the one pole without being driven to
the other.” Thus nature is impelled to spirit, and spirit to nature;
either may be given the first place, and both must come to pass. “If the
objective is made the chief,” we have the natural sciences as result, and
“the necessary tendency,” the end, “of all natural science thus is to
pass from nature to intelligence. This is the meaning of the effort to
connect natural phenomena with theory. The highest perfection of natural
science would be the perfect spiritualization of all natural laws into
laws of intuitive perception and thought. The phenomenal (the material
element) must entirely disappear, and laws (the formal element) alone
remain. Hence it comes to pass that the more that which is in conformity
with law breaks forth in nature itself, the more the outward covering
disappears; the phenomena themselves become more spiritual, and finally
cease altogether. The perfect theory of nature would be that by which the
whole of nature should be resolved into an intelligence. The dead and
unconscious products of nature are only abortive attempts on the part
of nature to reflect itself, but the so-called dead nature is really
an immature,” torpid, fossilized “intelligence”; it is implicit only,
and thus remains in externality; “hence in its phenomena,” even though
“still unconsciously, the character of intelligence shines through. Its
highest end, which is to become object to itself, is first attained
by nature” (instead of nature we should call it the Idea of nature),
“through its highest and ultimate reflection, which is none other than
man, or, more generally, it is that which we call reason, through which
nature for the first time returns completely within itself, and whereby
it becomes evident that nature is originally identical with what is known
in us as intelligence or the conscious. Through this tendency to make
nature intelligent natural science becomes the philosophy of nature.”
The intelligent character of nature is thus spoken of as a postulate
of science. The other point of view is “to give the subjective the
foremost place.” Thus here “the problem is how to add an objective
element agreeing with it. To start from the subjective as from the first
and absolute, and to make the objective arise from it,” signifies a new
departure; its consideration forms the content of true Transcendental
Philosophy, or, as Schelling himself now named this science, “the
other science fundamental to Philosophy.” The organ of transcendental
philosophy is the subjective, the production of inward action. Production
and reflection upon this production, the unconscious and conscious in
one, is the æsthetic act of the imagination.[417] Thus these two separate
processes are as a whole very clearly expressed: the process which leads
from nature to the subject, and that leading from the ego to the object.
But the true process could only be traced out by means of logic, for it
contains pure thoughts; but the logical point of view was what Schelling
never arrived at in his presentation of things.

a. In respect of the ego, as principle of the transcendental philosophy,
Schelling sets to work in the same way as did Fichte, inasmuch as he
begins from the fact of knowledge “in which the content is conditioned
through the form, and the form through the content”; this is formal
A = A. But does A exist? The ego is “the point where subject and object
are one in their unmediated condition”; the ego is just Ego = Ego,
subject-object; and that is the act of self-consciousness wherein I am
for myself object to myself. In self-consciousness there is not to be
found a distinction between me and anything else; what are distinguished
are directly identical, and there is so far nothing at all in opposition
to this self-consciousness. How the case stands with regard to external
objects is the question which must be decided later, in the further
course of development. It is only the Notion of the ego which is to be
laid hold of: “The Notion of the ego, that is the act whereby thought
in general becomes object to itself, and the ego itself (the object)
are absolutely one; independently of this act the ego is nothing.” It
is the act whereby thought makes itself objective, and wherein the ego
is brought into harmony with the objective, with thought; and from
this standpoint it had to be demonstrated how the ego makes its way to
objectivity. “The ego, as pure act, as pure action, is not objective
in knowledge itself, for the reason that it is the principle of all
knowledge. If it is to be object of knowledge, this must come to pass
through a very different kind of knowledge than the ordinary.” The
immediate consciousness of this identity is intuition, but inwardly
it becomes “intellectual intuition”; it “is a knowledge which is the
production of its object: sensuous intuition or perception is perception
of such a nature that the perception itself appears to be different
from what is perceived. Now intellectual intuition is the organ of all
transcendental thought,” the act of pure self-consciousness generally.
“The ego is nothing else than a process of production which ever makes
itself its own object. Science can start from nothing objective,” but
from “the non-objective which itself becomes object” as an “original
duplicity. Idealism is the mechanism of the origination of the objective
world from the inward principle of spiritual activity.”[418]

On the one hand Schelling’s system is related to the philosophy of
Fichte, and, on the other hand, he, like Jacobi, makes his principle
immediate knowledge—the intelligent intuitive perception which all who
wish to philosophize must have. But what comes next is that its content
is no longer the indeterminate, the essence of essence, but likewise
the Absolute, God, the absolutely self-existent, though expressed as
concrete, _i.e._ as mediating itself within itself, as the absolute
unity or indifference of subjective and objective. Intellectual intuition
is the Fichtian imagination oscillating between two different points.
We have already spoken above (p. 417) of the _form_ of intellectual
intuition; it is the most convenient manner of asserting knowledge
respecting—anything one likes. But the immediate knowledge of God as
spiritual is only in the consciousness of Christian nations, and not for
others. This immediate knowledge appears to be still more contingent
as the intellectual intuition of the concrete, or the identity of
subjectivity and objectivity. This intuition is intellectual indeed,
because it is a rational intuition, and as knowledge it is likewise
absolutely one with the object of knowledge. But this intuition,
although itself knowledge, is not as yet known; it is the unmediated,
the postulated. As it is in this way an immediate we must possess it,
and what may be possessed may likewise not be possessed. Thus since the
immediate presupposition in Philosophy is that individuals have the
immediate intuition of this identity of subjective and objective, this
gave the philosophy of Schelling the appearance of indicating that the
presence of this intuition in individuals demanded a special talent,
genius, or condition of mind of their own, or as though it were generally
speaking an accidental faculty which pertained to the specially favoured
few. For the immediate, the intuitively perceived, is in the form of an
existent, and is not thus an essential; and whoever does not understand
the intellectual intuition must come to the conclusion that he does not
possess it. Or else, in order to understand it, men must give themselves
the trouble of possessing it; but no one can tell whether he has it or
not—not even from understanding it, for we may merely think we understand
it. Philosophy, however, is in its own nature capable of being universal;
for its ground-work is thought, and it is through thought that man is
man. Schelling’s principle is thus indeed clearly a universal; but if
a definite intuition, a definite consciousness is demanded, such as the
consciousness or intuition of the identity of subjective and objective,
this determinate particular thought is not as yet to be found in it.

It was, however, in this form of knowledge of the absolute as concrete,
and, further, in the form of unity of subjective and objective, that
Philosophy as represented by Schelling more especially marked itself off
from the ordinary conceiving consciousness and its mode of reflection.
Even less than Fichte did Schelling attain to popularity (_supra_, pp.
504, 505), for the concrete in its nature is directly speculative.
The concrete content, God, life, or whatever particular form it has,
is indeed the content and object of natural consciousness; but the
difficulty lies in bringing what is contained in the concrete into
concrete thought in accordance with its different determinations, and
in laying hold of the unity. It pertains to the standpoint of the
understanding to divide and to distinguish, and to maintain the finite
thought-determinations in their opposition; but Philosophy demands that
these different thoughts should be brought together. Thought begins
by holding apart infinite and finite, cause and effect, positive and
negative; since this is the region of reflecting consciousness, the old
metaphysical consciousness was able to take part in so doing: but the
speculative point of view is to have this opposition before itself and
to reconcile it. With Schelling the speculative form has thus again come
to the front, and philosophy has again obtained a special character of
its own; the principle of Philosophy, rational thought in itself, has
obtained the form of thought. In the philosophy of Schelling the content,
the truth, has once more become the matter of chief importance, whereas
in the Kantian philosophy the point of interest was more especially
stated to be the necessity for investigating subjective knowledge. This
is the standpoint of Schelling’s philosophy in its general aspects.

b. Since in further analysis the distinction between subject and object
comes into view and is accepted, there follows the relationship of the
ego to its other; with Fichte that forms the second proposition, in
which the self-limitation of the ego is posited. The ego posits itself
in opposition to itself, since it posits itself as conditioned by the
non-ego; that is the infinite repulsion, for this conditionment is the
ego itself. Schelling, on the one hand, says: “The ego is unlimited as
the ego only in so far as it is limited,” as it relates to the non-ego.
Only thus does consciousness exist, self-consciousness is a barren
determination; through its intuition of self the ego becomes finite to
itself. “This contradiction only allows itself to be dissolved by the ego
becoming in this finitude infinite to itself, _i.e._ by its having an
intuitive perception of itself as an infinite Becoming.” The relation of
the ego to itself and to the infinite check or force of repulsion is a
constant one. On the other hand it is said: “The ego is limited only in
so far as it is unlimited;” this limitation is thus necessary in order to
be able to get beyond it. The contradiction which we find here remains
even if the ego always limits the non-ego. “Both activities—that which
makes for infinitude, the limitable, real, objective activity, and the
limiting and ideal, mutually presuppose one another. Idealism reflects
merely on the one, realism on the other, transcendental idealism on
both.”[419] All this is a tangled mass of abstractions.

c. “Neither through the limiting activity nor through the limited does
the ego arrive at self-consciousness. There consequently is a third
activity, compounded from the other two, through which the ego of
self-consciousness arises; this third is that which oscillates between
the two—the struggle between opposing tendencies.” There is essential
relation only, relative identity; the difference therein present thus
ever remains. “This struggle cannot be reconciled by one such action,
but only by an infinite succession of such,” _i.e._ the reconciliation
of the opposition between the two tendencies of the ego, the inward and
the outward, is, in the infinite course of progression, only an apparent
one. In order that it may be complete, the whole inward and outward
nature must be presented in all its details: but Philosophy can only
set forth the epochs which are most important. “If all the intermediate
links in sensation could be set forth, that would necessarily lead us to
a deduction of all the qualities in nature, which last is impossible.”
Now this third activity, which contains the union directly in itself,
is a thought in which particularity is already contained. It is the
intuitive understanding of Kant, the intelligent intuition or intuitively
perceiving intelligence; Schelling, indeed, definitely names this
absolute unity of contradictions intellectual intuition. The ego here
is not one-sided in regard to what is different; it is identity of the
unconscious and the conscious, but not an identity of such a nature that
its ground rests on the ego itself.[420]

This ego must be the absolute principle: “All philosophy starts from a
principle which as absolute identity is non-objective.” For if it is
objective, separation is at once posited and it is confronted by another;
but the principle is the reconciliation of the opposition, and therefore
in and for itself it is non-objective. “Now how should a principle such
as this be called forth to consciousness and understood, as is required
if it is the condition attached to the comprehension of all philosophy?
That it can no more be comprehended through Notions [Begriffe] than set
forth, requires no proof.” Notion to Schelling signifies a category of
the ordinary understanding; Notion is, however, the concrete thought
which in itself is infinite. “There thus remains nothing more than
that it should be set forth in an immediate intuition. If there were
such an intuition which had as object the absolutely identical, that
which in itself is neither subjective nor objective, and if for such,
which,” however, “can be an intellectual intuition only, one could
appeal to immediate experience,” the question would be: “How can this
intuition be again made objective, _i.e._ how can it be asserted without
doubt that it does not rest on a subjective deception, if there is
not a universal objectivity in that intuition, which is recognized by
all?” This intellectual principle in itself should thus be given in an
experience so that men may be able to appeal to it. “The objectivity of
intellectual intuition is art. The work of art alone reflects to me what
is otherwise reflected through nothing—that absolute identical which has
already separated itself in the ego itself.” The objectivity of identity
and the knowledge of the same is art; in one and the same intuition the
ego is here conscious of itself and unconscious.[421] This intellectual
intuition which has become objective is objective sensuous intuition—but
the Notion, the comprehended necessity, is a very different objectivity.

Thus a principle is presupposed both for the content of philosophy and
for subjective philosophizing: on the one hand it is demanded that the
attitude adopted should be one of intellectual intuition, and, on the
other hand, this principle has to be authenticated, and this takes place
in the work of art. This is the highest form of the objectivization of
reason, because in it sensuous conception is united with intellectuality,
sensuous existence is merely the expression of spirituality. The
highest objectivity which the subject attains, the highest identity of
subjective and objective, is that which Schelling terms the power of
imagination. Art is thus comprehended as what is inmost and highest, that
which produces the intellectual and real in one, and philosophizing is
conceived as this genius of art. But art and power of imagination are not
supreme. For the Idea, spirit, cannot be truly given expression to in
the manner in which art expresses its Idea. This last is always a method
pertaining to intuitive perception; and on account of this sensuous
form of existence the work of art cannot correspond to the spirit.
Thus because the point last arrived at is designated as the faculty of
imagination, as art, even in the subject this is a subordinate point
of view, and thus in itself this point is not the absolute identity
of subjectivity and objectivity. In subjective thought, rational,
speculative thought is thus indeed demanded, but if this appears false to
you nothing farther can be said than that you do not possess intellectual
intuition. The proving of anything, the making it comprehensible, is thus
abandoned; a correct apprehension of it is directly demanded, and the
Idea is thus assertorically pre-established as principle. The Absolute
is the absolute identity of subjective and objective, the absolute
indifference of real and ideal, of form and essence, of universal and
particular; in this identity of the two there is neither the one nor
the other. But the unity is not abstract, empty, and dry; that would
signify logical identity, classification according to something common
to both, in which the difference remains all the while outside. The
identity is concrete: it is subjectivity as well as objectivity; the two
are present therein as abrogated and ideal. This identity may easily be
shown in the ordinary conception: the conception, we may for example
say, is subjective; it has, too, the determinate content of exclusion in
reference to other conceptions; nevertheless, the conception is simple—it
is one act, one unity.

What is lacking in Schelling’s philosophy is thus the fact that the
point of indifference of subjectivity and objectivity, or the Notion of
reason, is absolutely presupposed, without any attempt being made at
showing that this is the truth. Schelling often uses Spinoza’s form
of procedure, and sets up axioms. In philosophy, when we desire to
establish a position, we demand proof. But if we begin with intellectual
intuition, that constitutes an oracle to which we have to give way, since
the existence of intellectual intuition was made our postulate. The true
proof that this identity of subjective and objective is the truth, could
only be brought about by means of each of the two being investigated in
its logical, _i.e._ essential determinations; and in regard to them,
it must then be shown that the subjective signifies the transformation
of itself into the objective, and that the objective signifies its not
remaining such, but making itself subjective. Similarly in the finite,
it would have to be shown that it contained a contradiction in itself,
and made itself infinite; in this way we should have the unity of finite
and infinite. In so doing, this unity of opposites is not asserted
beforehand, but in the opposites themselves it is shown that their truth
is their unity, but that each taken by itself is one-sided—that their
difference veers round, casting itself headlong into this unity—while the
understanding all the time thinks that in these differences it possesses
something fixed and secure. The result of thinking contemplation would in
this former case be that each moment would secretly make itself into its
opposite, the identity of both being alone the truth. The understanding
certainly calls this transformation sophistry, humbug, juggling, and
what-not. As a result, this identity would, according to Jacobi, be
one which was no doubt conditioned and of set purpose produced. But we
must remark that a one-sided point of view is involved in apprehending
the result of development merely as a result; it is a process which is
likewise mediation within itself, of such a nature that this mediation is
again abrogated and asserted as immediate. Schelling, indeed, had this
conception in a general way, but he did not follow it out in a definite
logical method, for with him it remained an immediate truth, which can
only be verified by means of intellectual intuition. That is the great
difficulty in the philosophy of Schelling. And then it was misunderstood
and all interest taken from it. It is easy enough to show that subjective
and objective are different. Were they not different, nothing could be
made of them any more than of A = A; but they are in opposition _as one_.
In all that is finite, an identity is present, and this alone is actual;
but besides the fact that the finite is this identity, it is also true
that it is the absence of harmony between subjectivity and objectivity,
Notion and reality; and it is in this that finitude consists. To this
principle of Schelling’s, form, or necessity, is thus lacking, it is only
asserted. Schelling appears to have this in common with Plato and the
Neo-Platonists, that knowledge is to be found in the inward intuition
of eternal Ideas wherein knowledge is unmediated in the Absolute. But
when Plato speaks of this intuition of the soul, which has freed itself
from all knowledge that is finite, empirical, or reflected, and the
Neo-Platonists tell of the ecstasy of thought in which knowledge is the
immediate knowledge of the Absolute, this definite distinction must be
noticed, viz., that with Plato’s knowledge of the universal, or with
his intellectuality, wherein all opposition as a reality is abrogated,
dialectic is associated, or the recognized necessity for the abrogation
of these opposites; Plato does not begin with this, for with him the
movement in which they abrogate themselves is present. The Absolute is
itself to be looked at as this movement of self-abrogation; this is the
only actual knowledge and knowledge of the Absolute. With Schelling this
idea has, however, no dialectic present in it whereby those opposites may
determine themselves to pass over into their unity, and in so doing to be
comprehended.

2. Schelling begins with the idea of the Absolute as identity of the
subjective and objective, and accordingly there evinced itself in the
presentations of his system which followed, the further necessity of
proving this idea; this he attempted to do in the two Journals of
Speculative Physics. But if that method be once adopted, the procedure
is not immanent development from the speculative Idea, but it follows
the mode of external reflection. Schelling’s proofs are adduced in such
an exceedingly formal manner that they really invariably presuppose the
very thing that was to be proved. The axiom assumes the main point in
question, and all the rest follows as a matter of course. Here is an
instance: “The innermost essence of the Absolute can only be thought of
as identity absolute, altogether pure and undisturbed. For the Absolute
is only absolute, and what is thought in it is necessarily and invariably
the same, or in other words, is necessarily and invariably absolute. If
the idea of the Absolute were a general Notion” (or conception), “this
would not prevent a difference being met with in it, notwithstanding
this unity of the absolute. For things the most different are yet in the
Notion always one and identical, just as a rectangle, a polygon and a
circle are all figures. The possibility of the difference of all things
in association with perfect unity in the Notion lies in the manner in
which the particular in them is combined with the universal. In the
Absolute this altogether disappears, because it pertains to the very idea
of the Absolute that the particular in it is also the universal, and
the universal the particular; and further that by means of this unity
form and existence are also one in it. Consequently, in regard to the
Absolute, from the fact of its being the Absolute, there likewise follows
the absolute exclusion from its existence of all difference, and that at
once.”[422]

In the former of the two above-named works, the “Journal of Speculative
Physics,” Schelling began by again bringing forward the Substance
of Spinoza, simple, absolute Existence, inasmuch as he makes his
starting-point the absolute identity of the subjective and objective.
Here, like Spinoza, he employed the method of geometry, laying down
axioms and proving by means of propositions, then going on to deduce
other propositions from these, and so on. But this method has no real
application to philosophy. Schelling at this point laid down certain
forms of difference, to which he gave the name of potencies, adopting
the term from Eschenmayer, who made use of it (p. 514);[423] they are
ready-made differences, which Schelling avails himself of. But philosophy
must not take any forms from other sciences, as here from mathematics.
With Schelling, the leading form is that which was brought into
remembrance again by Kant, the form of triplicity as first, second, and
third potency.

Schelling, like Fichte, begins with I = I, or with the absolute
intuition, expressed as proposition or definition of the Absolute, that
“Reason is the absolute indifference of subject and object”: so that
it is neither the one nor the other, for both have in it their true
determination; and their opposition, like all others, is utterly done
away with. The true reality of subject and object is placed in this
alone, that the subject is not posited in the determination of subject
against object, as in the philosophy of Fichte; it is not determined
as in itself existent, but as subject-object, as the identity of the
two; in the same way the object is not posited according to its ideal
determination as object, but in as far as it is itself absolute, or
the identity of the subjective and objective. But the expression
“indifference” is ambiguous, for it means indifference in regard to
both the one and the other; and thus it appears as if the content of
indifference, the only thing which makes it concrete, were indifferent.
Schelling’s next requirement is that the subject must not be hampered
with reflection; that would be bringing it under the determination of
the understanding, which, equally with sensuous perception, implies
the separateness of sensuous things. As to the form of its existence,
absolute indifference is with Schelling posited as A = A; and this
form is for him the knowledge of absolute identity, which, however, is
inseparable from the Being or existence of the same.[424]

Thus, therefore, opposition, as form and reality or existence, no doubt
appears in this Absolute, but it is determined as a merely relative
or unessential opposition: “Between subject and object no other than
quantitative difference is possible. For no qualitative difference as
regards the two is thinkable,” because absolute identity “is posited as
subject and object only as regards the form of its Being, not as regards
its existence. There is consequently only a quantitative difference
left,” _i.e._ only that of magnitude: and yet difference must really be
understood as qualitative, and must thus be shown to be a difference
which abrogates itself. This quantitative difference, says Schelling,
is the form _actu_: “The quantitative difference of subjective and
objective is the basis of all finitude. Each determined potency marks
a determined quantitative difference of the subjective and objective.
Each individual Being is the result of a quantitative difference of
subjectivity and objectivity. The individual expresses absolute identity
under a determined form of Being:” so that each side is itself a relative
totality, A = B, and at the same time the one factor preponderates in
the one, and the other factor in the other, but both remain absolute
identity.[425] This is insufficient, for there are other determinations;
difference is undoubtedly qualitative, although this is not the absolute
determination. Quantitative difference is no true difference, but an
entirely external relation; and likewise the preponderance of subjective
and objective is not a determination of thought, but a merely sensuous
determination.

The Absolute itself, in so far as the positing of difference is taken
into account, is defined by Schelling as the quantitative indifference of
subjective and objective: in respect to absolute identity no quantitative
difference is thinkable. “Quantitative difference is only possible
outside of absolute identity, and outside of absolute totality. There
is nothing in itself outside of totality, excepting by virtue of an
arbitrary separation of the individual from the whole. Absolute identity
exists only under the form of the quantitative indifference of subjective
and objective.” Quantitative difference, which appears outside of
absolute identity and totality, is therefore, according to Schelling, in
itself absolute identity, and consequently thinkable only under the form
of the quantitative indifference of the subjective and objective. “This
opposition does not therefore occur in itself, or from the standpoint of
speculation. From this standpoint A exists just as much as B does; for A
like B is the whole absolute identity, which only exists under the two
forms, but under both of them alike. Absolute identity is the universe
itself. The form of its Being can be thought of under the image of a
line,” as shown by the following scheme:

  +               +
  A = B       A = B
  -----------------
        A = A

“in which the same identity is posited in each direction, but with A or B
preponderating in opposite directions.”[426] If we go into details, the
main points from an elementary point of view are the following.

The first potency is that the first quantitative difference of the
Absolute, or “the first relative totality is matter. Proof: A = B is
not anything real either as relative identity or as relative duplicity.
As identity A = B, in the individual as in the whole, can be expressed
only by the line,”—the first dimension. “But in that line A is posited
throughout as existent,” _i.e._ it is at the same time related to B.
“Therefore this line presupposes A = B as relative totality throughout;
relative totality is therefore the first presupposition, and if relative
identity exists, it exists only through relative totality,”—this is
duplicity, the second dimension. “In the same way relative duplicity
presupposes relative identity. Relative identity and duplicity are
contained in relative totality, not indeed _actu_, but yet _potentia_.
Therefore the two opposites must mutually extinguish each other in
a third” dimension. “Absolute identity as the immediate basis of
the reality of A and B in matter, is the force of gravitation. If A
preponderates we have the force of attraction, if B preponderates we have
that of expansion. The quantitative positing of the forces of attraction
and expansion passes into the infinite; their equilibrium exists in the
whole, not in the individual.”[427] From matter as the first indifference
in immediacy Schelling now passes on to further determinations.

The second potency (A²) is light, this identity itself posited as
existent; in so far as A = B, A² is also posited. The same identity,
“posited under the form of relative identity,” _i.e._ of the polarity
which we find appearing “in A and B, is the force of cohesion. Cohesion
is the impression made on matter by the self-hood” of light “or by
personality, whereby matter first emerges as particular out of the
universal identity, and raises itself into the realm of form.” Planets,
metals and other bodies form a series which under the form of dynamic
cohesion expresses particular relations of cohesion, in which on the
one hand contraction preponderates, and on the other hand expansion.
These potencies appear with Schelling as north and south, east and west
polarity: their developments further appear as north-west, south-east,
&c. He counts as the last potency Mercury, Venus, the Earth, &c. He
continues: “Cohesion outside of the point of indifference I term passive.
Towards the negative side” (or pole) “fall some of the metals which
stand next to iron, after them the so-called precious metals,” then the
“diamond, and lastly carbon, the greatest passive cohesion. Towards the
positive side, again, some metals fall, in which the cohesive nature of
iron gradually diminishes,” _i.e._ approaches disintegration, and lastly
“disappears in nitrogen.” Active cohesion is magnetism, and the material
universe is an infinite magnet. The magnetic process is difference in
indifference, and indifference in difference, and therefore absolute
identity as such. The indifference point of the magnet is the “neither
nor” and the “as well as”; the poles are potentially the same essence,
only posited under two factors which are opposed. Both poles depend “only
upon whether + or - preponderates”; they are not pure abstractions. “In
the total magnet the empirical magnet is the indifference point. The
empirical magnet is iron. All bodies are mere metamorphoses of iron—they
are potentially contained in iron. Every two different bodies which touch
each other set up mutually in each other relative diminution and increase
of cohesion. This mutual alteration of cohesion by means of the contact
of two different bodies is electricity; the cohesion-diminishing factor
+E is the potency of hydrogen,-E is the potency of oxygen. The totality
of the dynamic process is represented only by the chemical process.”[428]

“By the positing of the dynamic totality the addition of light is
directly posited as a product. The expression, the total product,
therefore signifies light combined with the force of gravitation; by the
positing of the relative totality of the whole potency, the force of
gravity is directly reduced to the mere form of the Being of absolute
identity.” Thus is the third potency (A³), the organism.[429] Schelling
launched out into too many individual details, if he desired to indicate
the construction of the whole universe. On the one hand, however, he
did not complete this representation, and on the other hand, he has
confined himself mainly to implicit existence, and has mixed therewith
the formalism of external construction according to a presupposed scheme.
In this representation he advanced only as far as the organism, and did
not reach the presentation of the other side of knowledge, _i.e._ the
philosophy of spirit. Schelling began time after time, in accordance
with the idea implied in this construction, to work out the natural
universe, and especially the organism. He banishes all such meaningless
terms as perfection, wisdom, outward adaptability; or, in other words,
the Kantian formula, that a thing appears so and so to our faculty of
knowledge, is transformed by him into this other formula, that such and
such is the constitution of Nature. Following up Kant’s meagre attempt
at demonstrating spirit in nature, he devoted special attention to
inaugurating anew this mode of regarding nature, so as to recognize in
objective existence the same schematism, the same rhythm, as is present
in the ideal. Hence nature represents itself therein not as something
alien to spirit, but as being in its general aspect a projection of
spirit into an objective mode.

We have further to remark that Schelling by this theory became the
originator of modern Natural Philosophy, since he was the first to
exhibit Nature as the sensuous perception or the expression of the
Notion and its determinations. Natural Philosophy is no new science; we
met with it continually—in the works of Aristotle, for instance, and
elsewhere. English Philosophy is also a mere apprehension in thought of
the physical; forces, laws of Nature, are its fundamental determinations.
The opposition of physics and Natural Philosophy is therefore not the
opposition of the unthinking and the thinking view of Nature; Natural
Philosophy means, if we take it in its whole extent, nothing else
than the thoughtful contemplation of Nature; but this is the work of
ordinary physics also, since its determinations of forces, laws, &c.,
are thoughts. The only difference is that in physics thoughts are formal
thoughts of the understanding, whose material and content cannot, as
regards their details, be determined by thought itself, but must be
taken from experience. But concrete thought contains its determination
and its content in itself, and merely the external mode of appearance
pertains to the senses. If, then, Philosophy passes beyond the form of
the understanding, and has apprehended the speculative Notion, it must
alter the determinations of thought, the categories of the understanding
regarding Nature. Kant was the first to set about this; and Schelling has
sought to grasp the Notion of Nature, instead of contenting himself with
the ordinary metaphysics of the same. Nature is to him nothing but the
external mode of existence as regards the system of thought-forms, just
as mind is the existence of the same system in the form of consciousness.
That for which we have to thank Schelling, therefore, is not that he
brought thought to bear on the comprehension of Nature, but that he
altered the categories according to which thought applied itself to
Nature; he introduced forms of Reason, and applied them—as he did the
form of the syllogism in magnetism, for instance—in place of the ordinary
categories of the understanding. He has not only shown these forms in
Nature, but has also sought to evolve Nature out of a principle of this
kind.

In the “Further Exposition of the System of Philosophy” which the “New
Journal for Speculative Physics” furnishes, Schelling chose other forms;
for, by reason of incompletely developed form and lack of dialectic,
he had recourse to various forms one after another, because he found
none of them sufficient. Instead of the equilibrium of subjectivity
and objectivity, he now speaks of the identity of existence and form,
of universal and particular, of finite and infinite, of positive and
negative, and he defines absolute indifference sometimes in one and
sometimes in another form of opposition, just according to chance. All
such oppositions may be employed; but they are only abstract, and refer
to different stages in the development of the logical principle itself.
Form and essence are distinguished by Schelling in this way, that
form, regarded on its own account, is the particular, or the emerging
of difference, subjectivity. But real existence is absolute form or
absolute knowledge immediately in itself, a self-conscious existence in
the sense of thinking knowledge, just as with Spinoza it had the form
of something objective or in thought. Speculative Philosophy is to be
found in this assertion, not that it asserts an independent philosophy,
for it is purely organization; knowledge is based on the Absolute. Thus
Schelling has again given to transcendental Idealism the significance of
absolute Idealism. This unity of existence and form is thus, according
to Schelling, the Absolute; or if we regard reality as the universal,
and form as the particular, the Absolute is the absolute unity of
universal and particular, or of Being and knowledge. The different
aspects, subject and object, or universal and particular, are only ideal
oppositions; they are in the Absolute entirely and altogether one. This
unity as form is intellectual intuition, which posits Thinking and
Being as absolutely alike, and as it formally expresses the Absolute,
it becomes at the same time the expression of its essence. He who has
not the power of imagination, whereby he may represent this unity to
himself, is deficient in the organ of Philosophy. But in this consists
the true absoluteness of all and each, that the one is not recognized as
universal, and the other as particular, but the universal in this its
determination is recognized as unity of the universal and particular,
and in like manner the particular is recognized as the unity of both.
Construction merely consists in leading back everything determined and
particular into the Absolute, or regarding it as it is in absolute unity;
its determinateness is only its ideal moment, but its truth is really
its Being in the Absolute. These three moments or potencies—that of the
passing of existence (the infinite) into form (the finite), and of form
into existence (which are both relative unities), and the third, the
absolute unity, thus recur anew in each individual. Hence Nature, the
real or actual aspect, as the passing of existence into form or of the
universal into the particular, itself again possesses these three unities
in itself, and in the same way the ideal aspect does so; therefore each
potency is on its own account once more absolute. This is the general
idea of the scientific construction of the universe—to repeat in each
individual alike the triplicity which is the scheme of the whole, thereby
to show the identity of all things, and in doing so to regard them in
their absolute essence, so that they all express the same unity.[430]

The more detailed explanation is extremely formal: “Existence passes into
form—this taken by itself being the particular (the finite)—by means of
the infinite being added to it; unity is received into multiplicity,
indifference into difference.” The other assertion is: “Form passes into
existence by the finite being received into the infinite, difference into
indifference.” But passing into and receiving into are merely sensuous
expressions. “Otherwise expressed, the particular becomes absolute
form by the universal becoming one with it, and the universal becomes
absolute existence by the particular becoming one with it. But these two
unities, as in the Absolute, are not outside of one another, but in one
another, and therefore the Absolute is absolute indifference of form and
existence,” as unity of this double passing-into-one. “By means of these
two unities two different potencies are determined, but in themselves
they are both the exactly equal roots of the Absolute.”[431] That is a
mere assertion, the continual return after each differentiation, which is
perpetually again removed out of the Absolute.

“Of the first absolute transformation there are copies in phenomenal
Nature; therefore Nature, regarded in itself, is nothing else than
that first transformation as it exists in the absolute (unseparated
from the other). For by means of the infinite passing into the finite,
existence passes into form; since then form obtains reality only by
means of existence, existence, when it has passed into form without form
having (according to the assumption) similarly passed into existence,
can be represented only as potentiality or ground of reality, but not
as indifference of possibility and actuality. But that which may be
described thus, namely as existence, in so far as that is mere ground of
reality, and therefore has really passed into form, although form has not
in turn passed into it, is what presents itself as Nature.—Existence
makes its appearance in form, but in return form also makes its
appearance in existence; this is the other unity,” that of mind. “This
unity is established by the finite being received into the infinite. At
this point form, as the particular, strikes into existence, and itself
becomes absolute. Form which passes into existence places itself as
absolute activity and positive cause of reality in opposition to the
existence which passes into form, and which appears only as ground. The
passing of absolute form into existence is what we think of as God, and
the images or copies of this transformation are in the ideal world, which
is therefore in its implicitude the other unity.”[432] Each of these
two transformations, then, is the whole totality, not, however, posited
and not appearing as totality, but with the one or the other factor
preponderating; each of the two spheres has, therefore, in itself again
these differences, and thus in each of them the three potencies are to be
found.

The ground or basis, Nature as basis merely, is matter, gravity, as the
first potency; this passing of form into existence is in the actual world
universal mechanism, necessity. But the second potency is “the light
which shineth in darkness, form which has passed into existence. The
absolute unification of the two unities in actuality, so that matter is
altogether form, and form is altogether matter, is organism, the highest
expression of Nature as it is in God, and of God as He is in Nature, in
the finite.” On the ideal side “Knowledge is the essence of the Absolute
brought into the daylight of form; action is a transformation of form, as
the particular, into the essence of the Absolute. As in the real world
form that is identified with essence appears as light, so in the ideal
world God Himself appears in particular manifestation as the living form
which has emerged in the passing of form into essence, so that in every
respect the ideal and real world are again related as likeness and
symbol. The absolute unification of the two unities in the ideal, so that
material is wholly form and form wholly material, is the work of art;
and that secret hidden in the Absolute which is the root of all reality
comes here into view, in the reflected world itself, in the highest
potency and highest union of God and Nature as the power of imagination.”
On account of that permeation art and poetry therefore hold the highest
rank in Schelling’s estimation. But art is the Absolute in sensuous form
alone. Where and what could the work of art be, which should correspond
to the Idea of the spirit? “The universe is formed in the Absolute as
the most perfect organic existence and the most perfect work of art: for
Reason, which recognizes the Absolute in it, it possesses absolute truth;
for the imagination, which represents the Absolute in it, it possesses
absolute Beauty. Each of these expresses the very same unity,” regarded
“from different sides; and both arrive at the absolute indifference point
in the recognition of which lies both the beginning and the aim of real
knowledge.”[433] This highest Idea, these differences, are grasped as a
whole in a very formal manner only.

3. The relation of Nature to Spirit, and to God, the Absolute, has
been stated by Schelling elsewhere, _i.e._ in his later expositions,
as follows: he defines the existence of God as Nature—in so far as God
constitutes Himself its ground or basis, as infinite perception—and
Nature is thus the negative moment in God, since intelligence and
thought exist only by means of the opposition of one Being. For in one
of his writings, directed on some particular occasion against Jacobi,
Schelling explains himself further with regard to the nature of God and
His relation to Nature. He says: “God, or more properly the existence
which is God, is ground: He is ground of Himself as a moral Being.
But” then “it is ground that He makes Himself”—not cause. Something
must precede intelligence, and that something is Being—“since thought
is the exact opposite of Being. That which is the beginning of an
intelligence cannot be in its turn intelligent, since there would
otherwise be no distinction; but it cannot be absolutely unintelligent,
for the very reason that it is the potentiality of an intelligence. It
will accordingly be something between these, _i.e._ it will operate
with wisdom, but as it were with an innate, instinctive, blind, and
yet unconscious wisdom; just as we often hear those who are under a
spell uttering words full of understanding, but not uttering them with
comprehension of their meaning, but as it were owing to an inspiration.”
God, therefore, as this ground of Himself, is Nature—Nature as it is in
God; this is the view taken of Nature in Natural Philosophy.[434] But
the work of the Absolute is to abrogate this ground, and to constitute
itself Intelligence. On this account Schelling’s philosophy has later
been termed a Philosophy of Nature, and that in the sense of a universal
philosophy, while at first Natural Philosophy was held to be only a part
of the whole.

It is not incumbent on us here to give a more detailed account of
Schelling’s philosophy, or to show points in the expositions hitherto
given by him which are far from satisfactory. The system is the latest
form of Philosophy which we had to consider, and it is a form both
interesting and true. In the first place special emphasis, in dealing
with Schelling, must be laid on the idea that he has grasped the true
as the concrete, as the unity of subjective and objective. The main
point in Schelling’s philosophy thus is that its interest centres round
that deep, speculative content, which, as content, is the content with
which Philosophy in the entire course of its history has had to do.
The Thought which is free and independent, not abstract, but in itself
concrete, comprehends itself in itself as an intellectually actual
world; and this is the truth of Nature, Nature in itself. The second
great merit possessed by Schelling is to have pointed out in Nature the
forms of Spirit; thus electricity, magnetism, &c., are for him only
external modes of the Idea. His defect is that this Idea in general,
its distinction into the ideal and the natural world, and also the
totality of these determinations, are not shown forth and developed as
necessitated in themselves by the Notion. As Schelling has not risen to
this point of view, he has misconceived the nature of thought; the work
of art thus becomes for him the supreme and only mode in which the Idea
exists for spirit. But the supreme mode of the Idea is really its own
element; thought, the Idea apprehended, is therefore higher than the work
of art. The Idea is the truth, and all that is true is the Idea; the
systematizing of the Idea into the world must be proved to be a necessary
unveiling and revelation. With Schelling, on the other hand, form is
really an external scheme, and his method is the artificial application
of this scheme to external objects. This externally applied scheme
takes the place of dialectic progress; and this is the special reason
why the philosophy of Nature has brought itself into discredit, that it
has proceeded on an altogether external plan, has made its foundation a
ready-made scheme, and fitted into it Nature as we perceive it. These
forms were potencies with Schelling, but instead of mathematical forms
or a type of thought like this, by some other men sensuous forms have
been taken as basis, just as were sulphur and mercury by Jacob Boehme.
For instance, magnetism, electricity, and chemistry have been defined to
be the three potencies in Nature, and thus in the organism reproduction
has been termed chemistry; irritability, electricity; and sensibility,
magnetism.[435] In this way there has crept into Natural Philosophy
the great formalism of representing everything as a series, which is a
superficial determination without necessity, since instead of Notions
we find formulas. Brilliant powers of imagination are displayed, such
as were exhibited by Görres. This mistake of applying forms which are
taken from one sphere of Nature to another sphere of the same has been
carried a long way; Oken, for example, calls wood-fibres the nerves and
brain of the plant, and is almost crazy on the subject. Philosophy would
in this way become a play of mere analogical reflections; and it is not
with these but with thoughts that we have to do. Nerves are not thoughts,
any more than such expressions as pole of contraction, of expansion,
masculine, feminine, &c. The formal plan of applying an external scheme
to the sphere of Nature which one wishes to observe, is the external
work of Natural Philosophy, and this scheme is itself derived from the
imagination. That is a most false mode of proceeding; Schelling took
advantage of it to some extent, others have made a complete misuse of it.
All this is done to escape thought; nevertheless, thought is the ultimate
simple determination which has to be dealt with.

It is therefore of the greatest importance to distinguish Schelling’s
philosophy, on the one hand, from that imitation of it which throws
itself into an unspiritual farrago of words regarding the Absolute; and,
on the other hand, from the philosophy of those imitators, who, owing to
a failure to understand intellectual intuition, give up comprehension,
and with it the leading moment of knowledge, and speak from so-called
intuition, _i.e._ they take a glance at the thing in question, and having
fastened on it some superficial analogy or definition, they fancy they
have expressed its whole nature, while in point of fact they put an
end to all capacity for attaining to scientific knowledge. This whole
tendency places itself, in the first place, in opposition to reflective
thought, or to progress in fixed, steadfast, immovable Notions. But
instead of remaining in the Notion and recognizing it as the unresting
ego, they have lighted on the opposite extreme of passive intuition,
of immediate Being, of fixed implicitude; and they think that they can
make up for the lack of fixity by superficial observation, and can
render this observation intellectual by determining it once more by some
fixed Notion or other; or they bring their minds to bear on the object
of consideration by saying, for instance, that the ostrich is the fish
among birds, because he has a long neck—fish becomes a general term, but
not a Notion. This whole mode of reasoning, which has forced its way
into natural history and natural science, as well as into medicine, is a
miserable formalism, an irrational medley of the crudest empiricism with
the most superficial ideal determinations that formalism ever descended
to. The philosophy of Locke is not so crude as it is, for it is not a
whit better in either its content or its form, and it is combined with
foolish self-conceit into the bargain. Philosophy on this account sank
into general and well-deserved contempt, such as is for the most part
extended to those who assert that they have a monopoly of philosophy.
Instead of earnestness of apprehension and circumspection of thought,
we find in them a juggling with idle fancies, which pass for deep
conceptions, lofty surmises, and even for poetry; and they think they
are right in the centre of things when they are only on the surface.
Five-and-twenty years ago[436] the case was the same with poetic art; a
taste for ingenious conceits took possession of it, and the effusions
of its poetic inspiration came forth blindly from itself, shot out as
from a pistol. The results were either crazy ravings, or, if they were
not ravings, they were prose so dull that it was unworthy of the name of
prose. It is just the same in the later philosophies. What is not utterly
senseless drivel about the indifference-point and polarity, about oxygen,
the holy, the infinite, &c., is made up of thoughts so trivial that we
might well doubt our having correctly apprehended their meaning, in the
first place because they are given forth with such arrogant effrontery,
and in the second place because we cannot help trusting that what was
said was not so trivial as it seems. As in the Philosophy of Nature men
forgot the Notion and proceeded in a dead unspiritual course, so here
they lose sight of spirit entirely. They have strayed from the right
road; for by their principle, Notion and perception are one unity, but in
point of fact this unity, this spirit, itself emerges in immediacy, and
is therefore in intuitive perception, and not in the Notion.


E. FINAL RESULT.

The present standpoint of philosophy is that the Idea is known in its
necessity; the sides of its diremption, Nature and Spirit, are each of
them recognized as representing the totality of the Idea, and not only as
being in themselves identical, but as producing this one identity from
themselves; and in this way the identity is recognized as necessary.
Nature, and the world or history of spirit, are the two realities; what
exists as actual Nature is an image of divine Reason; the forms of
self-conscious Reason are also the forms of Nature. The ultimate aim
and business of philosophy is to reconcile thought or the Notion with
reality. It is easy from subordinate standpoints to find satisfaction
in modes of intuitive perception and of feeling. But the deeper the
spirit goes within itself, the more vehement is the opposition, the
more abundant is the wealth without; the depth is to be measured by
the greatness of the craving with which spirit seeks to find itself
in what lies outside of itself. We saw the thought which apprehends
itself appearing; it strove to make itself concrete within itself. Its
first activity is formal; Aristotle was the first to say that νοῦς is
the thought of thought. The result is the thought which is at home
with itself, and at the same time embraces the universe therein, and
transforms it into an intelligent world. In apprehension the spiritual
and the natural universe are interpenetrated as one harmonious universe,
which withdraws into itself, and in its various aspects develops the
Absolute into a totality, in order, by the very process of so doing, to
become conscious of itself in its unity, in Thought. Philosophy is thus
the true theodicy, as contrasted with art and religion and the feelings
which these call up—a reconciliation of spirit, namely of the spirit
which has apprehended itself in its freedom and in the riches of its
reality.

To this point the World-spirit has come, and each stage has its own form
in the true system of Philosophy; nothing is lost, all principles are
preserved, since Philosophy in its final aspect is the totality of forms.
This concrete idea is the result of the strivings of spirit during almost
twenty-five centuries of earnest work to become objective to itself, to
know itself:

  _Tantæ molis erat, se ipsam cognoscere mentem._

All this time was required to produce the philosophy of our day; so
tardily and slowly did the World-spirit work to reach this goal. What we
pass in rapid review when we recall it, stretched itself out in reality
to this great length of time. For in this lengthened period, the Notion
of Spirit, invested with its entire concrete development, its external
subsistence, its wealth, is striving to bring spirit to perfection, to
make progress itself and to develop from spirit. It goes ever on and on,
because spirit is progress alone. Spirit often seems to have forgotten
and lost itself, but inwardly opposed to itself, it is inwardly working
ever forward (as when Hamlet says of the ghost of his father, “Well said,
old mole! canst work i’ the ground so fast?”[437]), until grown strong
in itself it bursts asunder the crust of earth which divided it from the
sun, its Notion, so that the earth crumbles away. At such a time, when
the encircling crust, like a soulless decaying tenement, crumbles away,
and spirit displays itself arrayed in new youth, the seven league boots
are at length adopted. This work of the spirit to know itself, this
activity to find itself, is the life of the spirit and the spirit itself.
Its result is the Notion which it takes up of itself; the history of
Philosophy is a revelation of what has been the aim of spirit throughout
its history; it is therefore the world’s history in its innermost
signification. This work of the human spirit in the recesses of thought
is parallel with all the stages of reality; and therefore no philosophy
oversteps its own time. The importance which the determinations of
thought possessed is another matter, which does not belong to the history
of Philosophy. These Notions are the simplest revelation of the World
spirit: in their more concrete form they are history.

We must, therefore, in the first place not esteem lightly what spirit has
won, namely its gains up to the present day. Ancient Philosophy is to be
reverenced as necessary, and as a link in this sacred chain, but all the
same nothing more than a link. The present is the highest stage reached.
In the second place, all the various philosophies are no mere fashionable
theories of the time, or anything of a similar nature; they are neither
chance products nor the blaze of a fire of straw, nor casual eruptions
here and there, but a spiritual, reasonable, forward advance; they are of
necessity one Philosophy in its development, the revelation of God, as He
knows Himself to be. Where several philosophies appear at the same time,
they are different sides which make up one totality forming their basis;
and on account of their one-sidedness we see the refutation of the one by
the other. In the third place we do not find here feeble little efforts
to establish or to criticize this or that particular point; instead of
that, each philosophy sets up a new principle of its own, and this must
be recognized.

If we glance at the main epochs in the whole history of Philosophy, and
grasp the necessary succession of stages in the leading moments, each of
which expresses a determinate Idea, we find that after the Oriental whirl
of subjectivity, which attains to no intelligibility and therefore to no
subsistence, the light of thought dawned among the Greeks.

1. The philosophy of the ancients had the absolute Idea as its thought;
and the realization or reality of the same consisted in comprehending the
existing present world, and regarding it as it is in its absolute nature.
This philosophy did not make its starting-point the Idea itself, but
proceeded from the objective as from something given, and transformed the
same into the Idea; the Being of Parmenides.

2. Abstract thought, νοῦς, became known to itself as universal essence or
existence, not as subjective thought; the Universal of Plato.

3. In Aristotle the Notion emerges, free and unconstrained, as
comprehending thought, permeating and spiritualizing all the forms which
the universe contains.

4. The Notion as subject, its independence, its inwardness, abstract
separation, is represented by the Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics: here
we have not the free, concrete form, but universality abstract and in
itself formal.

5. The thought of totality, the intelligible world, is the concrete
Idea as we have seen it with the Neo-Platonists. This principle is
ideality generally speaking, which is present in all reality, but not
the Idea which knows itself: this is not reached until the principle
of subjectivity, individuality, found a place in it, and God as spirit
became actual to Himself in self-consciousness.

6. But it has been the work of modern times to grasp this Idea as spirit,
as the Idea that knows itself. In order to proceed from the conscious
Idea to the self-conscious, we must have the infinite opposition, namely
the fact that the Idea has come to the consciousness of being absolutely
sundered in twain. As spirit had the thought of objective existence,
Philosophy thus perfected the intellectuality of the world, and produced
this spiritual world as an object existing beyond present reality,
like Nature,—the first creation of spirit. The work of the spirit now
consisted in bringing this Beyond back to reality, and guiding it into
self-consciousness. This is accomplished by self-consciousness thinking
itself, and recognizing absolute existence to be the self-consciousness
that thinks itself. With Descartes pure thought directed itself on
that separation which we spoke of above. Self-consciousness, in the
first place, thinks of itself as consciousness; therein is contained
all objective reality, and the positive, intuitive reference of its
reality to the other side. With Spinoza Thought and Being are opposed
and yet identical; he has the intuitive perception of substance, but
the knowledge of substance in his case is external. We have here the
principle of reconciliation taking its rise from thought as such, in
order to abrogate the subjectivity of thought: this is the case in
Leibnitz’s monad, which possesses the power of representation.

7. In the second place, self-consciousness thinks of itself as being
self-consciousness; in being self-conscious it is independent, but
still in this independence it has a negative relation to what is
outside self-consciousness. This is infinite subjectivity, which
appears at one time as the critique of thought in the case of Kant, and
at another time, in the case of Fichte, as the tendency or impulse
towards the concrete. Absolute, pure, infinite form is expressed as
self-consciousness, the Ego.

8. This is a light that breaks forth on spiritual substance, and shows
absolute content and absolute form to be identical;—substance is in
itself identical with knowledge. Self-consciousness thus, in the third
place, recognizes its positive relation as its negative, and its negative
as its positive,—or, in other words, recognizes these opposite activities
as the same, _i.e._ it recognizes pure Thought or Being as self-identity,
and this again as separation. This is intellectual perception; but it
is requisite in order that it should be in truth intellectual, that it
should not be that merely immediate perception of the eternal and the
divine which we hear of, but should be absolute knowledge. This intuitive
perception which does not recognize itself is taken as starting-point as
if it were absolutely presupposed; it has in itself intuitive perception
only as immediate knowledge, and not as self-knowledge: or it knows
nothing, and what it perceives it does not really know,—for, taken at its
best, it consists of beautiful thoughts, but not knowledge.

But intellectual intuition is knowledge, since, in the first place, in
spite of the separation of each of the opposed sides from the other, all
external reality is known as internal. If it is known according to its
essence, as it is, it shows itself as not existing of itself, but as
essentially consisting in the movement of transition. This Heraclitean
or Sceptical principle, that nothing is at rest, must be demonstrated of
each individual thing; and thus in this consciousness—that the essence of
each thing lies in determination, in what is the opposite of itself—there
appears the apprehended unity with its opposite. Similarly this unity is,
in the second place, to be recognized even in its essence; its essence
as this identity is, in the same way, to pass over into its opposite, or
to realize itself, to become for itself something different; and thus
the opposition in it is brought about by itself. Again, it may be said
of the opposition, in the third place, that it is not in the Absolute;
this Absolute is existence, the eternal, &c. This is, however, itself an
abstraction in which the Absolute is apprehended in a one-sided manner
only, and the opposition is apprehended only as ideal (_supra_, p.
536); but in fact it is form, as the essential moment of the movement
of the Absolute. This Absolute is not at rest, and that opposition is
not the unresting Notion; for the Idea, unresting though it is, is
yet at rest and satisfied in itself. Pure thought has advanced to the
opposition of the subjective and objective; the true reconciliation of
the opposition is the perception that this opposition, when pushed to
its absolute extreme, resolves itself; as Schelling says, the opposites
are in themselves identical—and not only in themselves, but eternal life
consists in the very process of continually producing the opposition and
continually reconciling it. To know opposition in unity, and unity in
opposition—this is absolute knowledge; and science is the knowledge of
this unity in its whole development by means of itself.

This is then the demand of all time and of Philosophy. A new epoch has
arisen in the world. It would appear as if the World-spirit had at last
succeeded in stripping off from itself all alien objective existence,
and apprehending itself at last as absolute Spirit, in developing
from itself what for it is objective, and keeping it within its own
power, yet remaining at rest all the while. The strife of the finite
self-consciousness with the absolute self-consciousness, which last
seemed to the other to lie outside of itself, now comes to an end. Finite
self-consciousness has ceased to be finite; and in this way absolute
self-consciousness has, on the other hand, attained to the reality which
it lacked before. This is the whole history of the world in general up
to the present time, and the history of Philosophy in particular, the
sole work of which is to depict this strife. Now, indeed, it seems to
have reached its goal, when this absolute self-consciousness, which it
had the work of representing, has ceased to be alien, and when spirit
accordingly is realized as spirit. For it becomes such only as the result
of its knowing itself to be absolute spirit, and this it knows in real
scientific knowledge. Spirit produces itself as Nature, as the State;
nature is its unconscious work, in the course of which it appears to
itself something different, and not spirit; but in the State, in the
deeds and life of History, as also of Art, it brings itself to pass with
consciousness; it knows very various modes of its reality, yet they are
only modes. In scientific knowledge alone it knows itself as absolute
spirit; and this knowledge, or spirit, is its only true existence. This
then is the standpoint of the present day, and the series of spiritual
forms is with it for the present concluded.

At this point I bring this history of Philosophy to a close. It has been
my desire that you should learn from it that the history of Philosophy is
not a blind collection of fanciful ideas, nor a fortuitous progression.
I have rather sought to show the necessary development of the successive
philosophies from one another, so that the one of necessity presupposes
another preceding it. The general result of the history of Philosophy is
this: in the first place, that throughout all time there has been only
one Philosophy, the contemporary differences of which constitute the
necessary aspects of the one principle; in the second place, that the
succession of philosophic systems is not due to chance, but represents
the necessary succession of stages in the development of this science;
in the third place, that the final philosophy of a period is the
result of this development, and is truth in the highest form which the
self-consciousness of spirit affords of itself. The latest philosophy
contains therefore those which went before; it embraces in itself all the
different stages thereof; it is the product and result of those that
preceded it. We can now, for example, be Platonists no longer. Moreover
we must raise ourselves once for all above the pettinesses of individual
opinions, thoughts, objections, and difficulties; and also above our
own vanity, as if our individual thoughts were of any particular value.
For to apprehend the inward substantial spirit is the standpoint of the
individual; as parts of the whole, individuals are like blind men, who
are driven forward by the indwelling spirit of the whole. Our standpoint
now is accordingly the knowledge of this Idea as spirit, as absolute
Spirit, which in this way opposes to itself another spirit, the finite,
the principle of which is to know absolute spirit, in order that absolute
spirit may become existent for it. I have tried to develop and bring
before your thoughts this series of successive spiritual forms pertaining
to Philosophy in its progress, and to indicate the connection between
them. This series is the true kingdom of spirits, the only kingdom of
spirits that there is—it is a series which is not a multiplicity, nor
does it even remain a series, if we understand thereby that one of its
members merely follows on another; but in the very process of coming to
the knowledge of itself it is transformed into the moments of the one
Spirit, or the one self-present Spirit. This long procession of spirits
is formed by the individual pulses which beat in its life; they are the
organism of our substance, an absolutely necessary progression, which
expresses nothing less than the nature of spirit itself, and which
lives in us all. We have to give ear to its urgency—when the mole that
is within forces its way on—and we have to make it a reality. It is my
desire that this history of Philosophy should contain for you a summons
to grasp the spirit of the time, which is present in us by nature,
and—each in his own place—consciously to bring it from its natural
condition, _i.e._ from its lifeless seclusion, into the light of day.

I have to express my thanks to you for the attention with which you have
listened to me while I have been making this attempt; it is in great
measure due to you that my efforts have met with so great a measure of
success. And it has been a source of pleasure to myself to have been
associated with you in this spiritual community; I ought not to speak of
it as if it were a thing of the past, for I hope that a spiritual bond
has been knit between us which will prove permanent. I bid you a most
hearty farewell.

       *       *       *       *       *

(The closing lecture of the series was given on the 22nd March, 1817; on
the 14th March, 1818; on the 12th August, 1819; on the 23rd March, 1821;
on the 30th March, 1824; on the 28th March, 1828; and on the 26th March,
1830.)




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Neander. Genet. Entwickelung d. vornehmsten gnost. Systeme, p. 43.

[2] Neander. Genetische Entwickelung, &c., pp. 87-91.

[3] Tennemann, Vol. VIII Section I. p. 366; Buhle: Lehrb. d. Gesch. d.
Phil. Part V. p. 36; Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. pp. 23, 24; 28,
29.

[4] Moses Maimonides: More Nevochim, P. I. c. 71, pp. 133, 134 (Basil.
1629).

[5] Abulphar. Dynast. IX. pp. 153, 171, 208, 209; Brucker. Hist. crit.
phil. T. III. pp. 27-29, 44.

[6] Moses Maimonides: More Nevochim, P. I. c. 73, pp. 152-155, 157-159.

[7] Pocock. Specim. hist. Arab. pp. 78, 79; Hottinger. Biblioth. orient.
c. 2, p. 219; Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. III. pp. 65, 66; Tennemann,
Vol. VIII. Section I. p. 374.

[8] Hottinger. Biblioth. orient. c. 2, p. 221; Gabriel Sionita: De
moribus Orient. p. 16; Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. III. pp. 73, 74;
Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section I. pp. 374, 375.

[9] Leo Africanus: De illustrib. Arabum viris, c. 9, p. 268; Abulphar.
Dynast. IX. p. 230, Tiedemann, Geist. d. spec. Phil. Vol. IV. p. 112,
_sqq._, Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. III. pp. 80-84.

[10] Leo Afric. De illustrib. Arabum viris, c. 12, p. 274; Brucker. Hist.
cr. phil. T. III. pp. 93-95; Tiedemann, Geist. d. spec. Phil. Vol. IV.
pp. 120-126, Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section I. pp. 383-396.

[11] Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. III. p. 97.

[12] Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. III. p. 101; Tennemann, Vol. III.
Section I. pp. 420, 421.

[13] Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. II. p. 857; Tennemann, Vol. VIII.
Section I. pp. 446, 447.

[14] Moses Maimonides: More Nevochim, P. I. c. 51, pp. 76-78; c. 57, 58,
pp. 93-98; II. c. 1, 2, pp. 184-193; III. c. 8, pp. 344-350; &c., &c.

[15] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Pt. I. p. 49.

[16] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. pp. 614-617; Bulæus: Hist.
Universitatis Parisiensis; T. I. p. 184.

[17] Bulæus: Hist. Univ. Paris. T. I. p. 182. (Tennemann, Vol. VIII. pp.
71, 72.)

[18] De prædestinatione. Proœmium (Veterum auctorum, qui IX. sæculo de
prædestinatione et gratia scripserunt, opera et fragmenta, cura Gilb.
Mauguin. Paris, 1650. T. I. p. 103.)

[19] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. I. pp. 115, 117.

[20] Anselmi Epistol. XLI. I. 11 (Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. I. pp. 159,
160.)

[21] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. I. p. 116; Eadmerus: De vita Anselmi
(subjuncta operibus Anselmi editis a Gabr. Gerberon. 1721. Fol.), p. 6.

[22] Gaunilo: Liber pro insipiente, c. 5; Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. I.
p. 139; Brucker, Hist. crit. phil. T. III. p. 665.

[23] Tiedemann: Geist d. specul. Philos. Vol. IV. p. 277; Brucker. Hist.
crit. phil. T. III. p. 762.

[24] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. II. pp. 457, 458.

[25] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. pp. 764-768.

[26] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. I. pp. 317, 325; Brucker, Hist. crit.
phil. T. III. p. 688; Thomas Aquinas: in IV. libros sentent. L. II. Dist.
17, Qu. I. Art. I; Alberti Magni: Summa Theol. P. I. Tract. IV. Qu. 20
(Oper. T. XVII. p. 76).

[27] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. II. pp. 550-553; Brucker, Hist. crit.
phil. T. III. p. 802.

[28] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Sec. II. pp. 554-561.

[29] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. pp. 825-828; Bulæus: Hist. Univ.
Paris. T. IV. p. 970.

[30] Duns Scotus in Magistrum sententiarum. Proœmium (Tennemann, Vol.
VIII. Sec. II. p. 706).

[31] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. p. 828; et not. from Sancrutius.

[32] Trithemius: Annal. Hirsaugiens, T. I. p. 135.

[33] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. pp. 779, 697; Tennemann, Vol.
VIII. Sec. I. pp. 353-359, and in the same place, note 3 (cf. Jourdain,
Gesch. d. Arist. Schriften im Mittelalter, ubersetzt von Stahr pp.
165-176); Bulæus: Hist. Univers. Paris, T. III. pp. 82, 142; Launoius, De
varia Arist. fortuna in Academ. Paris, c. IX. p. 210.

[34] Hegel erroneously mentions this event as occurring to “William
of England” instead of to William of Holland, King of the Romans.
[Translator’s note.]

[35] Brucker. Hist. cr. phil. T. III. pp. 788-798.

[36] Anselmus: De fide trinitatis, c. 2, 3; Epist. XLI. 1. 11; Tennemann,
Vol. VIII. Section I. p. 158.

[37] Rixner: Handbuch der Geschichte der Philos., Vol. II. p. 26 (1st
ed.); Anselmus De fide trinitatis, c. 2; Buhle: Lehrbuch d. Geschichte d.
Philosoph., Part V. p. 184; Abælard, Epist. XXI.; Tennemann, Vol. VIII
Section I. pp. 162, 163.

[38] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section I. p. 339; Joh. Sarisberiensis:
Metalogicus, L. II. c. 17.

[39] Tiedemann: Geist d. specul. Philos. Vol. V. pp. 401, 402; Suarez.
Disputationes metaphysicæ, Disp. I Sectio 6.

[40] Tiedemann; Geist d. specul. Philos. Vol. IV. pp. 490, 491; Thomas
Aquinas: De ente et essent. c 3 et 5.

[41] Tiedemann: Geist d. spec. Philos. Vol. IV. pp. 609-613; Scotus:
in Magistrum sententiar. L. II. Dist., 3. Qu. 1-6; Occam: in libr. I.
sentent. Dist. II. Quæst. 6 (Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 852,
853.)

[42] Rixner: Handbuch der Geschichte der Philos. Vol. II. p. 110.

[43] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. pp. 846-848, 911, 912; Tennemann,
Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 903, 944, 945, 925, 939, 940; Bulæus: Hist.
Univers. Paris, T. IV. pp. 257, 265.

[44] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 914-919, 945-947; Bulæus:
Hist. Univ. Paris. T.V. pp. 706, 739, 740.

[45] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section I. p. 61; Cramer, Fortsetzung von
Bossuet, Part V. Vol. II. p. 88.

[46] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section I. p. 61; Bulæus: Hist. Univ. Paris.
T. I. p. 169.

[47] Rixner: Handbuch d. Gesch. d. Phil. Vol. II. p. 153.

[48] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section I, pp. 236, 237.

[49] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. III. p. 878.

[50] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 955, 956.

[51] Rixner: Handbuch d. Geschichte d. Philos. Vol. II. p. 157;
Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section II. p. 964 _seq._; Tiedemann: Geist d.
spec. Phil. Vol. V. p. 290 _seq._

[52] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 824-829.

[53] Rixner: Lehrbuch d. Gesch. d. Philos. Vol. II. p. 126; Tennemann,
Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 829, 833.

[54] Tennemann, Vol. VIII. Section II. pp. 834-836; Rixner: Handb. d.
Gesch. d. Phil. Vol. II. Appendix, pp. 86-89; Jordanus Brunus Nolanus: De
compendiosa architectura et complemento artis Lullii, Sectio II. (Bruni
scripta, quæ latine confecit, omnia; ed. Gfrörer, Stuttgardiæ 1835,
Fasciculus II. pp. 243-264).

[55] Buhle: Lehrb. d. Gesch. d. Phil., Part VI. Section I. pp. 125—128;
Tennemann, Vol. IX. pp. 22, 23.

[56] Pomponatius: Tractatus de immortalitate animæ, c. VII., VIII. p. 35;
c. IX. pp. 57, 58; c. XII. pp. 89, 90; c. XV. p. 142.

[57] Ficinus: Proœmium in Plotinum, p. 2, Pomponatius, l. l. c. III. p.
9; c. IV. 12; Tennemann, Vol. IX. pp. 65-67.

[58] Bruck. Hist. crit. phil. T. IV. P. I. p. 164.

[59] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. IV. P. I. pp. 44, 45.

[60] Ficinus: Proœmium in Plotinum, p. 1; Brucker. I. 1, p. 49, 55, 48.

[61] Proclus: Theologia Platonis, Appendix, pp. 503-505; Tennemann, Vol.
IX. p. 149.

[62] Tennemann, Vol. IX. pp. 164, 165; Tiedemann: Geist d. Spec. Phil.
Vol. V. p. 483; Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. IV. P. I. pp. 358, 365,
366; Rixner: Handbuch d. Gesch. d. Phil. Vol. II. p. 206.

[63] Tennemann, Vol. IX. pp. 228-230; Brucker. 1. 1, p. 721.

[64] Brucker. Hist. crit. phil. T. IV. P. II. pp. 63, 64, 66-68; Buhle:
Lehrb. d. Gesch. d. Phil. Part VI. Section I. pp. 360, 362; Cardanus: De
vita propria, c. 4, pp. 9-11; Tiedemann, Geist d. spec. Philosophie, Vol.
V. pp. 563, 564.

[65] Buhle: Lehrb. d. Gesch. d. Phil. Part VI. Section I. pp. 362-365;
Tiedemann, Geist. d. Spec. Phil. Vol. V. p. 565; Brucker. Hist. crit.
phil. T. IV. P. II. pp. 71-74; Cardanus: De vita propria, c. 26, p. 70.

[66] Cardanus: De genitur. XII. p. 84; Buhle: Lehrbuch d. Gesch. d. Phil.
