letter is a long, confused, unconnected string of expressions, which,
when read, can hardly be understood.

It is not only painful to me to give language to my ideas but even
to receive them. I have studied mankind, and think myself a tolerable
observer, yet I know nothing from what I see, but all from what I
remember, nor have I understanding except in my recollections. From
all that is said, from all that passes in my presence, I feel nothing,
conceive nothing, the exterior sign being all that strikes me;
afterwards it returns to my remembrance; I recollect the place, the
time, the manner, the look, and gesture, not a circumstance escapes me;
it is then, from what has been done or said, that I imagine what has
been thought, and I have rarely found myself mistaken.

So little master of my understanding when alone, let any one judge what
I must be in conversation, where to speak with any degree of ease you
must think of a thousand things at the same time: the bare idea that I
should forget something material would be sufficient to intimidate me.
Nor can I comprehend how people can have the confidence to converse in
large companies, where each word must pass in review before so many,
and where it would be requisite to know their several characters and
histories to avoid saying what might give offence. In this particular,
those who frequent the world would have a great advantage, as they know
better where to be silent, and can speak with greater confidence; yet
even they sometimes let fall absurdities; in what predicament then must
he be who drops as it were from the clouds? It is almost impossible he
should speak ten minutes with impunity.

In a tete-a-tete there is a still worse inconvenience; that is; the
necessity of talking perpetually, at least, the necessity of answering
when spoken to, and keeping up the conversation when the other is
silent. This insupportable constraint is alone sufficient to disgust me
with variety, for I cannot form an idea of a greater torment than being
obliged to speak continually without time for recollection. I know not
whether it proceeds from my mortal hatred of all constraint; but if I
am obliged to speak, I infallibly talk nonsense. What is still worse,
instead of learning how to be silent when I have absolutely nothing to
say, it is generally at such times that I have a violent inclination:
and endeavoring to pay my debt of conversation as speedily as possible,
I hastily gabble a number of words without ideas, happy when they
only chance to mean nothing; thus endeavoring to conquer or hide my
incapacity, I rarely fail to show it.

I think I have said enough to show that, though not a fool, I have
frequently passed for one, even among people capable of judging; this
was the more vexatious, as my physiognomy and eyes promised otherwise,
and expectation being frustrated, my stupidity appeared the more
shocking. This detail, which a particular occasion gave birth to, will
not be useless in the sequel, being a key to many of my actions which
might otherwise appear unaccountable; and have been attributed to a
savage humor I do not possess. I love society as much as any man, was
I not certain to exhibit myself in it, not only disadvantageously, but
totally different from what I really am. The plan I have adopted of
writing and retirement, is what exactly suits me. Had I been present, my
worth would never have been known, no one would even have suspected it;
thus it was with Madam Dupin, a woman of sense, in whose house I lived
for several years; indeed, she has often since owned it to me: though
on the whole this rule may be subject to some exceptions. I shall now
return to my history.

The estimate of my talents thus fixed, the situation I was capable
of promised, the question only remained how to render me capable of
fulfilling my destined vocation. The principle difficulty was, I did not
know Latin enough for a priest. Madam de Warens determined to have me
taught for some time at the seminary, and accordingly spoke of it to
the Superior, who was a Lazarist, called M. Gras, a good-natured little
fellow, half blind, meagre, gray-haired, insensible, and the least
pedantic of any Lazarist I ever knew; which, in fact, is saying no great
matter.

He frequently visited Madam de Warens, who entertained, caressed, and
made much of him, letting him sometimes lace her stays, an office he was
willing enough to perform. While thus employed, she would run about the
room, this way or that, as occasion happened to call her. Drawn by the
lace, Monsieur the Superior followed, grumbling, repeating at every
moment, “Pray, madam, do stand still;” the whole forming a scene truly
diverting.

M. Gras willingly assented to the project of Madam de Warens, and, for a
very moderate pension, charged himself with the care of instructing me.
The consent of the bishop was all that remained necessary, who not only
granted it, but offered to pay the pension, permitting me to retain the
secular habit till they could judge by a trial what success they might
have in my improvement.

What a change! but I was obliged to submit; though I went to the
seminary with about the same spirits as if they had been taking me to
execution. What a melancholy abode! especially for one who left the
house of a pretty woman. I carried one book with me, that I had borrowed
of Madam de Warens, and found it a capital resource! it will not be
easily conjectured what kind of book this was--it was a music book.
Among the talents she had cultivated, music was not forgotten; she had a
tolerable good voice, sang agreeably, and played on the harpsichord. She
had taken the pains to give me some lessons in singing, though before
I was very uninformed in that respect, hardly knowing the music of
our psalms. Eight or ten interrupted lessons, far from putting me in
a condition to improve myself, did not teach me half the notes;
notwithstanding, I had such a passion for the art, that I determined to
exercise myself alone. The book I took was not of the most easy kind; it
was the cantatas of Clerambault. It may be conceived with what attention
and perseverance I studied, when I inform my reader, that without
knowing anything of transposition or quantity, I contrived to sing with
tolerable correctness, the first recitative and air in the cantata of
Alpheus and Arethusa; it is true this air is, so justly set, that it is
only necessary to recite the verses in their just measure to catch the
music.

There was at the seminary a curst Lazarist, who by undertaking to teach
me Latin made me detest it. His hair was coarse, black and greasy, his
face like those formed in gingerbread, he had the voice of a buffalo,
the countenance of an owl, and the bristles of a boar in lieu of a
beard; his smile was sardonic, and his limbs played like those of
a puppet moved by wires. I have forgotten his odious name, but the
remembrance of his frightful precise countenance remains with me, though
hardly can I recollect it without trembling; especially when I call to
mind our meeting in the gallery, when he graciously advanced his filthy
square cap as a sign for me to enter his apartment, which appeared more
dismal in my apprehension than a dungeon. Let any one judge the contrast
between my present master and the elegant Abbe de Gauvon.

Had I remained two months at the mercy of this monster, I am certain my
head could not have sustained it; but the good M. Gras, perceiving I was
melancholy, grew thin, and did not eat my victuals, guessed the cause of
my uneasiness (which indeed was not very difficult) and taking me from
the claws of this beast, by another yet more striking contrast, placed
me with the gentlest of men, a young Faucigneran abbe, named M. Gatier,
who studied at the seminary, and out of complaisance for M. Gras, and
humanity to myself, spared some time from the prosecution of his
own studies in order to direct mine. Never did I see a more pleasing
countenance than that of M. Gatier. He was fair complexioned, his beard
rather inclined to red; his behavior like that of the generality of
his countrymen (who under a coarseness of countenance conceal much
understanding), marked in him a truly sensible and affectionate soul.
In his large blue eyes there was a mixture of softness, tenderness, and
melancholy, which made it impossible to see him without feeling one’s
self interested. From the looks and manner of this young abbe he might
have been supposed to have foreseen his destiny, and that he was born to
be unhappy.

His disposition did not belie his physiognomy: full of patience and
complaisance, he rather appeared to study with than to instruct me.
So much was not necessary to make me love him, his predecessor having
rendered that very easy; yet, notwithstanding all the time he bestowed
on me, notwithstanding our mutual good inclinations, and that his plan
of teaching was excellent, with much labor, I made little progress. It
is very singular, that with a clear conception I could never learn
much from masters except my father and M. Lambercier; the little I know
besides I have learned alone, as will be seen hereafter. My spirit,
impatient of every species of constraint, cannot submit to the law of
the moment; even the fear of not learning prevents my being attentive,
and a dread of wearying those who teach, makes me feign to understand
them; thus they proceed faster than I can comprehend, and the conclusion
is I learn nothing. My understanding must take its own time and cannot
submit to that of another.

The time of ordination being arrived, M. Gatier returned to his province
as deacon, leaving me with gratitude, attachment, and sorrow for his
loss. The vows I made for him were no more answered than those I offered
for myself. Some years after, I learned, that being vicar of a parish,
a young girl was with child by him, being the only one (though he
possessed a very tender heart) with whom he was ever in love. This was
a dreadful scandal in a diocese severely governed, where the priests
(being under good regulation) ought never to have children--except by
married women. Having infringed this politic law, he was put in prison,
defamed, and driven from his benefice. I know not whether it was ever
after in his power to reestablish his affairs; but the remembrance of
his misfortunes, which were deeply engraven on my heart, struck me when
I wrote Emilius, and uniting M. Gatier with M. Gaime, I formed from
these two worthy priests the character of the Savoyard Vicar, and
flatter myself the imitation has not dishonored the originals.

While I was at the seminary, M. d’Aubonne was obliged to quit Annecy,
Moultou being displeased that he made love to his wife, which was
acting like a dog in the manger, for though Madam Moultou was extremely
amiable, he lived very ill with her, treating her with such brutality
that a separation was talked of. Moultou, by repeated oppressions, at
length procured a dismissal from his employment: he was a disagreeable
man; a mole could not be blacker, nor an owl more knavish. It is
said the provincials revenge themselves on their enemies by songs; M.
d’Aubonne revenged himself on his by a comedy, which he sent to Madam
de Warens, who showed it to me. I was pleased with it, and immediately
conceived the idea of writing one, to try whether I was so silly as the
author had pronounced me. This project was not executed till I went to
Chambery, where I wrote ‘The Lover of Himself’. Thus when I said in the
preface to that piece, “it was written at eighteen,” I cut off a few
years.

Nearly about this time an event happened, not very important in itself,
but whose consequence affected me, and made a noise in the world when
I had forgotten it. Once a week I was permitted to go out; it is not
necessary to say what use I made of this liberty. Being one Sunday at
Madam de Warens, a building belonging to the Cordeliers, which joined
her house, took fire; this building which contained their oven, being
full of dry fagots, blazed violently and greatly endangered the house;
for the wind happening to drive the flames that way, it was covered with
them. The furniture, therefore, was hastily got out and carried into the
garden which fronted the windows, on the other side the before-mentioned
brook. I was so alarmed that I threw indiscriminately everything that
came to hand out of the window, even to a large stone mortar, which at
another time I should have found it difficult to remove, and should have
thrown a handsome looking-glass after it had not some one prevented
me. The good bishop, who that day was visiting Madam de Warens, did not
remain idle; he took her into the garden, where they went to prayers
with the rest that were assembled there, and where sometime afterwards,
I found them on their knees, and presently joined them. While the good
man was at his devotions, the wind changed, so suddenly and critically,
that the flames which had covered the house and began to enter the
windows, were carried to the other side of the court, and the house
received no damage. Two years after, Monsieur de Berner being dead, the
Antoines, his former brethren, began to collect anecdotes which might
serve as arguments of his beatification; at the desire of Father Baudet,
I joined to these an attestation of what I have just related, in doing
which, though I attested no more than the truth, I certainly acted ill,
as it tended to make an indifferent occurrence pass for a miracle. I had
seen the bishop in prayer, and had likewise seen the wind change during
the prayer, and even much to the purpose, all this I could certify
truly; but that one of these facts was the cause of the other, I ought
not to have attested, because it is what I could not possibly be assured
of. Thus much I may say, that as far as I can recollect what my ideas
were at that time, I was sincerely, and in good earnest a Catholic. Love
of the marvellous is natural to the human heart; my veneration for the
virtuous prelate, and secret pride in having, perhaps, contributed to
the event in question, all helped to seduce me; and certainly, if this
miracle was the effect of ardent prayer, I had a right to claim a share
of the merits.

More than thirty years after, when I published the ‘Lettres de
la Montagne’, M. Feron (I know not by what means) discovered this
attestation, and made use of it in his paper. I must confess the
discovery was very critically timed, and appeared very diverting, even
to me.

I was destined to be the outcast of every condition; for notwithstanding
M. Gatier gave the most favorable account he possibly could of my
studies, they plainly saw the improvement I received bore no proportion
to the pains taken to instruct me, which was no encouragement to
continue them: the bishop and superior, therefore, were disheartened,
and I was sent back to Madam de Warens, as a subject not even fit to
make a priest of; but as they allowed, at the same time, that I was
a tolerably good lad, and far from being vicious, this account
counterbalanced the former, and determined her not to abandon me.

I carried back in triumph the dear music book, which had been so useful
to me, the air of Alpheus and Arethusa being almost all I had learned at
the seminary. My predilection for this art started the idea of making
a musician of me. A convenient opportunity offered; once a week, at
least, she had a concert at her house, and the music-master from the
cathedral, who directed this little band, came frequently to see her.
This was a Parisian, named M. le Maitre, a good composer, very lively,
gay, young, well made, of little understanding, but, upon the whole, a
good sort of man. Madam de Warens made us acquainted; I attached myself
to him, and he seemed not displeased with me. A pension was talked of,
and agreed on; in short, I went home with him, and passed the winter
the more agreeably at his chambers, as they were not above twenty paces
distant from Madam de Warens’, where we frequently supped together. It
may easily be supposed that this situation, ever gay, and singing with
the musicians and children of the choir, was more pleasing to me than
the seminary and fathers of St. Lazarus. This life, though free, was
regular; here I learned to prize independence, but never to abuse
it. For six whole months I never once went out except to see Madam de
Warens, or to church, nor had I any inclination to it. This interval is
one of those in which I enjoyed the greatest satisfaction, and which I
have ever recollected with pleasure. Among the various situations I
have been placed in, some were marked with such an idea of virtuous
satisfaction, that the bare remembrance affects me as if they were yet
present. I vividly recollect the time, the place, the persons, and even
the temperature of the air, while the lively idea of a certain local
impression peculiar to those times, transports me back again to the very
spot; for example, all that was repeated at our meetings, all that was
sung in the choir, everything that passed there; the beautiful and noble
habits of the canons, the chasubles of the priests, the mitres of the
singers, the persons of the musicians; an old lame carpenter who played
the counter-bass, a little fair abbe who performed on the violin, the
ragged cassock which M. le Maitre, after taking off his sword, used to
put over his secular habit, and the fine surplice with which he covered
the rags of the former, when he went to the choir; the pride with which
I held my little flute to my lips, and seated myself in the orchestra,
to assist in a recitative which M. le Maitre had composed on purpose for
me; the good dinner that afterwards awaited us, and the good appetites
we carried to it. This concourse of objects, strongly retraced in my
memory, has charmed me a hundred time as much, or perhaps more, than
ever the reality had done. I have always preserved an affection for a
certain air of the ‘Conditor alme Syderum’, because one Sunday in Advent
I heard that hymn sung on the steps of the cathedral, (according to
the custom of that place) as I lay in bed before daybreak. Mademoiselle
Merceret, Madam de Warens’ chambermaid, knew something of music; I shall
never forget a little piece that M. le Maitre made me sing with her, and
which her mistress listened to with great satisfaction. In a word, every
particular, even down to the servant Perrine, whom the boys of the
choir took such delight in teasing. The remembrance of these times of
happiness and innocence frequently returning to my mind, both ravish and
affect me.

I lived at Annecy during a year without the least reproach, giving
universal satisfaction. Since my departure from Turin I had been guilty
of no folly, committed none while under the eye of Madam de Warens. She
was my conductor, and ever led me right; my attachment for her became
my only passion, and what proves it was not a giddy one, my heart
and understanding were in unison. It is true that a single sentiment,
absorbing all my faculties, put me out of a capacity of learning even
music: but this was not my fault, since to the strongest inclination, I
added the utmost assiduity. I was attentive and thoughtful; what could
I do? Nothing was wanting towards my progress that depended on me;
meantime, it only required a subject that might inspire me to occasion
the commission of new follies: that subject presented itself, chance
arranged it, and (as will be seen hereafter) my inconsiderate head gave
in to it.

One evening, in the month of February, when it was very cold, being all
sat round the fire, we heard some one knock at the street door. Perrine
took a light, went down and opened it: a young man entering, came
upstairs, presented himself with an easy air, and making M. Maitre
a short, but well-turned compliment, announced himself as a French
musician, constrained by the state of his finances to take this liberty.
The heart of the good Le Maitre leaped at the name of a French musician,
for he passionately loved both his country and profession; he therefore
offered the young traveller his service--and use of his apartment, which
he appeared to stand much in need of, and which he accepted without
much ceremony. I observed him while he was chatting and warming himself
before supper; he was short and thick, having some fault in his shape,
though without any particular deformity; he had (if I may so express
myself) an appearance of being hunchbacked, with flat shoulders, and I
think he limped. He wore a black coat, rather worn than old, which
hung in tatters, a very fine but dirty shirt, frayed ruffles; a pair of
splatterdashes so large that he could have put both legs into either of
them, and, to secure himself from the snow, a little hat, only fit to
be carried under his arm. With this whimsical equipage, he had, however,
something elegant in his manners and conversation; his countenance
was expressive and agreeable, and he spoke with facility if not with
modesty; in short, everything about him bore the mark of a young
debauchee, who did not crave assistance like a beggar, but as a
thoughtless madcap. He told us his name was Venture de Villeneuve, that
he came from Paris, had lost his way, and seeming to forget that he had
announced himself for a musician, added that he was going to Grenoble to
see a relation that was a member of Parliament.

During supper we talked of music, on which subject he spoke well: he
knew all the great virtuosi, all the celebrated works, all the actors,
actresses, pretty women, and powerful lords; in short nothing was
mentioned but what he seemed thoroughly acquainted with. Though no
sooner was any topic started, than by some drollery, which set every
one a-laughing, he made them forget what had been said. This was on a
Saturday; the next day there was to be music at the cathedral: M. le
Maitre asked if he would sing there--“Very willingly.”--“What part would
he chose?”--“The counter-tenor:” and immediately began speaking of other
things. Before he went to church they offered him his part to
peruse, but he did not even look at it. This Gasconade surprised Le
Maitre--“You’ll see,” said he, whispering to me, “that he does not know
a single note.”--I replied: “I am very much afraid of him.” I followed
them into the church; but was extremely uneasy, and when they began, my
heart beat violently, so much was I interested in his behalf.

I was presently out of pain: he sung his two recitatives with all
imaginable taste and judgment; and what was yet more, with a very
agreeable voice. I never enjoyed a more pleasing surprise. After
mass, M. Venture received the highest compliments from the canons and
musicians, which he answered jokingly, though with great grace. M. le
Maitre embraced him heartily; I did the same; he saw I was rejoiced at
his success, and appeared pleased at my satisfaction.

It will easily be surmised, that after having been delighted with M.
Bacle, who had little to attract my admiration, I should be infatuated
with M. Venture, who had education, wit, talents, and a knowledge of
the world, and might be called an agreeable rake. This was exactly what
happened, and would, I believe, have happened to any other young man
in my place; especially supposing him possessed of better judgment to
distinguish merit, and more propensity to be engaged by it; for Venture
doubtless possessed a considerable share, and one in particular, very
rare at his age, namely, that of never being in haste to display his
talents. It is true, he boasted of many things he did not understand,
but of those he knew (which were very numerous) he said nothing,
patiently waiting some occasion to display them, which he then did with
ease, though without forwardness, and thus gave them more effect. As
there was ever some intermission between the proofs of his various
abilities, it was impossible to conjecture whether he had ever
discovered all his talents. Playful, giddy, inexhaustible, seducing in
conversation, ever smiling, but never laughing, and repeating the rudest
things in the most elegant manner--even the most modest women were
astonished at what they endured from him: it was in vain for them to
determine to be angry; they could not assume the appearance of it. It
was extraordinary that with so many agreeable talents, in a country
where they are so well understood, and so much admired, he so long
remained only a musician.

My attachment to M. Venture, more reasonable in its cause, was also less
extravagant in its effects, though more lively and durable than that
I had conceived for M. Bacle. I loved to see him, to hear him, all his
actions appeared charming, everything he said was an oracle to me, but
the enchantment did not extend far enough to disable me from quitting
him. I spoke of him with transport to Madam de Warens, Le Maitre
likewise spoke in his praise, and she consented we should bring him to
her house. This interview did not succeed; he thought her affected,
she found him a libertine, and, alarmed that I had formed such an ill
acquaintance, not only forbade me bringing him there again, but likewise
painted so strongly the danger I ran with this young man, that I became
a little more circumspect in giving in to the attachment; and very
happily, both for my manners and wits, we were soon separated.

M. le Maitre, like most of his profession, loved good wine; at table he
was moderate, but when busy in his closet he must drink. His maid was so
well acquainted with this humor that no sooner had he prepared his
paper to compose, and taken his violoncello, than the bottle and glass
arrived, and was replenished from time to time: thus, without being ever
absolutely intoxicated, he was usually in a state of elevation. This
was really unfortunate, for he had a good heart, and was so playful that
Madam de Warens used to call him the kitten. Unhappily, he loved his
profession, labored much and drank proportionately, which injured his
health, and at length soured his temper. Sometimes he was gloomy and
easily offended, though incapable of rudeness, or giving offence to any
one, for never did he utter a harsh word, even to the boys of the choir:
on the other hand, he would not suffer another to offend him, which was
but just: the misfortune was, having little understanding, he did not
properly discriminate, and was often angry without cause.

The Chapter of Geneva, where so many princes and bishops formerly
thought it an honor to be seated, though in exile it lost its ancient
splendor, retained (without any diminution) its pride. To be admitted,
you must either be a gentleman or Doctor of Sorbonne. If there is
a pardonable pride, after that derived from personal merit, it is
doubtless that arising from birth, though, in general, priests having
laymen in their service treat them with sufficient haughtiness, and thus
the canons behaved to poor Le Maitre. The chanter, in particular, who
was called the Abbe de Vidonne, in other respects a well-behaved man,
but too full of his nobility, did not always show him the attention
his talents merited. M. le Maitre could not bear these indignities
patiently; and this year, during passion week, they had a more serious
dispute than ordinary. At an institution dinner that the bishop gave the
canons, and to which M. Maitre was always invited, the abbe failed in
some formality, adding, at the same time, some harsh words, which the
other could not digest; he instantly formed the resolution to quit them
the following night; nor could any consideration make him give up his
design, though Madam de Warens (whom he went to take leave of) spared
no pains to appease him. He could not relinquish the pleasure of leaving
his tyrants embarrassed for the Easter feast, at which time he knew they
stood in greatest need of him. He was most concerned about his
music, which he wished to take with him; but this could not easily be
accomplished, as it filled a large case, and was very heavy, and could
not be carried under the arm.

Madam de Warens did what I should have done in her situation; and
indeed, what I should yet do: after many useless efforts to retain
him, seeing he was resolved to depart, whatever might be the event,
she formed the resolution to give him every possible assistance. I
must confess Le Maitre deserved it of her, for he was (if I may use the
expression) dedicated to her service, in whatever appertained to either
his art or knowledge, and the readiness with which he obliged gave
a double value to his complaisance: thus she only paid back, on an
essential occasion, the many favors he had been long conferring on her;
though I should observe, she possessed a soul that, to fulfill such
duties, had no occasion to be reminded of previous obligations.
Accordingly she ordered me to follow Le Maitre to Lyons, and to continue
with him as long as he might have occasion for my services. She has
since avowed, that a desire of detaching me from Venture had a great
hand in this arrangement. She consulted Claude Anet about the conveyance
of the above-mentioned case. He advised, that instead of hiring a beast
at Annecy, which would infallibly discover us, it would be better, at
night, to take it to some neighboring village, and there hire an ass to
carry it to Seyssel, which being in the French dominions, we should have
nothing to fear. This plan was adopted; we departed the same night
at seven, and Madam de Warens, under pretense of paying my expenses,
increased the purse of poor Le Maitre by an addition that was very
acceptable. Claude Anet, the gardiner, and myself, carried the case
to the first village, then hired an ass, and the same night reached
Seyssel.

I think I have already remarked that there are times in which I am
so unlike myself that I might be taken for a man of a direct opposite
disposition; I shall now give an example of this. M. Reydelet, curate of
Seyssel, was canon of St. Peter’s, consequently known to M. le Maitre,
and one of the people from whom he should have taken most pains to
conceal himself; my advice, on the contrary, was to present ourselves to
him, and, under some pretext, entreat entertainment as if we visited him
by consent of the chapter. Le Maitre adopted the idea, which seemed to
give his revenge the appearance of satire and waggery; in short, we went
boldly to Reydelet, who received us very kindly. Le Maitre told him he
was going to Bellay by desire of the bishop, that he might superintend
the music during the Easter holidays, and that he proposed returning
that way in a few days. To support this tale, I told a hundred others,
so naturally that M. Reydelet thought me a very agreeable youth, and
treated me with great friendship and civility. We were well regaled and
well lodged: M. Reydelet scarcely knew how to make enough of us; and we
parted the best friends in the world, with a promise to stop longer on
our return. We found it difficult to refrain from laughter, or wait till
we were alone to give free vent to our mirth: indeed, even now, the bare
recollection of it forces a smile, for never was waggery better or
more fortunately maintained. This would have made us merry during the
remainder of our journey, if M. le Maitre (who did not cease drinking)
had not been two or three times attacked with a complaint that he
afterwards became very subject to, and which resembled an epilepsy.
These fits threw me into the most fearful embarrassments, from which I
resolved to extricate myself with the first opportunity.

According to the information given to M. Reydelet, we passed our Easter
holidays at Bellay, and though not expected there, were received by
the music-master, and welcomed by every one with great pleasure. M. le
Maitre was of considerable note in his profession, and, indeed, merited
that distinction. The music-master of Bellay (who was fond of his own
works) endeavored to obtain the approbation of so good a judge; for
besides being a connoisseur, M. le Maitre was equitable, neither a
jealous, ill-natured critic, nor a servile flatterer. He was so superior
to the generality of country music-masters and they were so sensible of
it, that they treated him rather as their chief than a brother musician.

Having passed four or five days very agreeably at Bellay, we departed,
and continuing our journey without meeting with any accidents, except
those I have just spoken of, arrived at Lyons, and were lodged at Notre
Dame de Pitie. While we waited for the arrival of the before-mentioned
case (which by the assistance of another lie, and the care of our good
patron, M. Reydelet, we had embarked on the Rhone) M. le Maitre went to
visit his acquaintance, and among others Father Cato, a Cordelier, who
will be spoken of hereafter, and the Abbe Dortan, Count of Lyons, both
of whom received him well, but afterwards betrayed him, as will be seen
presently; indeed, his good fortune terminated with M. Reydelet.

Two days after our arrival at Lyons, as we passed a little street not
far from our inn, Le Maitre was attacked by one of his fits; but it was
now so violent as to give me the utmost alarm. I screamed with terror,
called for help, and naming our inn, entreated some one to bear him to
it, then (while the people were assembled, and busy round a man that had
fallen senseless in the street) he was abandoned by the only friend on
whom he could have any reasonable dependence; I seized the instant
when no one heeded me, turned the corner of the street and disappeared.
Thanks to Heaven, I have made my third painful confession; if many such
remained, I should certainly abandon the work I have undertaken.

Of all the incidents I have yet related, a few traces are remaining
in the places where I have lived; but what I have to relate in the
following book is almost entirely unknown; these are the greatest
extravagancies of my life, and it is happy they had not worse
conclusions. My head, (if I may use the simile) screwed up to the
pitch of an instrument it did not naturally accord with, had lost
its diapason; in time it returned to it again, when I discontinued my
follies, or at least gave in to those more consonant to my disposition.
This epoch of my youth I am least able to recollect, nothing having
passed sufficiently interesting to influence my heart, to make me
clearly retrace the remembrance. In so many successive changes, it is
difficult not to make some transpositions of time or place. I
write absolutely from memory, without notes or materials to help
my recollection. Some events are as fresh in my idea as if they had
recently happened, but there are certain chasms which I cannot fill up
but by the aid of recital, as confused as the remaining traces of those
to which they refer. It is possible, therefore, that I may have erred
in trifles, and perhaps shall again, but in every matter of importance
I can answer that the account is faithfully exact, and with the same
veracity the reader may depend I shall be careful to continue it.

My resolution was soon taken after quitting Le Maitre; I set out
immediately for Annecy. The cause and mystery of our departure had
interested me for the security of our retreat: this interest, which
entirely employed my thoughts for some days, had banished every other
idea; but no sooner was I secure and in tranquility, than my predominant
sentiment regained its place. Nothing flattered, nothing tempted me, I
had no wish but to return to Madam de Warens; the tenderness and truth
of my attachment to her had rooted from my heart every imaginable
project, and all the follies of ambition, I conceived no happiness
but living near her, nor could I take a step without feeling that the
distance between us was increased. I returned, therefore, as soon
as possible, with such speed, and with my spirits in such a state of
agitation, that though I recall with pleasure all my other travels, I
have not the least recollection of this, only remembering my leaving
Lyons and reaching Annecy. Let anyone judge whether this last event can
have slipped my memory, when informed that on my arrival I found Madam
de Warens was not there, having set out for Paris.

I was never well informed of the motives of this journey. I am certain
she would have told me had I asked her, but never was man less curious
to learn the secrets of his friend. My heart is ever so entirely filled
with the present, or with past pleasures, which become a principal part
of my enjoyment, that there is not a chink or corner for curiosity to
enter. All that I conceive from what I heard of it, is, that in the
revolution caused at Turin by the abdication of the King of Sardinia,
she feared being forgotten, and was willing by favor of the intrigues of
M. d’ Aubonne to seek the same advantage in the court of France, where
she has often told me she should have preferred it, as the multiplicity
of business there prevents your conduct from being so closely inspected.
If this was her business, it is astonishing that on her return she
was not ill received; be that as it will, she continued to enjoy her
allowance without any interruption. Many people imagined she was charged
with some secret commission, either by the bishop, who then had business
at the court of France, where he himself was soon after obliged to go,
or some one yet more powerful, who knew how to insure her a gracious
reception at her return. If this was the case, it is certain the
ambassadress was not ill chosen, since being young and handsome, she had
all the necessary qualifications to succeed in a negotiation.




