XI

THE PRINCIPLE OF GENERAL RELATIVITY

How Einstein, to a Degree Never Before Equalled, Isolates the External
Reality from the Observer's Contribution

BY E. T. BELL
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON
SEATTLE


Einstein's general relativity is of such vast compass, being
coextensive with the realm of physical events, that in any brief
account a strict selection from its numerous aspects is prescribed. The
old, restricted principle being contained in the general, we shall
treat the latter, its close relations with gravitation, and the
significance of both for our knowledge of space and time. The essence
of Einstein's generalization is its final disentanglement of that
part of any physical event which is contributed by the observer from
that which is inherent in the nature of things and independent of
all observers.

The argument turns upon the fact that an observer must describe any
event with reference to some framework from which he makes measurements
of time and distance. Thus, suppose that at nine o'clock a ball is
tossed across the room. At one second past nine the ball occupies a
definite position which we can specify by giving the three distances
from the centre of the ball to the north and west walls and the
floor. In this way, refining our measurements, we can give a precise
description of the entire motion of the ball. Our final description
will consist of innumerable separate statements, each of which contains
four numbers corresponding to four measurements, and of these one
will be for time and three for distances at the time indicated.

Imagine now that a man in an automobile looks in and observes the
moving ball. Suppose he records the motion. To do so, he must refer to
a timepiece and some body of reference. Say he selects his wrist-watch,
the floor of his auto and two sides meeting in a corner. Fancy that
just as he begins his series of observations his auto starts bucking
and the main-spring of his watch breaks, so that he must measure
"seconds" by the crazy running-down of his watch, and distances with
reference to the sides of his erratic auto. Despite these handicaps
he completes a set of observations, each of which consists of a
time measured by his mad watch and three distances reckoned from
the sides of his bucking machine. Let us assume him to have been so
absorbed in his experiment that he noticed neither the disorders
of his watch nor the motion of his auto. He gives us his sets of
measurements. We remark that his seconds are only small fractions
of ours, also his norths and wests are badly mixed. If we interpret
his sets in terms of our stationary walls and sober clock we find
the curious paradox that the ball zigzagged across the room like an
intoxicated bee. He obstinately argues that we know no more than he
about how the ball actually moved. For we got a smooth description,
he asserts, by choosing an artificially simple reference framework,
having no necessary relations whatever to the ball. The crooked
path plotted from his observations proves, he declares, that the
ball was subject to varying forces of which we in the room suspected
nothing. He contends that our room was being jarred by a system of
forces which exactly compensated and smoothed out the real jaggedness
of path observed by himself. But if we know all about his watch and
auto we can easily apply necessary corrections to his measurements,
and, fitting the corrected set to our reference-framework of walls
and clock, recover our own smooth description.

For consistency we must carry our readjustments farther. The path
mapped from our measurements is a curve. Perhaps the curvature was
introduced by some peculiarity of our reference framework? Possibly
our own room is being accelerated upward, so that it makes the ball's
true path--whatever that may be--appear curved downward, just as the
autoist's zigzags made the path he mapped appear jagged. Tradition
attributes the downward curving to the tug of gravity. This force we
say accelerates the ball downward, producing the curved path. Is this
the only possible explanation? Let us see.




GRAVITATION AND ACCELERATION

Imagine a man in a room out of which he cannot see. He notices that
when he releases anything it falls to the floor with a constant
acceleration. Further he observes that all his objects, independently
of their chemical and physical properties, are affected in precisely
the same way. Now, he previously has experimented with magnets, and
has remarked that they attract certain bodies in essentially the same
way that the things which he drops are "attracted" to whatever is
beneath the floor. Having explained magnetic attraction in terms of
"forces," he makes his first hypothesis: (A) He and his room are in
a strong "field of force," which he designates gravitational. This
force pulls all things downward with a constant acceleration. Here
he notes a singular distinction between magnetic and gravitational
"forces": magnets attract only a few kinds of matter, notably iron;
the novel "force," if indeed a force at all, acts similarly upon all
kinds of matter. He makes another hypothesis: (B) His room and he
are being accelerated upward.



Either (A) or (B) describes the facts perfectly. By no experiment
can he discriminate between them. So he takes the great step, and
formulates the Equivalence Hypothesis:


A gravitational field of force is precisely equivalent in its effects
to an artificial field of force introduced by accelerating the
framework of reference, so that in any small region it is impossible
to distinguish between them by any experiment whatever.


Next reconsidering his magnetic "forces," he extends the equivalence
hypothesis to cover all manifestations of force: The effects
attributed to forces of any kind whatever can be described equally
well by saying that our reference frameworks are accelerated; and
moreover there is possible no experiment which will discriminate
between the descriptions.

If the accelerations are null, the frameworks are at rest or in
uniform motion relatively to one another. This special case is the
"restricted" principle of relativity, which asserts that it is
impossible experimentally to detect a uniform motion through the
ether. Being thus superfluous for descriptions of natural phenomena,
the ether may be abandoned, at least temporarily. The older physics
sought this absolute ether framework to which all motions could be
unambiguously referred, and failed to find it. The most exacting
experiments, notably that of Michelson-Morley, revealed no trace of
the earth's supposed motion through the ether. Fitzgerald accounted
for the failure by assuming that such motion would remain undetected if
every moving body contracted by an amount depending upon its velocity
in the direction of motion. The contraction for ordinary velocities
is imperceptible. Only when as in the case of the beta particles,
the velocity is an appreciable fraction of the velocity of light,
is the contraction revealed. This contraction follows immediately
from Einstein's generalization constructed upon the equivalence
hypothesis and the restricted relativity principle. We shall see that
the contraction inevitably follows from the actual geometry of the
universe. [2]

Let us return for a moment to the moving ball. Four measures,
three of distances and one of time, are required in specifying its
position with reference to some framework at each point and at each
instant. All of these measures can be summed up in one compendious
statement--the equations of motion showed how in changing from our
room to his accelerated auto we found a new summary, "transformed
equations," which seemed to indicate that the ball had traversed
a strong, variable field of force. Is there then in the chaos of
observational disagreements anything which is independent of all
observers? There is, but it is hidden at the very heart of nature.




PATHS THROUGH THE WORLD OF FOUR DIMENSIONS

To exhibit this, we must recall a familiar proposition of geometry:
the square on the longest side of a right-angled triangle is equal
to the sum of the squares on the other two sides. It has long been
known that from this alone all the metrical properties of Euclidean
space--the space in which for 2,000 years we have imagined we were
living--can be deduced. Metrical properties are those depending upon
measurement. Now, in the geometry of any space, Euclidean or not,
there is a single proposition of a similar sort which tells us how
to find the most direct distance between any two points that are
very close together. This small distance is expressed in terms of
the two sets of distance measurements by which the end-points are
located, just as two neighboring positions of our ball were located
by two sets of four measurements each. We say by analogy that two
consecutive positions of the ball are separated by a small interval of
time-space. From the formula for the very small interval of time-space
we can calculate mathematically all the metrical properties of the time
and space in which measurements for the ball's motion must be made. So
in any geometry mathematical analysis predicts infallibly the truth
about all facts depending upon measurements from the simple formula
of the interval between neighboring points. Thus, on a sphere the sum
of the angles of any triangle formed by arcs of great circles exceeds
180°, and this follows from the formula for the shortest ("geodesic")
distance between neighboring points on the spherical surface.

We saw that it takes four measurements, one for time and three for
distances, to fix an elementary event, viz., the position of the
centre of our ball at any instant. A system of all possible such sets
of four measurements each, constitutes what mathematicians call a
four-dimensional space. The study of the four-dimensional time-space
geometry, once its shortest-distance proposition is known, reveals all
those relations in nature which can be ascertained by measurements,
that is, experimentally. We have then to find this indispensable
proposition.

Imagine the path taken by a particle moving solely under the influence
of gravitation. This being the simplest possible motion of an actual
particle in the real world, it is natural to guess that its path
will be such that the particle moves from one point of time-space to
another by the most direct route. This in fact is verified by forming
the equations of the free particle's motion, which turn out to be
precisely those that specify a geodesic (most direct line) joining
the two points. On the (two-dimensional) surface of a sphere such a
line is the position taken by a string stretched between two points
on the surface, and this is the shortest distance on the surface
between them. But in the time-space geometry we find a remarkable
distinction: the interval between any two points of the path taken is
the longest possible, and between any two points there is only one
longest path. Translated into ordinary space and time this merely
asserts that the time taken between any two points on the natural
path is the longest possible.

Recall now that when the line-formula for any kind of space is known
all the metrical properties of that space are completely determined,
and combine with this what we have just found, namely, the equations
of motion of a particle subject only to gravitation are the same
equations as those which fix the line-formula for the four-dimensional
time-space. Since gravitation alone determines the motion of the
particle, and since this motion is completely described by the very
equations which fix all the metrical properties of time-space, it
follows that the metrical (experimentally determinable) properties
of time-space are equivalent to those of gravitation, in the sense
that each set of properties implies the other.




THE UNIVERSE OF SPACE-TIME

We have found the thing in nature which is independent of all
observers, and it turns out to be the very structure of time-space
itself. The motion of the free particle obviously is a thing
unconditioned by accidents of observation; the particle under the
influence of gravitation alone must go a way of its own. And if some
observer in an artificial field of force produced by the acceleration
of his reference framework describes the path as knotted, he merely is
foisting eccentricities of his own motion upon the direct path of the
particle. The conclusion is rational, for we believe that time-space
exists independently of any man's way of perceiving it.

Incidentally note that this space is that of the physical world. For
only by measurements of distances and times can we become aware of
our extension in time and space. If beyond this time-space geometry
of measurements there is some "absolute geometry," science can have
no concern with it, for never can it be revealed by the one exploring
device we possess--measurement.

We have followed a single particle. Let us now form a picture of
several. Any event can be analyzed into a multitude of coincidences
in time-space. For consider two moving particles--say electrons. If
they collide they both are in very approximately one place at the
same time. We imagine the path of an electron through time-space
plotted by a line (in four-dimensional space), which will deviate
from a "most direct" (geodesic) path if the electron is subjected
to forces. This is the "world-line" of the electron. If the world
lines of several electrons intersect at one point in time-space,
the intersection pictures the fact of their coincidence somewhere
and somewhen; for all their world-lines having a time-space point in
common, at some instant they must have been in collision. Each point
of a world-line pictures the position at a certain place at a certain
time; and it is the intersections of world-lines which correspond to
physical events. Of what lies between the intersections we have no
experimental knowledge.

Imagine the world-lines of all the electrons in the universe threading
time-space like threads in a jelly. The intersections of the tangle
are a complete history of all physical events. Now distort the
jelly. Clearly the mutual order of the intersections will be unchanged,
but the distances between them will be shortened or lengthened. To a
distortion of the jelly corresponds a special choice (by some observer)
of a reference framework for describing the order of events. He cannot
change the natural sequence of events. Again we have found something
which is independent of all observers.

We can now recapitulate our conclusions and state the principle of
relativity in its most general form.

(1) Observers describe events by measures of times and distances made
with regard to their frameworks of reference.

(2) The complete history of any event is summarized in a set of
equations giving the positions of all the particles involved at
every instant.

(3) Two possibilities arise. (A) Either these equations are the
same in form for all space-time reference frameworks, persisting
formally unchanged for all shifts of the reference scheme; or (B),
they subsist only when some special framework is used, altering their
form as they are referred to different frameworks. If (B) holds,
we naturally assume that the equations, and the phenomena which they
profess to represent, owe their existence to some peculiarity of the
reference framework. They do not, therefore, describe anything which is
inherent in the nature of things, but merely some idiosyncrasy of the
observer's way of regarding nature. If (A) holds, then obviously the
equations describe some real relation in nature which is independent
of all possible ways of observing and recording it.

(4) In its most general form the principle of relativity states that
those relations, and those alone, which persist unchanged in form
for all possible space-time reference frameworks are the inherent
laws of nature.

To find such relations Einstein has applied a mathematical method
of great power--the calculus of tensors--with extraordinary
success. This calculus threshes out the laws of nature, separating
the observer's eccentricities from what is independent of him, with
the superb efficiency of a modern harvester. The residue is a physical
geometry--or geometrical physics--of time-space, in which it appears
that the times and spaces contributed by the several observers'
reference frameworks are shadows of their own contrivings; while
the real, enduring universe is a fourfold order of time and space
indissolubly bound together. One observer separates this time-space
into his own "time" and "space" in one way, determined by his path
through the world of events; another, moving relatively to the first,
separates it differently, and what for one is time shades into space
for another.

This time-space geometry is non-Euclidean. It is "warped" (curved),
the amount of warping at any place being determined by the intensity
of the gravitational field there. Thus again gravitation is rooted in
the nature of things. In this sense it is not a force, but a property
of space. Wherever there is matter there is a gravitational field,
and hence a warping of space. Conversely, as long ago imagined by
Clifford, wherever there is a warping of space, there is matter;
and matter is resolved ultimately into wrinkles in time-space.

To visualize a warped space, consider a simple analogy. A man walks
away from a polished globe; his image recedes into the mirror-space,
shortening and thinning as it goes, and thinning (in the direction of
motion) faster than it shortens. Everything around him experiences
a like effect. If he tries to discover this by a footrule it
automatically shortens faster as he turns it into the horizontal
position, so his purpose eludes him. The mirror-space is warped in
the direction of the image's motion. So is our own. For all bodies,
as evidenced by the Fitzgerald contraction, shorten in the direction
of motion. And just as the image can never penetrate the mirror-space
a greater distance than half its radius, so probably time-space is
curved in such a way that our universe, like the surface of a sphere,
is finite in extent, but unbounded.









