XXII

THE GENERAL THEORY

Fragments of Particular Merit on This Phase of the Subject

BY VARIOUS CONTRIBUTORS


When Dorothy was carried by the cyclone from her home in Kansas to the
land of Oz, together with her uncle's house and her little dog Toto,
she neglected to lower the trap door over the hole in the floor which
formerly led to the cyclone cellar and Toto stepped through. Dorothy
rushed to the opening expecting to see him dashed onto the rocks below
but found him floating just below the floor. She drew him back into
the room and closed the trap.

The author of the chronicle of Dorothy's adventures explains that the
same force which held up the house held up Toto but this explanation
is not necessary. Dorothy was now floating through space and house
and dog were subject to the same forces of gravitation which gave
them identical motions. Dorothy must have pushed the dog down onto the
floor and in doing so must herself have floated to the ceiling whence
she might have pushed herself back to the floor. In fact gravitation
was apparently suspended and Dorothy was in a position to have tried
certain experiments which Einstein has never tried because he was
never in Dorothy's unique position.]188



The Principle of Equivalence, of which Einstein's suspended cage
experiment is the usual illustration, and upon which the generalized
theory of relativity is built, is thus stated by Prof. Eddington: "A
gravitational field of force is precisely equivalent to an artificial
field of force, so that in any small region it is impossible, by any
conceivable experiment, to distinguish between them. In other words,
force is purely relative."

This may be otherwise stated by going back to our idea of a
four-dimensional world, the points of which represent the positions
and times of events. If we mark in such a space-time the successive
positions of an object we get a line, or curve, which represents the
whole history of the object, inasmuch as it shows us the position
of the object at every time. The reader may imagine that all events
happen in one plane, so that only two perpendicular dimensions
are needed to fix positions in space, with a third perpendicular
dimension for time. He may then conceive, if he may not picture,
an analogous process for four-dimensional space-time. These lines,
"tracks of objects through space-time," were called by Minkowski
"world-lines." We may now say that all the events we observe are the
intersections of world-lines. The temperature at noon was 70°. This
means that if I plot the world-line of the top of the mercury column
and the world-line of a certain mark on the glass they intersect in
a certain point of space-time. All that we know are intersections of
these world-lines. Suppose now we have a large number of them drawn
in our four-dimensional world, satisfying all known intersections,
and let us suppose the whole embedded in a jelly. We may distort
this jelly in any way, changing our coordinates as we please, but we
shall neither destroy nor create intersections of world-lines. It
may be proved that a change from one system of reference, to which
observations are referred, to any other system, moving in any way
with respect to the first system, may be pictured as a distortion of
the four-dimensional jelly. The laws of nature, therefore, being laws
that describe intersections, must be expressible in a form independent
of the reference system chosen.

From these postulates, Einstein was able to show such a formulation
possible. His law may be stated very simply:--All bodies move through
space-time in the straightest possible tracks.

The fact that an easy non-mathematical explanation can not be given,
of how this law is reached, or of just why the straightest track of
Mercury through space-time will give us an ellipse in space after we
have split space-time up into space and time, is no valid objection to
the theory. Newton's law that bodies attract with a force proportional
to their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance is simple, but no one has ever given an easy non-mathematical
proof of how that law requires the path of Mercury to be an ellipse,
with the sun at a focus, instead of some other curve.]182



One of the grave difficulties we have in gaining a satisfactory
comprehension of Einstein's conceptions, is that they do not readily
relate themselves to our modes of geometrical thought. Within limits
we may choose our own geometry, but it may be at the cost of unwieldy
complication. If we think with Newton in terms of Euclidean geometry
and consider the earth as revolving around the sun, the motions of
our solar system can be stated in comparatively simple terms. If,
on the other hand, we should persist in stating them, as Ptolemy
would have done, from the earth as a relatively stationary center,
our formulas will become complicated beyond ready comprehension. For
this reason it is much simpler in applying the theory of relativity,
and in considering and describing what actually happens in the physical
universe, to use geometrical conceptions to which the actual conditions
can be easily related. We find such an instrument in non-Euclidean
geometry, wherein space will appear as though it were projected
from a slightly concave mirror. It is in this sense that some speak
of space as curved. The analogy is so suggestive it tempts one to
linger over it. Unless there were material objects within the range
of the mirror, its conformation would be immaterial; the thought of
the space which the mirror, as it were, circumscribes, is dependent
upon the presence of such material objects. The lines of light and of
all other movement will not be quite "straight" from the view-point
of Euclidean geometry. A line drawn in a universe of such a nature
must inevitably return upon itself. Nothing therefore, can ever pass
out of this unlimitedly great but yet finite cosmos. But even now,
since our imaginary mirror is only very slightly concave, it follows
that for limited regions like the earth or even the solar system, our
conception of geometry may well be rectilinear and Euclidean. Newton's
law of gravitation will be quite accurate with only a theoretical
modification drawn from the theory of relativity.]82



The way in which a curvature of space might appear to us as a force
is made plainer by an example. Suppose that in a certain room a
marble dropped anywhere on the floor always rolled to the center of
the room; suppose the same thing happened to a baseball, a billiard
ball, and a tennis ball. These results could be explained in two
ways; we might assume that a mysterious force of attraction existed
at the center of the floor, which affected all kinds of balls alike;
or we might assume that the floor was curved. We naturally prefer the
latter explanation. But when we find that in the neighborhood of a
large material body all other bodies move toward it in exactly the
same manner, regardless of their nature or their condition, we are
accustomed to postulate a mysterious attractive force (gravitation);
Einstein, on the contrary, adopts the other alternative, that the
space around the body is curved.]223



In the ordinary "analytical geometry," the position and motion of
all the points considered is referred to a rigid "body" or "frame of
reference." This usually consists of an imaginary room of suitable
size. The position of any point is then given by three numbers, i.e.,
its distances from one side wall and from the back wall and its height
above the floor. These three numbers can only give one point, every
other point having at least one number different. In four-dimensional
geometry a fourth wall may be vaguely imagined as perpendicular to
all three walls, and a fourth number added, giving the distance of
the "point" from this wall also. Since "rigid" bodies do not exist in
gravitational fields the "frame of reference" must be "non-rigid." The
frame of reference in the Gaussian system need not be rigid, it can
be of any shape and moving in any manner, in fact a kind of jelly. A
"point" or "event" in the four dimensioned world is still given by four
numbers but these numbers do not represent distances from anywhere;
all that is necessary is that no two events shall have exactly the
same four numbers to represent them, and that two events which are
very close together shall be represented by numbers which differ only
slightly from one another. This system assumes so little that it will
be seen to be very wide in its scope; although to the ordinary mind,
what is gained in scope seems more than that lost in concreteness. This
does not concern the mathematician, however, and by using this system
he gains his object, proving that the general laws of nature remain
the same when expressed in any Gaussian coordinate system whatever.]220



Einstein enunciates a general principle that it is possible to find
a transformation of coordinate axes which is exactly equivalent
to any force, and in particular one which is equivalent to the
force of gravitation. That is by concentrating our attention on
the transformation which is a purely mathematical operation we can
afford to neglect the force completely. To get a better idea of this
principle of equivalence as it is called, let us consider a relatively
simple example (which actually has nothing to do with gravitation,
but which will serve to make our notions clearer.) A person on the
earth unconsciously refers all his experiences, i.e., the motions
of the objects around him to a set of axes fixed in the earth on
which he stands. However, we know that the earth is rotating about
its axis, and his axes of reference are also rotating with respect to
the space about him. From the point of view of general relativity it
is exactly because we do refer motions on the surface of the earth
to axes rotating with the earth that we experience the so-called
centrifugal force of the earth's rotation, with which everyone is
familiar. If we could find it convenient to transform from moving axes
to fixed axes, the force would vanish, since it is exactly equivalent
to the transformation from one set of axes to the other. However,
we find it unnatural to refer daily experiences to axes that are not
placed where we happen to be, and so we prefer to take the force and
rotating axes instead of no force and fixed axes.]272



We seem to have a direct experience of force in our muscular
sensations. By pushing or pulling we can set bodies in motion. It
is natural to assume, that something similar occurs, when Nature set
bodies in motion. But is this not a relic of animism? The savage and
the ancients peopled all the woods and skies with Gods and demons, who
carries on the activities of nature by their own bodily efforts. Today
we have dispossessed the demons, but the ghost of a muscular pull
still holds the planets in place.]141



The general theory is an extension of the special theory which enables
the law of gravitation to be deduced. Not in Newton's form, it is true,
but in a better form, that is, one that accounts for two important
facts otherwise not explained. But it is a far more general theory
that indicated above. It is a complete study of the relations between
laws expressed by means of any four coordinates (of which three space
and one time is a special case), and the same laws expressed in the
four coordinates of a system having any motion whatever with respect
to the first system. By restricting this general study in accordance
with certain postulates about the nature of the universe we live in,
we arrive at a number of conclusions which fit more closely with
observed facts that the conclusions drawn from Newton's theory.]221









NOTES


[1] It will be noted that Mr. Bolton pronounces the geometry of
space to be Euclidean in the absence of gravitational fields, not
that of space-time. This is in accord with what was pointed out on
page 161.--Editor.

[2] The author here comes perilously close to ascribing to this
"contraction" the sort of physical reality which it does not
possess. See page 96.--Editor.

[3] Dr. Davis went rather fully into the algebra of the
Michelson-Morley experiment. But Dr. Russell has covered the same
ground in a form somewhat more advantageous from the typographical
viewpoint, and the point is not one which it is profitable to discuss
twice; so we eliminate this part of Dr. Davis' text.--Editor.

[4] This statement is objectionable, as explained in Chapter
IV.--Editor.

[5] A. Einstein: Die Grundlage der allgemeinen
Relativitätstheorie. Ann. d. Physik. 4, vol. 49, page 776.

[6] At this point we have again used the blue pencil on Dr. Davis'
text, his discussion of the three observational tests of the General
Theory adding nothing to Dr. Pickering's.--The Editor.

[7] Commander McHardy uses the term "event" in a sense somewhat
different from that seen in a majority of the essays. He reserves
for the four-dimensional element--the instant of time at a point in
space--the name "point-event"; and the term "event" he applies to a
collection of these forming, together, an observable whole. An actual
physical happening, like a railroad wreck or a laboratory experiment,
it will be realized is of the latter sort, occupying an appreciable
region of space rather than a single point, and an appreciable interval
of time rather than a single second. To the element, the "point-event"
of Commander McHardy's essay, this bears the same relation that the
geometer's solid bears to his point. This comment is in no sense
to be taken as criticism of Commander McHardy's terminology, which
rather appeals to us; we make it merely to guard against confusion
in the reader's mind.--Editor.

[8] This paragraph is the result of an editorial revision
of the author's text, designed to retain the substance of his
presentation, while tying up what he has to say more definitely with
the preceding essays, and eliminating the distinction between finite
and infinitesimal intervals, which we believe to be out of place in
an essay of this character. We will not apologize to our mathematical
readers for having used finite and differential notation in the same
equation, in violation of mathematical convention.--Editor.

[9] Although gravitational force in a small region can be imitated
or annulled by accelerating motion, there remains the disturbing
influence of gravitational matter already referred to and expressed in
the fabric curvature. It is this that defines how unique tracks run,
or rather, how bodies progress.--Author.

[10] Not all gravitational fields may be transformed away by a
proper choice of coordinates. If this were so, the space, whose
nature is independent of any choice of coordinates, would always
be Euclidean.--Author.

[11] Thus when it it said that a body contracts or that a clock runs
slow when it is put in motion no actual physical change is implied. The
judgment of different observers--one at rest with respect to the body
and one not--are different.--Author.

[12] The balance of Dr. Royds' essay is given to a discussion of
the phenomena of Mercury's perihelial advance, the deflection of
light under the gravitational field of the sun, and the shift in
spectral lines, in connection with which alone Einstein's theory
makes predictions which are sufficiently at variance with those
of Newtonian science to be of value in checking up the theory
observationally. In the interest of space conservation and in the
presence of Dr. Pickering's very complete discussion of these matters
we omit Dr. Royds' statement.--Editor.

[13] There is, on any view, no difference as regards observation of
position only.--Author.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Einstein's Theories of Relativity and
Gravitation, by J. Malcolm Bird

