XV

THE NEW WORLD

A Universe in Which Geometry Takes the Place of Physics, and Curvature
That of Force

BY GEORGE FREDERICK HEMENS, M.C., B.SC., LONDON


It is familiar knowledge that the line, the surface and ordinary
Euclidean space are to be regarded as spaces of one, two and three
dimensions respectively and readers of this journal are aware
that a hypothetical space of four dimensions has been closely
investigated. The most convenient space to study is the surface or
two-space, since we can regard it as embedded in a three-space. If a
surface is curved it is generally impossible to draw a straight line
on it, for as we see clearly, the "straightest" line is changing its
direction at every point. To describe this property accurately it
is necessary to ascribe to each point a magnitude which expresses
what happens to the direction of a short line in the region when
displaced a short distance parallel to itself. This is called the
direction-defining magnitude. Different sets of values of this
magnitude relate to surfaces of different curvatures.

A second fundamental property has recently been pointed out. There
is inherent in every part of a space a measure of length peculiar
to that particular region and which in general varies from region
to region. To describe this variation accurately it is necessary to
ascribe to each point another magnitude called the length-defining
magnitude, which expresses the change from each point to the next of
the unit of length. These two magnitudes define the surface completely.

Similarly, a space of any number of dimensions is defined completely
by a similar pair of magnitudes. A space is the "field" of such
a magnitude-pair and the nature of these magnitudes defines the
dimensions of the space. The four-space usually described is the
Euclidean member of an infinity of four-spaces.

When we look into a mirror we see a space differing from ordinary
space in that right and left are interchanged and this is described
mathematically by saying that if we locate points as usual by
specifying three distances $X_1$, $X_2$, $X_3$ of the point from three
mutually perpendicular planes, then a point $X_1$, $X_2$, $X_3$, in
actual space corresponds with a point $X_1$, $X_2$, $ -X_3$ in the
mirrored space: in other words the mirrored space is derived from
the real space by multiplying the $X_3$ coordinates by $-1$. If we
were to multiply by $\sqrt{-1}$ instead of $-1$ we should derive a
different space; in this case, however, we have no mirror to show us
what it looks like. Such a space is said to have one negative dimension
and it has the peculiar property that in the figure derived from the
right triangle of ordinary space the square of the "hypotenuse" equals
the difference and not the sum of the squares of the other two sides,
so that the length of a line may sometimes have to be represented by
the square-root of a negative number, a "complex" number.

In considering what at first sight may appear to be fantastic
statements made by this theory, it must be borne in mind that all our
knowledge of the external universe comes through our sense-impressions,
and our most confident statements about external things are really
of the nature of inferences from these sense-impressions and, being
inferences, liable to be wrong. So that if the theory says that a
stone lying on the ground is not a simple three-dimensional object, and
that its substance is not the same as its substance a moment before,
the matter is one for due consideration and not immediate disbelief.

The idea that the universe extends in time as well as in space is not
new, and fiction-writers have familiarized us with wonderful machines
in which travellers journey in time and are present at various stages
of the world's history. This conception of the universe, to which the
name "space-time" is usually applied, is adopted by the new theory
and assigned the status of a physical reality.




THE WORLD GEOMETRY

The fundamental creed of the new theory is that the space-time universe
constitutes a true four-dimensional space of one negative dimension,
this dimension being time. The variations from point to point of
the direction-defining and length-defining magnitudes generate the
geometrical properties of curvature, etc., and these are cognised by
the human mind as physical phenomena: our sense-impressions are nothing
more nor less than perceptions of the geometry of a fourspace. So
instead of inferring from our sense-impressions the existence of
matter, motion and the like as we are accustomed to do, we should with
equal justice infer the existence of a geometrical fourspace. Thus it
becomes necessary to prepare a dictionary in which the familiar things
of our world are identified with those geometrical properties of the
four-space which really constitute them, and in so doing parts of
our geometrical knowledge assume the guise of new physical knowledge.

Through the fourspace our consciousness travels, cognising a changing
three-dimensional section of it as it goes and thus giving rise
to time. It becomes aware that the fourspace is pleated or folded
along lines all running roughly in the same direction, and possibly
because this is the easiest direction to follow, it travels along the
lines. The direction of this motion is the negative dimension. Thus
consciousness is always aware of the nearly constant forms of the
cross-sections of the pleats along which it travels. These unvarying
forms constitute matter: matter is the form of a section through
a uniform pleat of the fourspace--a three-dimensional aspect of a
four-dimensional curvature; so that in strict accuracy we should
say that a stone is the shape or form of a changing section of a
four-dimensional object, the complete object being a long fold in the
fourspace. The physical interpretation of this conservation of form
of the cross-section is that matter is conserved. It is thus seen that
the conscious mind, by following these pleats, has so determined time
that the law of the conservation of matter must hold. The mathematical
treatment of the subject makes it clear that practically all other
physical laws similarly follow as a direct result of this choice of
time. The type of order prevailing in the physical universe, the laws
of gravitation, heat, motion and the rest are not directly imposed
by some external power, but are apparently chosen by mind itself.

In the neighborhood of these pleats the fourspace is still curved,
but to a smaller degree. This we cognise as energy or as a field
of force. Thus energy is seen to be the same kind of thing as
matter and would therefore be expected to have weight. This was
experimentally demonstrated in 1919 when light was in effect actually
weighed. Conversely, matter consists of energy; and it is calculated
that one liter of water contains sufficient energy to develop a million
horsepower for about four years. It is now believed that the sun's
energy is derived from the disintegration of the matter of which it
is made.

The method of establishing these identifications will be clear from the
following: We already knew that matter is made up of electrons and that
radiant energy is electromagnetic and before the advent of this theory
it was regarded as certain that practically all observed physical
phenomena except gravitation were manifestations of the electromagnetic
field. The new theory has confirmed this belief. It is found that
the gravitational and electromagnetic conditions of the universe are
completely defined if to each point of space-time a gravitational and
an electric potential are ascribed. These are magnitudes of the same
nature as the direction-defining and length-defining magnitudes which
must necessarily be associated with every point of space-time if it
is a true "space," and they are therefore identified with these. By
performing ordinary mathematical operations on these magnitudes
statements of fact clothed in mathematical form are obtained, which are
to be interpreted on the one hand as physical laws and on the other
as geometrical properties of the fourspace. Nearly all our physical
laws are derivable mathematically in this way, so that an extensive
identification is effected which has been fruitful of results.

It has been mentioned that a slight curvature is sometimes cognised
as force and as this identification appeared originally as a postulate
its history is interesting.




THE GENESIS OF THE THEORY

An experiment by Michelson and Morley (1887), on which the whole theory
is based, made it appear that if a man measures the velocity at which
light passes him he will get the same result whether he is stationary,
rushing to meet the light, or moving in the same direction as the
light. The solution was provided by Einstein in 1905. He suggested that
since we know the results of these determinations ought not to agree,
something must have happened to the clocks and measuring-rods used in
measuring the velocity so that the standards of length and time were
not the same in the three cases, the alterations being exactly such as
to make the velocity of light constant. This solution is universally
accepted as true and is the fundamental postulate. Thus the length of
a stick and the rate at which time passes will change as the velocity
of the person observing these things changes. If a man measured the
length of an aeroplane going past him at 161,000 miles per second it
would measure only half the length observed when stationary. If the
aeroplane were going with the velocity of light, its length would
vanish though its breadth and height would be unaltered. Similarly,
if of two twin brothers one were continually moving with reference
to the other their ages would gradually diverge, for time would go at
different rates for the two. If one moved with the velocity of light,
time would stand still for him while for the other it would go on as
usual. To get actually younger it would be necessary to move quicker
than light which is believed to be impossible. The velocity of light
is assumed to be the greatest velocity occurring in nature.

Evidently then if the distance in space and the interval in time
separating two given events, such as the firing of a gun and the
bursting of the shell, are measured by two observers in uniform
relative motion, their estimates will not agree. Consider now the
simple problem of measuring the distance between two points on an
ordinary drawing-board. If we draw two perpendicular axes, we can
define this distance by specifying the lengths of the projections
on the two axes of the line joining the points. If we choose two
different axes the projections will not be the same but will define
the same length. Similarly, in a Euclidean four-space the distance
between two points will be defined by the projections on the four
axes, but if these axes be rotated slightly, the projections will be
different, but will define the same length. Now, returning to the two
observers just mentioned, it was noticed by Minkowski in 1908 that
if the space measurements between the two events are split into the
usual three components, and if the time measurements are multiplied
by $\sqrt{-1}$, the difference between the two sets of measurements
is exactly the same as would have occurred had these two events
been points in a Euclidean fourspace, and two different observations
made of their distance apart using two sets of axes inclined to each
other. The velocity of light is made equal to 1 in this calculation by
a suitable choice of units. This discovery threw a vivid light on the
problem of space-time, showing that it is probably a true four-space
of one negative dimension, a simple derivative of the much-discussed
and now familiar Euclidean four-space.

Although this discovery gave a tremendous impetus to the progress
of the theory, it is probable that it holds a deeper significance
not yet revealed. It is probably a statement of the "stuff" of which
the four-space is made, and perhaps also of how it is made; but the
problem remains unsolved.

It thus becomes plain that our two observers are merely looking at the
same thing from different viewpoints. Each has just as much right as
the other to regard himself as being at rest in ordinary space (this is
the postulate of the relativity of uniform motion) and to regard his
time direction as a straight line in the four-space. The difference
is merely that the two time axes are inclined to each other. If,
however, one were moving with an acceleration with reference to the
other his path in the four-space will appear curved to the other,
though he himself, since he regards it as his time axis, will still
assume it to be straight. If there is a body moving in what one
observer sees to be a straight line, the other will, of course,
in general see it as curved, and following the usual custom, since
this body, without apparent reason, deviates from the straight path,
will say there must be some force acting on it. Thus the curvature
of his time axis, due to his accelerated motion, makes it appear
that there is round him a field of force, which causes freely moving
bodies to deviate from the straight path. Now if space-time is itself
inherently curved it is not generally possible for any line in it to
be straight any more than it is possible for any line on the surface
of a sphere to be straight. Hence, all axes must be curved, and all
observers, whatever their states of motion, must experience fields of
force which are of the same nature as those due to motion only. The
extra force experienced when a lift begins to rise is an example of
force due to pure motion: gravitation is the similar force due to an
inherent curvature of the four-space, and it was the postulate that
these forces were similar that made possible Einstein's solution of
the general problem of gravitation.




THE TIME DIAGRAM

The correlation of time with its geometrical analogue is of absorbing
interest. Representing velocity by the common method of plotting
a curve showing positions at various times and marking distances
horizontally and times vertically, the velocity of light being 1,
$MM'$ and $NN'$ will both represent this velocity. Since this is
assumed to be the greatest velocity occurring in nature, all other
possible velocities are represented by lines falling within the upper
and lower V's. Now this diagram correctly represents two dimensions
of Minkowski's Euclidean four-space so, transmuting to real but flat
four-space by multiplying times by $\sqrt{-1}$, it is seen that there
is a region outside which no effect can be propagated from $O$ since
that would involve the existence of a velocity greater than that of
light. This region represents the future of $O$. Similarly, $O$ can
only be affected by events within the region derived from the
downward-opening V, which therefore represents the past of $O$.
The region between the two represents events which may be either
simultaneous with $O$ or not, according to the velocity of the
observer at $O$. Thus in this theory an event dictated by free-will,
could affect points in its "future" region, but not in any other,
which agrees with experience and shows that the theory is not
essentially "determinist." If "free-will" is really free, the future
is not yet determined, and the fourspace must be in some way formed
by the will as time progresses.

The trains of thought inspired by Einstein's postulates have already
carried us to a pinnacle of knowledge unprecedented in the history of
man. On every hand, as we look out upon the universe from our new and
lofty standpoint, unexpected and enthralling vistas open up before us,
and we find ourselves confronting nature with an insight such as no
man has ever before dared aspire to.

It is completely unthinkable that this theory can ever be swept
aside. Apart from experimental verifications which, in point of fact,
lend it the strongest support, no one could work through the theory
without feeling that here, in truth, the inner workings of the universe
were laid bare before him. The harmony with nature is far too complete
for any doubt to arise of its truth.









