IV

THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

What Einstein's Study of Uniform Motion Tells Us About Time and Space
and the Nature of the External Reality

BY VARIOUS CONTRIBUTORS AND THE EDITOR


Whatever the explanation adopted for the negative result of the
Michelson-Morley experiment, one thing stands out clearly: the attempt
to isolate absolute motion has again failed.]* [Einstein generalizes
this with all the other and older negative results of similar sort into
a negative deduction to the effect that no experiment is possible upon
two systems which will determine that one of them is in motion and
the other at rest.]121 [He elevates the repeated failure to detect
absolute motion through space into the principle that experiment
will never reveal anything in the nature of absolute velocities. He
postulates that all laws of nature can and should be enunciated in
such forms that they are as true in these forms for one observer
as for another, even though these observers with their frames of
reference be in motion relative to one another.]264

[There are various ways of stating the principle of the relativity
of uniform motion which has been thus arrived at, and which forms
the basis of the Special Theory of Einstein. If we care to emphasize
the rôle of mathematics and the reference frame we may say that]*
[any coordinate system having a uniform rectilinear motion with
respect to the bodies under observation may be interchangeably used
with any other such system in describing their motions;]232 [or that
the unaccelerated motion of a system of reference cannot be detected
by observations made on this system alone.]194 [Or we can let this
aspect of the matter go, and state the relativity postulate in a form
more intelligible to the non-mathematician by simply insisting that
it is impossible by any means whatever to distinguish any other than
the relative motion between two systems that are moving uniformly. As
Dr. Russell puts it on a later page, we can assume boldly that the
universe is so constituted that uniform straight-ahead motion of an
observer and all his apparatus will not produce any difference whatever
in the result of any physical process or experiment of any kind.

As we have seen, this is entirely reasonable, on philosophical grounds,
until we come to consider the assumptions of the past century with
regard to light and its propagation. On the basis of these assumptions
we had expected the Michelson-Morley experiment to produce a result
negativing the notion of universal relativity. It refused to do this,
and we agree with Einstein that the best explanation is to return
to the notion of relativity, rather than to invent a forced and
special hypothesis to account for the experiment's failure. But we
must now investigate the assumptions underlying the theory of light,
and remove the one that requires the ether to serve as a universal
standard of absolute motion.




LIGHT AND THE ETHER

It is among the possibilities that the wave theory of light itself
will in the end be more or less seriously modified. It is even more
definitely among the possibilities that the ether will be discarded.]*
[Certainly when Lord Kelvin estimates that its mass per cubic
centimeter is .000,000,000,000,000,001 gram, while Sir Oliver Lodge
insists that the correct figure is 1,000,000,000,000,000 grams, it is
quite evident that we know so little about it that it is better to
get along without it if we can.]216 [But to avoid confusion we must
emphasize that Einstein makes no mention whatsoever of the ether;
his theory is absolutely independent of any theory of the ether.]139
[Save as he forbids us to employ the ether as a standard of absolute
motion, Einstein does not in the least care what qualities we assign
to it, or whether we retain it at all. His demands are going to be made
upon light itself, not upon the alleged medium of light transmission.

When two observers in relative motion to one another measure their
velocities with respect to a third material object, they expect to get
different results. Their velocities with regard to this object properly
differ, for it is no more to be taken as a universal super-observer
than either of them. But if they get different results when they come
to measure the velocity with which light passes their respective
systems, relativity is challenged. Light is with some propriety
to be regarded as a universal observer; and if it will measure our
velocities against each other we cannot deny it rank as an absolute
standard. If we are not prepared to abandon universal relativity,
and adopt one of the "fluke" explanations for the Michelson-Morley
result, we must boldly postulate that in free space light presents the
same velocity $C$ to all observers--whatever the source of the light,
whatever the relative motion between source and observer, whatever the
relative motion between the several observers. The departure here from
the old assumption lies in the circumstance that the old physics with
its ether assigned to light a velocity universally constant in this
ether; we have stopped talking about the medium and have made the
constant $C$ refer to the observer's measured value of the velocity
of light with regard to himself.

We are fortified in this assumption by the Michelson-Morley
result and by all other observations bearing directly upon the
matter. Nevertheless, as Mr. Francis says in his essay, we feel
instinctively that space and time are not so constituted as to
make it possible, if I pass you at 100 miles per hour, for the
same light-impulse to pass us both at the same speed $C$.]* [The
implicit assumptions underlying this feeling, be they true or false,
are now so interwoven with the commonly received notions of space and
time that any theory which questions them has all the appearance of
a fantastic and unthinkable thing.]115 [We cannot, however, go back
on our relativity; so when]* [Einstein shows us that an entirely new
set of time and space concepts is necessary to reconcile universe
relativity with this fundamental fact of the absolute constancy of
the observed velocity of light in vacuo,]18 [all that is left for us
to do is to inquire what revisions are necessary, and submit to them.]*

[The conceptual difficulties of the theory arise principally from
attributing to space and time the properties of things. No portion of
space can be compared with another, save by convention; it is things
which we compare. No interval of time can be compared with another,
save by convention. The first has gone when the second becomes
"now".]149 [It is events that we compare, through the intervention
of things. Our measurements are never of space or of time, but only
of the things and the events that occupy space and time. And since
the measurements which we deal with as though they were of space and
of time lie at the foundation of all physical science, while at the
same time themselves constituting, as we have seen, the only reality
of which we are entitled to speak, it is in order to examine with
the utmost care the assumptions underlying them. That there are such
assumptions is clear--the very possibility of making measurements is
itself an assumption, and every technique for carrying them out rests
on an assumption. Let us inquire which of these it is that relativity
asks us to revise.]*




THE MEASUREMENT OF TIME AND SPACE

[Time is generally conceived as perfectly uniform. How do we judge
about it? What tells us that the second just elapsed is equal to the
one following? By the very nature of time the superposition of its
successive intervals is impossible. How then can we talk about the
relative duration of these intervals? It is clear that any relationship
between them can only be conventional.]178 [As a matter of fact, we
habitually measure time in terms of moving bodies. The simplest method
is to agree that some entity moves with uniform velocity. It will be
considered as travelling equal distances in equal intervals of time,
the distances to be measured as may be specified by our assumptions
governing this department of investigation.]179 [The motions of the
earth through which we ultimately define the length of day and year,
the division of the former into 86,400 "equal" intervals as defined by
the motions of pendulum or balance wheel through equal distances, are
examples of this convention of time measurement. Even when we correct
the motions of the earth, on the basis of what our clocks tell us of
these motions, we are following this lead; the earth and the clocks
fall out, it is plain that one of them does not satisfy our assumption
of equal lengths in equal times, and we decide to believe the clock.]*

[The foregoing concerning time may be accepted as inherent in
time itself. But concerning lengths it may be thought that we
are able to verify absolutely their equality and especially their
invariability. Let us have the audacity to verify this statement. We
have two lengths, in the shape of two rods, which coincide perfectly
when brought together. What may we conclude from this coincidence? Only
that the two rods so considered have equal lengths at the same
place in space and at the same moment. It may very well be that each
rod has a different length at different locations in space and at
different times; that their equality is purely a local matter. Such
changes could never be detected if they affected all objects in the
universe. We cannot even ascertain that both rods remain straight
when we transport them to another location, for both can very well
take the same curvature and we shall have no means of detecting it.

Euclidean geometry assumes that geometrical objects have sizes and
shapes independent of position and of orientation in space, and
equally invariable in time. But the properties thus presupposed are
only conventional and in no way subject to direct verification. We
cannot even ascertain space to be independent of time, because when
comparing geometrical objects we have to conceive them as brought to
the same place in space and in time.]178 [Even the statement that
when they are made to coincide their lengths are equal is, after
all, itself an assumption inherent in our ideas of what constitutes
length. And certainly the notion that we can shift them from place
to place and from moment to moment, for purposes of comparison, is
an assumption; even Euclid, loose as he was from modern standards
in this business of "axioms," knew this and included a superposition
axiom among his assumptions.

As a matter of fact, this procedure for determining equality of lengths
is not always available. It assumes, it will be noted, that we have
free access to the object which is to be measured--which is to say,
it assumes that this object is at rest with respect to us. If it
is not so at rest, we must employ at least a modification of this
method; a modification that will in some manner involve the sending
of signals. Even when we employ the Euclidean method of superposition
directly, we must be assured that the respective ends of the lengths
under comparison coincide at the same time. The observer cannot be
present at both ends simultaneously; at best he can only be present
at one end and receive a signal from the other end.




THE PROBLEM OF COMMUNICATION

Accordingly, in making the necessary assumptions to cover the matter
of measuring lengths, we must make one with regard to the character
of the signals which are to be employed for this purpose. If we
could assume a system of signalling that would consume no time in
transmission all would be simple enough. But we have no experience with
such a system. Even if we believe that it ought to be possible thus
to transmit signals at infinite velocity, we may not, in the absence
of our present ability to do this, assume that it is possible. So we
may only assume, with Einstein, that for our signals we shall employ
the speediest messenger with which we are at present acquainted. This
of course is light, the term including any of the electromagnetic
impulses that travel at the speed $C$.

Of course in the vast majority of cases the distance that any light
signal in which we are interested must go to reach us is so small that
the time taken by its transmission can by no means be measured. We
are then, to all intents and purposes, at both places--the point of
origin of the signal and the point of receipt--simultaneously. But
this is not the question at all. Waiving the fact that in astronomical
investigations this approximation no longer holds, the fact remains
that it is, in every case, merely an approximation. Approximations are
all right in observations, where we know that they are approximations
and act accordingly. But in the conceptual universe that parallels the
external reality, computation is as good an agent of observation as
visual or auditory or tactile sensation; if we can compute the error
involved in a wrong procedure the error is there, regardless of whether
we can see it or not. We must have methods which are conceptually
free from error; and if we attempt to ignore the velocity of our
light signals we do not meet this condition.

The measurement of lengths demands that we have a criterion of
simultaneity between two remote points--remote in inches or remote
in light-years, it does not matter which. There is no difficulty in
defining simultaneity of two events that fall in the same point--or
rather, in agreeing that we know what we mean by such simultaneity. But
with regard to two events that occur in remote places there may be a
question. A scientific definition differs from a mere description in
that it must afford us a means of testing whether a given item comes
under the definition or not. There is some difficulty in setting up
a definition of simultaneity between distant events that satisfies
this requirement. If we try simply to fall back upon our inherent
ideas of what we mean by "the same instant" we see that this is not
adequate. We must lay down a procedure for determining whether two
events at remote points occur at "the same instant," and check up
alleged simultaneity by means of this procedure.

Einstein says, and we must agree with him, that he can find but one
reasonable definition to cover this ground. An observer can tell
whether he is located half way between two points of his observation;
he can have mirrors set up at these points, send out light-signals,
and note the time at which he gets back the reflection. He knows
that the velocity of both signals, going and coming, is the same;
if he observes that they return to him together so that their time of
transit for the round trip is the same, he must accept the distances as
equal. He is then at the mid-point of the line joining the two points
under observation; and he may define simultaneity as follows, without
introducing anything new or indeterminate: Two events are simultaneous
if an observer midway between them sees them at the same instant, by
means, of course, of light originating at the points of occurrence.]*

[It is this definition of simultaneity, coupled with the assumption
that all observers, on whatever uniformly moving systems, would obtain
the same experimental value for the velocity of light, that leads to
the apparent paradoxes of the Special Theory of Relativity. If it be
asked why we adopt it, we must in turn ask the inquirer to propose
a better system for defining simultaneous events on different moving
bodies.]198

[There is nothing in this definition to indicate, directly, whether
simultaneity persists for all observers, or whether it is relative,
so that events simultaneous to one observer are not so to another. The
question must then be investigated; and the answer, of course, will
hinge upon the possibility of making proper allowances for the time of
transit of the light signals that may be involved. It seems as though
this ought to be possible; but a simple experiment will indicate that
it is not, unless the observers involved are at rest with respect to
one another.




AN EINSTEINIAN EXPERIMENT

Let us imagine an indefinitely long, straight railroad track, with
an observer located somewhere along it at the point $M$. According to
the convention suggested above, he has determined points $A$ and $B$
in opposite directions from him along the track, and equally distant
from him. We shall imagine, further, than a beneficent Providence
supplies two lightning flashes, one striking at $A$ and one at $B$,
in such a way that observer $M$ finds them to be simultaneous.

While all this is going on, a train is passing--a very long train,
amply long enough to overlap the section $AMB$ of the track. Among
the passengers there is one, whom we may call $M'$, who is directly
opposite $M$ at the instant when, according to $M$, the lightning
strikes. Observe he is not opposite $M$ when $M$ sees the flashes,
but a brief time earlier--at the instant when, according to $M$'s
computation, the simultaneous flashes occurred. At this instant there
are definitely determined the points $A'$ and $B'$, on the train;
and since we may quite well think of the two systems--train-system
and track-system--as in coincidence at this instant, $M'$ is midway
between $A'$ and $B'$, and likewise is midway between $A$ and $B$.

Now if we think of the train as moving over the track in the direction
of the arrow, we see very easily that $M'$ is running away from the
light from $A$ and toward that from $B$, and that, despite--or if
you prefer because of--the uniform velocity of these light signals,
the one from $B$ reaches him, over a slightly shorter course, sooner
than the one from $A$, over the slightly longer course. When the light
signals reach $M$, $M'$ is no longer abreast of him but has moved along
a wee bit, so that at this instant when $M$ has the two signals, one
of these has passed $M'$ and the other has yet to reach him. The upshot
is that the events which were simultaneous to $M$ are not so to $M'$.

It will probably be felt that this result is due to our having,
somewhat unjustifiably and inconsistently, localized on the train
the relative motion between train and track. But if we think of
the track as sliding back under the train in the direction opposite
to the arrow, and carrying with it the points $A$ and $B$; and if
we remember that this in no way affects $M$'s observed velocity of
light or the distances $AM$ and $BM$ as he observes them: we can
still accept his claim that the flashes were simultaneous. Then we
have again the same situation: when the flashes from $A$ and from
$B$ reach $M$ at the same moment, in his new position a trifle to
the left of his initial position of the diagram, the flash from $A$
has not yet reached $M'$ in his original position while that from
$B$ has passed him. Regardless of what assumption we make concerning
the motion between train-system and track-system, or more elegantly
regardless of what coordinate system we use to define that motion,
the event at $B$ precedes that at $A$ in the observation of $M'$. If
we introduce a second train moving on the other track in the opposite
direction, the observer on it will of course find that the flash at $A$
precedes that at $B$--a disagreement not merely as to simultaneity but
actually as to the order of two events! If we conceive the lightning
as striking at the points $A'$ and $B'$ on the train, these points
travel with $M'$ instead of with $M$; they are fixed to his coordinate
system instead of to the other. If you carry out the argument now,
you will find that when the flashes are simultaneous to $M'$, the
one at $A$ precedes that at $B$ in $M$'s observation.

A large number of experiments more or less similar in outline to
this one can be set up to demonstrate the consequences, with regard
to measured values of time and space, of relative motion between two
observers. I do not believe that a multiplicity of such demonstrations
contributes to the intelligibility of the subject, and it is for
this reason that I have cut loose from immediate dependence upon the
essayists in this part of the discussion, concentrating upon the single
experiment to which Einstein himself gives the place of importance.




WHO IS RIGHT?

We may permit Mr. Francis to remind us here that neither $M$ nor
$M'$ may correct his observation to make it accord with the other
fellow's. The one who does this is admitting that the other is at
absolute rest and that he is himself in absolute motion; and this
cannot be. They are simply in disagreement as to the simultaneity of
two events, just as two observers might be in disagreement about the
distance or the direction of a single event. This can mean nothing
else than that, under the assumptions we have made, simultaneity is
not an absolute characteristic as we had supposed it to be, but, like
distance and direction, is in fact merely a relation between observer
and objective, and therefore depends upon the particular observer
who happens to be operating and upon the reference frame he is using.

But this is serious. My time measurements depend ultimately upon
my space measurements; the latter, and hence both, depend closely
upon my ideas of simultaneity. Yours depend upon your reading of
simultaneity in precisely the same way.]* [Suppose the observer on
the track, in the above experiment, wants to measure the length of
something on the car, or the observer on the car something on the
track. The observer, or his assistant, must be at both ends of the
length to be measured at the same time, or get simultaneous reports
in some way from these ends; else they will obtain false results. It
is plain, then, that with different criteria of what the "same time"
is, the observers in the two systems may get different values for
the measured lengths in question.]220

[Who is right? According to the principle of relativity a decision on
this question is absolutely impossible. Both parties are right from
their own points of view; and we must admit that two events in two
different places may be simultaneous for certain observers, and yet
not simultaneous for other observers who move with respect to the first
ones. There is no contradiction in this statement, although it is not
in accordance with common opinion, which believes simultaneousness to
be something absolute. But this common opinion lacks foundation. It
cannot be proved by direct perception, for simultaneity of events
can be perceived directly,]24 [and in a manner involving none of our
arbitrary assumptions,]* [only if they happen at the same place;
if the events are distant from each other, their simultaneity or
succession can be stated only through some method of communicating by
signals. There is no logical reason why such a method should not lead
to different results for observers who move with regard to one another.

From what we have said, it follows immediately that in the new theory
not only the concept of simultaneousness but also that of duration is
revealed as dependent on the motion of the observer.]24 [Demonstration
of this should be superfluous; it ought to be plain without argument
that if two observers cannot agree whether two instants are the same
instant or not, they cannot agree on the interval of time between
instants. In the very example which we have already examined, one
observer says that a certain time-interval is zero, and another gives
it a value different from zero. The same thing happens whenever the
observers are in relative motion.]* [Two physicists who measure the
duration of a physical process will not obtain the same result if
they are in relative motion with regard to one another.

They will also find different results for the length of a body. An
observer who wants to measure the length of a body which is moving
past him must in one way or another hold a measuring rod parallel to
its motion and mark those points on his rod with which the ends of
the body come into simultaneous coincidence. The distance between the
two marks will then indicate the length of the body. But if the two
markings are simultaneous for one observer, they will not be so for
another one who moves with a different velocity, or who is at rest,
with regard to the body under observation. He will have to ascribe
a different length to it. And there will be no sense in asking which
of them is right: length is a purely relative concept, just as well
as duration.]24




THE RELATIVITY OF TIME AND SPACE

[The degree to which distance and time become relative instead of
absolute quantities under the Special Theory of Relativity can be
stated very definitely. In the first place, we must point out that the
relativity of lengths applies with full force only to lengths that lie
parallel to the direction of relative motion. Those that lie exactly
perpendicular to that direction come out the same for both observers;
those that lie obliquely to it show an effect, depending upon the
angle, which of course becomes greater and greater as the direction
of parallelism is approached.

The magnitude of the effect is easily demonstrated, but with this
demonstration we do not need to be concerned here. It turns out
that if an observer moving with a system finds that a certain time
interval in the system is $T$ seconds and that a certain length in
the system is $L$ inches, then an observer moving parallel with $L$
and with a velocity $v$ relative to the system will find for these
the respective values $T \div K$ and $L \times K$, where

    $$K = \sqrt{1 - v^2/C^2}.$$

$C$ in this expression of course represents the velocity of light. It
will be noted that the fraction $v^2/C^2$ is ordinarily very small;
that the expression under the radical is therefore less than 1 but
by a very slight margin; and that the entire expression $K$ is itself
therefore less than 1 but by an even slighter margin. This means, then,
that the observer outside the system finds the lengths in the system
to be a wee bit shorter and the time intervals a wee bit longer than
does the observer in the system. Another way of putting the matter
is based, ultimately, upon the fact that in order for the observer
in the system to get the larger value for distance and the smaller
value for time, his measuring rod must go into the distance under
measurement more times than that of the moving observer, while his
clock must beat a longer second in order that less of them shall be
recorded in a given interval between two events. So it is often said
that the measuring rod as observed from without is contracted and
the clock runs slow. This does not impress me as a happy statement,
either in form or in content.]*

[The argument that these formulae are contradicted by human experience
can be refuted by examining a concrete instance. If a train is
1,000 feet long at rest, how long will it be when running a mile a
minute?]232 [I have quoted this question exactly as it appears in the
essay from which it is taken, because it is such a capital example of
the objectionable way in which this business is customarily put. For
the statement that lengths decrease and time-intervals increase "with
velocity" is not true in just this form. The velocity, to have meaning,
must be relative to some external system; and it is the observations
from that external system that are affected. So long as we confine
ourselves to the system in which the alleged modifications of size
are stated as having taken place, there is nothing to observe that
is any different from what is usual; there is no way to establish
that we are enjoying a velocity, and in fact within the intent of
the relativity theory we are not enjoying a velocity, for we are
moving with the objects which we are observing. It is inter-systemic
observations, and these alone, that show the effect. When we travel
with the system under observation, we get the same results as any
other observer on this system; when we do not so travel, we must
conduct our observations from our own system, in relative motion to
the other, and refer our results to our system.

Now when no particular observer is specified, we must of course
assume an observer connected with the train, or with whatever the body
mentioned. To that observer it doesn't make the slightest difference
what the train does; it may stand at rest with respect to some external
system or it may move at any velocity whatsoever; its length remains
always 1,000 feet. In order for this question to have the significance
which its propounder means it to have, I must restate it as follows:
A train is 1,000 feet long as measured by an observer travelling with
it. If it passes a second observer at 60 miles per hour, what is its
length as observed by him? The answer is now easy.]* [According to the
formula the length of the moving train as seen from the ground will be

    $$1,000 \times \sqrt{1 - (88)^2 / (186,000 \times 5,280)^2} =
    999.999,999,999,996$$

feet, a change entirely too small for detection by the most delicate
instruments. Examination of the expression K shows that in so far
as terrestrial movements of material objects are concerned it is
equal to 1]232 [within a far smaller margin than we can ever hope to
make our observations. Even the diameter of the earth, as many of the
essayists point out, will be shortened only 2 1/2 inches for an outside
observer past whom it rushes with its orbital speed of 18.5 miles per
second. But slight as the difference may be in these familiar cases,
its scientific importance remains the same.]*




RELATIVITY AND REALITY

[A simple computation shows that this effect is exactly the amount
suggested by Lorentz and Fitzgerald to explain the Michelson-Morley
experiment.]188 [This ought not to surprise us, since both that
explanation and the present one are got up with the same purpose. If
they both achieve that purpose they must, numerically, come to the
same thing in any numerical case. It is, however, most emphatically
to be insisted that the present "shortening" of lengths]* [no longer
appears as a "physical" shortening caused by absolute motion through
the ether but is simply a result of our methods of measuring space
and time.]188 [Where Fitzgerald and Lorentz had assumed that a body in
motion has its dimensions shortened in the direction of its motion,]220
[this very form of statement ceases to possess significance under
the relativity assumption.]* [For if we cannot tell which of two
bodies is moving, which one is shortened? The answer is, both--for
the other fellow. For each frame of reference there is a scale of
length and a scale of time, and these scales for different frames
are related in a manner involving both the length and the time.]220
[But we must not yield to the temptation to say that all this is not
real; the confinement of a certain scale of length and of time to
a single observation system does not in the least make it unreal.]*
[The situation is real--as real as any other physical event.]165

[The word physical is used in two senses in the above paragraph. It
is denied that the observed variability in lengths indicates any
"physical" contraction or shrinkage; and on the heels of this it
is asserted that this observed variability is of itself an actual
"physical" event. It is difficult to express in words the distinction
between the two senses in which the term physical is employed in these
two statements, but I think this distinction ought to be clear once
its existence is emphasized. There is no material contraction; it is
not right to say that objects in motion contract or are shorter; they
are not shorter to an observer in motion with them. The whole thing is
a phenomenon of observation. The definitions which we are obliged to
lay down and the assumptions which we are obliged to make in order,
first, that we shall be able to measure at all, and second, that we
shall be able to escape the inadmissible concept of absolute motion,
are such that certain realities which we had supposed ought to be the
same for all observers turn out not to be the same for observers who
are in relative motion with respect to one another. We have found this
out, and we have found out the numerical relation which holds between
the reality of the one observer and that of the other. We have found
that this relation depends upon nothing save the relative velocity
of the two observers. As good a way of emphasizing this as any is to
point out that two observers who have the same velocity with respect
to the system under examination (and whose mutual relative velocity
is therefore zero) will always get the same results when measuring
lengths and times on that system. The object does not go through any
process of contraction; it is simply shorter because it is observed
from a station with respect to which it is moving. Similar remarks
might be made about the time effect; but the time-interval is not so
easily visualized as a concrete thing and hence does not offer such
temptation for loose statement.

The purely relative aspect of the matter is further brought out if
we consider a single example both backwards and forwards. Systems $S$
and $S'$ are in relative motion. An object in $S$ which to an observer
in $S$ is $L$ units long, is shorter for an observer in $S'$--shorter
by an amount indicated through the "correction factor" $K$. Now if
we have, in the first instance, made the objectionable statement
that objects are shorter in system $S'$ than they are in $S$, it
will be quite natural for us to infer from this that objects in $S$
must be longer than those in $S'$; and from this to assert that when
the observer in $S$ measures objects lying in $S'$, he gets for them
greater lengths than does the home observer in $S'$. But if we have,
in the first instance, avoided the objectionable statement referred
to, we shall be much better able to realize that the whole business is
quite reciprocal; that the phenomena are symmetric with respect to the
two systems, to the extent that we can interchange the systems in any
of our statements without modifying the statements in any other way.

Objects in $S$ appear shorter and times in $S$ appear longer to the
external "moving" observer in $S'$ than they do to the domestic
observer in $S$. Exactly in the same way, objects in $S'$ appear
shorter to observers in the foreign system $S$ than to the home
observer in $S'$, who remains at rest with respect to them. I think
that when we get the right angle upon this situation, it loses the
alleged startling character which has been imposed upon it by many
writers. The "apparent size" of the astronomer is an analogy in
point. Objects on the moon, by virtue of their great distance, look
smaller to observers on the earth than to observers on the moon. Do
objects on the earth, on this account, look larger to a moon observer
than they do to us? They do not; any suggestion that they do we should
receive with appropriate scorn. The variation in size introduced by
distance is reciprocal, and this reciprocity does not in the least
puzzle us. Why, then, should that introduced by relative motion
puzzle us?




TIME AND SPACE IN A SINGLE PACKAGE

Our old, accustomed concepts of time and space, which have grown
up through countless generations of our ancestors, and been handed
down to us in the form in which we are familiar with them, leave no
room for a condition where time intervals and space intervals are
not universally fixed and invariant. They leave no room for us to
say that]* [one cannot know the time until he knows where he is,
nor where he is until he knows the time,]220 [nor either time or
place until he knows something about velocity. But in this concise
formulation of the difference between what we have always believed
and what we have seen to be among the consequences of Einstein's
postulates of the universal relativity of uniform motion, we may
at once locate the assumption which, underlying all the old ideas,
is the root of all the trouble. The fact is we have always supposed
time and space to be absolutely distinct and independent entities.]*

[The concept of time has ever been one of the most absolute of all
the categories. It is true that there is much of the mysterious about
time; and philosophers have spent much effort trying to clear up
the mystery--with unsatisfactory results. However, to most persons
it has seemed possible to adopt an arbitrary measure or unit of
duration and to say that this is absolute, independent of the state
of the body or bodies on which it is used for practical purposes.]272
[Time has thus been regarded as something which of itself flows on
regularly and continuously, regardless of physical events concerning
matter.]150 [In other words, according to this view, time is not
affected by conditions or motions in space.]272 [We have deliberately
chosen to ignore the obvious fact that time can never appear to us,
be measured by us, or have the least significance for us, save as
a measure of something that is closely tied up with space and with
material space-dimensions. Not merely have we supposed that time and
space are separated in nature as in our easiest perceptions, but we
have supposed that they are of such fundamentally distinct character
that they can never be tied up together. In no way whatever, assumes
the Euclidean and Newtonian intellect, may space ever depend upon
time or time upon space. This is the assumption which we must remove
in order to attain universal relativity; and while it may come hard,
it will not come so hard as the alternative. For this alternative is
nothing other than to abandon universal relativity. This course would
leave us with logical contradictions and discrepancies that could not
be resolved by any revision of fundamental concepts or by any cleaning
out of the Augean stables of old assumptions; whereas the relativity
doctrine as built up by Einstein requires only such a cleaning out in
order to leave us with a strictly logical and consistent whole. The
rôle of Hercules is a very difficult one for us to play. Einstein
has played it for the race at large, but each of us must follow him
in playing it for himself.




SOME FURTHER CONSEQUENCES

I need not trespass upon the subject matter of those essays which
appear in full by going here into any details with regard to the
manner in which time and space are finally found to depend upon one
another and to form the parts of a single universal whole. But I
may appropriately point out that if time and space are found to be
relative, we may surely expect some of the less fundamental concepts
that depend upon them to be relative also. In this expectation we are
not disappointed. For one thing,]* [mass has always been assumed to
be a constant, independent of any motion or energy which it might
possess. Just as lengths and times depend upon relative motion,
however, it is found that mass, which is the remaining factor in
the expression for energy due to motion, also depends upon relative
velocities. The dependence is such that if a body takes up an amount
of energy $E$ with respect to a certain system, the body behaves,
to measurements made from that system, as though its mass had been
increased by an amount $E/C^2$, where $C$ is as usual the velocity
of light.]194

[This should not startle us. The key to the situation lies in the
italicized words above, which indicate that the answer to the query
whether a body has taken up energy or not depends upon the seat of
observation. If I take up my location on the system $S$, and you
on the system $S'$, and if we find that we are in relative motion,
we must make some assumption about the energy which was necessary,
initially, to get us into this condition. Suppose we are on two
passing trains.]* [The chances are that either of us will assume that
he is at rest and that it is the other train which moves, although
if sufficiently sophisticated one of us may assume that he is moving
and that the other train is at rest.]272 [Whatever our assumption,
whatever the system, the localization of the energy that is carried
in latent form by our systems depends upon this assumption. Indeed,
if our systems are of differing mass, our assumptions will even govern
our ideas of the amount of energy which is represented by our relative
motion; if your system be the more massive, more energy would have to
be localized in it than in mine to produce our relative motion. If
we did not have the universal principle of relativity to forbid,
we might make an arbitrary assumption about our motions and hence
about our respective latent energies; in the presence of this veto,
the only chance of adjustment lies in our masses, which must differ
according to whether you or I observe them.]*

[For most of the velocities with which we are familiar $E/C^2$ is,
like the difference between $K$ and unity, such an extremely small
quantity that the most delicate measurements fail to detect it. But
the electrons in a highly evacuated tube and the particles shot
out from radioactive materials attain in some cases velocities as
high as eight-tenths that of light. When we measure the mass of such
particles at different velocities we find that it actually increases
with the velocity, and in accordance with the foregoing law.]194
[This observation, in fact, antedates Einstein's explanation, which
is far more satisfactory than the earlier differentiation between
"normal mass" and "electrical mass" which was called upon to account
for the increase.]*

[But if the quantity $E/C^2$ is to be considered as an actual increase
in mass, may it not be possible that all mass is energy? This would
lead to the conclusion that the energy stored up in any mass is
$mC^2$. The value is very great, since $C$ is so large; but it is in
good agreement with the internal energy of the atom as calculated
from other considerations. It is obvious that conservation of mass
and of momentum cannot both hold good under a theory that translates
the one into the other. Mass is then not considered by Einstein as
conservative in the ordinary sense, but it is the total quantity of
mass plus energy in any closed system that remains constant. Small
amounts of energy may be transformed into mass, and vice versa.]194

[Other features of the theory which are often displayed as consequences
are really more in the nature of assumptions. It will be recalled that
when we had agreed upon the necessity of employing signals of some
sort, we selected as the means of signalling the speediest messenger
with which we happened to be acquainted. Our subsequent difficulties
were largely due to the impossibility of making a proper allowance
for this messenger's speed, even though we knew its numerical value;
and as a consequence, this speed enters into our formulae. Now we have
not said in so many words that $C$ is the greatest speed attainable,
but we have tacitly assumed that it is. We need not, therefore, be
surprised if our formulae give us absurd results for speeds higher than
$C$, and indicate the impossibility of ever attaining these. Whatever
we put into a problem the algebra is bound to give us back. If we look
at our formula for $K$, we see that in the event of $v$ equalling $C$,
lengths become zero and times infinite. The light messenger itself,
then, has no dimension; and for it time stands still.

If we suppose $v$ to be greater than $C$, we get even more bizarre
results, for then the factor $K$ is the square root of a negative
number, or as the mathematician calls it an "imaginary" quantity;
and with it, lengths and times become imaginary too.

The fact that time stops for it, and the fact that it is the limiting
velocity, give to $C$ certain of the attributes of the mathematician's
infinity. Certainly if it can never be exceeded, we must have a new
formula for the composition of velocities. Otherwise when my system
passes yours at a speed of 100,000 miles per second, while yours
passes a third in the same direction at the same velocity, I shall
be passing this third framework at the forbidden velocity of 200,000
miles per second--greater than $C$. In fact Einstein is able to show
that an old formula, which had already been found to connect the speed
of light in a material medium with the speed of that medium, will now
serve universally for the composition of velocities. When we combine
the velocities $v$ and $u$, instead of getting the resultant $v+u$
as we would have supposed, we get the resultant

    $$(v + u) / (1 + (uv / C^2))\,,$$ or $$C^2(v + u) / (C^2 + uv)$$

This need not surprise us either, if we will but reflect that
the second velocity effects a second revision of length and time
measurements between the systems involved. And now, if we let either
$v$, or $u$, or even both of them, take the value $C$, the resultant
still is $C$. In another way we have found $C$ to behave like the
mathematician's infinity, to which, in the words of the blind poet,
if we add untold thousands, we effect no real increment.




ASSUMPTION AND CONSEQUENCE

A good many correspondents who have given the subject sufficient
thought to realize that the limiting character of the velocity $C$ is
really read into Einstein's system by assumption have written, in more
or less perturbed inquiry, to know whether this does not invalidate
the whole structure. The answer, of course, is yes--provided you can
show this assumption to be invalid. The same answer may be made of
any scientific doctrine whatever, and in reference to any one of the
multitudinous assumptions underlying it. If we were to discover,
tomorrow, a way of sending signals absolutely instantaneously,
Einstein's whole structure would collapse as soon as we had agreed to
use this new method. If we were to discover a signalling agent with
finite velocity greater than that of light, relativity would persist
with this velocity written in its formulae in the place of $C$.

It is a mistake to quote Einstein's theory in support of the
statement that such a velocity can never be. An assumption proves its
consequences, but never can prove itself; it must remain always an
assumption. But in the presence of long human experience supporting
Einstein's assumption that no velocity in excess of $C$ can be found,
it is fair to demand that it be disputed not with argument but with
demonstration. The one line of argument that would hold out a priori
hope of reducing the assumption to an absurdity would be one based
on the familiar idea of adding velocities; but Einstein has spiked
this argument before it is started by replacing the direct addition
of velocities with another method of combining them that fits in
with his assumption and as well with the observed facts. The burden
of proof is then on the prosecution; anyone who would contradict our
assertion that $C$ is the greatest velocity attainable may do so only
by showing us a greater one. Until this has been done, the admission
that it may properly be attempted can in no way be construed as a
confession of weakness on the part of Einstein.

It may be well to point out that in no event may analogy be drawn with
sound, as many have tried to do. In the first place sound requires
a material medium and its velocity with regard to this rather than
relative to the observer we know to be fixed; in the second place,
requiring a material medium, sound is not a universal signalling
agent; in the third place, we know definitely that its velocity can
be exceeded, and are therefore barred from making the assumption
necessary to establish the analogy. The very extraordinary behavior
of light in presenting a velocity that is the same for all observers,
and in refusing to betray the least material evidence of any medium
for its transmission, rather fortifies us in believing that Einstein's
assumption regarding the ultimate character of this velocity is in
accord with the nature of things.




RELATIVITY AND THE LAYMAN

A great deal can be said in the direction of general comment making the
Special Theory and its surprising accompaniments easier of acceptance,
and we shall conclude the present discussion by saying some of these
things.]* [It has been objected that the various effects catalogued
above are only apparent, due to the finite velocity of light--that
the real shape and size of a body or the real time of an event cannot
be affected by the point of view or the motion of an observer. This
argument would be perfectly valid, if there were real times and
distances; but there are not. These are earth-bound notions, due to
our experience on an apparently motionless platform, with slow-moving
bodies. Under these circumstances different observations of the same
thing or of the same event agree. But when we no longer have the solid
earth to stand on, and are dealing with velocities so high that the
relativity effects become appreciable, there is no standard by which
to resolve the disagreements. No one of the observations can claim
to be nearer reality than any other. To demand the real size of a
thing is to demand a stationary observer or an instantaneous means
of information. Both are impossible.

When relativity asks us to give up our earth-bound notions of absolute
space and absolute time the sensation, at first, is that we have
nothing left to stand on. So must the contemporaries of Columbus have
felt when told that the earth rested on--nothing. The remedy too is
similar. Just as they had to be taught that falling is a local affair,
that the earth is self-contained, and needs no external support--so we
must be taught that space and time standards are local affairs. Each
moving body carries its own space and time standards with it; it is
self-contained. It does not need to reach out for eternal support,
for an absolute space and time that can never quite be attained. All
we ever need to know is the relation of the other fellow's space
and time standards to our own. This is the first thing relativity
teaches us.]141

[The consequences of Einstein's assumptions have led many to reject the
theory of relativity, on the ground that its conclusions are contrary
to common sense--as they undoubtedly are. But to the contemporaries
of Copernicus and Galileo the theory that the earth rotates on its
axis and revolves around the sun was contrary to common sense; yet
this theory prevailed. There is nothing sacred about common sense;
in the last analysis its judgments are based on the accumulated
experience of the human race. From the beginning of the world up to
the present generation, no bodies were known whose velocities were
not extremely small compared with that of light. The development of
modern physics has led to discovery of very much larger velocities,
some as high as 165,000 miles per second. It is not to be wondered at
that such an enlargement of our experience requires a corresponding
enlargement or generalization of the concepts of space and time. Just
as the presupposition of primitive man that the earth was flat had
to be given up in the light of advancing knowledge, so we are now
called upon to give up our presupposition that space and time are
absolute and independent in their nature.

The reader must not expect to understand the theory of relativity in
the sense of making it fit in with his previous ideas. If the theory
be right these ideas are wrong and must be modified, a process apt
to be painful.]223 [All the reader can do is to become familiar with
the new concepts, just as a child gets used to the simple relations
and quantities he meets until he "understands" them.]221 [Mr. Francis
has said something of the utmost significance when he points out that
"understanding" really means nothing in the world except familiarity
and accustomedness.]* [The one thing about the relativity doctrine
that we can hope thus to understand at once and without pain is the
logical process used in arriving at our results.]221 [Particularly is
it hard to give a satisfactory explanation of the theory in popular
language, because the language itself is based on the old concepts;
the only language which is really adequate is that of mathematics.]223
[Unless we have, in addition to the terms of our ordinary knowledge,
a set of definitions that comes with a wide knowledge of mathematics
and a lively sense of the reality of mathematical constructions, we
are likely to view the theory of relativity through a fog of familiar
terms suddenly become self-contradictory and deceptive. Not that we
are unfamiliar with the idea that some of our habitual notions may
be wrong; but knowledge of their illusory nature arises and becomes
convincing only with time. We may now be ready to grant that the earth,
seemingly so solid, is really a whirling globe rushing through space;
but we are no more ready immediately to accept the bald assertion that
this space is not what it seems than our ancestors were to accept the
idea that the earth was round or that it moved.]156 [What we must have,
if we are to comprehend relativity with any degree of thoroughness,
is the mathematician's attitude toward his assumptions, and his
complete readiness to swap one set of assumptions for another as a
mere part of the day's work, the spirit of which I have endeavored
to convey in the chapter on non-Euclidean geometry.]*




PHYSICS VS. METAPHYSICS

[The ideas of relativity may seem, at first sight, to be giving us
a new and metaphysical theory of time and space. New, doubtless; but
certainly the theory was meant by its author to be quite the opposite
of metaphysical. Our actual perception of space is by measurement,
real and imagined, of distances between objects, just as our actual
perception of time is by measurement. Is it not less metaphysical
to accept space and time as our measurements present them to us,
than to invent hypotheses to force our perceptual space into an
absolute space that is forever hidden from us?]182 [In order not to
be metaphysical, we must eliminate our preconceived notions of space
and time and motion, and focus our attention upon the indications
of our instruments of observation, as affording the only objective
manifestations of these qualities and therefore the only attributes
which we can consider as functions of observed phenomena.]47 [Einstein
has consistently followed the teachings of experience, and completely
freed himself from metaphysics.]114 [That this is not always easy
to do is clear, I think, if we will recall the highly metaphysical
character often taken by the objections to action-at-a-distance
theories and concepts; and if we will remind ourselves that it was
on purely metaphysical grounds that Newton refused to countenance
Huyghens' wave theory of light. Whether, as in the one case, it
leads us to valid conclusions, or, as in the other, to false ones,
metaphysical reasoning is something to avoid. Einstein, I think,
has avoided it about as thoroughly as anyone ever did.]*









