XXI

THE EQUIVALENCE HYPOTHESIS

The Discussion of This, With Its Difficulties and the Manner in Which
Einstein Has Resolved Them, from the Essay by

PROF. E. N. DA C. ANDRADE, ORDNANCE COLLEGE, WOOLWICH, ENGLAND


Having shown that, of several systems all moving with reference to one
another with uniform motion, no one is entitled to any preference over
the others, and having deduced the laws for such systems, Einstein
was confronted with a difficulty which had long been felt. A body
rotating, which is a special case of an accelerated body, can be
distinguished from one at rest, without looking outside it, by the
existence of the so-called centrifugal forces.

This circumstance, which gives certain bodies an absolute or
preferential motion, is unpalatable to the relativist; he would
like there to be no difference as regards forces [13] between the
case when the earth rotates with reference to outside bodies (the
stars) considered as fixed, and the case when the earth is considered
fixed and all outside bodies rotate around it. This point cannot be
investigated by direct experiment; we can spin a top but we cannot
keep a top at rest and spin the world round it, to see if the forces
are same.

In considering the problem of how to devise laws which should make all
rotations relative, Einstein conceived the brilliant yet simple idea
that gravitation could be brought into the scheme as an acceleration
effect, since both ordinary accelerational forces and gravitational
forces are proportional to the same thing, the mass of a body. The
impossibility of separating the two kinds of effect can be easily
seen by considering the starting of an elevator. When the elevator
is quickly accelerated upwards we feel a downward pull, just as if
the gravitational pull had been increased, and if the acceleration
continued to be uniform, bodies tested with a spring balance would
all weigh more in the elevator than they did on firm ground. In a
similar way the whole of the gravitational pull may be considered to
be an accelerational effect, the difficulty being to devise laws of
motion which will give the effects that we find by actual observation.

But it is obvious that we cannot, by ordinary mechanics, consider the
earth as being accelerated in all directions, which we should have to
do, apparently, to account for the fact that the gravitational pull
is always toward the center. [It is obvious that we cannot explain
gravitation by assuming that the earth's surface is continually moving
outward with an accelerated velocity.]227 So Einstein found that, as
long as we treat the problem by Euclid's geometry, we cannot reach
a satisfactory solution. But he found that to the four-dimensional
space made up of the three ordinary dimensions of space, together with
the time-dimension which we have already mentioned in discussing the
special theory, may be attributed a peculiar geometry, the nature of
which departs more and more from Euclidean geometry as we approach a
gravitational body, and the net result of which is to make possible
the universal correspondence of gravitation and acceleration.

This modification of the geometry of space is often spoken of as the
"curvature of space," an expression which is puzzling, especially as
the space which is "curved" is four-dimensional time-space. But we
can get an idea of what is meant by considering figures, triangles
say, drawn on the surface, of a sphere. These triangles, although
drawn on a surface, will not have the same properties as triangles
drawn on flat paper--their three angles will not together equal right
angles. They will be non-Euclidean. This is only a rough analogy, but
we can see that the curvature of the surface causes a departure from
Euclidean geometry for plane figures, and consequently the departure
from Euclidean laws extended to four dimensions may be referred to
as caused by "curvature of space."

It is difficult to imagine a lump of matter affecting the geometry of
the space round it. Once more we must use a rough illustration. Imagine
a very hot body, and that, knowing nothing of its properties, we
have to measure up the space round it with metal measuring-rods. The
nearer we are to the body, the longer the rods will become, owing to
the expansion of the metal. When we measure out a square, one side
of which is nearer the body than the opposite side, its angles will
not be right angles. If we knew nothing of the laws of heat we should
say that the body had made the space round it non-Euclidean.

Einstein found, then, that by taking the properties of space, as given
by measurement, to be modified in the neighborhood of masses of matter,
he could devise general laws according to which gravitational effects
would be produced, and there would be no absolute rotation. All
forces will be the same whether a body rotates with everything
outside it fixed, or the body is fixed, and everything rotates
round it. All motion is then relative, and the theory is one of
"general relativity." The velocity of light is, however, no longer
constant, and its path is not a straight line, if it is passing near
gravitating matter. This does not contradict the special theory,
which did not allow for gravitation. Rather, the special theory is
a particular case to which the generalised theory reduces when there
is no matter about, just as the Newtonian dynamics is a special case
of the special theory, which we obtain when all velocities are small
compared to that of light.









