XIX

EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF RELATIVITY

A Simple Explanation of His Postulates and Their Consequences

BY T. ROYDS, KODAIKANAL OBSERVATORY, INDIA


Einstein's theory of relativity seeks to represent to us the world as
it really is instead of the world of appearances which may be deceiving
us. When I was in town last week to buy 5 yards of calico I watched
the draper very carefully as he measured the cloth to make sure I was
not cheated. Yet experiment can demonstrate, and Einstein's theory
can explain, that the draper's yardstick became longer or shorter
according to the direction in which it was held. The length of the
yardstick did not appear to me to change simply because everything else
in the same direction, the store, the draper, the cloth, the retina
of my eye, changed length in the same ratio. Einstein's theory points
out not only this, but every case where appearances are deceptive,
and tries to show us the world of reality.

Einstein's theory is based on the principle of relativity and
before we try to follow his reasoning we must spend a little time
in understanding what he means by "relativity" and in grasping how
the idea arises. Suppose I wish to define my motion as I travel
along in an automobile. I may be moving at the rate of 25 miles an
hour relative to objects fixed on the roadside, but relative to a
fellow-passenger I am not moving at all; relative to the sun I am
moving with a speed of 18 1/2 miles per second in an elliptical orbit,
and again relative to the stars I am moving in the direction of the
star Vega at a speed of 12 miles per second. Thus motion can only be
defined relative to some object or point of reference. Now this is
not satisfactory to the exact scientist. Scientists are not content
with knowing, for example, that the temperature of boiling water is
+100° C. relative to the temperature of freezing; they have set out
to determine absolute temperatures and have found that water boils at
373° C. above absolute zero. Why should I not, therefore, determine
the absolute motion of the automobile, not its motion relative to
the road, earth, sun or stars, but relative to absolute rest?

Michelson and Morley set out in their famous experiment to measure the
absolute velocity of their laboratory, which was, of course, fixed
on the earth. The experiment consisted of timing two rays of light
over two equal tracks at right angles to each other. When one track
was situated in the direction of the earth's motion they expected to
get the same result as when two scullers of equal prowess are racing
in a river, one up and down the stream and the other across and back;
the winner will be the sculler rowing across the stream, as working
out an example will convince. Even if the earth had been stationary
at the time of one experiment, the earth's motion round the sun would
have been reversed 6 months later and would then have given double the
effect. They found, however, that the two rays of light arrived always
an exact dead heat. All experimenters who have tried since have arrived
at the same result and found it impossible to detect absolute motion.

The principle of relativity has its foundation in fact on these
failures to detect absolute motion. This principle states that the
only motion we can ever know about is relative motion. If we devise
an experiment which ought to reveal absolute motion, nature will
enter into a conspiracy to defeat us. In the Michelson and Morley
experiment the conspiracy was that the track in the direction of the
earth's absolute motion should contract its length by just so much
as would allow the ray of light along it to arrive up to time.

We see, therefore, that according to the principle of relativity
motion must always remain a relative term, in much the same way as
vertical and horizontal, right and left, are relative terms having
only meaning when referred to some observer. We do not expect to
find an absolute vertical and are wise enough not to attempt it;
in seeking to find absolute motion physicists were not so wise and
only found themselves baffled.

The principle that all motion is relative now requires to be worked
out to all its consequences, as has been done by Einstein, and we
have his theory of relativity. Einstein conceives a world of four
dimensions built up of the three dimensions of space, namely up and
down, backwards and forwards, right and left, with time as the fourth
dimension. This is an unusual conception to most of us, so let us
simplify it into something which we can more easily picture but which
will still allow us to grasp Einstein's ideas. Let us confine ourselves
for the present to events which happen on this sheet of paper, i.e.,
to space of two dimensions only and take time as our third dimension
at right angles to the plane of the paper. We have thus built up a
three dimensional world of space-time which is every bit as useful
to us as a four dimensional representation so long as we only need
study objects moving over the sheet of paper.

Suppose a fly is crawling over this sheet of paper and let us make
a movie record of it. If we cut up the strip of movie film into the
individual pictures and cement them together one above another in
their proper order, we shall build up a solid block of film which
will be a model of our simplified world of space-time and in which
there will be a series of dots representing the motion of the fly
over the paper. Just as I can state the exact position of an object
in my room by defining its height above the floor, its distance
from the north wall and its distance from the east wall, so we can
reduce the positions of the dots to figures for use in calculations
by measuring their distances from the three faces intersecting in the
lines $OX$, $OY$, and $OT$, where $OXAYTBCD$ represents the block of
film. The mathematician would call the three lines $OX$, $OY$, $OT$
the coordinate axes. Measuring all the dots in this way we shall
obtain the motion of the fly relative to the coordinate axes $OX$,
$OY$, $OT$. If we add a block $OTDYEFGH$ of plain film we can use
$EX$, $EH$, $EF$ as coordinate axes and again obtain the motion of
the fly relative to these new axes; or we can add block after block
so as to keep the axes moving. We can conceive of other changes of
axes. The operator making the movie record might have taken the fly
for the hero of the piece and moved the camera about so as to keep the
fly more or less central in the picture; or he might, by turning the
handle first fast and then slow and by moving the camera, have made
the fly appear to be doing stunts. Moving the camera would change the
axes of $x$ and $y$, and turning the handle at different speeds would
change the axis of time. Again, we might change the axes by pushing
the block out of shape or by distorting it into a state of strain.
Whatever change of axes we make, any dot in the block of film will
signify a coincidence of the fly with a certain point of the paper
at a certain time, and the series of dots will, in every case, be a
representation of the motion of the fly. Maybe the representation
will be a distorted one, but who is to say which is the absolutely
undistorted representation? The principle of relativity which we laid
down before says that no one set of coordinates will give the absolute
motion of the fly, so that one set is as good as another. The principle
that all motion is relative means, therefore, that no matter how we
change our coordinates of space-time, the laws of motion which we
deduce must be the same for all changes.

To use an analogy, the sculptured head of Shakespeare on my table may
appear to have hollow cheeks when I admit light from the east window
only, or to have sunken eyes with light from the skylight in the roof,
but the true shape of the head remains the same in all lights.

Hence, if with reference to two consecutive dots in our block of
film a mathematical quantity can be found which will not change no
matter how we changes our axes of coordinates, that quantity must
be an expression of the true law of motion of the fly between the
two points of the paper and the two times represented by these two
dots. Einstein has worked out such a quantity remaining constant for
all changes of coordinates of the four dimensional world of space-time.

In passing we may notice a feature of Einstein's world of space-time
which we shall doubtless find it difficult to conceive, namely,
that there is no essential difference between a time and a distance
in space. Since one set of coordinates is as good as another, we
can transform time into space and space into time according as we
choose our axes. For example if we change $OX$, $OT$, the axes of $x$
and time in Fig. 2, into $OX'$, $OT'$ by a simple rotation, the new
time represented by $OT'$ consists partly of $OA$ in the old time
and partly of $OB in the old $x$ direction. Referring to our block
of movie film again, it means that although I might separate the
block into space and time by slicing it into the original pictures,
I can just as readily slice it in any direction I choose and still
get individual pictures representing the motion of the fly but with,
of course, new time and space. So whilst I may be believe that a liner
has travelled 3,000 miles in 4 days, an observer on a star who knows
nothing of my particular axes in space-time may say, with equal truth,
that it went 2,000 miles in 7 days. Thus, time and space are not two
separate identities in Einstein's view; there only exists a world of
four dimensions which we can split up into time and space as we choose.

Let us see now how Einstein explains gravitation. When a body is not
acted on by any forces (except gravitation) the quantity which remains
constant for all changes of coordinates implies that the body will
follow that path in the space of an outside observer which takes the
least time. It is an observed fact that one body attracts another by
gravitation; that is, the path of one body is bent from its course by
the presence of another. Now we can bend the path of the fly in our
block of film by straining the block in some way. Suppose, therefore,
that I strain the world so as to bend the path of a body exactly as
the gravitation due to some other body bends it; i.e., by a change
of coordinates I have obtained the same effect as that produced
by gravitation. Einstein's theory, therefore, explains gravitation
as a distortion of the world of space-time due to the presence of
matter. Suppose first that a body is moving with no other bodies near;
according to Einstein it will take the path in space which requires the
least time, i.e., a straight line as agrees with our experience. If now
the world be strained by the presence of another body or by a change
of coordinates it will still pursue the path of least time, but this
path is now distorted from the straight line, just as in a similar way
the path on a globe requiring the least time to travel follows a great
circle. So, on Einstein's view of gravitation, the earth moves in an
elliptical path around the sun not because a force is acting on it,
but because the world of space-time is so distorted by the presence of
the sun that the path of least time through space is the elliptical
path observed. There is, therefore, no need to introduce any idea of
"force" of gravitation. Einstein's theory explains gravitation only
in the sense that he has explained it away as a force of nature and
makes it a property of space-time, namely, a distortion not different
from an appropriate change of coordinates. He does not, however,
explain how or why a body can distort space-time. It is noteworthy
that whilst the law of gravitation and the law of uniform motion in
a straight line when no force is acting were separate and independent
laws under Newton, Einstein finds one explanation for both under the
principle of relativity. [12]









