XVI

THE QUEST OF THE ABSOLUTE

Modern Developments in Theoretical Physics, and the Climax Supplied
by Einstein

BY DR. FRANCIS D. MURNAGHAN,
JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY
BALTIMORE


We shall discuss the more important aspects of the theory popularly
known as the "Einstein Theory of Gravitation" and shall try to show
clearly that this theory is a natural outcome of ideas long held by
physicists in general. These ideas are:

(a) The impossibility of "action at a distance;" in other words we
find an instinctive repugnance to admit that one body can affect
another, remote from it, instantaneously and without the existence
of an intervening medium.

(b) The independence of natural, i.e., physical, laws of their
mathematical mode of expression. Thus, when an equation is written down
as the expression of a physical law it must be satisfied, no matter
what units we choose in order to measure the quantities occurring in
the equation. As our physics teacher used to say "the expression of the
law must have in every term the same dimensions." More than this the
choice of the quantities used to express the law--if there be a choice
open--must have no effect on its correctness. As we were told--"all
physical laws are capable of expression as relations between vectors or
else as relations between magnitudes of the same dimensions." We shall
hope to make this clearer in its proper place in the essay, as its
obvious generalization is Einstein's cardinal principle of relativity.

The measurements which an experimental physicist makes are always the
expression of a coincidence of two points in space at the same time. If
we ask such an experimenter what he means by a point in space he tells
us that, for him, the term has no meaning until he has a material
body with reference to which he can locate the point by measurements;
in general it requires three measurements and he expresses this by
saying that space has three dimensions. He measures his distance,
as a rule, parallel to three mutually perpendicular lines fixed in
the material body--a Cartesian reference-frame so-called. So that a
"point in space" is equivalent to a given material reference-frame
and three numbers or coordinates. If, for any reason, we prefer to
use a new material reference-frame the coordinates or measurements
will change and, if we know the relative positions of the two material
reference-frames, there is a definite relation between the two sets of
three coordinates which is termed a transformation of coordinates. But
which particular material reference-frame shall we use? The first
choice would, we think, be that attached to the earth. But, even yet,
we are in doubt as there are numberless Cartesian frameworks attached
to the earth (as to any material body) and it is here that our idea
(b) begins to function. We say it must be immaterial which of these
Cartesian frames we use. In each frame a vector has three components
and when we change from one frame to another the components change
in such a way that if two vectors have their three components equal
in one framework they will be equal in any other attached to the
same material system. So our idea (b), which says that our physical
equations must be vector equations, is equivalent to saying that the
choice of the framework attached to any given material body can have
no effect on the mode of expression of a natural law.

Shall we carry over our idea (b) to answer the next question: "To
which material body shall we attach our framework?" To this question
Newton gave one answer and Einstein another. We shall first consider
Newton's position and then we may hope to see clearly where the new
theory diverges from the classical or Newtonian mechanics. Newton's
answer was that there is a particular material frame with reference
to which the laws of mechanics have a remarkably simple form commonly
known as "Newton's laws of motion" and so it is preferable to use
this framework which is called an absolute frame.

What is the essential peculiarity of an absolute frame? Newton was
essentially an empiricist of Bacon's school and he observed the
following facts. Let us suppose we have a framework of reference
attached to the earth. Then a small particle of matter under the
gravitational influence of surrounding bodies, including the earth,
takes on a certain acceleration $A_1$. Now suppose the surrounding
bodies removed (since we cannot remove the earth we shall have to
view the experiment as an abstraction), and another set introduced;
the particle, being again at its original position, will begin to
move with an acceleration $A_2$. If both sets of surrounding bodies
are present simultaneously the particle begins to move with an
acceleration which is approximately but not quite the sum of $A_1$
and $A_2$. Newton postulated there there is a certain absolute
reference frame in which the approximation would be an equality;
and so the acceleration, relative to the material frame, furnishes
a convenient measure of the effect of the surrounding bodies--which
effect we call their gravitational force. Notice that if the effect
of the surrounding bodies is small the acceleration is small and
so we obtain as a limiting case, Newton's law of inertia which says
that a body subject to no forces has no acceleration; a law which,
as Poincaré justly observed, can never be subjected to experimental
justification. The natural questions then arise: which is the
absolute and privileged reference-frame and how must the simple laws
be modified when we use a frame more convenient for us--one attached
to the earth let us say? The absolute frame is one attached to the
fixed stars; and to the absolute or real force defined as above,
we must add certain terms, usually called centrifugal forces. These
are referred to as fictitious forces because, as it is explained,
they are due to the motion of the reference-frame with respect to
the absolute frame and in no way depend on the distribution of the
surrounding bodies. Gravitational force and centrifugal forces have
in common the remarkable property that they depend in no way on the
material of the attracted body nor on its chemical state; they act
on all matter and are in this way different from other forces met
with in nature, such as magnetic or electric forces. Further Newton
found that he could predict the facts of observation accurately on the
hypothesis that two small particles of matter attracted each other,
in the direction of the line joining them, with a force varying
inversely as the square of the distance between them. This law is an
"action at a distance" law and so is opposed to the idea (a).

We have tacitly supposed that the space in which we make our
measurements is that made familiar to us by the study of Euclid's
elements. The characteristic property of this space is that
stated by the theorem of Pythagoras that the distance between two
points is found by extracting the square root of the sum of the
squares of the differences of the Cartesian coordinates of the two
points. Mathematicians have long recognized the possibility of other
types of space and Einstein has followed their lead. He abandons
the empiricist method and when asked what he means by a point in
space replies that to him a point in space is equivalent to four
numbers how obtained it is unnecessary to know a priori; in certain
special cases they may be the three Cartesian coordinates of the
experimenter (measured with reference to a definite material framework)
together with the time. Accordingly he says his space is of four
dimensions. Between any two "points" we may insert a sequence of sets
of four numbers, varying continuously from the first set to the second,
thus forming what we call a curve joining the two points. Now we define
the "length" of this curve in a manner which involves all the points
on it and stipulate that this length has a physical reality, i.e.,
according to our idea (b) its value is independent of the particular
choice of coordinates we make in describing the space. Among all
the joining curves there will be one with the property of having
the smallest length; this is called a geodesic and corresponds to
the straight line in Euclidean space. We must now, for lack of an
a priori description of the actual significance of our coordinates,
extend the idea of vector so that we may speak of the components of
a vector no matter what our coordinates may actually signify. In
this way are introduced what are known as tensors; if two tensors
are equal, i.e., have all their components equal, in any one set of
coordinates they are equal in any other and the fundamental demand of
the new physics is that all physical equations which are not merely
the expression of equality of magnitudes must state the equality of
tensors. In this way no one system of coordinates is privileged above
any other and the laws of physics are expressed in a form independent
of the actual coordinates chosen; they are written, as we may say,
in an absolute form.




THE GRAVITATIONAL HYPOTHESIS

Einstein flatly denies Newton's hypothesis that there is an absolute
system (and, indeed, many others before him had found it difficult
to admit that so insignificant a part of the universe as our fixed
star system should have such a privileged position as that accorded
to it in the Newtonian Mechanics). In any system, he says, we have no
reason to distinguish between the so-called real gravitational force
and the so-called fictitious centrifugal forces--if we wish so to
express it gravitational force is fictitious force. [10] A particle
moving in the neighborhood of material bodies moves according to a law
of inertia--a physical law expressible, therefore, in a manner quite
independent of the choice of coordinates. The law of inertia is that
a particle left to itself moves along the geodesics or shortest lines
in the space. If the particle is remote from other bodies the space
has the Euclidean character and we have Newton's law of inertia;
otherwise the particle is in a space of a non-Euclidean character
(the space being always the four-dimensional space) and the path of
the particle is along a geodesic in that space. Einstein, in order
to make the theory more concrete, makes a certain stipulation as to
the nature of the gravitational space which stipulation is expressed,
as are all physical laws, by means of a tensor equation--and this is
sometimes called his law of gravitation.

Perhaps it will be well, in exemplification, to explain why light
rays, which pass close to the sun, should be bent according to the new
theory. It is assumed that light rays travel along certain geodesics
known as minimal geodesics. The sun has an intense gravitational field
near it--or, as we now say, the departure of the four-dimensional
space from the Euclidean is very marked for points near the sun--but
for points so remote as the earth this departure is so small as
to be negligible. Hence the form of the geodesics near the sun is
different from that near the earth. If the space surrounding the
sun were Euclidean the actual paths of the light rays would appear
different from geodesics or straight-lines. Hence Einstein speaks
of the curvature of the light rays due to the gravitational field of
the sun; but we must not be misled by a phrase. Light always travels
along geodesics (or straight lines--the only definition we have of a
straight line is that it is a geodesic); but, owing to the "distortion"
of the space they traverse, due to the sun, these geodesics reach us
with a direction different from that they would have if they did not
pass through the markedly non-Euclidean space near the sun.

The consideration of the fundamental four-dimensional space as
being non-Euclidean where matter is present gives a possibility of
an answer to the world old question: Is space finite or infinite? Is
time eternal or finite? The fascinating possibility arises that the
space may be like the two-dimensional surface of a sphere which to a
limited experience seems infinite in extent and flat or Euclidean in
character. A new Columbus now asks us to consider other possibilities
in which we should have a finite universe--finite not only as to space
measurement but as to time (for the space may be such that all of the
four coordinates of its points are bounded in magnitude). However,
although Einstein speaks of the possibility of a finite universe, we
do not, personally, think his argument convincing. Points on a sphere
may be located by the Cartesian coordinates of their stereographic
projections on the equatorial plane and these coordinates, which
might well be those actually measured, are not bounded.




THE SPECIAL RELATIVITY THEORY

In our account of the Einstein theory we have not followed its
historical order of development for two reasons. Firstly, the
earlier Special Relativity Theory properly belongs to a school
of thought diametrically opposed to that furnishing the "General
Theory of Relativity" and, secondly, the latter cannot be obtained
from the former by the process of generalization as commonly
understood. Einstein, when proposing the earlier theory, adopted
the position of the empiricist so that to him the phrase, a point in
space, had no meaning without a material framework of reference in
which to measure space distances. When he came to investigate what
is meant by time and when he asked the question "what is meant by
the statement that two remote events are simultaneous?" it became
evident that some mode of communication between the two places is
necessary; the mode adopted was that by means of light-signals. The
fundamental hypothesis was then made that the velocity of such signals
is independent of the velocity of their source (some hypothesis is
necessary if we wish to compare the time associated with events, when
one material reference-system is used, and the corresponding time when
another in motion relative to the first is adopted). It develops that
time and space measurements are inextricably interwoven; there is no
such thing as the length of a body or the duration of an event but
rather these are relative to the reference-system. [11] Minkowski
introduced the idea of the space of events--of four dimensions--but
this space was supposed Euclidean like the three-dimensional space
of his predecessors. To Einstein belongs the credit of taking from
this representation a purely formal mathematical character and of
insisting that the "real" space--whose distances have a physical
significance--is the four-dimensional space. But we cannot insist
too strongly on the fact that in the gravitational space of the
general theory there is no postulate of the constancy of velocity of a
light-signal and accordingly no method of assigning a time to events
corresponding to that adopted in the special theory. In this latter
theory attention was confined to material systems moving with uniform
velocity with respect to each other and it developed that the velocity
of light was the ultimate velocity faster than which no system could
move--a result surprising and a priori rather repugnant. It is merely
a consequence of our mode of comparing times of events; if some other
method--thought transference, let us say--were possible the velocity
of this would be the "limiting velocity."

In conclusion we should remark that the postulated equivalence of
"gravitational" and "centrifugal" forces demands that anything
possessed of inertia will be acted upon by a gravitational field and
this leads to a possible identification of matter and energy. Further
our guiding idea (a) will prompt us to say, following the example
of Faraday in his electrical researches, that the geodesics of a
gravitational space have a physical existence as distinct from a mere
mathematical one. The four-dimensional space we may call the ether, and
so restore this bearer of physical forces to the position it lost when,
as a three-dimensional idea in the Special Relativity Theory, it had to
bear an identical relation to a multitude of relatively moving material
systems. The reason for our seemingly paradoxical title for an essay on
Relativity will be clear when it is remembered that in the new theory
we consider those space-time properties which are absolute or devoid
of reference to any particular material reference-frame. Nevertheless,
although the general characteristics of the theory are thus described,
without reference to experiment, when the theory is to be tested it
is necessary to state what the four coordinates discussed actually
are--how they are determined by measurement. It is our opinion that
much remains to be done to place this portion of the subject on a
satisfactory basis. For example, in the derivation of the nature
of the gravitational space, surrounding a single attracting body,
most of the accounts use Cartesian coordinates as if the space were
Euclidean and step from these to polar coordinates by the formulæ
familiar in Euclidean geometry. But these details are, perhaps,
like matters of elegance, if we shall be allowed to give Einstein's
quotation from Boltzmann, to be left to the "tailor and the cobbler."









