XVII

THE PHYSICAL SIDE OF RELATIVITY

The Immediate Contacts Between Einstein's Theories and Current Physics
and Astronomy

BY PROFESSOR WILLIAM H. PICKERING
HARVARD COLLEGE OBSERVATORY,
MANDEVILLE, JAMAICA


The Theory of Relativity will be treated first from the physical
side, leaving the three astronomical tests to which it has been put
to be discussed later. There is one astronomical fact however that
must be mentioned in this connection, and this is the discovery of
the aberration of light by Bradley in 1726. It is found that every
star in the heavens apparently describes a small annual ellipse,
whose major axis is 41'' in length. This Bradley showed to be due to a
combination of the velocity of the earth in its orbit, and the velocity
of light; and it is so explained in all the elementary text-books on
astronomy. It implies a stationary ether through which the earth is
moving. The importance of this statement will appear presently.

The subject is usually illustrated by supposing a man to go out in a
rainstorm carrying a vertical tube. If the rain is falling vertically,
and the man stands still, the sides of the tube will not be wet,
save by an occasional drop, but if the tube is moved, it must then be
inclined forward in order to keep it dry. The angle of inclination,
which corresponds to aberration, will depend on the relative velocity
of the tube, corresponding to the earth, and the rain drops which
correspond to the waves of light.

If three lines are dropped upon a point in space, each line being
perpendicular to the plane containing the other two, we have what
is known as a system of coordinates. Einstein's original theory
of relativity, which he now designates as the "special theory,"
depends on two principles. The first is that "Every law of nature
which holds good with respect to a coordinate system $K$ must also
hold good for any other system $K'$, provided that $K$ and $K'$ are
in uniform movement of translation." The second principle is that
"Light in a vacuum has a definite and constant velocity, independent
of the velocity of its source."

These two sentences may be considered as authoritative, being quoted
in Einstein's own words.1 The first of these principles need not
greatly surprise us. The second is not well expressed, because it
is ambiguous. He does not say how the first "velocity" is measured,
whether relatively to the ether or relatively to the observer. In
fact this is the very gist of the whole matter, as we shall presently
see. In the case of sound the velocity is constant with regard to the
medium, the air, in the case of light it is supposed to be constant
with regard to the observer. It reaches him with a constant velocity,
no matter how he moves.

In order to understand this statement clearly let us consider the
appended tabular diagram. On a calm day imagine a source of sound
at $S$ in line a. This may be either a gun or a bell. Imagine an
observer 1,100 feet distant, located at $O$. The velocity of sound in
air is 1,100 feet per second. This velocity we will take as unity,
as indicated in the third column, and the velocity with which the
sound reaches the observer is also 1, as shown in the fourth. It will
reach him in a unit interval of 1 second, as shown in the fifth. If
the bell is struck, it will give its normal pitch or frequency,
which we will also call unity, in the sixth column.

Now imagine case b where the observer is on a train advancing toward
$S$. When he is 1,100 feet distant, the gun is fired, but as he is
advancing toward it, he hears it at $O$ in rather less than a second,
as shown in the fifth column. The velocity of the sound with regard
to him is rather more than unity, as shown in the fourth column. If
the bell is sounded, the pitch, that is the frequency, is raised,
because he receives more sound waves per second than before.

In case c the observer is stationary, but the source of sound is
receding. At a distance of 1,100 feet the gun is fired, and the
observer hears it after an interval of just one second, as in case
a. The velocities with regard to the observer and through the medium
are also unity. If the bell is struck the pitch is lowered, since he
receives fewer sound waves per second, the reverse of case b.


                    Velocity
    Source     in       to         Interval   Frequency   Observer
               Medium   Observer

                                  Air

a       S     1         1          1          1             O
b       S     1         1+         1-         1+        O
c   S         1         1          1          1-            O
d   S         1         1+         1-         1         O

                                 Ether

A       S     1         1           1         1             O
B       S     1-        1           1         1+        O
C   S         1         1           1         1-            O
D   S         1 -       1           1         1         O


In case d imagine the source and the observer 1,100 feet apart, and
advancing on the same train. When the gun is fired, the velocity of
the sound waves will be greater with regard to the observer, and he
will hear the sound in less than a second, as in case b. When the
bell is struck it will have the normal pitch, the same as in case a.

We find therefore that for sound the velocity with regard to
the medium is always unity, while the velocity with regard to the
observer, and the interval elapsed, depend only on the motion of the
observer himself, and are independent of the motion of the source. The
frequency of the vibrations, on the other hand, depends only on the
relative motion of the observer and the source, but is independent of
their common motion in any direction. Further, it makes no difference
whether the source and the observer are moving on a train, or whether
they are stationary, and a uniform wind is blowing past them.

In the case of light waves we shall find a very different state of
affairs, although the rules for frequency are the same as they are for
sound. In case A we have the normal conditions, where both the source
and observers are stationary. In case B we have a representation of
the Michelson-Morley experiment as supplemented by that of Majorana,2
where the source is stationary and the observer advances. Unlike the
case of sound, the interval elapsed, as shown by the experiment, is now
the same as in case A, and since the distance to the observer is less,
the velocity of light with respect to the ether must also be less than
unity. Since the observer is advancing against the light, this will
permit the velocity of light with regard to the observer to remain
unity, in conformity with the second principle of relativity. Compare
with case b for sound. As Jeans expresses it, "The velocity of light
in all directions is the same, whatever the motion of the observer."3
That is to say it appears to be the same to him, however he moves.

Case C represents Einstein's statement, as confirmed by Majorana's
experiment. It does not differ from case c for sound. Case D is
more complex, but accepting the statement above that the velocity
is constant with regard to the observer, we see that the velocity
through the medium must be less, and that the interval elapsed will
be constant, as in case B. Could we use the brighter stars and planets
as sources of light, several of these cases could be further tested.

This brings us at once to statements that contradict our common
sense. For instance, Jeans says "no matter what the velocity of the
observer is, the light surface, as observed by that observer, is
invariably a sphere having that observer as center."3 That is to say
the light surface, or wave front, is a contracting, not an expanding,
sphere. This, if confirmed, would go a long way toward making our
universe a subjective rather than an objective phenomenon. Again
imagine a flash of light, such as an explosion, to occur when an
observer is in a given position. It makes no difference how the
observer may move while the light is approaching him, whether several
miles forward or backward, the light will reach him in exactly the
same time, as is shown by Michelson's experiment. Or if two observers
are at the same spot when the explosion occurs, and one moves forward,
and the other backward, they will both see the explosion at exactly
the same instant.

This sounds ridiculous, but not only is it what Jeans says, but it is
the logical interpretation of Einstein's second principle, if Einstein
means by velocity, velocity with regard to the observer. If he means
velocity with regard to the medium, then the case is exactly the same
as that of sound in air, and Michelson's experiment as well as the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory of light are contradicted. This theory is now
universally accepted, and Michelson's experiment has been carefully
repeated by other observers, and fully confirmed. This is the very
heart of the relativity question.

If we state the matter objectively it comes to this. The velocity
of light with regard to the ether is a variable quantity, depending
merely on where the observer chooses to go. As Eddington well says,
"these relations to the ether have no effect on the phenomena and can
be disregarded--a step which appears to divest the ether of the last
remnants of substantiality."4

The only way of avoiding this apparent absurdity seems to be to
consider that the ether moves with the earth. Michelson's result would
then be fully explained. Of course this can only be true for a few
miles above the earth's surface. Beyond that the ether must either
be stationary or move with the sun. The velocity of light with regard
to the ether would then be a constant, just as the velocity of sound
is constant with regard to the air. This would contradict Einstein's
second principle as it is generally understood. The trouble with
this suggestion is that it fails to account for aberration, which,
as already explained, appears to require that the earth should be
moving through the ether. To meet this emergency would involve some
modification of the undulatory theory of light, which apparently
would not be impossible, but has not yet been made.

In 1915 Einstein brought out an extension of his first principle. This
he calls the "general theory of relativity." It states that in our
choice of coordinate systems we "should not be limited in any way
so far as their state of motion is concerned."1 This leads to the
three astronomical consequences mentioned later in this paper, two
of which have been more or less confirmed, and the third practically
contradicted as far as quantitative measures are concerned.5

As is well known the kinetic energy of a moving body may be
expressed as $e = 1/2mv^2$, but if the body is charged electrically,
the fraction becomes $1/2(m + m')v^2$, where $m'$ is a quantity
dependent on the square of the electrical charge. That is to say,
we have the normal mass of the body, and also what we may call its
electrical mass. If when in this condition a portion of the mass is
electrical, the question at once occurs to us, why may not the whole
mass be electrical, in other words, a form of energy? Although this
has not been satisfactorily proved hitherto, yet such is the general
belief among physicists. As Einstein puts it "inert mass is nothing
else than latent energy."1 The same idea is sometimes expressed as
"the mass of ordinary matter is due to the electromagnetic energy of
its ultimate particles, and electromagnetic energy wherever found
must possess mass, i.e., inertia."6 If that is so, since a ray of
light on the undulatory theory is a form of electromagnetic energy,
it too must possess mass. Since all mass with which we are familiar is
subject to the attraction of gravitation, it seemed likely that a ray
of light would be bent out of its course in passing near the sun, and
this as we have seen was proved to be true at the recent solar eclipse.

That portion of the mass of a body due to its electrical charge can
be readily shown experimentally to vary with the velocity of the
body. Einstein has shown the same to be true of the normal mass,
as is illustrated in the advance of the perihelion of the orbit
of Mercury. He has also pointed out that gravitation, inertia and
centrifugal force are all closely related, and obey similar laws. Thus
if we rise from the earth with accelerated velocity, we apparently
increase our weight. Again if the velocity of rotation of the earth on
its axis should be increased, our weight would be diminished. These
facts are suggestive when we come to consider the ultimate cause
of gravitation.

Another fact which must be rather startling to the older school
of scientists is that momentum is no longer simply $mv$, mass times
velocity, but that the velocity of light $c$, comes into the question,
and the formula for momentum now assumes the form of

    $$\frac{m v}{\sqrt{1 - \frac{v^2}{c^2}}}$$

For ordinary velocities this correction is extremely small, but it
has been shown to be necessary, both theoretically and experimentally,
when dealing with the high velocities with which we are now familiar.

The theory of relativity is so widespread in its application that
several other theories have become more or less intimately combined
with it, for which Einstein is in no way responsible. One of these is
known as the Fitzgerald-Lorentz theory, that all bodies are subject to
a contraction in the direction of their motions through space. This was
first suggested in order to explain the Michelson-Morley experiment,
but has proved inadequate to do so, particularly when the observer is
receding from the source. This contraction is expressed by the same
factor used in the denominator of the revised expression for momentum,
given above. Again the quantity $c$ is so enormous, that even for
large bodies at planetary velocities the contraction amounts to very
little. Thus the earth moving at a speed of eighteen miles per second
in its orbit, is flattened only 1/200,000,000, or 2.5 inches. On the
other hand for high velocities of many thousand miles per second,
such as we have become familiar with in the case of the radioactive
substances, the flattening is a very considerable fraction of the
diameter of the moving body, one-half or more, and in the case of
the corpuscles of light, if that theory were adopted, this flattening
becomes equal to the diameter, and their thickness is reduced to zero.

When we view Einstein's theories from the astronomical standpoint,
the earliest fact bearing on relativity that we need consider was
the discovery of aberration, by Bradley, in 1726, as seen above. In
1872 Airy observed the star g Draconis through a telescope filled
with water. Since the velocity of light is less in water than in
air, we should naturally expect to find the aberration appreciably
increased. It was found, on the other hand, however, to be unaffected.

In 1887 the results of the famous Michelson-Morley experiment were
published.7 In this experiment the velocity of light was measured
in various directions with regard to the motion of the earth in its
orbit. If the ether were stationary, and the earth moving through it,
different velocities should be obtained in different directions. Such
was not the case however, and the experiment indicated that the ether
moved with the earth. It thus flatly contradicted the conclusions
founded on aberration.

Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity, of 1905, as we have seen,
resolves this contradiction. But as we shall presently see, it is the
General Theory, of 1915, that leads to astronomical applications of
broad scope. It indicates, for instance, that there is no essential
difference between gravitation and inertia. This idea may be crudely
illustrated by our feelings of increased weight when an elevator
starts rapidly upwards. A man while falling freely in space ceases
to feel the pull of gravitation.

But we must not as yet conceive of the theory of relativity as a
universally accepted and unquestioned truth of science. Eddington is
its leading English exponent, and he is supported by such men as Jeans,
Larmor, and Jeffreys. On the other hand, the theory has been severely
criticised by Lodge, Fowler, Silberstein, and Sampson. Few American
scientists have expressed any opinions in print on the subject,
and the recent eclipse observations, to which we shall refer later,
are to be repeated with more suitable instruments for verification
in 1922, in the hope of obtaining more accurate and accordant results.8

An appurtenance of the Einstein theories which bears much the
same relation to them as does the Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction,
mentioned above, is the idea, first clearly stated by Minkowski,
that time is a kind of space--a fourth dimension. This the reader
will doubtless find to be the most difficult portion of the theory
to picture in his own mind. It is entirely unsupported by experiment
or observation, necessarily so, and is based wholly on mathematical
and philosophical conceptions. Our distinction between space and time
seems to be that the direction in which we progress without effort
is time; the other directions, in which we have to make an exertion
to move ourselves, or in which we are carried, are space. How many
dimensions empty space may have, we really have no means of knowing,
because we can neither see nor feel it. Matter we know has three,
length, breadth, and thickness, also that it lies remote from us in
three corresponding directions. These facts may have given us the
erroneous impression that space too has only three dimensions. Now
it is claimed that time is a fourth, and that there are also others.

In order to illustrate this, Eddington asks us to imagine a movie film
taken of a man or of any moving object. Let the separate pictures be
cut apart and piled on one another. This would form a sort of pictorial
history of the individual for a brief interval in his life, in the form
of a cube. If we attempt to pick it up, it falls apart, thus clearly
showing the difference between time and space. But suppose it now
all glued together in one solid cube, so that it is no easier to cut
a section in one direction than in another. That is Minkowski's idea
of space and time, and further, that the direction in which we should
cut it depends merely on the velocity with which we are moving through
space. I should cut it parallel to the films, but a man on a rapidly
moving star, in order to separate it into space and time, would cut
it in an inclined direction. That is a thing which may be true, but it
is one which we believe no mortal man can clearly picture to himself.

On the other hand Turner has recently made a very interesting
point,9 namely, that the fourth dimension as actually treated
by the mathematicians is not time itself, but time multiplied
by a constant--the velocity of light.10 Without affecting the
astronomical proofs of relativity at all, this simplifies our
conceptions enormously. In ordinary everyday life time and space
cannot be identical, any more than a yard can be identical with a
quart. On what is known to physicists as the centimeter-gram-second
system, distance is represented by $l$, mass by $m$, and time by
$t$. Velocity is then distance divided by time, $l/t$, or as we say
in English units, so many feet per second, and the fourth dimension
may be expressed as time multiplied by velocity, $t \times l/t =
l$. That is to say, it is simply distance, just like the other three
dimensions. To say that time is the fourth dimension from this point
of view, appears to us just as ridiculous as it would be to attempt
to measure the velocity of a train in quarts. It is quite correct,
however, although unusual, to speak of a given train as moving at a
speed of 10 quarts per square inch per second, $l^3/l^2 t = l/t$. This
would be equivalent to a velocity of 33 miles per hour.

If I wish to give a complete dimensional description of myself in my
four dimensions, I must give my length, my breadth, and my thickness,
ever since I came into being, and also the course I have traversed
through space since that time. This latter distance will be expressed
in terms of a unit whose length is 186,000 miles, the distance
traversed by light in one second. The distance which I travel through
space annually is enormous, and very complex as to direction. It
involves not merely my own motions as I cross the room, or take a
train or steamer, but also those due to the rotation of the earth on
its axis, its revolution round the sun, and the motion of the latter
through the heavens. In general I travel, or in other words increase
my length in the fourth dimension, by over 4,000 units a year. The
fourth dimension accordingly, if this view is accepted, is simply a
distance like the other three, and perfectly easy to understand.

We now come to the three actual tests by which the theory has been
tried. The planets as is well known revolve about the sun in ellipses,
with the sun in one of the foci. That is to say, the sun is not in
the center, but a little on one side of it. The end of the ellipse
where the planet comes nearest to the sun is called the perihelion,
and here the planet is moving most rapidly. The other end is called
the aphelion, and here the motion is slowest. According to Newton's
theory of gravitation, if a spherical sun possesses a single planet
or companion, its orbit will be permanently fixed in space unless
perturbed by some other body. If a second planet exist, it will
cause the perihelion of the first slowly to advance. According to
Einstein the mass of a planet depends in part on its velocity. It
will therefore be less at aphelion where it is moving slowly than at
perihelion where it is moving rapidly, consequently in addition to
the Newtonian attraction we have another one which increases as we
approach the sun. The effect of this will be to cause the perihelion
of the orbit to advance, whether there is a second planet or not.

Among the larger planets Mercury has the most eccentric orbit, and it
also moves most rapidly, so that it is particularly well adapted to
test the relativity theory. The observed advance of its perihelion is
574'' per century, instead of the theoretical figure 532'', due to the
other planets--a difference of 42''.11 This has long been a puzzling
discrepancy between observation and the law of gravitation. Prior to
Einstein, attempts were made to eliminate it by assuming a certain
oblateness of the solar disk. If the equatorial diameter exceeded the
polar by only 0''.5 the whole advance would be accounted for, but not
only has this ellipticity failed of detection, but if it existed,
it should produce a very noticeable and inadmissible change in the
inclination of Mercury's orbit, amounting to about 3'' per century,
as has been demonstrated by both Herzer and Newcomb.12

Einstein from computations alone, without introducing any new
constants or hypotheses whatever, showed, if the theory of relativity
be accepted, that the sun should produce an acceleration of 43''
per century, thus entirely accounting for the observed discrepancy,
far within the limits of accuracy of the observations. The only other
planet whose orbit has a large eccentricity, and that is suitable
for investigation, is the planet Mars. Here the discrepancy between
observation and theory is very slight, only 4'', and a portion of
that may be due to the attraction of the asteroids. This deviation
is so slight that it may well be due entirely to accidental errors
of observation, but however that may be, Einstein's theory reduces
it to 2''.7.

This all seems very satisfactory and complete, but the trouble
with it is that the coincidence for Mercury is rather too good. It
is based on the assumption that the sun is a perfect sphere, and
that the density of its surface is uniform from the equator to the
poles. This would doubtless be true if the sun did not revolve on
its axis. In point of fact it does revolve, in a period in general of
about 26 days. Consequently an object on its equator must experience
a certain amount of centrifugal force. Therefore if its surface were
of uniform density the shape of the sun would be an oblate spheroid.

It can be readily shown that the theoretical excess of the equatorial
over the polar diameter, due to the centrifugal force, should amount to
only 0''.04, an amount which could hardly be detected by observation,
and might readily be concealed by a slight excess of equatorial over
polar density. Any reasonable excess of density at the center would
diminish this result but slightly. The molecular weight of the central
material13 is probably about 2. This computed equatorial excess is
one-twelfth of the amount necessary to cause the observed advance,
and should therefore cause an advance of the perihelion of about 3''.5
per century, reducing the difference between the observed advance
and that caused by gravitation to 38''.5. According to Einstein the
advance due to relativity should be, as we saw, 43'', a discrepancy
of 4''.5 per century, or 10 per cent. Jeffreys has remarked that
any discrepancy such as 10'' "would be fatal to a theory such as
Einstein's, which contains no arbitrary constituent capable of
adjustment to suit empirical facts."14 It must be pointed out here
however, that so far as known, this small correction to the motion
of Mercury's perihelion has not previously been suggested, so that
there has been no opportunity hitherto for its criticism by others.

It was due largely to the success with Mercury that it was decided to
put the relativity theory to another test. According to the Newtonian
theory, as stated by Newton himself, corpuscles as well as planets
have mass, and must therefore be attracted by the sun. According to
Einstein, owing to their high velocity, this attraction must be twice
as great as it would be according to the theory of gravitation. If the
ray of light proceeding from a star were to pass nearly tangent to the
sun's limb it should be deflected 0''.87 according to Newton. According
to the theory of relativity it should be deflected 1''.75. Stars
of course cannot usually be observed near the sun. It is therefore
necessary to take advantage of a total solar eclipse, when the sun is
completely hidden by the moon, in order to secure these observations.

Two expeditions, one to Africa, and one to South America, observed
successfully the total eclipse of May 29, 1919. The former was
located on the Island of Principe in the Gulf of Guinea. The latter
was located at Sobral, Brazil. Their equipment and results are shown
in the following table, where the successive columns give the location,
the aperture in inches of the telescopes employed, their focus in feet,
the number of plates secured, the number of stars measured, their
mean deduced deflection from their true positions by the attraction
of the sun, and the deviations from the theoretical results.15 In
the first and last line of the table shown herewith, this


    Location   Aperture   Focus   Plates   Stars   Defl.    Dev.

    Principe         13      11        2       5   1''.60   -0''.15
    Sobral           13      11       19      12   0 .93    (+0 .06)
      ,,              4      19        8       7   1 .98    +0 .23


deviation is taken from Einstein's computed value of 1''.75. In the
second line the difference shown is from the value required by the
Newtonian theory, 0''.87. The results obtained with this telescope
were rejected however, although they were much the most numerous,
because it was found that for some reason, supposed to be the heating
of the mirror by the sun before the eclipse, the star images were
slightly out of focus, and were therefore considered unreliable. The
results with the two other telescopes were not very accordant, but the
4-inch had the longer focus, secured the greater number of plates,
and showed the greater number of stars. The results obtained with
it therefore appear to have been the more reliable. They differ from
Einstein's prediction by 13 per cent. In future expeditions to test
this question, the mirror in front of the telescope will be eliminated.

We now come to the final test which has been applied to Einstein's
theory. Einstein showed that in the intense gravitational field of the
sun, the theory of relativity required that all of the spectrum lines
should be shifted slightly toward the red end. The shift however is
exceedingly small, and can only be detected and measured with the
most powerful modern instruments. Moreover only certain lines can
be used, because owing to varying pressure in the solar atmosphere,
which affects many lines, as well as to rapid motion in the line of
sight, which may affect all of them, still larger displacements are
liable to occur.

According to the theory of relativity the displacement of the lines
should be $+0.0080 A$. St. John at Mt. Wilson found a displacement
for the cyanogen lines of only $+0.0018 A$.16 Evershed at Kodaikanal
found +0.0060 at the north pole of the sun, and +0.0080 at the south
pole. These latter values however were only for the stronger lines. The
weaker lines give much smaller shifts, as do those of calcium and
magnesium.17 According to Einstein all lines should give nearly the
same shift, an amount proportional to the wave length. It therefore
appears that we must conclude by saying that Einstein's theory of
relativity has been partially, but not completely, verified.



The reference numbers in the above text have nothing to do with the
numbers used in other parts of this volume to acknowledge the work
of the various contestants; they refer to Dr. Pickering's sources,
as follows:

1 Journ. Brit. Astron. Assoc., 1919, 30, 76.

2 Comptes Rendus, 165, 424, and 167, 71.

3 Monthly Notices R. A. S., 1919, 80, 104.

4 Monthly Notices R. A. S., 1917, 77, 379.

5 Astro-Physical Journal, 1917, 46, 249. Journ. Brit. Astron. Assoc.,
1920, 30, 276.

6 Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 1917, 77, 377.

7 Amer. Journ. Sci., 34, 333.

8 Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 1920, 80, 628.

9 The Observatory 1920, April. From an Oxford Note Book.

10 Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 1917. 78, 3 De Sitter, 1919, 80, 121,
Jeans, 80, 146 Jeffreys.

11 "Gravitation and the Principle of Relativity," Eddington. Royal
Institution of Great Britain, 1918.

12 Journ. Brit. Astron. Assoc., 1920, 30, 125.

13 "The Interior of a Star," Eddington. Scientia, 1918, 23, 15.

14 Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 1919, 80, 138.

15 Monthly Notices. R. A. S., 1920, 80,
415. Journ. Brit. Astron. Assoc., 1919, 30, 46.

16 Astro-Physical Journ., 1917, 46, 249.

17 Journ. Brit. Astron. Assoc., 1920, 30, 276.









