XII

FORCE VS. GEOMETRY

How Einstein Has Substituted the Second for the First in Connection
With the Cause of Gravitation

BY SAUL DUSHMAN
GENERAL ELECTRIC LABORATORIES SCHENECTADY, N. Y.


The theory of relativity represents a most strikingly original
conception of time and space, which was suggested by Einstein in order
to correlate with all our past experience certain observations made
in recent years. It is therefore extremely comprehensive in its scope;
it demands from us a radical revision in our notions of time and space;
it throws new light on the nature of mass and energy, and finally, it
furnishes a totally new conception of the old problem of gravitation.

The starting point of the theory is the familiar observation that
motion is always relative: that is, to define the motion of any object
we must always use some point of reference. Thus we speak of the
velocity of a train as 40 miles per hour with respect to the earth's
surface, but would find it impossible to determine its absolute speed,
or motion in space, since we know of no star whose position can be
spoken of as absolutely fixed. These and similar considerations have
led to the conclusion, pointed out by Newton and others, that it is
impossible by any mechanical experiments on the earth to measure its
velocity in space.

However, the results of observations on the phenomena of light and
electricity led to the revival of the same problem under another
form. As well known, there was evolved from these discoveries,
the theory that light and electrical energy are of the same nature,
and are in each case manifestations of wave-disturbances propagated
through a hypothetical medium, the ether, with a velocity of 186,000
miles per second.

The problem therefore arose as to whether the earth and all stellar
bodies move through this ether. In that case it ought to be possible
to measure the velocity of the earth with respect to this medium, and
under these conditions we could speak, in a sense, of absolute motion.

A large number of experiments has been tried with this end in view. The
most famous of these, and the one which stimulated the subsequent
development of the theory of relativity, was that carried out by
Michelson and Morley in 1887. To understand the significance of this
experiment we shall refer briefly to an analogous observation which
is quite familiar.

Does it take longer to swim to a point 1 mile up a stream and back
or to a point 1 mile across stream and back? The experienced swimmer
will answer that the up-and-down journey takes longer. If we assume
that the swimmer has a speed of 5 miles an hour in still water and
that the current is 3 miles an hour, we find that, while it requires
five-eighths hour to make the up-and-down journey, it takes only
one-half hour for the trip across stream and back. The ratio between
the times required for the two journeys is thus five-fourths, and if
this is written in the form

    $$\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - (\frac{3}{5})^2}}$$

it shows how the result depends upon the square of the ratio of the
speeds of the swimmer and the current.

Now the earth is moving in its orbit about the sun with a velocity
of 18 miles per second. If the earth moves through the ether and a
light-beam passes from one mirror to another and back again, the time
taken for this journey ought to be longer when the light-path is in
the direction of the earth's motion than when it is at right angles
to this direction. For we can consider the light as a swimmer having
a speed of 186,000 miles per second and travelling in a stream whose
current is 18 miles per second.

When Michelson and Morley tried the experiment they could not observe
any difference in the velocity of light in the two directions. The
experiment has since been repeated under various conditions, but
always with negative results.

Einstein's contribution to science consists in interpreting this
result as being in accord with Newton's ideas on mechanical relativity
in that it demonstrates the impossibility of measuring absolute
motion, not only by mechanical, but also by optical or electrical
experiments. Consequently the velocity of light must be regarded as
constant and independent of the motion of either source or observer.




THE RELATIVITY OF UNIFORM MOTION

Let us consider some of the consequences which follow from this
principle. An observer travelling with say one-half the velocity
of light in the same direction as a ray of light would find that the
latter has the usual velocity of 186,000 miles per second. Similarly an
observer travelling in the opposite direction to that of the light-ray,
with one-half the velocity of light, would obtain the same result.

Einstein has shown that these conclusions can be valid only if the
units of time and space used by the two observers depend upon their
relative motions. A careful calculation shows that the unit of length
used by either observer appears to the other observer contracted
when placed in the direction of their relative motion (but not,
when placed at right angles to this direction), and the unit of time
used by either observer appears to the other too great. Moreover, the
ratio of the units of length or of time varies with the square of the
relative speed of the two observers, according to a relation which is
similar to that mentioned above for the swimmer in the current. This
relation shows that as the relative speed approaches that of light
the discrepancy between the units increases.

Thus, for an observer moving past our earth with a velocity which is
nine-tenths that of light, a meter stick on the earth would be 44
centimeters as measured by him, while a second on our clocks would
be about two and a half seconds as marked by his clock. Similarly,
what he calls a meter length would, for us, be only 44 centimeters
and he would appear to us to be living about two and a half times
slower than we are. Each observer is perfectly consistent in his
measurements of time and space as long as he confines his observations
to his own system, but when he tries to make observations on another
system moving past his, he finds that the results which he obtains
do not agree with those obtained by the other observer.

It is not surprising that in accordance with this conclusion it also
follows that the mass of a body must increase with its velocity. For
low velocities the increase is so small that we cannot ever hope to
measure it, but as the velocity of light is approached the difference
becomes more and more appreciable and a body having the velocity of
light would possess infinite mass, which simply means that such a
velocity cannot be attained by any material object. This conclusion
has been experimentally confirmed by observations on the mass of
the extremely small negatively charged particles which are emitted
by radioactive elements. Some of these particles are ejected with
velocities which are over nine-tenths that of light, and measurements
show that the increase in mass is in accord with this theory.

The relativity theory also throws new light on the nature of mass
itself. According to this view, mass and energy are equivalent. The
absolute destruction of 1 gram of any substance, if possible, would
yield an amount of energy which is one hundred million times as much
as that obtained by burning the same mass of coal. Conversely, energy
changes are accompanied by changes in mass. The latter are ordinarily
so inappreciably small as to escape our most refined methods of
measurements, but in the case of the radioactive elements we actually
observe this phenomenon. From this standpoint, also, the laws of
conservation of energy and of mass are shown to be intimately related.




UNIVERSAL RELATIVITY

So far we have dealt with what has been designated as the special
theory of relativity. This, as we have seen, applies to uniform motion
only. In extending the theory to include non-uniform or accelerated
motion, Einstein has at the same time deduced a law of gravitation
which is much more general than that of Newton.

A body falling towards the earth increases in velocity as it falls. The
motion is said to be accelerated. We ascribe this increase in velocity
to a gravitational force exerted by the earth on all objects. As
shown by Newton, this force acts between all particles of matter in
the universe, and varies inversely as the square of the distance,
and directly as the product of the masses.

Of course, we have had a number of theories of gravitation, and
none of them have proven successful. Einstein, however, was the
first one to suggest a conception of gravitation which has proven
extremely significant. He points out that a gravitational force
is non-existent for a person falling freely with the acceleration
due to gravity. For this person there is no sensation of weight,
and if he were in a closed box which is also falling with the same
acceleration, he would be unable to decide as to whether his system
were falling or situated in interplanetary space where there is
no gravitational field. Furthermore, if he were to carry out any
optical or electrical experiments in this box he would observe the
same results as an experimenter on the earth. A ray of light would
travel in a straight line so far as this observer can perceive,
while an external observer would, of course, judge differently.

Einstein shows that this is equally true for all kinds of acceleration
including that due to rotation. In the case of a rotating body there
exists a centrifugal force which tends to make objects on the surface
fly outwards, but for an external observer this force does not exist
any more than gravity exists for the observer falling freely.

Thus we can draw the general conclusion that a gravitational field or
any other field of force may be eliminated by choosing an observer
moving with the proper acceleration. For this observer, however,
the laws of optics and electricity must be just as valid as for an
observer on the earth.

In postulating this equivalence hypothesis Einstein merely makes use
of the very familiar observation that, independently of the nature
of the material, all bodies possess the same acceleration in a given
field of force.

The problem which Einstein now sets out to solve is that of determining
the law which shall describe the motion of any system in a field of
force in such a general manner as to leave unaltered the fundamental
relations of electricity and optics.

In connection with the solution of this problem he finds it necessary
to discard the limitations placed on us by ordinary or Euclidean
geometry. In this manner geometrical concepts as well as those of
force are completely robbed of all notions of absoluteness, and the
goal of a general theory of relativity is attained.




THE GEOMETRY OF GRAVITATION

Let us consider a circular disc rotating with a uniform peripheral
speed. According to the deductions from the "special theory" of
relativity, an observer situated near the edge of this disc, but not
rotating with it, will observe that units of length measured along
the circumference of the disc are contracted. On the other hand,
measurements along the diameter, which is at right angles to the
direction of motion of the circumference, will show no contraction
whatever, and, consequently the observer will find that the ratio
of circumference to diameter has not the well known value 3.14159
... but exceeds this value, the difference being greater and greater
as the peripheral speed approaches that of light. That is, the laws
of ordinary geometry no longer hold true.

However, we know other cases in which the ordinary or Euclidean
geometry is not applicable. Thus suppose that on the surface of a
sphere we describe a series of concentric circles. Since the surface
is curved, we are not surprised at finding that the circumference of
any one of these circles is less than 3.14159 ... times the distance
across the circle as measured on the surface of the sphere. What
this means, therefore, is that we cannot use Euclidean geometry to
describe measurements on the surface of a sphere, and every schoolboy
knows this from comparing Mercator's projection of the earth's surface
with the actual representation on a globe.

When we come to think of it, the reason we realize all this is
because our sense of three dimensions enables us to differentiate
flat surfaces from those that are curved. Let us, however, imagine
a two-dimensional being living on the surface of a large sphere. So
long as his measurements are confined to relatively small areas he
will find it possible to describe all his measurements in terms of
Euclidean geometry. As, however, his area of operation increases
he will begin to observe greater and greater discrepancies. Being
unfamiliar with the existence of such a three-dimensional object as
a sphere, and therefore not realizing that he is on the surface of
one, our intelligent two-dimensional being will conclude that the
disturbance in his geometry is due to the action of a force, and by
means of plausible assumptions on the "law" of this force he will
reconcile his observations with the laws of plane geometry.

Now since an acceleration in a gravitational field is identical with
that due to centrifugal force produced by rotation, we concluded that
the geometry in a gravitational field must also be non-Euclidean. That
is, space in the neighborhood of matter is distorted or curved. The
curvature of space bears the same relation to three dimensions that
the curvature of a spherical surface bears to two dimensions, and
that is why we do not perceive it, any more than the intelligent
two-dimensional being would be aware of the distortion of his space
(or surface). Furthermore, like this being, we have assumed the
existence of a gravitational force to account for discrepancies in
our geometrical measurements.

The identification in this manner of gravitational effects with
geometrical curvature of space enables Einstein to derive a general
law for the path of any particle in a gravitational field, with respect
both to space and to time. Furthermore, the law expresses this motion
in terms which are independent of the relative motion and position
of the observer, and satisfies the condition that the fundamental
laws of physics be equally valid for all observers. The solution
of the problem involved the use of a new kind of higher calculus,
elaborated by two Italian mathematicians, Ricci and Levi-Civita. The
result is a law of motion which is extremely general in its validity.

For low velocities it approximates to Newton's solution, and in the
absence of a gravitational field it leads to the same conclusions as
the special theory of relativity. There are three deductions from this
law which have aroused a great deal of interest, and the confirmation
of two of these by actual observation must be regarded as striking
proof of Einstein's theory.









