V

THAT PARALLEL POSTULATE

Modern Geometric Methods; the Dividing Line Between Euclidean and
Non-Euclidean; and the Significance of the Latter

BY THE EDITOR


The science of geometry has undergone a revolution of which the
outsider is not informed, but which it is necessary to understand
if we are to attain any comprehension of the geometric formulation
of Einstein's results; and especially if we are to appreciate why
it is proper and desirable to formulate these results geometrically
at all. The classical geometer regarded his science from a narrow
viewpoint, as the study of a certain set of observed phenomena--those
of the space about us, considered as an entity in itself and divorced
from everything in it. It is clear that some things about that space
are not as they appear (optical illusions), and that other things
about it are true but by no means apparent (the sum-of-squares
property of a right triangle, the formulæ for surface and volume
of a sphere, etc.). While many things about space are "obvious,"
these need in the one case disproof and in the other discovery and
proof. With all their love of mental processes for their own sake,
it is then not surprising that the Greeks should have set themselves
the task of proving by logical process the properties of space,
which a less thoughtful folk would have regarded as a subject only
for observational and experimental determination.

But, abstract or concrete, the logical structure must have a starting
point; and it is fair to demand that this consist in a statement
of the terms we are going to use and the meanings we are going to
attach to them. In other words, the first thing on the program will
be a definition, or more probably, several definitions.

Now the modern scientist has a somewhat iconoclastic viewpoint toward
definitions, and especially toward the definition of his very most
fundamental ideas.

We do not speak here in terms of dictionary definitions. These have
for object the eminent necessity of explaining the meaning and use
of a word to some one who has just met it for the first time. It
is easy enough to do this, if the doer possesses a good command
of the language. It is not even a matter of grave concern that the
words used in the definition be themselves known to the reader; if
they are not, he must make their acquaintance too. Dr. Johnson's
celebrated definition of a needle stands as perpetual evidence
that when he cannot define a simple thing in terms of things still
simpler, the lexicographer is forced to define it in terms of things
more complex. Or we might demonstrate this by noting that the best
dictionaries are driven to define such words as "and" and "but"
by using such complex notions as are embodied in "connective,"
"continuative," "adversative," and "particle."

It is otherwise with the scientist who undertakes to lay down a
definition as the basis of further procedure in building up the
tissue of his science. Here a degree of rigorous logic is called for
which would be as superfluous in the dictionary as the effort there
to attain it would be out of place. The scientist, in building up
a logical structure that will withstand every assault, must define
everything, not in terms of something which he is more or less
warranted in supposing his audience to know about, but actually in
terms of things that have already been defined. This really means that
he must explain what he is talking about in terms of simpler ideas
and simpler things, which is precisely what the lexicographer does
not have to worry about. This is why it is quite trivial to quote a
dictionary definition of time or space or matter or force or motion
in settlement of a controversy of scientific or semi-scientific nature.




TERMS WE CANNOT DEFINE

But the scientist who attempts to carry out this ideal system of
defining everything in terms of what precedes meets one obstacle
which he cannot surmount directly. Even a layman can construct a
passable definition of a complex thing like a parallelopiped, in
terms of simpler concepts like point, line, plane and parallel. But
who shall define point in terms of something simpler and something
which precedes point in the formulation of geometry? The scientist is
embarrassed, not in handling the complicated later parts of his work,
but in the very beginning, in dealing with the simplest concepts with
which he has to deal.

Suppose a dictionary were to be compiled with the definitions
arranged in logical rather than alphabetical order: every word to be
defined by the use only of words that have already been defined. The
further back toward the beginning we push this project, the harder it
gets. Obviously we can never define the first word, or the second,
save as synonymous with the first. In fact we should need a dozen
words, more or less, to start with--God-given words which we cannot
define and shall not try to define, but of which we must agree that
we know the significance. Then we have tools for further procedure;
we can start with, say, the thirteenth word and define all the rest
of the words in the language, in strictly logical fashion.

What we have said about definitions applies equally to statements
of fact, of the sort which are going to constitute the body of our
science. In the absence of simpler facts to cite as authority, we shall
never be able to prove anything, however simple this may itself be;
and in fact the simpler it be, the harder it is to find something
simpler to underlie it. If we are to have a logical structure of any
sort, we must begin by laying down certain terms which we shall not
attempt to define, and certain statements which we shall not try to
prove. Mathematics, physics, chemistry--in the large and in all their
many minor fields--all these must start somewhere. Instead of deceiving
ourselves as to the circumstances surrounding their start, we prefer to
be quite frank in recognizing that they start where we decide to start
them. If we don't like one set of undefined terms as the foundation,
by all means let us try another. But always we must have such a set.

The classical geometer sensed the difficulty of defining his first
terms. But he supposed that he had met it when he defined these in
words free of technical significance. "A point is that which has
position without size" seemed to him an adequate definition, because
"position" and "size" are words of the ordinary language with which
we may all be assumed familiar. But today we feel that "position"
and "size" represent ideas that are not necessarily more fundamental
than those of "line" and "point," and that such a definition begs
the question. We get nowhere by replacing the undefined terms "point"
and "line" and "plane," which really everybody understands, by other
undefined terms which nobody understands any better.

In handling the facts that it was inconvenient to prove, the classical
geometer came closer to modern practice. He laid down at the beginning
a few statements which he called "axioms," and which he considered to
be so self-evident that demonstration was superfluous. That the term
"self-evident" left room for a vast amount of ambiguity appears to
have escaped him altogether. His axioms were axioms solely because
they were obviously true.




LAYING THE FOUNDATION

The modern geometer falls in with Euclid when he writes an elementary
text, satisfying the beginner's demand for apparent rigor by defining
point and line in some fashion. But when he addresses to his peers an
effort to clarify the foundations of geometry to a further degree of
rigor and lucidity than has ever before been attained, he meets these
difficulties from another quarter. In the first place he is always
in search of the utmost possible generality, for he has found this to
be his most effective tool, enabling him as it does to make a single
general statement take the place and do the work of many particular
statements. The classical geometer attained generality of a sort,
for all his statements were of any point or line or plane. But the
modern geometer, confronted with a relation that holds among points
or between points and lines, at once goes to speculating whether there
are not other elements among or between which it holds. The classical
geometer isn't interested in this question at all, because he is
seeking the absolute truth about the points and lines and planes which
he sees as the elements of space; to him it is actually an object so to
circumscribe his statements that they may by no possibility refer to
anything other than these elements. Whereas the modern geometer feels
that his primary concern is with the fabric of logical propositions
that he is building up, and not at all with the elements about which
those propositions revolve.

It is of obvious value if the mathematician can lay down a proposition
true of points, lines and planes. But he would much rather lay down
a proposition true at once of these and of numerous other things;
for such a proposition will group more phenomena under a single
principle. He feels that on pure scientific grounds there is quite
as much interest in any one set of elements to which his proposition
applies as there is in any other; that if any person is to confine
his attention to the set that stands for the physicist's space,
that person ought to be the physicist, not the geometer. If he has
produced a tool which the physicist can use, the physicist is welcome
to use it; but the geometer cannot understand why, on that ground,
he should be asked to confine his attention to the materials on which
the physicist employs that tool.

It will be alleged that points and lines and planes lie in the
mathematician's domain, and that the other things to which his
propositions may apply may not so lie--and especially that if he will
not name them in advance he cannot expect that they will so lie. But
the mathematician will not admit this. If mathematics is defined on
narrow grounds as the science of number, even the point and line
and plane may be excluded from its field. If any wider definition
be sought--and of course one must be--there is just one definition
that the mathematician will accept: Dr. Keyser's statement that
"mathematics is the art or science of rigorous thinking."

The immediate concern of this science is the means of rigorous
thinking--undefined terms and definitions, axioms and propositions. Its
collateral concern is the things to which these may apply, the things
which may be thought about rigorously--everything. But now the
mathematician's domain is so vastly extended that it becomes more
than ever important for him to attain the utmost generality in all
his pronouncements.

One barrier to such generalization is the very name "geometry,"
with the restricted significance which its derivation and long usage
carry. The geometer therefore must have it distinctly understood
that for him "geometry" means simply the process of deducing a set
of propositions from a set of undefined primitive terms and axioms;
and that when he speaks of "a geometry" he means some particular set
of propositions so deduced, together with the axioms, etc., on which
they are based. If you take a new set of axioms you get a new geometry.

The geometer will, if you insist, go on calling his undefined terms by
the familiar names "point," "line," "plane." But you must distinctly
understand that this is a concession to usage, and that you are not
for a moment to restrict the application of his statements in any
way. He would much prefer, however, to be allowed new names for his
elements, to say "We start with three elements of different sorts,
which we assume to exist, and to which we attach the names A, B and
C--or if you prefer, primary, secondary and tertiary elements--or
yet again, names possessing no intrinsic significance at all, such as
ching, chang and chung." He will then lay down whatever statements he
requires to serve the purposes of the ancient axioms, all of these
referring to some one or more of his elements. Then he is ready for
the serious business of proving that, all his hypotheses being granted,
his elements A, B and C, or I, II and III, or ching, chang and chung,
are subject to this and that and the other propositions.

The objection will be urged that the mathematician who does all
this usurps the place of the logician. A little reflection will
show this not to be the case. The logician in fact occupies the same
position with reference to the geometer that the geometer occupies
with reference to the physicist, the chemist, the arithmetician,
the engineer, or anybody else whose primary interest lies with some
particular set of elements to which the geometer's system applies. The
mathematician is the tool-maker of all science, but he does not make
his own tools--these the logician supplies. The logician in turn
never descends to the actual practice of rigorous thinking, save as
he must necessarily do this in laying down the general procedures
which govern rigorous thinking. He is interested in processes, not
in their application. He tells us that if a proposition is true its
converse may be true or false or ambiguous, but its contrapositive
is always true, while its negative is always false. But he never,
from a particular proposition "If A is B then C is D," draws the
particular contrapositive inference "If C is not D then A is not
B." That is the mathematician's business.




THE RÔLE OF GEOMETRY

The mathematician is the quantity-production man of science. In
his absence, the worker in each narrower field where the elements
under discussion take particular concrete forms could work out,
for himself, the propositions of the logical structure that applies
to those elements. But it would then be found that the engineer had
duplicated the work of the physicist, and so for many other cases;
for the whole trend of modern science is toward showing that the
same background of principles lies at the root of all things. So the
mathematician develops the fabric of propositions that follows from
this, that and the other group of assumptions, and does this without
in the least concerning himself as to the nature of the elements of
which these propositions may be true. He knows only that they are true
for any elements of which his assumptions are true, and that is all he
needs to know. Whenever the worker in some particular field finds that
a certain group of the geometer's assumptions is true for his elements,
the geometry of those elements is ready at hand for him to use.

Now it is all right purposely to avoid knowing what it is that we
are talking about, so that the names of these things shall constitute
mere blank forms which may be filled in, when and if we wish, by the
names of any things in the universe of which our "axioms" turn out
to be true. But what about these axioms themselves? When we lay them
down in ignorance of the identity of the elements to which they may
eventually apply, they cannot by any possibility be "self-evident." We
may, at pleasure, accept as self-evident a statement about points and
lines and planes; or one about electrons, centimeters and seconds;
or one about integers, fractions, and irrational numbers; or one about
any other concrete thing or things whatever. But we cannot accept as
self-evident a statement about chings, changs and chungs. So we must
base our "axioms" on some other ground than this; and our modern
geometer has his ground ready and waiting. He accepts his axioms
on the ground that it pleases him to do so. To avoid all suggestion
that they are supposed to be self-evident, or even necessarily true,
he drops the term "axiom" and substitutes for it the more color-less
word "postulate." A postulate is merely something that we agreed to
accept, for the time being, as a basis of further argument. If it
turns out to be true, or if we can find circumstances under which and
elements to which it applies, any conclusions which we deduce from it
by trustworthy processes are valid within the same limitations. And
the propositions which tell us that, if our postulates are true, such
and such conclusions are true--they, too, are valid, but without any
reservation at all!

Perhaps an illustration of just what this means will not be out of
place. Let it be admitted, as a postulate, that $7+20$ is greater, by
1, than $7+19$. Let us then consider the statement: "If $7 + 19 = 65$,
then $7 + 20 = 66$." We know--at least we are quite certain--that $7 +
19$ is not equal to 65, if by "7" and "19" and "65" we mean what you
think we mean. We are equally sure, on the same grounds, that $7 +
20$ is not equal to 66. But, under the one assumption that we have
permitted ourselves, it is unquestionable that if $7 + 19$ were equal
to 65, then $7 + 20$ certainly would be equal to 66. So, while the
conclusion of the proposition which I have put in quotation marks is
altogether false, the proposition itself, under our assumption, is
entirely true. I have taken an illustration designed to be striking
rather than to possess scientific interest; I could just as easily
have shown a true proposition leading to a false conclusion, but of
such sort that it would be of decided scientific interest as telling
us one of the consequences of a certain assumption.




WHAT MAY WE TAKE FOR GRANTED?

This is all very fine; but how does the geometer know what postulates
to lay down? One is tempted to say that he is at liberty to postulate
anything he pleases, and investigate the results; and that whether or
not his postulate ever be realized, the propositions that he deduces
from it, being true, are of scientific interest. Actually, however,
it is not quite as simple as all that. If it were sufficient to make
a single postulate it would be as simple as all that; but it turns
out that this is not sufficient any more than it is sufficient to
have a single undefined term. We must have several postulates; and
they must be such, as a whole, that a geometry flows out of them. The
requirements are three.

In the first place, the system of postulates must be "categorical"
or complete--there must be enough of them, and they must cover enough
ground, for the support of a complete system of geometry. In practice
the test for this is direct. If we got to a point in the building up
of a geometry where we could not prove whether a certain thing was
one way always, or always the other way, or sometimes one way and
sometimes the other, we should conclude that we needed an additional
postulate covering this ground directly or indirectly. And we should
make that postulate--because it is precisely the things that we can't
prove which, in practical work, we agree to assume. Even Euclid had
to adopt this philosophy.

In the second place, the system of postulates must be consistent--no
one or more of them may lead, individually or collectively, to
consequences that contradict the results or any other or others. If
in the course of building up a geometry we find we have proved
two propositions that deny one another, we search out the implied
contradiction in our postulates and remedy it.

Finally, the postulates ought to be independent. It should not be
possible to prove any one of them as a consequence of the others. If
this property fails, the geometry does not fail with it; but it is
seriously disfigured by the superfluity of assumptions, and one of
them should be eliminated. If we are to assume anything unnecessarily,
we may as well assume the whole geometry and be done with it.

The geometer's business then is to draw up a set of postulates. This
he may do on any basis whatever. They may be suggested to him by
the behavior of points, lines and planes, or by some other concrete
phenomena; they may with equal propriety be the product of an
inventive imagination. On proceeding to deduce their consequences,
he will discover and remedy any lack of categoricity or consistence
or independence which his original system of postulates may have
lacked. In the end he will have so large a body of propositions without
contradiction or failure that he will conclude the propriety of his
postulates to have been established, and the geometry based on them
to be a valid one.




AND WHAT IS IT ALL ABOUT?

Is this geometry ever realized? Strictly it is not the geometer's
business to ask or answer this question. But research develops two
viewpoints. There is always the man who indulges in the pursuit of
facts for their sake alone, and equally the man who wants to see his
new facts lead to something else. One great mathematician is quoted
as enunciating a new theory of surpassing mathematical beauty with
the climacteric remark "And, thank God, no one will ever be able to
find any use for it." An equally distinguished contemporary, on being
interrogated concerning possible applications for one of his most
abstruse theorems, replied that he knew no present use for it; but that
long experience had made him confident that the mathematician would
never develop any tool, however remote from immediate utility, for
which the delvers in other fields would not presently find some use.

If we wish, however, we may inquire with perfect propriety, from the
side lines, whether a given geometry is ever realized. We may learn
that so far as has yet been discovered there are no elements for
which all its postulates are verified, and that there is therefore no
realization known. On the other hand, we may more likely find that
many different sets of elements are such that the postulates can be
interpreted as applying to them, and that we therefore have numerous
realizations of the geometry. As a human being the geometer may be
interested in all this, but as a geometer it really makes little
difference to him.

When we look at space about us, we see it, for some reason grounded
in the psychological history of the human race, as made up in the
small of points, which go to make up lines, which in turn constitute
planes. Or we can start at the other end and break space down first
into planes, then into lines, finally into points. Our perceptions
and conceptions of these points, lines and planes are very definite
indeed; it seems indeed, as the Greeks thought, that certain things
about them are self-evident. If we wish to take these self-evident
properties of point, line and plane, and combine with them enough
additional hair-splitting specifications to assure the modern geometer
that we have really a categorical system of assumptions, we shall
have the basis of a perfectly good system of geometry. This will be
what we unavoidably think of as the absolute truth with regard to
the space about us; but you mustn't say so in the presence of the
geometer. It will also be what we call the Euclidean geometry. It
has been satisfactory in the last degree, because not only space,
but pretty much every other system of two or three elements bearing
any relations to one another can be made, by employing as a means
of interpretation the Cartesian scheme of plotting, to fit into the
framework of Euclidean geometry. But it is not the only thing in the
world of conceptual possibilities, and it begins to appear that it
may not even be the only thing in the world of cold hard fact that
surrounds us. To see just how this is so we must return to Euclid,
and survey the historical development of geometry from his day to
the present time.




EUCLID'S GEOMETRY

Point, line and plane Euclid attempts to define. Modern objection
to these efforts was made clear above. Against Euclid's specific
performance we urge the further specific fault that his "definitions"
are really assumptions bestowing certain properties upon points, lines
and planes. These assumptions Euclid supplements in his axioms; and in
the process of proving propositions he unconsciously supplements them
still further. This is to be expected from one whose justification for
laying down an axiom was the alleged obvious character of the statement
made. If some things are too obvious to require demonstration, others
may be admitted as too obvious to demand explicit statement at all.

Thus, if Euclid has two points A and B in a plane, on opposite sides of
a line M, he will draw the line AB and without further formality speak
of the point C in which it intersects M. That it does so intercept M,
rather than in some way dodges it, is really an assumption as to the
nature of lines and planes. Or again, Euclid will speak of a point D
on the line AB, between or outside the points A and B, without making
the formal assumption necessary to insure that the line is "full" of
points so that such a point as D must exist. That such assumptions as
these are necessary follows from our previous remarks. If we think of
our geometry as dealing with "chings," "changs," and "chungs," or with
elements I, II and III, it is no longer in the least degree obvious
that the simplest property in the world applies to these elements. If
we wish any property to prevail we must state it explicitly.

With the postulates embodied in his definitions, those stated in his
axioms, and those which he reads into his structure by his methods of
proof, Euclid has a categorical set--enough to serve as foundation
for a geometry. We may then climb into Euclid's shoes and take the
next step with him. We follow him while he proves a number of things
about intersecting lines and about triangles. To be sure, when he
proves that two triangles are identically constituted by moving one of
them over on top of the other, we may protest on the ground that the
admission of motion, especially of motion thus imposed from without,
into a geometry of things is not beyond dispute. If Euclid has caught
our modern viewpoint, he will rejoin that if we have any doubts as to
the admissibility of motion he will lay down a postulate admitting it,
and we shall be silenced.

Having exhausted for the present the interest of intersecting lines,
our guide now passes to a consideration of lines in the same plane
that never meet. He defines such lines as parallel. If we object that
he should show the existence of a derived concept like this before
laying down a definition that calls for it to exist, he can show that
two lines drawn perpendicular to the same line never meet. He will
execute this proof by a special sort of superposition, which requires
that the plane be folded over on itself, through the third dimension
of surrounding space, rather than merely slid along upon itself.

We remain quiet while Euclid demonstrates that if two lines are cut by
any transversal in such a way as to make corresponding angles at the
two intersections equal, the lines are parallel. It is then in order
to investigate the converse: if the lines are parallel to begin with,
are the angles equal?




AXIOMS MADE TO ORDER

This sounds innocent enough; but in no way was Euclid able to devise a
proof--or, for that matter, a disproof. So he took the only way out,
and said that if the lines were parallel, obviously they extended in
the same direction and made the angles equal. The thing was so obvious,
he argued, that it was really an axiom and he didn't have to prove
it; so he stated it as an axiom and proceeded. He didn't state it
in precisely the form I have used; he apparently cast about for the
form in which it would appear most obvious, and found a statement that
suited him better than this one, and that comes to the same thing. This
statement tells us that if the transversal makes two corresponding
angles unequal, the lines that it cuts are not parallel and do meet
if sufficiently prolonged. But wisely enough, he did not transplant
this axiom, once he had arrived at it, to the beginning of the book
where the other axioms were grouped; he left it right where it was,
following the proposition that if the angles were equal the lines were
parallel. This of course was so that it might appeal back, for its
claim to obviousness, to its demonstrated converse of the proposition.

Euclid must have been dissatisfied with this cutting of the Gordian
knot; his successors were acutely so. For twenty centuries the parallel
axiom was regarded as the one blemish in an otherwise perfect work;
every respectable mathematician had his shot at removing the defect by
"proving" the objectionable axiom. The procedure was always the same:
expunge the parallel axiom, in its place write another more or less
"obvious" assumption, and from this derive the parallel statement more
or less directly. Thus if we may assume that the sum of the angles
of a triangle is always exactly 180 degrees, or that there can be
drawn only one line through a given point parallel to a given line,
we can prove Euclid's axiom. Sometimes the substitute assumption was
openly made and stated, as in the two instances cited; as often it
was admitted into the demonstration implicitly, as when it is quietly
assumed that we can draw a triangle similar to any given triangle and
with area as great as we please, or when parallels are "defined" as
everywhere equidistant. But such "proofs" never satisfied anyone other
than the man who made them; the search went merrily on for a valid
"proof" that should not in substance assume the thing to be proved.




LOCATING THE DISCREPANCY

Saccheri, an Italian Jesuit, would have struck bottom if he had had a
little more imagination. He gave an exhaustive reductio ad absurdum,
on the basis of the angle-sum theorem. This sum must be (a) greater
than or (b) equal to or (c) less than 180 degrees. Saccheri showed
that if one of these alternatives occurs in a single triangle, it must
occur in every triangle. The first case gave little trouble; admitting
the possibility of superposing in the special manner mentioned above,
which he did implicitly, he showed that this "obtuse-angled hypothesis"
contradicted itself. He pursued the "acute-angled hypothesis" for
a long time before he satisfied himself that he had caught it, too,
in an inconsistency. This left only the "right-angled hypothesis,"
proving the Euclidean angle-sum theory and through it the parallel
postulate. But Saccheri was wrong: he had found no actual contradiction
in the acute-angled hypothesis--for none exists therein.

The full facts were probably first known to Gauss, who had a finger in
every mathematical pie that had to do with the transition to modern
times. They were first published by Lobatchewsky, the Russian, who
anticipated the Hungarian John Bolyai by a narrow margin. All three
worked independently of Saccheri, whose book, though theoretically
available in Italian libraries, was actually lost to sight and had
to be rediscovered in recent years.

Like Saccheri, Lobatchewsky investigated alternative possibilities. But
he chose another point of attack: through a given point it must be
possible to draw, in the same plane with a given line (a) no lines or
(b) one line or (c) a plurality of lines, which shall not meet the
given line. The word parallel is defined only in terms of the second
of these hypotheses, so we avoid it here. These three cases correspond,
respectively, to those of Saccheri.

The first case Lobatchewsky ruled out just as did Saccheri, but
accepting consciously the proviso attached to its elimination;
the third he could not rule out. He developed the consequences of
this hypothesis as far as Euclid develops those of the second one,
sketching in a full outline for a system of geometry and trigonometry
based on a plurality of "non-cutters." This geometry constitutes a
coherent whole, without a logical flaw.

This made it plain what was the matter with Euclid's parallel
axiom. Nobody could prove it from his other assumptions because it
is not a consequence of these. True or false, it is independent of
them. Trinity Church is in New York, Faneuil Hall is in Boston, but
Faneuil Hall is not in Boston because Trinity is in New York; and we
could not prove that Faneuil Hall was in Boston if we knew nothing
about America save that Trinity is in New York. The mathematicians
of 2,000 years had been pursuing, on a gigantic scale, a delusion of
post hoc, ergo propter hoc.




WHAT THE POSTULATE REALLY DOES

Moreover, in the absence of an assumption covering the ground, we
shall not know which of the alternatives (a), (b), (c) holds. But
when one holds in a single case it holds permanently, as Saccheri and
Lobatchewsky both showed. So we cannot proceed on this indefinite
basis; we must know which one is to hold. Without the parallel
postulate or a substitute therefor that shall tell us the same thing
or tell us something different, we have not got a categorical set of
assumptions--we cannot build a geometry at all. That is why Euclid
had to have his parallel postulate before he could proceed. That is
why his successors had to have an assumption equivalent to his.

The reason why it took so long for this to percolate into the
understanding of the mathematicians was that they were thinking,
not in terms of the modern geometry and about undefined elements;
but in terms of the old geometry and about strictly defined and
circumscribed elements. If we understand what is meant by Euclidean
line and plane, of course the parallel postulate, to use the old
geometer's word, is true--of course, to adopt the modern viewpoint,
if we agree to employ an element to which that assumption applies,
the assumption is realized. The very fact of accepting the "straight"
line and the "flat" plane of Euclid constitutes acceptance of his
parallel postulate--the only thing that can separate his geometry
from other geometries. But of course we can't prove it; the prior
postulates which we would have to use in such an attempt apply where
it does not apply, and hence it cannot possibly be consequences of.

To all this the classical Euclidean rejoins that we seem to have
in mind elements of some sort to which, with one reservation, his
postulates apply. He wants to know what these elements look like. We
can, and must, produce them--else our talk about generality is mere
drivel. But we must take care that the Euclidean geometer does not
try to apply to our elements the notions of straightness and flatness
which inhere in the parallel postulate. We cannot satisfy and defy
that postulate at the same time. If we do not insist on this point, we
shall find that we are reading non-Euclidean properties into Euclidean
geometry, and interpreting the elements of the latter as straight
lines that are not straight, flat planes that are not flat. It is not
the mission of non-Euclidean geometry thus to deny the possibility
of Euclidean geometry; it merely demands a place of equal honor.




THE GEOMETRY OF SURFACES

Let us ask the Euclidean geometer whether he can recognize his plane
after we have crumpled it up like a piece of paper en route to the
waste basket. He will hesitate only long enough to recall that in
the special case of superposition he has reserved for himself the
privilege of deforming his own plane, and to realize that he can
always iron his plane out smooth again after we are through with
it. This emphasizes the true nature of the two-dimensionality which
is the fundamental characteristic of the plane (and of other things,
as we shall directly see). The plane is two-dimensional in points not
because two sets of mutually perpendicular Euclidean straight lines
can be drawn in it defining directions of north-south and east-west,
but because a point in it can be located by means of two measures. The
same statement may be made of anything whatever to which the term
"surface" is applicable; anything, however crumpled or irregular it
be, that possesses length and breadth without thickness. The surface
of a sphere, of a cylinder, of an ellipsoid, of a cone, of a doughnut
(mathematically known as a torus), of a gear wheel, of a French horn,
all these possess two-dimensionality in points; on all of them we can
draw lines and curves and derive a geometry of these figures. If we
get away from the notion that geometry of two dimensions must deal
with planes, and adopt in place of this idea the broader restriction
that it shall deal with surfaces, we shall have the generalization
which the Euclidean has demanded that we produce, and the one which
in the hands of the modern geometer has shown results.

In this two-dimensional geometry of surfaces in general, that of the
plane is merely one special case. Certain of the features met in that
case are general. If we agree that we know what we mean by distance,
we find that on every surface there is a shortest distance between
two points, together with a series of lines or curves along which
such distances are taken. These lines or curves we call geodesics. On
the plane the geodesic is the straight line. On surfaces in general
the geodesic, whatever its particular and peculiar shape, plays
the same rôle that is played by the straight line in the plane;
it is the secondary element of the geometry, the surface itself
and all other surfaces of its type are the tertiary elements. And
it is a fact that we can take all the possible spheres, or all the
possible French-horn surfaces, and conceive of space as we know it
being broken down by analysis into these surfaces instead of into
planes. The only reason we habitually decompose space into planes is
because it comes natural to us to think that way. But geometric points,
lines and surfaces must be recognized as abstractions without actual
existence, for all of them lack one or more of the three dimensions
which such existence implies. These figures exist in our minds but
not in the external world about us. So any decomposition of space
into geometric elements is a phenomenon of the mind only; it has no
parallel and no significance in the external world, and is made in
one way or in another purely at our pleasure. There isn't a true,
honest-to-goodness geometrical plane in existence any more than there
is an honest-to-goodness spherical surface: so on intrinsic grounds
one decomposition is as reasonable as another.

Certain of the most fundamental postulates are obeyed by all
surfaces. As we attempt to discriminate between surfaces of different
types, and get, for instance, a geometry that shall be valid for
spheres and ellipsoids but not for conicoids in general, we must do
so by bringing in additional postulates that embody the necessary
restrictions. A characteristic shared by planes, spheres, and various
other surfaces is that the geodesics can be freely slid along upon
themselves and will coincide with themselves in all positions when
thus slid; with a similar arrangement for the surface itself. But
the plane stands almost unique among surfaces in that it does not
force us to distinguish between its two sides; we can turn it over
and still it will coincide with itself; and this property belongs
also to the straight line. It does not belong to the sphere, or to
the great circles which are the geodesics of spherical geometry;
when we turn one of these over, through the three-dimensional space
that surrounds it, we find that the curvature lies in the wrong way
to make superposition possible. If we postulate that superposition be
possible under such treatment, we throw out the sphere and spherical
geometry; if we postulate that superposition be only by sliding the
surface upon itself we admit that geometry--as Saccheri failed to
see, as Lobatchewsky realized, and as Riemann showed at great length
in rehabilitating the "obtuse-angled hypothesis." Lobatchewsky's
acute-angled geometry is realized on a surface of the proper sort,
which admits of unrestricted superposition; but it is not the sort
of a surface that I care to discuss in an article of this scope.

Euclidean geometry is the natural and easy one, I suppose, because it
makes it easy to stop with three dimensions. If we take a secondary
element, a geodesic, which is "curved" in the Euclidean sense, we
get a tertiary element, a surface, which is likewise curved. Then
unless we are to make an altogether abrupt and unreasonable break,
we shall find that just as the curved geodesic generated a curved
surface, the curved surface must give rise to a "curved space"; and
just as the curved geodesic needed a second dimension to curve into,
and the curved surface a third, so the curved three-space requires
a fourth. Once started on this sort of thing, there doesn't really
seem to be any end.




EUCLIDEAN OR NON-EUCLIDEAN

Nevertheless, we must face the possibility that the space we live
in, or any other manifold of any sort whatever with which we deal on
geometric principles, may turn out to be non-Euclidean. How shall we
finally determine this? By measures--the Euclidean measures the angles
of an actual triangle and finds the sum to be exactly 180 degrees;
or he draws parallel lines of indefinite extent and finds them to
be everywhere equally distant; and from these data he concludes that
our space is really Euclidean. But he is not necessarily right.

We ask him to level off a plot of ground by means of a plumb
line. Since the line always points to the earth's center, the "level"
plot is actually a very small piece of a spherical surface. Any test
conducted on this plot will exhibit the numerical characteristics of
the Euclidean geometry; yet we know the geometry of this surface is
Riemannian. The angle-sum is really greater than 180 degrees; lines
that are everywhere equidistant are not both geodesics.

The trouble, of course, is that on this plot we deal with
so minute a fraction of the whole sphere that we cannot make
measurements sufficiently refined to detect the departure from
Euclidean standards. So it is altogether sensible for us to ask:
"Is the universe of space about us really Euclidean in whatever of
realized geometry it presents to us? Or is it really non-Euclidean,
but so vast in size that we have never yet been able to extend our
measures to a sufficiently large portion of it to make the divergence
from the Euclidean standard discernible to us?"

This discussion is necessarily fragmentary, leaving out much that
the writer would prefer to include. But it is hoped that it will
nevertheless make it clear that when the contestants in the Einstein
competition speak of a non-Euclidean universe as apparently having
been revealed by Einstein, they mean simply that to Einstein has
occurred a happy expedient for testing Euclideanism on a smaller
scale than has heretofore been supposed possible. He has devised a
new and ingenious sort of measure which, if his results be valid,
enables us to operate in a smaller region while yet anticipating that
any non-Euclidean characteristics of the manifold with which we deal
will rise above the threshold of measurement. This does not mean that
Euclidean lines and planes, as we picture them in our mind, are no
longer non-Euclidean, but merely that these concepts do not quite so
closely correspond with the external reality as we had supposed.

As to the precise character of the non-Euclideanism which is revealed,
we may leave this to later chapters and to the competing essayists. We
need only point out here that it will not necessarily be restricted
to the matter of parallelism. The parallel postulate is of extreme
interest to us for two reasons; first because historically it was the
means by which the possibilities and the importance of non-Euclidean
geometry were forced upon our attention; and second because it happens
to be the immediate ground of distinction between Euclidean geometry
and two of the most interesting alternatives. But Euclidean geometry
is characterized, not by a single postulate, but by a considerable
number of postulates. We may attempt to omit any one of these so that
its ground is not specifically covered at all, or to replace any one
of them by a direct alternative. We might conceivably do away with the
superposition postulate entirely, and demand that figures be proved
equivalent, if at all, by some more drastic test. We might do away
with the postulate, first properly formulated by Hilbert, on which our
ideas of the property represented in the word "between" depend. We
might do away with any single one of the Euclidean postulates, or
with any combination of two or more of them. In some cases this would
lead to a lack of categoricity and we should get no geometry at all;
in most cases, provided we brought a proper degree of astuteness to
the formulation of alternatives for the rejected postulates, we should
get a perfectly good system of non-Euclidean geometry: one realized,
if at all, by other elements than the Euclidean point, line and plane,
and one whose elements behave toward one another differently from
the Euclidean point, line and plane.

Merely to add definiteness to this chapter, I annex here the
statement that in the geometry which Einstein builds up as more
nearly representing the true external world than does Euclid's, we
shall dispense with Euclid's (implicit) assumption, underlying his
(explicitly stated) superposition postulate, to the effect that the
act of moving things about does not affect their lengths. We shall
at the same time dispense with his parallel postulate. And we shall
add a fourth dimension to his three--not, of course, anything in the
nature of a fourth Euclidean straight line perpendicular, in Euclidean
space, to three lines that are already perpendicular to each other,
but something quite distinct from this, whose nature we shall see
more exactly in the next chapter. If the present chapter has made it
clear that it is proper for us to do this, and has prevented anyone
from supposing that the results of doing it must be visualized in a
Euclidean space of three dimensions or of any number of dimensions,
it will have served its purpose.









