XIV

NEW CONCEPTS FOR OLD

What the World Looks Like After Einstein Has Had His Way With It

BY JOHN G. McHARDY, COMMANDER R.N.,
LONDON

                   "The new-created world, which fame in heaven
                    Long had foretold, a fabric wonderful,
                    Of absolute perfection."


Einstein's Theory of Relativity has led to determining a key law
of nature--the law of gravitation--which is also the basic law of
mechanics. Thus it embraces a whole realm of physics, and promises,
through the researches of Professor Weyl, to embrace another
realm--electro-dynamics. Its limitations are not yet reached, for
Einstein has already postulated therefrom a theory of a finite, yet
unbounded, universe. This essay, however, is mainly concerned with
mechanics, and electrical forces are not considered.

To have synthesised Newton's two great principles--his law of motion
and law of gravitation--interpreting in the process the empirical law
of equality of gravitational and inertial mass, is alone an immense
achievement; but Einstein's researches have opened up a new world
to the physicist and philosopher which is of greater importance. He
has given us a vision of the immaterial world, a geometrical or
mathematical vision, which is more satisfying than the "ether"
conceptions hitherto presented. The fabric of his vision is not
baseless. It is this fabric we shall consider, touching on certain
aspects of the Einstein theory in the endeavor to present an image in
miniature of his edifice of thought and to show the firmness of its
foundations. That they are well and truly laid was demonstrated by
the verification, from observations made during the solar eclipse in
1919, of Einstein's prediction of the displacement of a wave of light
in a gravitational field, showing light to have the property of weight.

The physical world is shown by Einstein to be a world of
"relations." Underlying it there is an absolute world of which physical
phenomena are the manifestation. "Give me matter and motion," says
Descartes, "and I will construct the world." "Give me a world in
which there are ordered relations," says the Relativist, "and I will
show you the behavior of matter therein" (mechanics). We first view
this underlying world as an abstraction, abstracting energy ("bound"
as in matter and electrons, "free" as in light), and its attribute
force. This abstraction we will call the "World-Frame." Later, we
will study the underlying world in connection with energy, and will
call this absolute world the "World-Fabric." The connection between
the geometrical character of the World-Frame and the geometrical
characters of the World-Fabric is the key to the law of gravitation.




THE WORLD-FRAME

This is our conception of a world, if such were possible, entirely free
from the influence of energy. We may conceive of it as an amorphous
immaterial something containing "point-events" (a point-event
being an instant of time at a point in space--a conception, not a
definition). These point-events have a fourfold order and definite
relation in this Frame, i.e. they can be specified by four variables
or coordinates in reference to some base called a reference system,
with respect to which they are forward or backward, right or left,
above or below, sooner or later. This shows the World-Frame to be
four-dimensional. Thus an aggregate of point-events (or an "event,"
which implies limited extension in space and limited duration
in time) [7] would have what we familiarly describe as length,
breadth, height and time. To express these metrical properties most
simply we must choose a four-dimensional reference system having
a particular form--rectilinear axes (Cartesian coordinates), and a
particular motion--uniform and rectilinear, i.e. unaccelerated, and
non-rotating with respect to the path of a light ray. We call this
an inertial system because Newton's Law of Inertia holds for such
a system alone. This system indicates how observers partition the
World-Frame into space and time. It restricts observers to uniform
rectilinear motion, and observations to bodies and light-pulses in
such motion. Thus gravitational and other forces are discounted,
and we obtain World-Frame conditions notwithstanding the fact that
observers are in the presence of energy.

Now the separation between point-events which have a definite relation
to each other must be absolute. The separation between two points in
a plane is defined by the unique distance between them (the straight
line joining them). Between point-events the analogue of this unique
distance, which we call the "separation-interval" (to indicate its
time-like and space-like nature), is also unique. Its unique and
absolute character give it great importance as thereby it is the same
for all observers regardless of their reference system.

If, in place of the rather cumbersome expression $X-x$ to indicate
the difference between the $x$-coordinates of two points, we employ
the more compact expression $dx$; if for the benefit of readers who
have a little algebra but no analysis we state explicitly that this
expression is a single symbol for a single quantity, and has nothing
to do with any product of two quantities $d$ and $x$; and if we
extend this notation to all our coordinates: then it is clear from
previous essays that the distance $S$ between two points in a plane
referred to a rectilinear system $OX$, $OY$, is given by the simple
equation $S^2 = (dx)^2 + (dy)^2$. Einstein and Minkowski show that
the value for the separation interval $\Omega$, the analogue of $S$,
referred to an inertial system is given by the equation

    $$\Omega^2 = (dx)^2 + (dy)^2 + (dz)^2 - (dt)^2\,,$$

which is seen to be a modified extension to four dimensions of the
equation for $S$. We must measure $t$ in the same units as $x$, $y$,
$z$. By taking the constant velocity of light (300,000 kilometres
per second) as unit velocity, we can measure in length or time
indiscriminately. [8]

We will analyse briefly this equation as it epitomizes the Special
Theory of Relativity. If the World-Frame had been Euclidean the
equation would have been

    $$\Omega^2 = (dx)^2 + (dy)^2 + (dz)^2 + (dt)^2$$

but this would not satisfy the "transformation equations" which
resulted from the Special Theory. These transformation equations
arose directly from a reconciliation between two observed facts; (a)
the observed agreement of all natural phenomena with the "Restricted
Principle of Relativity"--a principle which shows that absolute
rectilinear motion cannot be established--(as regards mechanics this
was recognized by Newton; the Michelson-Morley and other experiments
showed this principle also applied to optical and electro-dynamical
phenomena); and (b) the observed disagreement of optical and
electro-dynamical phenomena (notably the constancy of light velocity)
with the laws of dynamics as given by classical mechanics, e.g., in
regard to the compounding of relative velocities. Einstein effected
this reconciliation by detecting a flaw in classical mechanics. He
showed that by regarding space and time measurements as relative
to the observer--not absolute as Newton defined them--there was
nothing incompatible between the Principle of Relativity and the
laws of dynamics so modified. Newton's definitions were founded on
conception. Einstein's recognition of the relativity of space and
time is based on observation.

Equation (1) shows that the geometry of the World-Frame referred to
an inertial system is semi-Euclidean (hyperbolic), and that space and
time measurements are relative to the observer's inertial reference
system. The equation shows that the World-Frame has a certain
geometrical character which we distinguish as four-dimensional
"flatness." It is everywhere alike (homaloidal). Its flat character
is shown by the straight line nature of the separation-interval and
of the system to which it is most simply referred.

Thus we have found two absolute features in the World-Frame--(1) Its
geometrical character--"flatness"; (2) The separation-interval--which
can be expressed in terms of measurable variables called space and time
partitions, this partitioning being dependent on the observer's motion.

We are now in a position to explore the World-Fabric. Already we see
that, studied under inertial conditions (free of force), it agrees
with the World-Frame.




THE WORLD-FABRIC

The General Theory of relativity is largely concerned with the
investigation of the World-Fabric. Consider the World-Frame to be
disturbed. We may regard this disturbance, which manifests itself in
physical phenomena, as energy, or more correctly "action."

When energy is thwarted in its natural flow, force is manifested,
with which are associated non-uniform motions such as accelerations
and rotations. This disturbed World-Frame we distinguish as the
World-Fabric. It is found to have various non-Euclidean characters
differing from the simple "flat" character of the World-Frame according
to the degree of disturbance (action) in the region. Disturbance
gives the fabric a geometrical character of "curvature"; the more
considerable the disturbance, the greater the curvature. Thus an
empty region (not containing energy, but under its influence) has
less curvature than a region in which free energy abounds.

Our problem, after showing the relativity of force (especially
gravitational force), is to determine the law underlying the fabric's
geometrical character; to ascertain how the degree of curvature is
related to the energy influencing a region, and how the curvature of
one region is linked by differential equations to that of neighboring
regions. Such a law will be seen to be the law of gravitation.

We study the World-Fabric by considering tracks on which material
particles and light-pulses progress; we find such tracks regulated
and defined by the Fabric's curvature, and not, as hitherto supposed,
by attractive force inherent in matter. As a track is measurable by
summing the separation-intervals between near-by point-events on it,
all observers will agree which is the unique track between two distant
point-events. Einstein postulates that freely progressing bodies
will follow unique tracks, which are therefore called natural tracks
(geodesics).

If material bodies are prevented from following natural tracks by
contact with matter or other causes, the phenomenon of gravitational
force is manifested relative to them. Whenever the natural flow
of energy is interrupted force is born. For example, when the
piston interrupts the flow of steam, or golf ball flow of club,
force results--the interruption is mutual, and the force relative
to both. Likewise when the earth interrupts the natural track of a
particle (or observer) gravitational force is manifested relative
to both.

So long as a body moves freely no force is appreciated by it. A
falling aviator (neglecting air resistance) will not appreciate any
gravitational force. He follows a natural track, thereby freeing
himself from the force experienced in contact with matter. He
acquires an accelerating motion with respect to an inertial system. By
acquiring a particular accelerating motion an observer can annul any
force experienced in any small region where the field of force can
be considered constant.

Thus Einstein, interpreting the equality of gravitational and inertial
mass, showed that the same quality manifests itself according to
circumstances as "weight" or as inertia, and that all force is purely
relative and may be treated as one phenomenon (an interruption in
energy flow). This "Principle of Equivalence" shows that small portions
of the World-Fabric, observed from a freely moving particle (free of
force), could be treated as small portions of the World-Frame. [9]

If such observations were practicable, we could determine the Fabric
curvature by referring point-event measurements to equation (1). We
cannot observe from unique tracks but we can observe them from our
restrained situation. Their importance is now apparent, because, by
tracing them over a region, we are tracing something absolute in the
Fabric--its geometrical character. We study this curvature by exploring
separation-intervals on the tracks of freely moving bodies, relating
these separation-intervals to actual measurements in terms of space
and time components depending on the observer's reference system. The
law of curvature must be the law of gravitation. To illustrate the
lines on which Einstein proceeded to survey the World-Fabric from
the earth we will consider a similar but more simple problem--the
survey of the sea-surface curvature from an airship. We study this
curvature by exploring small distances on the tracks of ships (which we
must suppose can only move uniformly on unique tracks--arcs of great
circles), relating such distances to actual measurements in terms of
length and breadth components depending on the observer's reference
system. This two-dimensional surface problem can be extended to the
four-dimensional Fabric one.

We consider the surface to be covered by two arbitrarily drawn
intersecting series of curves: curves in one series not intersecting
each other, vide figure. This Gaussian system of coordinates is
appropriate only when the smaller the surface considered, the
more nearly it approximates to Euclidean conditions. It admits of
defining any point on the surface by two numbers indicating the curves
intersecting at that point. $P$ is defined by $x_1$, $x_2$. $P_1$
(very near $P$) is defined by $x_1 + dx_1$, $x_2 + dx_2$. The equation
for the minute distance $s$ between two adjacent points in such a
system is given by the general formula

    $$s^2 = g_{11}d{x_1}^2 + g_{12}dx_1dx_2 + g_{22}d{x_2}^2\,.$$

The $g$'s may be constants or functions of $x_1$, $x_2$. Their
value is dependent on the observer's reference system and on the
geometrical character of the surface observed. The curves being
arbitrary, the formula is appropriate for any reference system,
or even if the observer does not know exactly what his reference
system is. (The Fabric observer does not know what his space and time
partitioning actually is because he is in a gravitational field). It
is the $g$'s which disclose the geometry of an observer's partitions,
and their values also contain a reflection of the character of the
region observed.

We find $s$ by direct exploration with a moving ship ($\Omega$ is found
by direct exploration with a freely moving particle); $dx_1$, $dx_2$
are the observed length and breadth measurement differences which we
have to relate to $s$. By making sufficient observations in a small
area and referring them to the general formula we can find the values
of the $g$'s for the observer's particular reference system. Different
values for $g$'s will be found if the observer changes his reference
system, but there is a limitation to the values so obtainable owing to
the part played by the surface itself, which is diffidently expressing
its intrinsic geometrical character in the $g$'s in each observation.




EINSTEIN'S RESULTS

Thus we approach the absolute character of the surface through
the relative nature of the observer's reference system. There is a
relationship common to all values of the $g$'s that belong to the
same curvature. This relationship is expressed by a differential
equation. It is this equation of curvature that the airship's observer
must find. Einstein's problem was similar, but he was concerned with
four dimensions, which entailed a general formula with ten $g$'s,
and he had to find a set of differential equations of the second
order to determine the law of Fabric curvature. He divided the Fabric
into regions: I. World-Frame--beyond influence of energy. II. Empty
region--free of energy, but under its influence. III. Region containing
free energy only. Each region has a characteristic curvature. By
means of an absolute differential calculus--a wonderful mathematical
scaffolding erected by Riemann, Christoffel and others--involving the
theory of tensors, he succeeded in finding such a set of equations. He
kept the following points in view: (1) The equations must not only
give the character of region II, but must satisfy the special case
of region I; (2) They must be independent of any partitioning system,
because the General Theory of Relativity demands that a law of nature
be in a form appropriate for all observers whatever their position
and motion; (3) They must be concerned with energy which is conserved,
not mass which the Special Theory showed dependent on velocity. This
set of differential equations which shows how the curvature of the
Fabric at any point links to the curvature at neighboring points is
the law of gravitation, a law which has been severely tested by the
practical observation of the solar eclipse already referred to. At a
first approximation these equations degenerate into Newton's Law. At
a second approximation they account for the motion of the perihelion
of Mercury, which had hitherto baffled astronomers. All the laws
of mechanics are deducible from this law of World-Fabric curvature,
i.e. conservation of energy (which includes conservation of mass since
we re-define mass as energy) and conservation of momentum (re-defined
by a relativist). It must be noted that this law and the General
Theory show that the velocity of light is not absolutely constant,
but, like everything else, a light-pulse is affected by the Fabric
curvature in a gravitational field. In conclusion we will contrast
some conspicuous differences in the old world view of classical
mechanics and the new view presented by Einstein.

1. A three-dimensional ether medium with variously conceived properties
which communicated the supposed inherent attractive force in matter
in some unexplained way, and transmitted electromagnetic waves,
has been replaced by a four-dimensional external World-Fabric, the
geometrical character of which controls the motion of matter (energy)
and accounts for all mechanical laws.

2. After separating the observer's subjective share in definitions
from nature's share in the things defined, space, time, and force,
hitherto regarded as absolute, have been shown to be purely relative
and dependent on the observer's track. Mass has also proved to be
relative to velocity unless re-defined as energy. As classical
mechanics bases all definitions on space, time, and mass units,
the relativity of such defined quantities is now apparent.

3. Newton's laws of motion, his law of gravitation, and the laws of
conservation, hitherto regarded as unrelated, are now synthesised in
a basic law of mechanics.

Einstein has not disturbed the electric theory of matter, and both the
old and new physics have in common the "Principle of Least Action." We
obtain a glimpse of this principle in the unique tracks pursued by
freely moving bodies, which may be regarded as tracks of least effort,
force only being manifested as an expression of the Fabric's resentment
when bodies depart from these natural tracks. Einstein has approached
nearer to the truth in regard to the laws underlying nature, and,
as always, this means a simplification. His theory, which entails
a readjustment of such fundamental conceptions as space and time,
opens up fresh fields to scientific investigation and to philosophic
thought. It reveals a bridge uniting the domains of physics and
philosophy, and it heralds a new era in the history of science.









