XX

EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF GRAVITATION

The Discussion of the General Theory and Its Most Important
Application, from the Essay by

PROF. W. F. G. SWANN, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA, MINNEAPOLIS


Newton's great discovery regarding the motion of the planets consisted
in his showing that these could all be summed up in the following
statement: consider any planet in its relation to all particles in the
universe. Write down, for the planet, in the line joining it to any
particle, an acceleration proportional to the mass of the particle and
to the inverse square of its distance from the planet. Then calculate
the planet's resultant acceleration by combining all the accelerations
thus obtained.

We have here purposely avoided the use of the word "force," for
Newton's law is complete as a practical statement of fact without it;
and this word adds nothing to the law by way of enhancing its power
in actual use. Nevertheless, the fact that the acceleration is made
up as it were of non-interfering contributions from each particle
in the line joining it to the planet strongly suggests to the mind
something of the nature of an elastic pull for which the particle is
responsible, and to which the planet's departure from a straight-line
motion is due. The mind likes to think of the elastic; ever since the
time of Newton people have sought to devise some mechanism by which
these pulls might be visualized as responsible for the phenomena in
the same way as one pictures an elastic thread as controlling the
motion of a stone which swings around at its end.

This search has been always without success; and now Einstein has
found a rather different law which fits the facts better than Newton's
law. It is of such a type that it does not lend itself conveniently
to expression in terms of force; the mind would gain nothing by
trying to picture such forces as are necessary. It compensates for
this, however, in being capable of visualization in terms of what is
ultimately a much simpler concept.

In order to appreciate the fundamental ideas involved, suppose for
a moment that gravitation could be annihilated, completely, and
suppose I find myself upon this earth in empty space. You shall be
seated at some point in space and shall watch my doings. If I am in
the condition of mind of the people of the reign of King Henry VIII,
I shall believe that the earth does not rotate. If I let go a stone,
there being no gravity, I shall find that it flies away from me with
an acceleration. You will know, however, that the stone really moves
in a straight line with constant velocity, and that the apparent
acceleration which I perceive is due to the earth's rotation. If I
have argued that acceleration is due to force, I shall say that the
earth repels the stone, and shall try to find the law governing the
variation of this force with distance. I may go farther, and try to
imagine some reason for the force, some pushing action transmitted from
the earth to the stone through a surrounding medium; and, you will
pity me for all this wasted labor, and particularly for my attempt
to find a mechanism to account for the force, since you know that if
I would only accept your measurements all would appear so simple.

Let us probe this matter a little farther, however, from the
stand-point of myself. I must believe in the reality of the force,
since I have to be tied to my chair to prevent my departure from
the earth. I might wonder how this field of force would affect the
propagation of light, chemical action and so forth. For, even though I
had discovered that, by using your measures, I could transform away the
apparent effects of my field of force as far as concerned its power
to hurl stones about, I could still regard this as a mathematical
accident, and believe that the force was really there. Although I
might suspect that the same transformation of view-point that would
annul the field's effect as regards the stones would also annul its
effect as regards light, etc., I should not be sure of this, as you
would be; and my conscience would hardly allow me to do more than
look upon the assumption of complete equivalence between the apparent
field and a change in the system of measurement as a hypothesis. I
should be strongly tempted to make the hypothesis, however.

Now the question raised by Einstein is whether the force of gravity,
which we experience as a very real thing, may be put upon a footing
which is in some way analogous to that of the obviously fictitious
centrifugal force cited above: whether gravitation may be regarded as
a figment of our imagination engendered by the way in which we measure
things. He found that it could be so regarded. He went still farther,
and in his Principle of Equivalence, he postulated that the apparent
effects of gravitation in all phenomena could be attributed to the same
change in the system of our measurements that would account for the
ordinary phenomena of gravitation. On the basis of this hypothesis
he was able to deduce for subsequent experimental verification,
the effects of gravitation on light. He did not limit himself to
such simple changes in our measurements as were sufficient to serve
the purpose of the problem of centrifugal force cited above; but,
emboldened by the assumptions, in the older theory of relativity,
of change in standards of length and time on account of motion,
he went even farther than this, and considered the possibility of
change of our measures due to mere proximity to matter.

His problem amounted to an attempt to find some way in which it was
possible to conceive our scales and clocks as altered, relatively to
some more fundamental set, so as to allow of the planetary motions
being uniform and rectilinear with respect to these fundamental
measures, although they appear as they do to us. If we allow our
imaginations perfect freedom as to how the scales may be altered, we
shall not balk at assuming alterations varying in any way we please,
Einstein does, however, introduce restrictions for reasons which we
will now discern.

If we imagine our whole universe, with its observers, planetary
orbits, instruments, and everything else, embedded in a jelly, and
then distort the jelly and contents in any way, the numbers at which
our planetary orbits (or rather their telescopic images) intersect
our scales will be unaltered. Moreover, we could vary, in any manner,
the times at which all objects (including the clock hands) occupied
their distorted positions, and the hand of some clock near the point
where the planetary image crossed the scale would record for this
occurrence the same dial reading as before. An inhabitant of this
distorted universe would be absolutely unconscious of the change. Now
the General Theory of Relativity which expresses itself in slightly
varied forms, amounts to satisfying a certain philosophical craving
of the mind, by asserting that the laws of nature which control our
universe ought to be such that another universe like the above, whose
inhabitants would be unconscious of their change, would also satisfy
these laws, not merely from the standpoint of its own inhabitants,
but also from the standpoint of our measurements. In other words,
this second universe ought to appear possible to us as well as to
its inhabitants.

Einstein decides to make his theory conform to this philosophical
desire, and this greatly limits the modifications of clocks and
scales which he permits himself for the purpose of representing
gravitation. Further, if we express the alterations of the measures
as functions of proximity to matter, velocity and so forth, our
expressions for these alterations will include, as a particular case,
that where matter is absent, although the scales and observer may still
remain. Our alteration of the scales and clocks with velocity must thus
revert, for this case, to that corresponding to the older theory of
relativity, in order to avoid predicting that two observers, in uniform
motion relative to each other in empty space, will measure different
values for the velocity of light. In this way, the velocity of light
comes to play a part in expressing the alterations of the measures.

Even with these restrictions, Einstein was able to do the equivalent
of finding an alteration of scales and clocks in the presence of
matter which would account for our finding that the planetary motions
take place very nearly in accordance with Newton's law. The new law
has accounted with surprising accuracy for certain astronomical
irregularities for which Newton's law failed to account, and has
predicted at least one previously unknown phenomenon which was
immediately verified.

In conclusion, it may be of interest to state how the new law describes
the motion of a particle in the vicinity of a body like the earth. The
law amounts to stating that, if we measure a short distance, radially
as regards the earth's center, we must allow for the peculiarity of
our units by dividing by

    $$\sqrt{1-\frac{2mG}{c^2r}}$$

where $r$ is the distance from the earth's center, $m$ the mass
of the earth, $c$ the velocity of light, and $G$ the Newtonian
gravitational constant. Tangential measurements require no correction,
but intervals of time as measured by our clocks must be multiplied,
for each particular place, by the above factor. Then, in terms of
the corrected measures so obtained, the particle will be found to
describe a straight line with constant velocity although, in terms
of our actual measures, it appears to fall with an acceleration.









