IX

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

A Statement of What it is All About, in Ideas of One Syllable

BY HUGH ELLIOT
CHISLEHURST, KENT, ENGLAND


The invariance of the laws of nature was one of the most popular themes
of nineteenth century philosophy. For it was not till last century that
general acceptance was accorded to the doctrine of the "Uniformity
of Law," adumbrated in ancient times by Epicurus and Lucretius. It
is now a cardinal axiom of science that the same cause in the same
conditions is always followed by the same effect. There exists in
nature no indeterminate element; all things are governed by fixed laws,
and the discovery of these laws is the main business of science.


    It is necessary to guard against reading into this statement an
    erroneous idea of the content of a "law of nature." Such a law
    is of course not an enactment of any sort; and it is not even to
    be thought of as an actual explanation of the how and why of the
    phenomena with which it has to do. It really is nothing but an
    expression of our belief in the pronouncement of the preceding
    paragraph, that like conditions do produce like results. It is
    a prediction based on past experience, and is of value merely in
    that past experience leads us to credit its accuracy. The composite
    essay beginning on page 19 discusses this question of the reality
    of natural laws, and should be consulted in connection with the
    present contribution.--Editor.


This great philosophic principle was derived of course from the study
of natural science; i.e., from observations and experiments conducted
upon the earth. Their comprehensiveness is therefore limited by the
fact that the observer is always in a state of rest, or nearly so,
as compared with the earth. All observers upon the earth are moving
through space at the same velocity; and it was possible to argue that
the uniformity of law might only hold good, when experiments were
conducted at this velocity. An observer moving at very different
velocity might discover that the laws of nature under these new
conditions were somewhat different.

Such a view could indeed never be very plausible, for motion is only a
relative conception. Imagine a universe consisting of infinite "empty"
space, in which there is poised a single material body. How shall
we determine whether this body is at rest, or whether it is moving
at high or low velocity through space? It is never getting nearer
to anything or farther from anything, since there is no other body
for it to get nearer to or farther from. If we say it is moving at a
uniform velocity of a thousand miles a second, our statement really
has no significance. We have no more reason for affirming that it is
in motion than we have for affirming that it is at rest. In short,
there is no such thing as absolute motion; the conception of motion
only arises when there are two or more bodies changing their position
relatively to one another. This is what is meant by the relativity
of motion. It seemed therefore improbable that the laws of nature
would be different if the observer were moving at high velocity;
for the movement of the observer is not an absolute quantity, but
merely a statement of his relation to other bodies, and if there were
no other bodies, the statement itself would be meaningless.




THE BEHAVIOR OF LIGHT

Now among the established laws of nature is that which specifies
the velocity of light moving through a vacuum. If the laws of nature
are invariable, this velocity will always be the same. But consider
what would happen under the following circumstances: Suppose that
we are at rest, and that an observer on another body flies past us
at 150,000 miles a second. Suppose that at the moment he passes, a
piece of flint projecting from him grazes a piece of steel projecting
from us, giving rise to a spark; and that we both thereupon set about
to measure the velocity of the light so produced. After one second,
we should find that the light had traveled about 186,000 miles away,
and since during this second the other observer had traveled 150,000
miles, we should infer that the light traveling in his direction was
only about 36,000 miles ahead of him. We should also infer that he
would find this out by his experiment, and that he would estimate the
velocity of light as only 36,000 miles a second in his own direction,
and 336,000 miles a second in the opposite direction. But if this is
so, then that law of nature which specifies the velocity of light
is quite different for him and for us: the laws of nature must be
dependent upon the observer's motion--a conclusion which appears
incompatible with the idea of the relativity of motion.

And it so happens that it is also contradictory to experimental
conclusions. Experiments undertaken to settle the point show that
each observer finds the same velocity for the light of the spark;
and after one second, each observer finds that the light has traveled
186,000 miles from himself. But how is it possible that when it has
traveled 186,000 miles in the same direction as the other observer
who himself has moved 150,000 miles meanwhile, he should still think
it 186,000 miles ahead of him? That is the initial paradox; and since
there has been no room for error in the experiments, we are forced
to conclude that there was something wrong in the assumptions and
preconceptions with which we started.




SPACE AND TIME

There can in fact be only one interpretation. If we each find that the
light has moved the same number of miles in the same number of seconds,
then we must be meaning something different when we speak of miles and
seconds. We are speaking in different languages. Some subsidence has
occurred in the foundations of our systems of measurement. We are each
referring to one and the same objective fact; but since we describe
it quite differently, and at first sight incompatibly, some profound
alteration must have occurred in our perceptions--all unsuspected by
ourselves. It has been shown precisely what this alteration is. A body
moving at high velocity must become flattened in the direction of its
motion; all its measuring apparatus, when turned in that direction,
is shortened, so that no hint of the flattening can be obtained from
it. Furthermore, the standards of time are lengthened out, and clocks
go slower. The extent of this alteration in standards of space and time
is stated in the equations of the so-called Lorentz transformation.


Objection might be urged to the above paragraph on the ground that the
connection of the observer with the variability of measured lengths
and times is not sufficiently indicated, and that this variability
therefore might be taken as an intrinsic property of the observed
body--which of course it is not.--Editor.


We are accustomed to describe space as being of three dimensions, and
time as being of one dimension. As a matter of fact, both space and
time are "ideas," and not immediate sense-perceptions. We perceive
matter; we then infer a universal continuum filled by it, which
we call space. If we had no knowledge of matter, we should have no
conception of space. Similarly in the case of time: we perceive one
event following another, and we then invent a continuum which we call
time, as an abstraction based on the sequence of events. We do not see
space, and we do not see time. They are not real things, in the sense
that matter is real, and that events are real. They are products of
imagination: useful enough in common life, but misleading when we
try to look on the universe as a whole, free from the artificial
divisions and landmarks which we introduce into it for practical
convenience. Hence it is perhaps not so surprising after all that
in certain highly transcendental investigations, these artificial
divisions should cease to be a convenience, and become a hindrance.

Take for instance our conception of time. It differs from our
conception of space in that it has only one dimension. In space, there
is a right and left, an up and down, a before and after. But in time
there is only before and after. Why should there be this limitation of
the time-factor? Merely because that is the verdict of all our human
experience. But is our human experience based on a sufficiently broad
foundation to enable us to say that, under all conditions and in all
parts of the universe, there can be only one time-direction? May not
our belief in the uniformity of time be due to the uniformity of the
motion of all observers on the earth? Such in fact is the postulate of
relativity. We now believe that, at velocities very different from our
own, the standard of time would also be different from ours. From our
point of view, that different standard of time would not be confined
to the single direction fore and aft, as we know it, but would also
have in it an element of what we might call right and left. True,
it would still be of only one dimension, but its direction would
differ from the direction of our time. It would still run like a
thread through the universe, but not in the direction which we call
straight forward. It would have a slant in it, and the angle of the
slant depends upon the velocity of motion. It does not follow that
because we are all traveling in the same direction down the stream of
time, therefore that stream can only flow in the direction which we
know. "Before" and "after" are expressions which, like right and left,
depend upon our personal situation. If we were differently situated,
if to be precise we were moving at very high velocity, we should,
so to speak, be facing in a new direction and "before" and "after"
would imply a different direction of progress from that with which
we are now familiar.




THE WORLD OF REALITY

But, after all, the objective universe is the same old universe
however fast we are moving about in it, and whatever way we are
facing. These details merely determine the way we divide it up into
space and time. The universe is not affected by any arbitrary lines
which we draw through it for our personal convenience. For practical
purposes, we ascribe to it four dimensions, three in space and one in
time. Clearly if the time direction is altered, all dimensions both
of space and time must have different readings. If, for instance,
the time direction slopes away to the left, as compared with ours,
then space measurements to right and left must be correspondingly
altered. An analogy will simplify the matter.

Suppose we desire to reach a point ten miles off in a roughly
northeasterly direction. We might do so by walking six miles due east
and then eight miles due north. We should then be precisely ten miles
from where we started. But suppose our compass were out of order, so
that its north pole pointed somewhat to the west of north. Then in
order to get to our destination, we might have to walk seven miles
in the direction which we thought was east, and a little more than
seven miles in the direction which we thought was north. We should
then reach the same point as before. Both observers have walked
according to their lights, first due east and then due north, and
both have reached the same point: the one observer is certain that
the finishing point is six miles east of the starting-point, while
the other is sure it is seven miles.

Now we on the earth are all using a compass which points in the same
direction as regards time. But other observers, on bodies moving with
very different velocity, have a compass in which the time-direction is
displaced as compared with ours. Hence our judgments of distances will
not be alike. In our analogy, the northerly direction corresponds to
time, and the easterly direction to space; and so long as we use the
same compass we do not differ in our measurements of distances. But
for any one who has a different notion of the time-direction, not
only time intervals but space distances will be judged differently.

In short, the universe is regarded as a space-time continuum of four
dimensions. A "point" in space-time is called an "event"--that which
occurs at a specified moment and at a specified place. The distance
between two points in space-time is called their "interval." All
observers will agree as to the magnitude of any interval, since it
is a property of the objective universe; but they will disagree as
to its composition in space and time separately. In short, space
and time are relative conceptions; their relativity is a necessary
consequence of the relativity of motion. The paradox named at the
outset is overcome; for the two observers measuring the velocity of
the light produced as they passed one another, were using different
units of space and time. And hence emerges triumphant the Special
Principle of Relativity, which states that the laws of nature are
the same for all observers, whether they are in a state of rest or
of uniform motion in a straight line.




ACCELERATED MOTION

Uniform motion in a straight line is however a very special kind of
motion. Our experience in ordinary life is of motions that are neither
uniform nor in a straight line; both speed and direction of motion
are altering. The moving body is then said to undergo "acceleration":
which means either that its speed is increasing or diminishing, or
that its direction of motion is changing, or both. If we revert to our
former supposition of a universe in which there is only a single body
in "empty" space, we clearly cannot say whether it has acceleration
any more than whether it is moving, there being no outside standard
of comparison; and the General Principle of Relativity asserts the
invariance of the laws of nature for all states of motion of the
observer. In this case, however, a difference might be detected
by an observer on the moving body itself. It would be manifested
to him as the action of a force; such for instance as we feel when
a train in which we are traveling is increasing or reducing speed,
or when, without changing speed, it is rounding a corner. The force
dies away as soon as the velocity becomes uniform. Thus acceleration
reveals itself to us under the guise of action by a force. Force and
acceleration go together, and we may either say that the acceleration
is due to the force, or the impression of force to the acceleration.

Now when we are traveling with accelerated motion, we have quite a
different idea of what constitutes a straight line from that which
we had when at rest or in uniform motion. If we are moving at uniform
velocity in an airplane and drop a stone to the earth it will appear
to us in the airplane to fall in a straight line downward, while to
an observer on the earth it will appear to describe a parabola. This
is due to the fact that the stone gathers speed as it falls; it is
subject to the acceleration associated with gravity. Acceleration
obliterates the fundamental difference between a straight and
curved line. Unless we know what is the absolute motion of the
stone, and the two observers, we cannot say whether the line is
"really" a straight or a curved line. Since absolute motion is an
illegitimate conception, it follows that there is no such thing as
"really" straight or "really" curved. These are only appearances
set up as a consequence of our relative motions with respect to the
bodies concerned. If there were no such thing as acceleration--if the
stone fell to the earth at uniform velocity--then an observer on the
earth or anywhere else would agree that it fell in a straight line;
and straight lines would always be straight lines.

Under these circumstances, Euclidean geometry would be absolutely
true. But if we are in a state of acceleration, then what we think are
straight lines are "really" curved lines, and Euclidean geometry, based
on the assumption that its lines are straight, must founder when tested
by more accurate measurements. And in point of fact we are in a state
of acceleration: for we are being acted upon by a force--namely, the
force of gravitation. Wherever there is matter, there is gravitation;
wherever there is gravitation there is acceleration; wherever there
is acceleration Euclidean geometry is inaccurate. Hence in the space
surrounding matter a different geometry holds the field; and bodies
in general move through such space in curved lines.

Different parts of space are thus characterized by different
geometrical properties. All bodies in the universe proceed on
their established courses through space and time. But when they
come to distorted geometrical areas, their paths naturally seem
to us different from when they were moving through less disturbed
regions. They exhibit the difference by acquiring an acceleration;
and we explain the acceleration by alleging the existence of a force,
which we call the force of gravitation. But their motions can in fact
be perfectly predicted if we know the geometry of the space through
which they are traveling. The predictions so based have in fact proved
more accurate than those based on the law of gravitation.









