VIII

THE NEW CONCEPTS OF TIME AND SPACE

The Essay in Behalf of Which the Greatest Number of Dissenting Opinions
Have Been Recorded

BY MONTGOMERY FRANCIS NEW YORK


We have all had experiences, on trains and boats, illustrating our
inability to tell, without looking off to some external body, whether
we are at rest or moving uniformly; and when we do so look, to tell,
without reference to the ground or some other point external to both
systems, whether ours or the other be the seat of motion. Uniform
motion must be relative, because we find nowhere in the universe a
body in the unique state of absolute rest from which alone absolute
motion might be measured.

True, the wave theory of light with its homogeneous space-filling
ether seemed to provide a reference standard for the concept of
absolute motion, and for its measurement by experiment with light
rays. But when Michelson and Morley looked for this absolute motion
they found no trace of it. To the physicist, observational student
of the external world, nothing exists save observationally; what he
can never observe is not there. So: I. By no means whatever may we
regard uniform straight-line motion as other than relative.

As a further direct consequence of the Michelson-Morley experiment
we have: II. Light in a vacuum presents the same velocity, $C =
186,330$ miles per second, to all observers whatever their velocity
of relative motion. In addition to being experimentally established,
this is necessary to support I, for if light will distinguish between
our velocities, its medium is necessarily a universal standard for
absolute motion. But it is contrary to common sense to suppose that
if I pass you at 100 miles per hour, the same light impulse can pass
us both at the same speed, $C$. We feel, instinctively, that space and
time are not so constituted as to make this possible. But the fact has
been repeatedly demonstrated. And when common sense and fundamental
concepts clash with facts, it is not the facts that must yield. We
have survived such crises, notably one where we had to change the
fundamental concept of up-and-down; if another one is here, says
Einstein, let us meet it.

This the Special Theory of Relativity does. It accepts Postulates
I and II above; their consequences it deduces and interprets. For
extensive demonstration of these I lack space, and this has been
satisfactorily done by others so it is not my chief duty; but clearly
they will be startling. For the very ray of light which refuses to
recognize our relative motion is the medium through which I must
observe your system and you mine.

It turns out that I get different values for lengths and time intervals
in your system than you get, and vice versa. And we are both right! For
me to accept your "correction" were for me to admit that you are
at absolute rest and I in absolute motion, that your measure of
light velocity is right and mine wrong: admissions barred by the
postulates. We have nothing to correct; we can only recognize the
reason for the discrepancy; and knowing our relative velocity, each
can calculate from his own results what the other's will be. We find,
of course, that at ordinary velocities the discrepancy is many times
too small for detection; but at relative velocities at all comparable
with that of light it rises above the observational horizon.

To inquire the "true" length is meaningless. Chicago is east of Denver,
west of Pittsburgh, south of Milwaukee; we do not consider this
contradictory, or demand the "true" direction of Chicago. Einstein
finds that the concept of length, between points in space or events
in time, does not as we had supposed represent an intrinsic property
of the points or the events. Like direction, it is merely a relation
between these and the observer--a relation whose value changes with
the observer's velocity relative to the object. If our ideas of the
part played in the world by time and space do not permit us to believe
this, we must alter these ideas. Let us see how we may do this.




A WORLD OF POINTS

To deal with points in a plane the mathematician draws two
perpendicular lines, and locates any point, as $P$, by measuring its
distances, $X$ and $Y$, from these "coordinate axes." The directions
of his axes acquire for him a peculiar significance, standing out
above other directions; he is apt to measure the distances $X-x$ and
$Y-y$ between the points $P$ and $Q$ in these directions, instead of
measuring the single distance $PQ$. We do the same thing when we say
that the railroad station is five blocks north and two east.

The mathematician visualizes himself as an observer, located on his
coordinate framework. For another observer on another framework, the
horizontal and vertical distances $X'-x'$ and $Y'-y'$ between $P$ and
$Q$ are different. But for both, the distance from $P$ direct to $Q$
is the same. In each case the right triangle tells us that:

    $$PQ = \sqrt{(X-x)^2 + (Y-y)^2} = \sqrt{(X'-x')^2 + (Y'-y')^2}$$

Imagine an observer so dominated by his coordinate system that he
knows no way of relating $P$ with $Q$ save by their horizontal and
vertical separation. His whole scheme of things would be shattered
by the suggestion that other observers on other reference frames find
different horizontal and vertical components. We have to show him the
line $PQ$. We have to convince him that this length is the absolute
property enjoyed by his pair of points; that horizontals and verticals
are merely relations between the points and the observer, result of
the observer's having analyzed the distance $PQ$ into two components;
that different observers effect this decomposition differently; that
this seems not to make sense to him only because of his erroneous
concept of a fundamental difference between verticals and horizontals.




THE FOUR-DIMENSIONAL WORLD OF EVENTS

We too have created a distinction in our minds corresponding to no
sufficient reality. Our minds seize on time as inherently separable
from space. We see the world made up of things in a continuum of three
space dimensions; to make this dead world live there runs through it
a one-dimensional time continuum, imposed from without, unrelated.

But did you ever observe anything suggesting the presence of time
in the absence of space, or vice versa? No; these vessels of the
universe always occur together. Association of the space dimensions
into a manifold from which time is excluded is purely a phenomenon
of the mind. The space continuum cannot begin to exist until the time
dimension is supplied, nor can time exist without a place to exist in.

The external world that we observe is composed, not of points,
but of events. If a point lacks position in time it does not exist;
give it this position and it becomes an event. This world of events
is four-dimensional--which means nothing more terrifying than that
you must make four measures to locate an event. It does not mean,
at all, that you must visualize four mutually perpendicular lines in
your accustomed three-space or in a four-space analogous to it. If
this world of four dimensions seems to lack reality you will be
able to exhibit no better reality for your old ideas. Time belongs,
without question; and not as an afterthought, but as part of the
world of events.

To locate an event we use four measures: $X$, $Y$ and $Z$ for space,
$T$ for time. Using the same reference frame for time and space, we
locate a second event by the measures $x$, $y$, $z$, $t$. Minkowski
showed that the quantity

    $$\sqrt{(X-x)^2 + (Y-y)^2 + (Z-z)^2 - (CT-Ct)^2}$$

is the same for all observers, no matter how different their $x$'s,
$y$'s, $z$'s and $t$'s; just as in the plane the quantity

    $$\sqrt{(X-x)^2 + (Y-y)^2}$$

is the same for all observers, no matter how different their $x$'s
and $y$'s.

Such a quantity, having the same value for all observers, is
absolute. In the plane it represents the true, absolute distance
between the points--their intrinsic property. In dealing with events it
represents the true, absolute "interval," in time and space together
between the events. It is not space, nor time, but a combination of
the two. We have always broken it down into separate space and time
components. In this we are as naive as the plane observer who could
not visualize the distance $PQ$ until it was split into separate
horizontals and verticals. He understood with difficulty that another
observer, employing a different reference frame because in different
position, would make the decomposition differently. We understand with
difficulty that another observer, employing a different reference
frame because in uniform motion relative to us, will decompose the
"interval" between events into time and space components different
from ours. Time and space are relative to the observer; only the
interval representing space-time is absolute. So common sense stands
reconciled to the Special Theory of Relativity.




SUCCESSIVE STEPS TOWARD GENERALITY

Is then our laboriously acquired geometry of points in a
three-dimensional space to go into the discard? By no means. Jeans,
investigating the equilibrium of gaseous masses, found the general
case too difficult for direct attack. So he considered the case where
the masses involved are homogeneous and incompressible. This never
occurs; but it throws such light on the general case as to point the
way toward attack on it.

Euclidean geometry excludes motion, save that engineered by the
observer; and then the time is immaterial. Time does not enter at all;
the three space dimensions suffice. This simple case never occurs
where matter exists; but its conclusions are of value in dealing with
more general cases.

When we look into a world alleged to be that of Euclid and find motion,
we may retain the Euclidean concept of what constitutes the world and
invent a machinery to account for the motion; or we may abandon the
Euclidean world, as inadequate, in favor of a more general one. We
have adopted the second alternative.

Newton's laws tells us that a body free to move will do so, proceeding
in a straight line at uniform velocity until interfered with. We
do not ask, nor does the theory tell us, whence comes the initial
motion. There is no machinery to produce it; it is an inherent property
of Newton's world--assured by the superposition of the time continuum
upon Euclid's world to make Newton's, accepted without question along
with that world itself.

But Newton saw that his world of uniform motion, like Euclid's,
was never realized. In the neighborhood of one particle a second is
interfered with, forced to give up its uniform motion and acquire a
constant acceleration. This Newton explained by employing the first
of the alternatives mentioned above. He tells us that in connection
with all matter there exists a force which acts on other matter in a
certain way. He does not display the actual machinery through which
this "force" works, because he could not discover any machinery;
he had to stop with his brilliant generalization of the observed
facts. And all his successors have failed to detect the slightest
trace of a machinery of gravitation.

Einstein asks whether this is not because the machinery is
absent--because gravitation, like position in Euclid's world and
motion in Newton's, is a fundamental property of the world in which it
occurs. His point of attack here lay in precise formulation of certain
familiar facts that had never been adequately appreciated. These
facts indicate that even accelerated motion is relative, in spite of
its apparently real and absolute effects.




GRAVITATION AND ACCELERATION

An observer in a closed compartment, moving with constant acceleration
through empty space, finds that the "bottom" of his cage catches up
with objects that he releases; that it presses on his feet to give
him the sensation of weight, etc. It displays all the effects that
he would expect if it were at rest in a gravitational field. On the
other hand, if it were falling freely under gravitational influence,
its occupant would sense no weight, objects released would not leave
his hand, the reaction from his every motion would change his every
position in his cage, and he could equally well assume himself at
rest in a region of space free from gravitational action. Accelerated
motion may always be interpreted, by the observer on the system,
as ordinary force effects on his moving system, or as gravitational
effects on his system at rest.

An alternative statement of the Special Theory is that the observed
phenomena of uniform motion may equally be accounted for by supposing
the object in motion and the observer with his reference frame at
rest, or vice versa. We may similarly state the General Theory: The
observed phenomena of uniformly accelerated motion may in every case be
explained on a basis of stationary observer and accelerated objective,
or of stationary objective with the observer and his reference system
in accelerated motion. Gravitation is one of these phenomena. It
follows that if the observer enjoy properly accelerated axes (in
time-space, of course), the absolute character of the world about him
must be such as to present to him the phenomenon of gravitation. It
remains only to identify the sort of world, of which gravitation as
it is observed would be a fundamental characteristic.

Euclid's and Newton's systems stand as first and second approximations
to that world. The Special Relativity Theory constitutes a correction
of Newton, presumably because it is a third approximation. We must
seek in it those features which we may most hopefully carry along,
into the still more general case.

Newton's system retained the geometry of Euclid. But Minkowski's
invariant expression tells us that Einstein has had to abandon this;
for in Euclidean geometry of four dimensions the invariant takes
the form:

    $$\sqrt{(X-x)^2 + (Y-y)^2 + (Z-z)^2 + (T-t)^2}\,,$$

analogous to that of two and three dimensions. It is not the presence
of the constant $C$ in Minkowski's formula that counts; this is merely
an adjustment so that we may measure space in miles and time in the
unit that corresponds to a mile. It is the minus sign where Euclidean
geometry demands a plus that makes Minkowski's continuum non-Euclidean.

The editor has told us what this statement means. I think he has made
it clear that when we speak of the geometry of the four-dimensional
world, we must not read into this term the restrictions surrounding
the kind of geometry we are best acquainted with--that of the
three-dimensional Euclidean continuum. So I need only point out that
if we are to make a fourth (and we hope, final) approximation to the
reality, its geometry must preserve the generality attained by that
of the third step, if it goes no further.




EINSTEIN'S TIME-SPACE WORLD

Einstein accordingly examined the possible non-Euclidean geometries
of four dimensions, in search of one displaying fundamental
characteristics which, interpreted in terms of space-time, would
lead to the observed facts of gravitation. The mathematics of this
investigation is that part of his work which, we are told, but twelve
men can follow; so we may only outline his conclusions.

If we assume that in the neighborhood of matter the world of
space-time is non-Euclidean, and that its curvature or distortion or
non-Euclideanism is of a certain type already known to mathematicians;
that the curvature of this world in the neighborhood of matter
increases with the mass, and decreases as the distance from the matter
increases; and that every particle of matter that is not interfered
with travels through space-time in the most direct path possible in
that continuum; then the observed facts of gravitation are accounted
for as an inherent geometric property of this space-time world. We
usually say that the presence of matter distorts this world, and
that this distortion gives the track of particles through the region
affected its non-uniform character.

Gravitation then is not a force at all; it is the fundamental nature of
things. A body free to move through the world must follow some definite
path. Euclid says it will stand still; Newton that it will traverse
a straight line in three-space at uniform time-rate; Einstein that it
will move in a "geodesic" through time-space--in every-day language,
that it will fall.

The numerical consequences of Einstein's theory are, within the
limits of observation, the same as those of Newton's for all bodies
save one--Mercury. This planet shows a small deviation from the
path predicted by Newton's law; Einstein's theory gives its motion
exactly. Again, when modern research showed that light must be
affected by gravitation, Einstein's theory, because of the extreme
velocity of light, deviates from Newton's, where the speed is less a
determining factor; and observations of starlight deflected by the
sun during the eclipse were in much better accord with Einstein's
theory than Newton's. Moreover, the Special Theory predicts that mass
is an observational variable like length and duration. Radioactive
emanations have a velocity high enough to give appreciable results
here, and the prediction is verified, tending to support the general
theory by supporting its limiting case.

We like always to unify our science; and seldom, after effecting
a unification, are we forced to give it up. Einstein for the first
time brings mechanical, electromagnetic and gravitational phenomena
within one structure. This is one reason why physicists are so open
minded toward his theory--they want it to be true.




THE LAYMAN'S LAST DOUBT

The final answer to any series of questions is inevitably "because the
world is so constructed." The things we are content to leave on that
basis are those to which we are accustomed, and which we therefore
think we understand; those for which this explanation leaves us
unsatisfied are those which are new and unfamiliar. Newton told us
that the world of three-dimensional space with one-dimensional time
superposed was so constructed that bodies left to themselves would go
on forever in a straight line at constant speed. We think we understand
this, but our understanding consists merely of the unspoken query,
"Why, of course; what is there to prevent?" The Greeks, an intelligent
people, looked at this differently; they would have met Newton with
the unanimous demand "Why so; what is there to keep them going?" So
if, in seeking an explanation of anything, we come sooner than we
had expected to the finality "Because the world is so constructed,"
let us not feel that we have been cheated.









