X

RELIGION, THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE BEYOND AND THE APOCATASTASIS

_Kai gar isôs kai malista prepei mellonta echeise apodêmein diaskopein te
kai muthologein peri tês apodêmias tês echei, poian tina autên oiometha
einai._--PLATO: _Phædo_.


Religion is founded upon faith, hope, and charity, which in their turn
are founded upon the feeling of divinity and of God. Of faith in God is
born our faith in men, of hope in God hope in men, and of charity or
piety towards God--for as Cicero said,[47] _est enim pietas iustitia
adversum deos_--charity towards men. In God is resumed not only
Humanity, but the whole Universe, and the Universe spiritualized and
penetrated with consciousness, for as the Christian Faith teaches, God
shall at last be all in all. St. Teresa said, and Miguel de Molinos
repeated with a harsher and more despairing inflection, that the soul
must realize that nothing exists but itself and God.

And this relation with God, this more or less intimate union with Him,
is what we call religion.

What is religion? In what does it differ from the religious sense and
how are the two related? Every man's definition of religion is based
upon his own inward experience of it rather than upon his observation of
it in others, nor indeed is it possible to define it without in some way
or another experiencing it. Tacitus said (_Hist._ v. 4), speaking of the
Jews, that they regarded as profane everything that the Romans held to
be sacred, and that what was sacred to them was to the Romans impure:
_profana illic omnia quæ apud nos sacra, rursum conversa apud illos quæ
nobis incesta_. Therefore he, the Roman, describes the Jews as a people
dominated by superstition and hostile to religion, _gens superstitioni
obnoxia, religionibus adversa_, while as regards Christianity, with
which he was very imperfectly acquainted, scarcely distinguishing it
from Judaism, he deemed it to be a pernicious superstition, _existialis
superstitio_, inspired by a hatred of mankind, _odium generis humani_
(_Ab excessu Aug._, xv., 44). And there have been many others who have
shared his opinion. But where does religion end and superstition begin,
or perhaps rather we should say at what point does superstition merge
into religion? What is the criterion by means of which we discriminate
between them?

It would be of little profit to recapitulate here, even summarily, the
principal definitions, each bearing the impress of the personal feeling
of its definer, which have been given of religion. Religion is better
described than defined and better felt than described. But if there is
any one definition that latterly has obtained acceptance, it is that of
Schleiermacher, to the effect that religion consists in the simple
feeling of a relationship of dependence upon something above us and a
desire to establish relations with this mysterious power. Nor is there
much amiss with the statement of W. Hermann[48] that the religious
longing of man is a desire for truth concerning his human existence. And
to cut short these extraneous citations, I will end with one from the
judicious and perspicacious Cournot: "Religious manifestations are the
necessary consequence of man's predisposition to believe in the
existence of an invisible, supernatural and miraculous world, a
predisposition which it has been possible to consider sometimes as a
reminiscence of an anterior state, sometimes as an intimation of a
future destiny" (_Traité de l'enchaînement des idées fondamentales dans
les sciences et dans l'histoire_, § 396). And it is this problem of
human destiny, of eternal life, or of the human finality of the Universe
or of God, that we have now reached. All the highways of religion lead
up to this, for it is the very essence of all religion.

Beginning with the savage's personalization of the whole Universe in his
fetich, religion has its roots in the vital necessity of giving human
finality to the Universe, to God, and this necessity obliges it,
therefore, to attribute to the Universe, to God, consciousness of self
and of purpose. And it may be said that religion is simply union with
God, each one interpreting God according to his own sense of Him. God
gives transcendent meaning and finality to life; but He gives it
relatively to each one of us who believe in Him. And thus God is for man
as much as man is for God, for God in becoming man, in becoming human,
has given Himself to man because of His love of him.

And this religious longing for union with God is a longing for a union
that cannot be consummated in science or in art, but only in life. "He
who possesses science and art, has religion; he who possesses neither
science nor art, let him get religion," said Goethe in one of his
frequent accesses of paganism. And yet in spite of what he said, he
himself, Goethe...?

And to wish that we may be united with God is not to wish that we may be
lost and submerged in Him, for this loss and submersion of self ends at
last in the complete dissolution of self in the dreamless sleep of
Nirvana; it is to wish to possess Him rather than to be possessed by
Him. When his disciples, amazed at his saying that it was impossible for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, asked Jesus who then
could be saved, the Master replied that with men it was impossible but
not with God; and then said Peter, "Behold, we have forsaken all and
followed thee; what shall we have therefore?" And the reply of Jesus
was, not that they should be absorbed in the Father, but that they
should sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel
(Matt. xix. 23-26).

It was a Spaniard, and very emphatically a Spaniard, Miguel de Molinos,
who said in his _Guía Espiritual_[49] that "he who would attain to the
mystical science must abandon and be detached from five things: first,
from creatures; second, from temporal things; third, from the very gifts
of the Holy Spirit; fourth, from himself; and fifth, he must be detached
even from God." And he adds that "this last is the completest of all,
because that soul only that knows how to be so detached is that which
attains to being lost in God, and only the soul that attains to being so
lost succeeds in finding itself." Emphatically a true Spaniard, Molinos,
and truly Spanish is this paradoxical expression of quietism or rather
of nihilism--for he himself elsewhere speaks of annihilation--and not
less Spanish, nay, perhaps even more Spanish, were the Jesuits who
attacked him, upholding the prerogatives of the All against the claims
of Nothingness. For religion is not the longing for self-annihilation,
but for self-completion, it is the longing not for death but for life.
"The eternal religion of the inward essence of man ... the individual
dream of the heart, is the worship of his own being, the adoration of
life," as the tortured soul of Flaubert was intimately aware (_Par les
champs et par les grèves_, vii.).

When at the beginning of the so-called modern age, at the Renaissance,
the pagan sense of religion came to life again, it took concrete form in
the knightly ideal with its codes of love and honour. But it was a
paganism Christianized, baptized. "Woman--_la donna_--was the divinity
enshrined within those savage breasts. Whosoever will investigate the
memorials of primitive times will find this ideal of woman in its full
force and purity; the Universe is woman. And so it was in Germany, in
France, in Provence, in Spain, in Italy, at the beginning of the modern
age. History was cast in this mould; Trojans and Romans were conceived
as knights-errant, and so too were Arabs, Saracens, Turks, the Sultan
and Saladin.... In this universal fraternity mingle angels, saints,
miracles and paradise, strangely blended with the fantasy and
voluptuousness of the Oriental world, and all baptized in the name of
Chivalry." Thus, in his _Storia della Letteratura italiana_, ii., writes
Francesco de Sanctis, and in an earlier passage he informs us that for
that breed of men "in paradise itself the lover's delight was to look
upon his lady--_Madonna_--and that he had no desire to go thither if he
might not go in his lady's company." What, in fact, was Chivalry--which
Cervantes, intending to kill it, afterwards purified and Christianized
in _Don Quixote_--but a real though distorted religion, a hybrid between
paganism and Christianity, whose gospel perhaps was the legend of
Tristan and Iseult? And did not even the Christianity of the
mystics--those knights-errant of the spirit--possibly reach its
culminating-point in the worship of the divine woman, the Virgin Mary?
What else was the Mariolatry of a St. Bonaventura, the troubadour of
Mary? And this sentiment found its inspiration in love of the fountain
of life, of that which saves us from death.

But as the Renaissance advanced men turned from the religion of woman to
the religion of science; desire, the foundation of which was curiosity,
ended in curiosity, in eagerness to taste of the fruit of the tree of
good and evil. Europe flocked to the University of Bologna in search of
learning. Chivalry was succeeded by Platonism. Men sought to discover
the mystery of the world and of life. But it was really in order to save
life, which they had also sought to save in the worship of woman. Human
consciousness sought to penetrate the Universal Consciousness, but its
real object, whether it was aware of it or not, was to save itself.

For the truth is that we feel and imagine the Universal
Consciousness--and in this feeling and imagination religious experience
consists--simply in order that thereby we may save our own individual
consciousnesses. And how?

Once again I must repeat that the longing for the immortality of the
soul, for the permanence, in some form or another, of our personal and
individual consciousness, is as much of the essence of religion as is
the longing that there may be a God. The one does not exist apart from
the other, the reason being that fundamentally they are one and the same
thing. But as soon as we attempt to give a concrete and rational form to
this longing for immortality and permanence, to define it to ourselves,
we encounter even more difficulties than we encountered in our attempt
to rationalize God.

The universal consent of mankind has again been invoked as a means of
justifying this immortal longing for immortality to our own feeble
reason. _Permanere animos arbitratur consensu nationum omnium_, said
Cicero, echoing the opinion of the ancients (_Tuscul. Quæst._, xvi.,
36). But this same recorder of his own feelings confessed that, although
when he read the arguments in favour of the immortality of the soul in
the _Phædo_ of Plato he was compelled to assent to them, as soon as he
put the book aside and began to revolve the problem in his own mind, all
his previous assent melted away, _assentio omnis illa illabitur_ (cap.
xi., 25). And what happened to Cicero happens to us all, and it happened
likewise to Swedenborg, the most daring visionary of the other world.
Swedenborg admitted that he who discourses of life after death, putting
aside all erudite notions concerning the soul and its mode of union with
the body, believes that after death he shall live in a glorious joy and
vision, as a man among angels; but when he begins to reflect upon the
doctrine of the union of the soul with the body, or upon the
hypothetical opinion concerning the soul, doubts arise in him as to
whether the soul is thus or otherwise, and when these doubts arise, his
former idea is dissipated (_De cælo et inferno_, § 183). Nevertheless,
as Cournot says, "it is the destiny that awaits me, _me_ or my _person_,
that moves, perturbs and consoles me, that makes me capable of
abnegation and sacrifice, whatever be the origin, the nature or the
essence of this inexplicable bond of union, in the absence of which the
philosophers are pleased to determine that my person must disappear"
(_Traité_, etc., § 297).

Must we then embrace the pure and naked faith in an eternal life without
trying to represent it to ourselves? This is impossible; it is beyond
our power to bring ourselves or accustom ourselves to do so. And
nevertheless there are some who call themselves Christians and yet leave
almost altogether on one side this question of representation. Take any
work of theology informed by the most enlightened--that is, the most
rationalistic and liberal--Protestantism; take, for instance, the
_Dogmatik_ of Dr. Julius Kaftan, and of the 668 pages of which the sixth
edition, that of 1909, consists, you will find only one, the last, that
is devoted to this problem. And in this page, after affirming that
Christ is not only the beginning and middle but also the end and
consummation of History, and that those who are in Christ will attain to
fullness of life, the eternal life of those who are in Christ, not a
single word as to what that life may be. Half a dozen words at most
about eternal death, that is, hell, "for its existence is demanded by
the moral character of faith and of Christian hope." Its moral
character, eh? not its religious character, for I am not aware that the
latter knows any such exigency. And all this inspired by a prudent
agnostic parsimony.

Yes, the prudent, the rational, and, some will say, the pious,
attitude, is not to seek to penetrate into mysteries that are hidden
from our knowledge, not to insist upon shaping a plastic representation
of eternal glory, such as that of the _Divina Commedia_. True faith,
true Christian piety, we shall be told, consists in resting upon the
confidence that God, by the grace of Christ, will, in some way or
another, make us live in Him, in His Son; that, as our destiny is in His
almighty hands, we should surrender ourselves to Him, in the full
assurance that He will do with us what is best for the ultimate end of
life, of spirit and of the universe. Such is the teaching that has
traversed many centuries, and was notably prominent in the period
between Luther and Kant.

And nevertheless men have not ceased endeavouring to imagine to
themselves what this eternal life may be, nor will they cease their
endeavours so long as they are men and not merely thinking machines.
There are books of theology--or of what passes for theology--full of
disquisitions upon the conditions under which the blessed dead live in
paradise, upon their mode of enjoyment, upon the properties of the
glorious body, for without some form of body the soul cannot be
conceived.

And to this same necessity, the real necessity of forming to ourselves a
concrete representation of what this other life may be, must in great
part be referred the indestructible vitality of doctrines such as those
of spiritualism, metempsychosis, the transmigration of souls from star
to star, and the like; doctrines which as often as they are pronounced
to be defeated and dead, are found to have come to life again, clothed
in some more or less new form. And it is merely supine to be content to
ignore them and not to seek to discover their permanent and living
essence. Man will never willingly abandon his attempt to form a concrete
representation of the other life.

But is an eternal and endless life after death indeed thinkable? How
can we conceive the life of a disembodied spirit? How can we conceive
such a spirit? How can we conceive a pure consciousness, without a
corporal organism? Descartes divided the world into thought and
extension, a dualism which was imposed upon him by the Christian dogma
of the immortality of the soul. But is extension, is matter, that which
thinks and is spiritualized, or is thought that which is extended and
materialized? The weightiest questions of metaphysics arise practically
out of our desire to arrive at an understanding of the possibility of
our immortality--from this fact they derive their value and cease to be
merely the idle discussions of fruitless curiosity. For the truth is
that metaphysics has no value save in so far as it attempts to explain
in what way our vital longing can or cannot be realized. And thus it is
that there is and always will be a rational metaphysic and a vital
metaphysic, in perennial conflict with one another, the one setting out
from the notion of cause, the other from the notion of substance.

And even if we were to succeed in imagining personal immortality, might
we not possibly feel it to be something no less terrible than its
negation? "Calypso was inconsolable at the departure of Ulysses; in her
sorrow she was dismayed at being immortal," said the gentle, the
mystical Fénelon at the beginning of his _Télémaque_. Was it not a kind
of doom that the ancient gods, no less than the demons, were subject
to--the deprivation of the power to commit suicide?

When Jesus took Peter and James and John up into a high mountain and was
transfigured before them, his raiment shining as white as snow, and
Moses and Elias appeared and talked with him, Peter said to the Master:
"Master, it is good for us to be here; and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee and one for Moses and one for Elias," for he
wished to eternalize that moment. And as they came down from the
mountain, Jesus charged them that they should tell no man what they had
seen until the Son of Man should have risen from the dead. And they,
keeping this saying to themselves, questioned one with another what this
rising from the dead should mean, as men not understanding the purport
of it. And it was after this that Jesus met the father whose son was
possessed with a dumb spirit and who cried out to him, "Lord, I believe;
help thou mine unbelief" (Mark ix.).

Those three apostles did not understand what this rising from the dead
meant. Neither did those Sadducees who asked the Master whose wife she
should be in the resurrection who in this life had had seven husbands
(Matt. xxii.); and it was then that Jesus said that God is not the God
of the dead, but of the living. And the other life is not, in fact,
thinkable to us except under the same forms as those of this earthly and
transitory life. Nor is the mystery at all clarified by that metaphor of
the grain and the wheat that it bears, with which Paul answers the
question, "How are the dead raised up, and with what body do they come?"
(1 Cor. xv. 35).

How can a human soul live and enjoy God eternally without losing its
individual personality--that is to say, without losing itself? What is
it to enjoy God? What is eternity as opposed to time? Does the soul
change or does it not change in the other life? If it does not change,
how does it live? And if it changes, how does it preserve its
individuality through so vast a period of time? For though the other
life may exclude space, it cannot exclude time, as Cournot observes in
the work quoted above.

If there is life in heaven there is change. Swedenborg remarked that the
angels change, because the delight of the celestial life would gradually
lose its value if they always enjoyed it in its fullness, and because
angels, like men, love themselves, and he who loves himself experiences
changes of state; and he adds further that at times the angels are sad,
and that he, Swedenborg, discoursed with some when they were sad (_De
Cælo et Inferno_, §§ 158, 160). In any case, it is impossible for us to
conceive life without change, change of growth or of diminution, of
sadness or of joy, of love or of hate.

In effect, an eternal life is unthinkable and an eternal life of
absolute felicity, of beatific vision, is more unthinkable still.

And what precisely is this beatific vision? We observe in the first
place that it is called vision and not action, something passive being
therefore presupposed. And does not this beatific vision suppose loss of
personal consciousness? A saint in heaven, says Bossuet, is a being who
is scarcely sensible of himself, so completely is he possessed by God
and immerged in His glory.... Our attention cannot stay on the saint,
because one finds him outside of himself, and subject by an unchangeable
love to the source of his being and his happiness (_Du culte qui est dû
à Dieu_). And these are the words of Bossuet, the antiquietist. This
loving vision of God supposes an absorption in Him. He who in a state of
blessedness enjoys God in His fullness must perforce neither think of
himself, nor remember himself, nor have any consciousness of himself,
but be in perpetual ecstasy (_ekstasis_) outside of himself, in a
condition of alienation. And the ecstasy that the mystics describe is a
prelude of this vision.

He who sees God shall die, say the Scriptures (Judg. xiii. 22); and may
it not be that the eternal vision of God is an eternal death, a swooning
away of the personality? But St. Teresa, in her description of the last
state of prayer, the rapture, transport, flight, or ecstasy of the soul,
tells us that the soul is borne as upon a cloud or a mighty eagle, "but
you see yourself carried away and know not whither," and it is "with
delight," and "if you do not resist, the senses are not lost, at least I
was so much myself as to be able to perceive that I was being lifted up
"--that is to say, without losing consciousness. And God "appears to be
not content with thus attracting the soul to Himself in so real a way,
but wishes to have the body also, though it be mortal and of earth so
foul." "Ofttimes the soul is absorbed--or, to speak more correctly, the
Lord absorbs it in Himself; and when He has held it thus for a moment,
the will alone remains in union with Him"--not the intelligence alone.
We see, therefore, that it is not so much vision as a union of the will,
and meanwhile, "the understanding and memory are distraught ... like one
who has slept long and dreamed and is hardly yet awake." It is "a soft
flight, a delicious flight, a noiseless flight." And in this delicious
flight the consciousness of self is preserved, the awareness of
distinction from God with whom one is united. And one is raised to this
rapture, according to the Spanish mystic, by the contemplation of the
Humanity of Christ--that is to say, of something concrete and human; it
is the vision of the living God, not of the idea of God. And in the 28th
chapter she tells us that "though there were nothing else to delight the
sight in heaven but the great beauty of the glorified bodies, that would
be an excessive bliss, particularly the vision of the Humanity of Jesus
Christ our Lord...." "This vision," she continues, "though imaginary, I
did never see with my bodily eyes, nor, indeed, any other, but only with
the eyes of the soul." And thus it is that in heaven the soul does not
see God only, but everything in God, or rather it sees that everything
is God, for God embraces all things. And this idea is further emphasized
by Jacob Böhme. The saint tells us in the _Moradas Setimas_ (vii. 2)
that "this secret union takes place in the innermost centre of the soul,
where God Himself must dwell." And she goes on to say that "the soul, I
mean the spirit of the soul, is made one with God ..."; and this union
may be likened to "two wax candles, the tips of which touch each other
so closely that there is but one light; or again, the wick, the wax,
and the light become one, but the one candle can again be separated from
the other, and the two candles remain distinct; or the wick may be
withdrawn from the wax." But there is another more intimate union, and
this is "like rain falling from heaven into a river or stream, becoming
one and the same liquid, so that the river and the rain-water cannot be
divided; or it resembles a streamlet flowing into the sea, which cannot
afterwards be disunited from it; or it may be likened to a room into
which a bright light enters through two windows--though divided when it
enters, the light becomes one and the same." And what difference is
there between this and the internal and mystical silence of Miguel de
Molinos, the third and most perfect degree of which is the silence of
thought? (_Guía Espiritual_, book i., chap. xvii., § 128). Do we not
here very closely approach the view that "nothingness is the way to
attain to that high state of a mind reformed"? (book iii., chap. xx., §
196). And what marvel is it that Amiel in his _Journal Intime_ should
twice have made use of the Spanish word _nada_, nothing, doubtless
because he found none more expressive in any other language? And
nevertheless, if we read our mystical doctor, St. Teresa, with care, we
shall see that the sensitive element is never excluded, the element of
delight--that is to say, the element of personal consciousness. The soul
allows itself to be absorbed in God in order that it may absorb Him, in
order that it may acquire consciousness of its own divinity.

A beatific vision, a loving contemplation in which the soul is absorbed
in God and, as it were, lost in Him, appears either as an annihilation
of self or as a prolonged tedium to our natural way of feeling. And
hence a certain feeling which we not infrequently observe and which has
more than once expressed itself in satires, not altogether free from
irreverence or perhaps impiety, with reference to the heaven of eternal
glory as a place of eternal boredom. And it is useless to despise
feelings such as these, so wholly natural and spontaneous.

It is clear that those who feel thus have failed to take note of the
fact that man's highest pleasure consists in acquiring and intensifying
consciousness. Not the pleasure of knowing, exactly, but rather that of
learning. In knowing a thing we tend to forget it, to convert it, if the
expression may be allowed, into unconscious knowledge. Man's pleasure,
his purest delight, is allied with the act of learning, of getting at
the truth of things, of acquiring knowledge with differentiation. And
hence the famous saying of Lessing which I have already quoted. There is
a story told of an ancient Spaniard who accompanied Vasco Núñez de
Balboa when he climbed that peak in Darien from which both the Atlantic
and the Pacific are visible. On beholding the two oceans the old man
fell on his knees and exclaimed, "I thank Thee, God, that Thou didst not
let me die without having seen so great a wonder." But if this man had
stayed there, very soon the wonder would have ceased to be wonderful,
and with the wonder the pleasure, too, would have vanished. His joy was
the joy of discovery. And perhaps the joy of the beatific vision may be
not exactly that of the contemplation of the supreme Truth, whole and
entire (for this the soul could not endure), but rather that of a
continual discovery of the Truth, of a ceaseless act of learning
involving an effort which keeps the sense of personal consciousness
continually active.

It is difficult for us to conceive a beatific vision of mental quiet, of
full knowledge and not of gradual apprehension, as in any way different
from a kind of Nirvana, a spiritual diffusion, a dissipation of energy
in the essence of God, a return to unconsciousness induced by the
absence of shock, of difference--in a word, of activity.

May it not be that the very condition which makes our eternal union with
God thinkable destroys our longing? What difference is there between
being absorbed by God and absorbing Him in ourself? Is it the stream
that is lost in the sea or the sea that is lost in the stream? It is all
the same.

Our fundamental feeling is our longing not to lose the sense of the
continuity of our consciousness, not to break the concatenation of our
memories, the feeling of our own personal concrete identity, even though
we may be gradually being absorbed in God, enriching Him. Who at eighty
years of age remembers the child that he was at eight, conscious though
he may be of the unbroken chain connecting the two? And it may be said
that the problem for feeling resolves itself into the question as to
whether there is a God, whether there is a human finality to the
Universe. But what is finality? For just as it is always possible to ask
the why of every why, so it is also always possible to ask the wherefore
of every wherefore. Supposing that there is a God, then wherefore God?
For Himself, it will be said. And someone is sure to reply: What is the
difference between this consciousness and no-consciousness? But it will
always be true, as Plotinus has said (_Enn_., ii., ix., 8), that to ask
why God made the world is the same as to ask why there is a soul. Or
rather, not why, but wherefore (_dia ti_).

For him who places himself outside himself, in an objective hypothetical
position--which is as much as to say in an inhuman position--the
ultimate wherefore is as inaccessible--and strictly, as absurd--as the
ultimate why. What difference in effect does it make if there is not any
finality? What logical contradiction is involved in the Universe not
being destined to any finality, either human or superhuman? What
objection is there in reason to there being no other purpose in the sum
of things save only to exist and happen as it does exist and happen? For
him who places himself outside himself, none; but for him who lives and
suffers and desires within himself--for him it is a question of life or
death. Seek, therefore, thyself! But in finding oneself, does not one
find one's own nothingness? "Having become a sinner in seeking himself,
man has become wretched in finding himself," said Bossuet (_Traité de la
Concupiscence_, chap. xi.). "Seek thyself" begins with "Know thyself."
To which Carlyle answers (_Past and Present_, book iii., chap. xi.):
"The latest Gospel in this world is, Know thy work and do it. 'Know
thyself': long enough has that poor 'self' of thine tormented thee; thou
wilt never get to 'know' it, I believe! Think it not thy business, this
of knowing thyself; thou art an unknowable individual: know what thou
canst work at; and work at it, like a Hercules. That will be thy better
plan."

Yes, but what I work at, will not that too be lost in the end? And if it
be lost, wherefore should I work at it? Yes, yes, it may be that to
accomplish my work--and what is my work?--without thinking about myself,
is to love God. And what is it to love God?

And on the other hand, in loving God in myself, am I not loving myself
more than God, am I not loving myself in God?

What we really long for after death is to go on living this life, this
same mortal life, but without its ills, without its tedium, and without
death. Seneca, the Spaniard, gave expression to this in his _Consolatio
ad Marciam_ (xxvi.); what he desired was to live this life again: _ista
moliri_. And what Job asked for (xix. 25-7) was to see God in the flesh,
not in the spirit. And what but that is the meaning of that comic
conception of _eternal recurrence_ which issued from the tragic soul of
poor Nietzsche, hungering for concrete and temporal immortality?

And this beatific vision which is the primary Catholic solution of the
problem, how can it be realized, I ask again, without obliteration of
the consciousness of self? Will it not be like a sleep in which we
dream without knowing what we dream? Who would wish for an eternal life
like that? To think without knowing that we think is not to be sensible
of ourselves, it is not to be ourselves. And is not eternal life perhaps
eternal consciousness, not only seeing God, but seeing that we see Him,
seeing ourselves at the same time and ourselves as distinct from Him? He
who sleeps lives, but he has no consciousness of himself; and would
anyone wish for an eternal sleep? When Circe advised Ulysses to descend
to the abode of the dead in order to consult the soothsayer Teiresias,
she told him that Teiresias alone among the shades of the dead was
possessed of understanding, for all the others flitted about like
shadows (_Odyssey_, x., 487-495). And can it be said that the others,
apart from Teiresias, had really overcome death? Is it to overcome death
to flit about like shadows without understanding?

And on the other hand, may we not imagine that possibly this earthly
life of ours is to the other life what sleep is to waking? May not all
our life be a dream and death an awakening? But an awakening to what?
And supposing that everything is but the dream of God and that God one
day will awaken? Will He remember His dream?

Aristotle, the rationalist, tells in his _Ethics_ of the superior
happiness of the contemplative life, _bios theôrêtikos_; and all
rationalists are wont to place happiness in knowledge. And the
conception of eternal happiness, of the enjoyment of God, as a beatific
vision, as knowledge and comprehension of God, is a thing of rationalist
origin, it is the kind of happiness that corresponds with the God-Idea
of Aristotelianism. But the truth is that, in addition to vision,
happiness demands delight, and this is a thing which has very little to
do, with rationalism and is only attainable when we feel ourselves
distinct from God.

Our Aristotelian Catholic theologian, the author of the endeavour to
rationalize Catholic feeling, St. Thomas Aquinas, tells us in his
_Summa_ (_prima secundæ partis, quæstio_ iv., _art_. i) that "delight is
requisite for happiness. For delight is caused by the fact of desire
resting in attained good. Hence, since happiness is nothing but the
attainment of the Sovereign Good, there cannot be happiness without
concomitant delight." But where is the delight of him who rests? To
rest, _requiescere_--is not that to sleep and not to possess even the
consciousness that one is resting? "Delight is caused by the vision of
God itself," the theologian continues. But does the soul feel itself
distinct from God? "The delight that accompanies the activity of the
understanding does not impede, but rather strengthens that activity," he
says later on. Obviously! for what happiness were it else? And in order
to save delectation, delight, pleasure, which, like pain, has always
something material in it, and which we conceive of only as existing in a
soul incarnate in a body, it was necessary to suppose that the soul in a
state of blessedness is united with its body. Apart from some kind of
body, how is delight possible? The immortality of the pure soul, without
some sort of body or spirit-covering, is not true immortality. And at
bottom, what we long for is a prolongation of this life, this life and
no other, this life of flesh and suffering, this life which we imprecate
at times simply because it comes to an end. The majority of suicides
would not take their lives if they had the assurance that they would
never die on this earth. The self-slayer kills himself because he will
not wait for death.

When in the thirty-third canto of the _Paradiso_, Dante relates how he
attained to the vision of God, he tells us that just as a man who
beholds somewhat in his sleep retains on awakening nothing but the
impression of the feeling in his mind, so it was with him, for when the
vision had all but passed away the sweetness that sprang from it still
distilled itself in his heart.

    _Cotal son to, che quasi tutta cessa
    mia visione ed ancor mi distilla
    nel cuor lo dulce che nacque da essa_

like snow that melts in the sun--

    _cosi la neve al sol si disigilla_.

That is to say, that the vision, the intellectual content, passes, and
that which remains is the delight, the _passione impressa_, the
emotional, the irrational--in a word, the corporeal.

What we desire is not merely spiritual felicity, not merely vision, but
delight, bodily happiness. The other happiness, the rationalist
_beatitude_, the happiness of being submerged in understanding, can
only--I will not say satisfy or deceive, for I do not believe that it
ever satisfied or deceived even a Spinoza. At the conclusion of his
_Ethic_, in propositions xxxv. and xxxvi. of the fifth part, Spinoza,
affirms that God loves Himself with an infinite intellectual love; that
the intellectual love of the mind towards God is the selfsame love with
which God loves Himself, not in so far as He is infinite, but in so far
as He can be manifested through the essence of the human mind,
considered under the form of eternity--that is to say, that the
intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the infinite love
with which God loves Himself. And after these tragic, these desolating
propositions, we are told in the last proposition of the whole book,
that which closes and crowns this tremendous tragedy of the _Ethic_,
that happiness is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself, and that
our repression of our desires is not the cause of our enjoyment of
virtue, but rather because we find enjoyment in virtue we are able to
repress our desires. Intellectual love! intellectual love! what is this
intellectual love? Something of the nature of a red flavour, or a bitter
sound, or an aromatic colour, or rather something of the same sort as a
love-stricken triangle or an enraged ellipse--a pure metaphor, but a
tragic metaphor. And a metaphor corresponding tragically with that
saying that the heart also has its reasons. Reasons of the heart! loves
of the head! intellectual delight! delicious intellection!--tragedy,
tragedy, tragedy!

And nevertheless there is something which may be called intellectual
love, and that is the love of understanding, that which Aristotle meant
by the contemplative life, for there is something of action and of love
in the act of understanding, and the beatific vision is the vision of
the total truth. Is there not perhaps at the root of every passion
something of curiosity? Did not our first parents, according to the
Biblical story, fall because of their eagerness to taste of the fruit of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and to be as gods, knowers
of this knowledge? The vision of God--that is to say, the vision of the
Universe itself, in its soul, in its inmost essence--would not that
appease all our longing? And this vision can fail to satisfy only men of
a gross mind who do not perceive that the greatest joy of man is to be
more man--that is, more God--and that man is more God the more
consciousness he has.

And this intellectual love, which is nothing but the so-called platonic
love, is a means to dominion and possession. There is, in fact, no more
perfect dominion than knowledge; he who knows something, possesses it.
Knowledge unites the knower with the known. "I contemplate thee and in
contemplating thee I make thee mine"--such is the formula. And to know
God, what can that be but to possess Him? He who knows God is thereby
himself God.

In _La Dégradation de l'énergie_ (iv^e partie, chap. xviii., 2) B.
Brunhes relates a story concerning the great Catholic mathematician
Cauchy, communicated to him by M. Sarrau, who had it from Père Gratry.
While Cauchy and Père Gratry were walking in the gardens of the
Luxumbourg, their conversation turned upon the happiness which those in
heaven would have in knowing at last, without any obscurity or
limitation, the truths which they had so long and so laboriously sought
to investigate on earth. In allusion to the study which Cauchy had made
of the mechanistic theory of the reflection of light, Père Gratry threw
out the suggestion that one on the greatest intellectual joys of the
great geometrician in the future life would be to penetrate into the
secret of light. To which Cauchy replied that it did not appear to him
to be possible to know more about this than he himself already knew,
neither could he conceive how the most perfect intelligence could arrive
at a clearer comprehension of the mystery of reflection than that
manifested in his own explanation of it, seeing that he had furnished a
mechanistic theory of the phenomenon. "His piety," Brunhes adds, "did
not extend to a belief that God Himself could have created anything
different or anything better."

From this narrative two points of interest emerge. The first is the idea
expressed in it as to what contemplation, intellectual love, or beatific
vision, may mean for men of a superior order of intelligence, men whose
ruling passion is knowledge; and the second is the implicit faith shown
in the mechanistic explanation of the world.

This mechanistic tendency of the intellect coheres with the well-known
formula, "Nothing is created, nothing is lost, everything is
transformed"--a formula by means of which it has been sought to
interpret the ambiguous principle of the conservation of energy,
forgetting that practically, for us, for men, energy is utilizable
energy, and that this is continually being lost, dissipated by the
diffusion of heat, and degraded, its tendency being to arrive at a
dead-level and homogeneity. That which has value, and more than value,
reality, for us, is the differential, which is the qualitative; pure,
undifferentiated quantity is for us as if it did not exist, for it does
not act. And the material Universe, the body of the Universe, would
appear to be gradually proceeding--unaffected by the retarding action of
living organisms or even by the conscious action of man--towards a state
of perfect stability, of homogeneity (_vide_ Brunhes, _op. cit._) For,
while spirit tends towards concentration, material energy tends towards
diffusion.

And may not this have an intimate relation with our problem? May there
not be a connection between this conclusion of scientific philosophy
with respect to a final state of stability and homogeneity and the
mystical dream of the apocatastasis? May not this death of the body of
the Universe be the final triumph of its spirit, of God?

It is manifest that there is an intimate relation between the religious
need of an eternal life after death and the conclusions--always
provisional--at which scientific philosophy arrives with respect to the
probable future of the material or sensible Universe. And the fact is
that just as there are theologians of God and the immortality of the
soul, so there are also those whom Brunhes calls (_op. cit._, chap.
xxvi., § 2) theologians of monism, and whom it would perhaps be better
to call atheologians, people who pertinaciously adhere to the spirit of
_a priori_ affirmation; and this becomes intolerable, Brunhes adds, when
they harbour the pretension of despising theology. A notable type of
these gentlemen may be found in Haeckel, who has succeeded in solving
the riddles of Nature!

These atheologians have seized upon the principle of the conservation of
energy, the "Nothing is created, nothing is lost, everything is
transformed" formula, the theological origin of which is seen in
Descartes, and have made use of it as a means whereby we are able to
dispense with God. "The world built to last," Brunhes comments,
"resisting all wear and tear, or rather automatically repairing the
rents that appear in it--what a splendid theme for oratorical
amplification! But these same amplifications which served in the
seventeenth century to prove the wisdom of the Creator have been used in
our days as arguments for those who presume to do without Him." It is
the old story: so-called scientific philosophy, the origin and
inspiration of which is fundamentally theological or religious, ending
in an atheology or irreligion, which is itself nothing else but theology
and religion. Let us call to mind the comments of Ritschl upon this
head, already quoted in this work.

To-day the last word of science, or rather of scientific philosophy,
appears to be that, by virtue of the degradation of energy, of the
predominance of irreversible phenomena, the material, sensible world is
travelling towards a condition of ultimate levelness, a kind of final
homogeneity. And this brings to our mind the hypothesis, not only so
much used but abused by Spencer, of a primordial homogeneity, and his
fantastic theory of the instability of the homogeneous. An instability
that required the atheological agnosticism of Spencer in order to
explain the inexplicable transition from the homogeneous to the
heterogeneous. For how, without any action from without, can any
heterogeneity emerge from perfect and absolute homogeneity? But as it
was necessary to get rid of every kind of creation, "the unemployed
engineer turned metaphysician," as Papini called him, invented the
theory of the instability of the homogeneous, which is more ... what
shall I say? more mystical, and even more mythological if you like, than
the creative action of God.

The Italian positivist, Roberto Ardigo, was nearer the mark when,
objecting to Spencer's theory, he said that the most natural supposition
was that things always were as they are now, that always there have been
worlds in process of formation, in the nebulous stage, worlds
completely formed and worlds in process of dissolution; that
heterogeneity, in short, is eternal. Another way, it will be seen, of
not solving the riddle.

Is this perhaps the solution? But in that case the Universe would be
infinite, and in reality we are unable to conceive a Universe that is
both eternal and limited such as that which served as the basis of
Nietzsche's theory of eternal recurrence. If the Universe must be
eternal, if within it and as regards each of its component worlds,
periods in which the movement is towards homogeneity, towards the
degradation of energy, must alternate with other periods in which the
movement is towards heterogeneity, then it is necessary that the
Universe should be infinite, that there should be scope, always and in
each world, for some action coming from without. And, in fact, the body
of God cannot be other than eternal and infinite.

But as far as our own world is concerned, its gradual
levelling-down--or, we might say, its death--appears to be proved. And
how will this process affect the fate of our spirit? Will it wane with
the degradation of the energy of our world and return to
unconsciousness, or will it rather grow according as the utilizable
energy diminishes and by virtue of the very efforts that it makes to
retard this degradation and to dominate Nature?--for this it is that
constitutes the life of the spirit. May it be that consciousness and its
extended support are two powers in contraposition, the one growing at
the expense of the other?

The fact is that the best of our scientific work, the best of our
industry (that part of it I mean--and it is a large part--that does not
tend to destruction), is directed towards retarding this fatal process
of the degradation of energy. And organic life, the support of our
consciousness, is itself an effort to avoid, so far as it is possible,
this fatal period, to postpone it.

It is useless to seek to deceive ourselves with pagan pæans in praise
of Nature, for as Leopardi, that Christian atheist, said with profound
truth in his stupendous poem _La Ginestra_, Nature "gives us life like a
mother, but loves us like a step-mother." The origin of human
companionship was opposition to Nature; it was horror of impious Nature
that first linked men together in the bonds of society. It is human
society, in effect, the source of reflective consciousness and of the
craving for immortality, that inaugurates the state of grace upon the
state of Nature; and it is man who, by humanizing and spiritualizing
Nature by his industry, supernaturalizes her.

In two amazing sonnets which he called _Redemption_, the tragic
Portuguese poet, Antero de Quental, embodied his dream of a spirit
imprisoned, not in atoms or ions or crystals, but--as is natural in a
poet--in the sea, in trees, in the forest, in the mountains, in the
wind, in all material individualities and forms; and he imagines that a
day may come when all these captive souls, as yet in the limbo of
existence, will awaken to consciousness, and, emerging as pure thought
from the forms that imprisoned them, they will see these forms, the
creatures of illusion, fall away and dissolve like a baseless vision. It
is a magnificent dream of the penetration of everything by
consciousness.

May it not be that the Universe, our Universe--who knows if there are
others?--began with a zero of spirit--and zero is not the same as
nothing--and an infinite of matter, and that its goal is to end with an
infinite of spirit and a zero of matter? Dreams!

May it be that everything has a soul and that this soul begs to be
freed?

    _Oh tierras de Alvargonzález,
    en el corazón de España,
    tierras pobres, tierras tristes,
    tan tristes que tienen alma!_

sings our poet Antonio Machado in his _Campos de Castilla_.[50] Is the
sadness of the field in the fields themselves or in us who look upon
them? Do they not suffer? But what can an individual soul in a world of
matter actually be? Is it the rock or the mountain that is the
individual? Is it the tree?

And nevertheless the fact always remains that spirit and matter are at
strife. This is the thought that Espronceda expressed when he wrote:

    _Aquí, para vivir en santa calma,
    o sobra la materia, o sobra el alma._[51]

And is there not in the history of thought, or of human imagination if
you prefer it, something that corresponds to this process of the
reduction of matter, in the sense of a reduction of everything to
consciousness?

Yes, there is, and its author is the first Christian mystic, St. Paul of
Tarsus, the Apostle of the Gentiles, he who because he had never with
his bodily eyes looked upon the face of the fleshly and mortal Christ,
the ethical Christ, created within himself an immortal and religious
Christ--he who was caught up into the third heaven and there beheld
secret and unspeakable things (2 Cor. xii.). And this first Christian
mystic dreamed also of a final triumph of spirit, of consciousness, and
this is what in theology is technically called the apocatastasis or
restitution.

In 1 Cor. xv. 26-28 he tells us that "the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death, for he hath put all things under his feet. But when
he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is
excepted, which did put all things under him. And when all things shall
be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto
him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all": _hina hê
ho theos panta en pasin_--that is to say, that the end is that God,
Consciousness, will end by being all in all.

This doctrine is completed by Paul's teaching, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, with regard to the end of the whole history of the world. In
this Epistle, as you know, he represents Christ--by whom "were all
things created, that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and
invisible" (Col. i. 16)--as the head over all things (Eph. i. 22), and
in him, in this head, we all shall be raised up that we may live in the
communion of saints and that we "may be able to comprehend with all
saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to
know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge" (Eph. iii. 18, 19).
And this gathering of us together in Christ, who is the head and, as it
were, the compendium, of Humanity, is what the Apostle calls the
gathering or collecting together or recapitulating of all things in
Christ, _anakephalaiôsthai ta panta en Christô_. And this
recapitulation--_anakephalaiôsis_, anacefaleosis--the end of the world's
history and of the human race, is merely another aspect of the
apocatastasis. The apocatastasis, God's coming to be all in all, thus
resolves itself into the anacefaleosis, the gathering together of all
things in Christ, in Humanity--Humanity therefore being the end of
creation. And does not this apocatastasis, this humanization or
divinization of all things, do away with matter? But if matter, which is
the principle of individuation, the scholastic _principium
individuationis_, is once done away with, does not everything return to
pure consciousness, which, in its pure purity, neither knows itself nor
is it anything that can be conceived or felt? And if matter be
abolished, what support is there left for spirit?

Thus a different train of thought leads us to the same difficulties, the
same unthinkabilities.

It may be said, on the other hand, that the apocatastasis, God's coming
to be all in all, presupposes that there was a time when He was not all
in all. The supposition that all beings shall attain to the enjoyment of
God implies the supposition that God shall attain to the enjoyment of
all beings, for the beatific vision is mutual, and God is perfected in
being better known, and His being is nourished and enriched with souls.

Following up the track of these wild dreams, we might imagine an
unconscious God, slumbering in matter, and gradually wakening into
consciousness of everything, consciousness of His own divinity; we might
imagine the whole Universe becoming conscious of itself as a whole and
becoming conscious of each of its constituent consciousnesses, becoming
God. But in that case, how did this unconscious God begin? Is He not
matter itself? God would thus be not the beginning but the end of the
Universe; but can that be the end which was not the beginning? Or can it
be that outside time, in eternity, there is a difference between
beginning and end? "The soul of all things cannot be bound by that very
thing--that is, matter--which it itself has bound," says Plotinus
(_Enn._ ii., ix. 7). Or is it not rather the Consciousness of the Whole
that strives to become the consciousness of each part and to make each
partial consciousness conscious of itself--that is, of the total
consciousness? Is not this universal soul a monotheist or solitary God
who is in process of becoming a pantheist God? And if it is not so, if
matter and pain are alien to God, wherefore, it will be asked, did God
create the world? For what purpose did He make matter and introduce
pain? Would it not have been better if He had not made anything? What
added glory does He gain by the creation of angels or of men whose fall
He must punish with eternal torment? Did He perhaps create evil for the
sake of remedying it? Or was redemption His design, redemption complete
and absolute, redemption of all things and of all men? For this
hypothesis is neither more rational nor more pious than the other.

In so far as we attempt to represent eternal happiness to ourselves, we
are confronted by a series of questions to which there is no
satisfactory--that is, rational--answer, and it matters not whether the
supposition from which we start be monotheist, or pantheist, or even
panentheist.

Let us return to the Pauline apocatastasis.

Is it not possible that in becoming all in all God completes Himself,
becomes at last fully God, an infinite consciousness embracing all
consciousnesses? And what is an infinite consciousness? Since
consciousness supposes limitation, or rather since consciousness is
consciousness of limitation, of distinction, does it not thereby exclude
infinitude? What value has the notion of infinitude applied to
consciousness? What is a consciousness that is all consciousness,
without anything outside it that is not consciousness? In such a case,
of what is consciousness the consciousness? Of its content? Or may it
not rather be that, starting from chaos, from absolute unconsciousness,
in the eternity of the past, we continually approach the apocatastasis
or final apotheosis without ever reaching it?

May not this apocatastasis, this return of all things to God, be rather
an ideal term to which we unceasingly approach--some of us with fleeter
step than others--but which we are destined never to reach? May not the
absolute and perfect eternal happiness be an eternal hope, which would
die if it were to be realized? Is it possible to be happy without hope?
And there is no place for hope when once possession has been realized,
for hope, desire, is killed by possession. May it not be, I say, that
all souls grow without ceasing, some in a greater measure than others,
but all having to pass some time through the same degree of growth,
whatever that degree may be, and yet without ever arriving at the
infinite, at God, to whom they continually approach? Is not eternal
happiness an eternal hope, with its eternal nucleus of sorrow in order
that happiness shall not be swallowed up in nothingness?

Follow more questions to which there is no answer. "He shall be all in
all," says the Apostle. But will His mode of being in each one be
different or will it be the same for all alike? Will not God be wholly
in one of the damned? Is He not in his soul? Is He not in what is called
hell? And in what sense is He in hell?

Whence arise new problems, those relating to the opposition between
heaven and hell, between eternal happiness and eternal unhappiness.

May it not be that in the end all shall be saved, including Cain and
Judas and Satan himself, as Origen's development of the Pauline
apocatastasis led him to hope?

When our Catholic theologians seek to justify rationally--or in other
words, ethically--the dogma of the eternity of the pains of hell, they
put forward reasons so specious, ridiculous, and childish, that it would
appear impossible that they should ever have obtained currency. For to
assert that since God is infinite, an offence committed against Him is
infinite also and therefore demands an eternal punishment, is, apart
from the inconceivability of an infinite offence, to be unaware that, in
human ethics, if not in the human police system, the gravity of the
offence is measured not by the dignity of the injured person but by the
intention of the injurer, and that to speak of an infinite culpable
intention is sheer nonsense, and nothing else. In this connection those
words which Christ addressed to His Father are capable of application:
"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do," and no man who
commits an offence against God or his neighbour knows what he does. In
human ethics, or if you like in human police regulations--that which is
called penal law and is anything but law[52] eternal punishment is a
meaningless phrase.

"God is just and punishes us; that is all we need to know; as far as we
are concerned the rest is merely curiosity." Such was the conclusion of
Lamennais (_Essai_, etc., iv^e partie, chap, vii.), an opinion shared by
many others. Calvin also held the same view. But is there anyone who is
content with this? Pure curiosity!--to call this load that wellnigh
crushes our heart pure curiosity!

May we not say, perhaps, that the evil man is annihilated because he
wished to be annihilated, or that he did not wish strongly enough to
eternalize himself because he was evil? May we not say that it is not
believing in the other life that makes a man good, but rather that being
good makes him believe in it? And what is being good and being evil?
These states pertain to the sphere of ethics, not of religion: or,
rather, does not the doing good though being evil pertain to ethics, and
the being good though doing evil to religion?

Shall we not perhaps be told, on the other hand, that if the sinner
suffers an eternal punishment, it is because he does not cease to
sin?--for the damned sin without ceasing. This, however, is no solution
of the problem, which derives all its absurdity from the fact that
punishment has been conceived as vindictiveness or vengeance, not as
correction, has been conceived after the fashion of barbarous peoples.
And in the same way hell has been conceived as a sort of police
institution, necessary in order to put fear into the world. And the
worst of it is that it no longer intimidates, and therefore will have to
be shut up.

But, on the other hand, as a religious conception and veiled in mystery,
why not--although the idea revolts our feelings--an eternity of
suffering? why not a God who is nourished by our suffering? Is our
happiness the end of the Universe? or may we possibly sustain with our
suffering some alien happiness? Let us read again in the _Eumenides_ of
that terrible tragedian, Æschylus, those choruses of the Furies in
which they curse the new gods for overturning the ancient laws and
snatching Orestes from their hands--impassioned invectives against the
Apollinian redemption. Does not redemption tear man, their captive and
plaything, from the hands of the gods, who delight and amuse themselves
in his sufferings, like children, as the tragic poet says, torturing
beetles? And let us remember the cry, "My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?"

Yes, why not an eternity of suffering? Hell is an eternalization of the
soul, even though it be an eternity of pain. Is not pain essential to
life?

Men go on inventing theories to explain what they call the origin of
evil. And why not the origin of good? Why suppose that it is good that
is positive and original, and evil that is negative and derivatory?
"Everything that is, in so far as it is, is good," St. Augustine
affirmed. But why? What does "being good" mean? Good is good for
something, conducive to an end, and to say that everything is good is
equivalent to saying that everything is making for its end. But what is
its end? Our desire is to eternalize ourselves, to persist, and we call
good everything that conspires to this end and bad everything that tends
to lessen or destroy our consciousness. We suppose that human
consciousness is an end and not a means to something else which may not
be consciousness, whether human or superhuman.

All metaphysical optimism, such as that of Leibnitz, and all
metaphysical pessimism, such as that of Schopenhauer, have no other
foundation than this. For Leibnitz this world is the best because it
conspires to perpetuate consciousness, and, together with consciousness,
will, because intelligence increases will and perfects it, because the
end of man is the contemplation of God; while for Schopenhauer this
world is the worst of all possible worlds, because it conspires to
destroy will, because intelligence, representation, nullifies the will
that begot it.

And similarly Franklin, who believed in another life, asserted that he
was willing to live this life over again, the life that he had actually
lived, "from its beginning to the end"; while Leopardi, who did not
believe in another life, asserted that nobody would consent to live his
life over again. These two views of life are not merely ethical, but
religious; and the feeling of moral good, in so far as it is a
teleological value, is of religious origin also.

And to return to our interrogations: Shall not all be saved, shall not
all be made eternal, and eternal not in suffering but in happiness,
those whom we call good and those whom we call bad alike?

And as regards this question of good and evil, does not the malice of
him who judges enter in? Is the badness in the intention of him who does
the deed or is it not rather in that of him who judges it to be bad? But
the terrible thing is that man judges himself, creates himself his own
judge.

Who then shall be saved? And now the imagination puts forth another
possibility--neither more nor less rational than all those which have
just been put forward interrogatively--and that is that only those are
saved who have longed to be saved, that only those are eternalized who
have lived in an agony of hunger for eternity and for eternalization. He
who desires never to die and believes that he shall never die in the
spirit, desires it because he deserves it, or rather, only he desires
personal immortality who carries his immortality within him. The man who
does not long passionately, and with a passion that triumphs over all
the dictates of reason, for his own immortality, is the man who does not
deserve it, and because he does not deserve it he does not long for it.
And it is no injustice not to give a man that which he does not know how
to desire, for "ask, and it shall be given you." It may be that to each
will be given that which he desired. And perhaps the sin against the
Holy Ghost--for which, according to the Evangelist, there is no
remission--is none other than that of not desiring God, not longing to
be made eternal.

    As is your sort of mind
    So is your sort of search; you'll find
    What you desire, and that's to be
    A Christian,

said Robert Browning in _Christmas Eve and Easter Day_.

In his _Inferno_ Dante condemned the Epicureans, those who did not
believe in another life, to something more terrible than the not having
it, and that is the consciousness of not having it, and this he
expressed in plastic form by picturing them shut up in their tombs for
all eternity, without light, without air, without fire, without
movement, without life (_Inferno_, x., 10-15).

What cruelty is there in denying to a man that which he did not or could
not desire? In the sixth book of his _Æneid_ (426-429) the gentle Virgil
makes us hear the plaintive voices and sobbing of the babes who weep
upon the threshold of Hades,

    _Continuo àuditæ voces, vagitus et ingens,
    Infantumque animæ flentes in limine primo,_

unhappy in that they had but entered upon life and never known the
sweetness of it, and whom, torn from their mothers' breasts, a dark day
had cut off and drowned in bitter death--

    _Quos dulcis vitæ exsortes et at ubere raptos
    Abstulit atra dies et funere mersit acerbo._

But what life did they lose, if they neither knew life nor longed for
it? And yet is it true that they never longed for it?

It may be said that others craved life on their behalf, that their
parents longed for them to be eternal to the end that they might be
gladdened by them in paradise. And so a fresh field is opened up for the
imagination--namely, the consideration of the solidarity and
representivity of eternal salvation.

There are many, indeed, who imagine the human race as one being, a
collective and solidary individual, in whom each member may represent or
may come to represent the total collectivity; and they imagine salvation
as something collective. As something collective also, merit, and as
something collective sin, and redemption. According to this mode of
feeling and imagining, either all are saved or none is saved; redemption
is total and it is mutual; each man is his neighbour's Christ.

And is there not perhaps a hint of this in the popular Catholic belief
with regard to souls in purgatory, the belief that the living may devote
suffrages and apply merits to the souls of their dead? This sense of the
transmission of merits, both to the living and the dead, is general in
popular Catholic piety.

Nor should it be forgotten that in the history of man's religious
thought there has often presented itself the idea of an immortality
restricted to a certain number of the elect, spirits representative of
the rest and in a certain sense including them; an idea of pagan
derivation--for such were the heroes and demi-gods--which sometimes
shelters itself behind the pronouncement that there are many that are
called and few that are chosen.

Recently, while I was engaged upon this essay, there came into my hands
the third edition of the _Dialogue sur la vie et sur la mort_, by
Charles Bonnefon, a book in which imaginative conceptions similar to
those that I have been setting forth find succinct and suggestive
expression. The soul cannot live without the body, Bonnefon says, nor
the body without the soul, and thus neither birth nor death has any real
existence--strictly speaking, there is no body, no soul, no birth, no
death, all of which are abstractions and appearances, but only a
thinking life, of which we form part and which can neither be born nor
die. Hence he is led to deny human individuality and to assert that no
one can say "I am" but only "we are," or, more correctly, "there is in
us." It is humanity, the species, that thinks and loves in us. And souls
are transmitted in the same way that bodies are transmitted. "The living
thought or the thinking life which we are will find itself again
immediately in a form analogous to that which was our origin and
corresponding with our being in the womb of a pregnant woman." Each of
us, therefore, has lived before and will live again, although he does
not know it. "If humanity is gradually raised above itself, when the
last man dies, the man who will contain all the rest of mankind in
himself, who shall say that he may not have arrived at that higher order
of humanity such as exists elsewhere, in heaven?... As we are all bound
together in solidarity, we shall all, little by little, gather the
fruits of our travail." According to this mode of imagining and
thinking, since nobody is born, nobody dies, no single soul has finished
its struggle but many times has been plunged into the midst of the human
struggle "ever since the type of embryo corresponding with the same
consciousness was represented in the succession of human phenomena." It
is obvious that since Bonnefon begins by denying personal individuality,
he leaves out of account our real longing, which is to save our
individuality; but on the other hand, since he, Bonnefon, is a personal
individual and feels this longing, he has recourse to the distinction
between the called and the chosen, and to the idea of representative
spirits, and he concedes to a certain number of men this representative
individual immortality. Of these elect he says that "they will be
somewhat more necessary to God than we ourselves." And he closes this
splendid dream by supposing that "it is not impossible that we shall
arrive by a series of ascensions at the supreme happiness, and that our
life shall be merged in the perfect Life as a drop of water in the sea.
Then we shall understand," he continues, "that everything was
necessary, that every philosophy and every religion had its hour of
truth, and that in all our wanderings and errors and in the darkest
moments of our history we discerned the light of the distant beacon, and
that we were all predestined to participate in the Eternal Light. And if
the God whom we shall find again possesses a body--and we cannot
conceive a living God without a body--we, together with each of the
myriads of races that the myriads of suns have brought forth, shall be
the conscious cells of his body. If this dream should be fulfilled, an
ocean of love would beat upon our shores and the end of every life would
be to add a drop of water to this ocean's infinity." And what is this
cosmic dream of Bonnefon's but the plastic representation of the Pauline
apocatastasis?

Yes, this dream, which has its origin far back in the dawn of
Christianity, is fundamentally the same as the Pauline anacefaleosis,
the fusion of all men in Man, in the whole of Humanity embodied in a
Person, who is Christ, and the fusion not only of all men but of all
things, and the subsequent subjection of all things to God, in order
that God, Consciousness, may be all in all. And this supposes a
collective redemption and a society beyond the grave.

In the middle of the eighteenth century, two pietists of Protestant
origin, Johann Jakob Moser and Friedrich Christoph Oetinger, gave a new
force and value to the Pauline anacefaleosis. Moser "declared that his
religion consisted not in holding certain doctrines to be true and in
living a virtuous life conformably therewith, but in being reunited to
God through Christ. But this demands the thorough knowledge--a knowledge
that goes on increasing until the end of life--of one's own sins and
also of the mercy and patience of God, the transformation of all natural
feelings, the appropriation of the atonement wrought by the death of
Christ, the enjoyment of peace with God in the permanent witness of the
Holy Spirit to the remission of sins, the ordering of life according to
the pattern of Christ, which is the fruit of faith alone, the drawing
near to God and the intercourse of the soul with Him, the disposition to
die in grace and the joyful expectation of the Judgement which will
bestow blessedness in the more intimate enjoyment of God and in the
_commerce with all the saints_" (Ritschl, _Geschichte des Pietismus_,
vol. iii., § 43). The commerce with all the saints--that is to say, the
eternal human society. And for his part, Oetinger considers eternal
happiness not as the contemplation of God in His infinitude, but, taking
the Epistle to the Ephesians as his authority, as the contemplation of
God in the harmony of the creature with Christ. The commerce with all
the saints was, according to him, essential to the content of eternal
happiness. It was the realization of the kingdom of God, which thus
comes to be the kingdom of Man. And in his exposition of these doctrines
of the two pietists, Ritschl confesses _(op. cit._, iii., § 46) that
both witnesses have with these doctrines contributed something to
Protestantism that is of like value with the theological method of
Spener, another pietist.

We see, therefore, that the Christian, mystical, inward longing ever
since St. Paul, has been to give human finality, or divine finality, to
the Universe, to save human consciousness, and to save it by converting
all humanity into a person. This longing is expressed in the
anacefaleosis, the gathering together of all things, all things in earth
and in heaven, the visible and the invisible, in Christ, and also in the
apocatastasis, the return of all things to God, to consciousness, in
order that God may be all in all. And does not God's being all in all
mean that all things shall acquire consciousness and that in this
consciousness everything that has happened will come to life again, and
that everything that has existed in time will be eternalized? And within
the all, all individual consciousnesses, those which have been, those
that are, and those that will be, and as they have been, as they are,
and as they will be, will exist in a condition of society and
solidarity.

But does not this awakening to consciousness of everything that has
been, necessarily involve a fusion of the identical, an amalgamation of
like things? In this conversion of the human race into a true society in
Christ, a communion of saints, a kingdom of heaven, will not individual
differences, tainted as they are with deceit and even with sin, be
obliterated, and in the perfect society will that alone remain of each
man which was the essential part of him? Would it not perhaps result,
according to Bonnefon's supposition, that this consciousness that lived
in the twentieth century in this corner of this earth would feel itself
to be the same with other such consciousnesses as have lived in other
centuries and perhaps in other worlds?

And how can we conceive of an effective and real union, a substantial
and intimate union, soul with soul, of all those who have been?

    If any two creatures grew into one
    They would do more than the world has done,

said Browning in _The Flight of the Duchess_; and Christ has told us
that where two or three are gathered together in His name, there is He
in the midst of them.

Heaven, then, so it is believed by many, is society, a more perfect
society than that of this world; it is human society fused into a
person. And there are not wanting some who believe that the tendency of
all human progress is the conversion of our species into one collective
being with real consciousness--is not perhaps an individual human
organism a kind of confederation of cells?--and that when it shall have
acquired full consciousness, all those who have existed will come to
life again in it.

Heaven, so many think, is society. Just as no one can live in isolation,
so no one can survive in isolation. No one can enjoy God in heaven who
sees his brother suffering in hell, for the sin and the merit were
common to both. We think with the thoughts of others and we feel with
the feelings of others. To see God when God shall be all in all is to
see all things in God and to live in God with all things.

This splendid dream of the final solidarity of mankind is the Pauline
anacefaleosis and apocatastasis. We Christians, said the Apostle (I Cor.
xii. 27) are the body of Christ, members of Him, flesh of His flesh and
bone of His bone (Eph. v. 30), branches of the vine.

But in this final solidarization, in this true and supreme
_Christination_ of all creatures, what becomes of each individual
consciousness? what becomes of Me, of this poor fragile I, this I that
is the slave of time and space, this I which reason tells me is a mere
passing accident, but for the saving of which I live and suffer and hope
and believe? Granting that the human finality of the Universe is saved,
that consciousness is saved, would I resign myself to make the sacrifice
of this poor I, by which and by which alone I know this finality and
this consciousness?

And here, facing this supreme religious sacrifice, we reach the summit
of the tragedy, the very heart of it--the sacrifice of our own
individual consciousness upon the altar of the perfected Human
Consciousness, of the Divine Consciousness.

But is there really a tragedy? If we could attain to a clear vision of
this anacefaleosis, if we could succeed in understanding and feeling
that we were going to enrich Christ, should we hesitate for a moment in
surrendering ourselves utterly to Him? Would the stream that flows into
the sea, and feels in the freshness of its waters the bitterness of the
salt of the ocean, wish to flow back to its source? would it wish to
return to the cloud which drew its life from the sea? is not its joy to
feel itself absorbed?

And yet....

Yes, in spite of everything, this is the climax of the tragedy.

And the soul, my soul at least, longs for something else, not
absorption, not quietude, not peace, not appeasement, it longs ever to
approach and never to arrive, it longs for a never-ending longing, for
an eternal hope which is eternally renewed but never wholly fulfilled.
And together with all this, it longs for an eternal lack of something
and an eternal suffering. A suffering, a pain, thanks to which it grows
without ceasing in consciousness and in longing. Do not write upon the
gate of heaven that sentence which Dante placed over the threshold of
hell, _Lasciate ogni speranza!_ Do not destroy time! Our life is a hope
which is continually converting itself into memory and memory in its
turn begets hope. Give us leave to live! The eternity that is like an
eternal present, without memory and without hope, is death. Thus do
ideas exist, but not thus do men live. Thus do ideas exist in the
God-Idea, but not thus can men live in the living God, in the God-Man.

An eternal purgatory, then, rather than a heaven of glory; an eternal
ascent. If there is an end of all suffering, however pure and
spiritualized we may suppose it to be, if there is an end of all desire,
what is it that makes the blessed in paradise go on living? If in
paradise they do not suffer for want of God, how shall they love Him?
And if even there, in the heaven of glory, while they behold God little
by little and closer and closer, yet without ever wholly attaining to
Him, there does not always remain something more for them to know and
desire, if there does not always remain a substratum of doubt, how shall
they not fall asleep?

Or, to sum up, if in heaven there does not remain something of this
innermost tragedy of the soul, what sort of a life is that? Is there
perhaps any greater joy than that of remembering misery--and to remember
it is to feel it--in time of felicity? Does not the prison haunt the
freed prisoner? Does he not miss his former dreams of liberty?

       *       *       *       *       *

Mythological dreams! it will be said. And I have not pretended that they
are anything else. But has not the mythological dream its content of
truth? Are not dream and myth perhaps revelations of an inexpressible
truth, of an irrational truth, of a truth that cannot be proven?

Mythology! Perhaps; but, as in the days of Plato, we must needs
mythologize when we come to deal with the other life. But we have just
seen that whenever we seek to give a form that is concrete, conceivable,
or in other words, rational, to our primary, primordial, and fundamental
longing for an eternal life conscious of itself and of its personal
individuality, esthetic, logical, and ethical absurdities are multiplied
and there is no way of conceiving the beatific vision and the
apocatastasis that is free from contradictions and inconsistencies.

And nevertheless!...

Nevertheless, yes, we must needs long for it, however absurd it may
appear to us; nay, more, we must needs believe in it, in some way or
another, in order that we may live. In order that we may live, eh? not
in order that we may understand the Universe. We must needs believe in
it, and to believe in it is to be religious. Christianity, the only
religion which we Europeans of the twentieth century are really capable
of feeling, is, as Kierkegaard said, a desperate sortie (_Afsluttende
uvidenskabelig Efterskrift_, ii., i., cap. i.), a sortie which can be
successful only by means of the martyrdom of faith, which is, according
to this same tragic thinker, the crucifixion of reason.

Not without reason did he who had the right to do so speak of the
foolishness of the cross. Foolishness, without doubt, foolishness. And
the American humorist, Oliver Wendell Holmes, was not altogether wide of
the mark in making one of the characters in his ingenious conversations
say that he thought better of those who were confined in a lunatic
asylum on account of religious mania than of those who, while professing
the same religious principles, kept their wits and appeared to enjoy
life very well outside of the asylums.[53] But those who are at large,
are they not really, thanks to God, mad too? Are there not mild
madnesses, which not only permit us to mix with our neighbours without
danger to society, but which rather enable us to do so, for by means of
them we are able to attribute a meaning and finality to life and society
themselves?

And after all, what is madness and how can we distinguish it from
reason, unless we place ourselves outside both the one and the other,
which for us is impossible?

Madness perhaps it is, and great madness, to seek to penetrate into the
mystery of the Beyond; madness to seek to superimpose the
self-contradictory dreams of our imagination upon the dictates of a sane
reason. And a sane reason tells us that nothing can be built up without
foundations, and that it is not merely an idle but a subversive task to
fill the void of the unknown with fantasies. And nevertheless....

We must needs believe in the other life, in the eternal life beyond the
grave, and in an individual and personal life, in a life in which each
one of us may feel his consciousness and fed that it is united, without
being confounded, with all other consciousnesses in the Supreme
Consciousness, in God; we must needs believe in that other life in order
that we may live this life, and endure it, and give it meaning and
finality. And we must needs believe in that other life, perhaps, in
order that we may deserve it, in order that we may obtain it, for it may
be that he neither deserves it nor will obtain it who does not
passionately desire it above reason and, if need be, against reason.

And above all, we must feel and act as if an endless continuation of
our earthly life awaited us after death; and if it be that nothingness
is the fate that awaits us we must not, in the words of _Obermann_, so
act that it shall be a just fate.

And this leads us directly to the examination of the practical or
ethical aspect of our sole problem.

FOOTNOTES:

[47] _De natura deorum_, lib. i., cap. 41.

[48] _Op. cit._

[49] _Guía Espiritual que desembaraza al alma y la conduce por el
interior camino para alcanzar la perfecta contemplación y el rico tesoro
de la paz interior_, book iii., chap. xviii., § 185.

[50]

    O land of Alvargonzález,
    In the heart of Spain,
    Sad land, poor land,
    So sad that it has a soul!

[51]

    To living a life of blessed quiet here on earth,
    Either matter or soul is a hindrance.

[52] Eso que llaman derecho penal, y que es todo menos derecho.

[53] _The Autocrat of the Breakfast-table._




