Chapter II. Freedom Of Teaching And The State.


Close bonds of mutual dependence and solidarity interlink all created
beings, especially men. Insufficient in himself, both physically and
mentally, man finds in uniting with others everything he needs; thus do
individuals and families join forces, generations join hands; what the
fathers have earned is inherited and increased by new generations. Human
life is essentially social life and co-operation—in the indefinite form
social life within the great human society, in the definite form social
life within the two great bodies, Church and state. Within both bodies
human benefits are to be attained and protected against danger by common
exertion—within the Church the spiritual benefits of eternal character,
within the state the temporal benefits.

Hence both bodies, or societies, will have to take a position in relation
to science and its doctrine. Indeed, in civilized nations there is hardly
a public activity of mightier influence upon life than science. The
contemplation of this position shall now be our task.

Science, as we have above set forth, addresses itself to mankind—a
fallible science addressing itself to men easily deceived; therefore, an
unrestricted freedom in teaching is ethically inadmissible. Hence it
follows, as a matter of course, that the authorities of state and Church,
who must guard the common benefits, have the duty of keeping the freedom
in scientific teaching within its proper bounds, so far as this lies in
their power. Hitherto we have left these social authorities out of
consideration; the position taken was the general ethical one.

The case might be supposed that the Church had provided few restrictions
of this kind, and the state none at all; nevertheless, an absolute freedom
in teaching would still present a condition dangerous to the community at
large, contrary to the demands of morality; we should then have an
unrestricted freedom in teaching, permitted by law, but ethically
inadmissible.

The distinction is important. Quite often freedom in teaching is spoken of
as permitted by the state, as if it was identical with ethical permission.
If freedom in teaching is permitted by the state, this evidently means
only that the state permits teaching without interference on its part; it
says, I do not stand in the way, I let things proceed. But this does not
mean that it is right and proper. The burden of personal responsibility
rests upon him who avails himself of a freedom which, though not hindered
by the state, is in conflict with what is right. The state tolerates many
things—it does not interfere against unkindness, nor against extravagance,
nor deceit; nevertheless everybody is morally responsible for such doings.

If, then, we take up the question, what position social authority should
take toward scientific teaching, whether it be in the higher schools, or
outside of them, we are considering chiefly the state. It is the state
that enters most into consideration when freedom in teaching nowadays is
discussed; the state may interfere most effectively in the management of
schools and universities, for these are state institutions in most
countries.



Universities as State Institutions.


They were not always state institutions. The universities of the Middle
Ages were autonomous corporations, which constituted themselves, made
their own statutes, had their own courts, but enjoyed at the same time
legal rights. Conditions gradually changed after the Reformation. The
power of princes began more and more to interfere in the management of the
universities, until in the seventeenth century, and still more in the
eighteenth, the universities became state institutions, subject to the
reigning sovereign, the professors his salaried officials, and text-books,
subject and form of instruction were prescribed by the minute, paternal
directions of the sovereign, and with the mania for regulating that was a
feature of the eighteenth century. The nineteenth century brought more
liberty; it was demanded by the enlarged scope of universities, which no
longer were only the training schools for the learned professions, but
became the home of research, needing freedom of movement.

Nevertheless, universities are in many countries still state institutions.
They are founded by the state, are given organization and laws by the
state; the teachers are appointed and given their commissions by the
state. They are state officials, though less under government supervision
than other state officials. At the same time these universities are
possessed of a certain measure of autonomy, a remainder of olden times.
They elect their academic authorities, which have some autonomy and
disciplinary jurisdiction. Likewise the separate faculties have their
powers; they confer degrees, administer their benefices, and exert
considerable influence in filling vacant chairs.

The state then considers it its duty to grant freedom in teaching.
“Science and its teaching are free,” says the law in some countries. No
doubt a loosely drawn sentence; at any rate, it means that science should
be granted the _proper_ freedom. And this freedom it must have. We have
become more sensitive of unjustified paternal government than were the
people of the eighteenth century.



The Object of the State.


What kind of a freedom in teaching, then, should be granted by the state?
Unlimited freedom? This is, at any rate, not a necessary conclusion. The
state must also grant freedom to the father for the education of his
children, to the landowner for the culture of his fields, to the artist in
the production of his works; but that freedom would not be understood to
be an unlimited one, having no regard to the interests of society, but
merely as the exclusion of unwarranted interference. Hence if the state,
for reasons of the commonwealth, were to restrict freedom of teaching, the
restraint could not be considered unjust. The purpose of the state must
not suffer injury; to attain this purpose the state has the right to
demand, and must demand, all that is necessary to the purpose in view,
even though it entails a restriction of somebody’s freedom. Now for a
definition of this purpose of the state.

Like any other society, the state seeks to attain a definite object, so
much the more because the state is necessary to man, who otherwise would
have to forego the things most needed in life; and but for the public
co-operation of the many these could be attained not at all, or at least
not sufficiently. To provide these things is the object of the state,
viz., the public welfare of the citizens; it is to bring about public
conditions which will enable the citizens to attain their temporal
welfare. To this end the state must protect the rights of its subjects,
and must protect and promote the public goods of economic life, but
especially the spiritual benefits of morals and religion. The state,
through its legislative, judicial, and executive functions, is to _direct_
effectively the community to this end; therefore it is incumbent upon the
state to care for the preservation and promotion of both material and
spiritual benefits, for the protection of private rights, and for the
conditions necessary to its own existence, even against the arbitrary will
of its subjects.



Protection for the Spiritual Foundations of Life.


From this the conclusion naturally follows, that the state must not grant
freedom to propound in public, by speech or writing, theories that will
_endanger the religious and moral goods of its citizens and the foundation
of the state_.

We claim that the state neglects a solemn duty if it permits without
hindrance—we will not say, the ridicule and disparagement of religion and
morals: the less so, as freedom to ridicule and to slander has nothing to
do with freedom in teaching—but the public promulgation of theories which
are either irreligious, or against morals, or against the state. Even
though they be done in scientific form, injuries to the common weal remain
injuries, and they do not change into something else by being committed in
scientific form. The state must seek to prevent such injuries by strictly
enforced penalties and by the selection of conscientious teachers. The
enforcement of the principle may not be possible under circumstances,
legislatures may lack insight or good will, or the complexion of the state
may not admit of it for the time being, or permanently. Then we would
simply see a regrettable condition, a government incapable of ridding
itself of the morbid matter which is poisoning its marrow. But if there is
good will and energy, one thing may always be done to check injurious
influences, and that is the awakening and employment of forces of
opposition.


    The University of Halle is said to have been the first one to
    enjoy modern freedom in teaching. What, at that time, however, was
    meant by freedom in teaching, is shown by the words of _Chr.
    Thomasius_ in 1694: “Thank God that He has prompted His Anointed
    (the prince) not to introduce here the yoke under which many are
    now and then languishing, but gracefully to grant our teachers the
    freedom of doctrines _that are not against God and the state_.”
    One hundred and fifty years later Minister _Eichhorn_ advised the
    University of Koenigsberg that in natural sciences neither the
    individual freedom in teaching nor of research are limited, that
    the case is different, however, with philosophy as applied to
    life, with history, theology, and the science of laws. “The first
    requisite there,” he said, “is a proper bent of mind, which,
    however, can find its basis and its lasting support only in
    religion. With the proper bent of mind there will be no desire to
    teach doctrines which attack the roots of the very life of one’s
    own country.”


Now, what considerations make it plain that the duty of the state is as
stated? Two: consideration for its subjects, and consideration for the
state itself. The state must protect the highest _possessions of its
citizens_. For that reason men are by nature itself prompted to found
states, so as to protect better their common goods, by the strong hand of
an authority, against foes from within and without, and to enable them to
bequeath those goods inviolate to their sons and grandsons. Hence they
must demand of state-power not to tolerate conditions which would greatly
jeopardize those goods, and certainly not to allow attacks thereon by its
own educational organs. The highest spiritual benefits of civilization,
and at the same time the necessary foundations of a well-ordered life,
are, first of all, morality and religion; not morality alone, but also
religion, do not forget this. Man’s first duty is the duty of worshipping
God, of recognizing and worshipping his Creator, the ultimate end of all
things. A profound truth was stated by _Aristotle_, when, coupling the
duties to God with those to parents, he said that those merit punishment
who question the duty of worshipping the gods and of loving one’s parents.
Hence the first thing to be preserved to the nations is religion; it is in
many ways their most precious possession, too. Not only do all nations
possess religion, not excepting the most uncivilized; but there is no
power that influences life and stirs the heart more than religion.
Consider the religious wars of history; while they were surely deplorable,
they demonstrate what religion is to man. Even in individuals who to all
appearance are irreligious, religion never fully dies out; it appears
there in false forms, or is their great puzzle, maybe the incubus of their
lives, giving them no rest. Only in conjunction with firm religious
principle can morality stand fast. Nowadays they work for ethics without
religion, for education and school without God. Theoreticians in their
four walls, removed from all real life, are busily working out systems of
this sort. This new ethics has not yet stood the test of life, or, if it
did, it has succeeded in gaining for its adherents only those who are at
odds with religion and morals. These theories must first be otherwise
attested before they may replace the old, well-tried religious
foundations.


    The noted and justly esteemed pedagogue, _Fr. W. Foerster_,
    writes: “On the part of free-thinkers vigorous complaint has been
    made that my book so decidedly confesses the unparalleled
    pedagogic strength of the Christian religion. The author therefore
    repeats emphatically that this confession has not grown out of an
    arbitrary metaphysical mood, but directly out of his
    moral-pedagogic studies. For over ten years of a long period of
    instructing the youth in ethics, he has been engaged exclusively
    in studying psychologically the problem of character-forming, and
    the result of his studies is his conviction that all attempts at
    educating youth without religion are absolutely futile. And, in
    the judgment of the author, the only reason why the notion that
    religion is superfluous in education is prevalent in such large
    circles of modern pedagogues, is, that they have no extensive
    practical experience in character-training, nor made thorough and
    concentrated studies.” “The fact is, that all education in which
    religion to all outward appearance is dispensed with, is still
    deeply influenced by the after-effect of religious sanction and
    religious earnestness. What education without religion really
    means will become more clearly known in the coming generation.”


The state is zealous in protecting the property of its citizens, to which
end a powerful police apparatus is constantly at work. If the state deems
it its duty to interfere in this matter, must it not consider it a still
higher duty to protect religion and morals, for the very reason that they
are the property of its citizens, and even their most precious? _Pro aris
et focis_, for home and altar, was what was fought for by the old Romans.
Is it possible that a pagan government was more sterling and high-minded
than the Christian state of the present? If it is to be the bearer of
civilization, it ought to consider that man liveth not by bread alone. The
only true mental civilization is the one which does not hamper but helps
man in attaining his eternal goal.

Modern state power is being urged from all sides to take measures against
the corruption of morals by the novel and the shop window, and not to look
on apathetically when the consuming fire is spreading all about, in the
name of art. Are the dangers to the spiritual health of society any less
if reformers, in the name of science, shake at the foundations of
matrimony, advocate polygamy, teach atheism? Because a so-called reformer
has lost the fundamental truths of our moral-religious order, must all the
rest submit to an attack upon the sacred possessions of themselves and
their descendants?


    That the rights of the teacher are not unrestricted was set forth
    by an American paper (“Science,” No. 321) in its comment upon the
    removal of certain professors: “There are barriers set to them on
    the one hand by the rights of the students, and by the rights of
    the college where he teaches, on the other. The college must
    preserve its reputation and its good name, the student must be
    protected against palpable errors and waste of time.... If a
    professor of sociology should attack the institution of matrimony,
    and propound the gospel of polygamy and of free love, then neither
    the right to teach his views nor his honesty of purpose would save
    him from dismissal. This is of course a very extreme case, not
    likely to happen.”

    Is it so very extreme? Certainly not in regard to teaching by
    books. Listen: “From the foregoing it is self-evident that
    polygyny based upon the rivalry of men for women (analogous to the
    animal kingdom) presents the natural sexual practice of mankind.
    Whether there is to be preferred a simultaneous or a successive
    polygyny, or a combination of both, would depend on varying
    conditions. The ethical type of the sexual condition, viz., in
    general the desirable biological type, is the one that would best
    suit a polygyny based upon a selection of man.” It is taught
    further: “The monogamic principle of marriage in general is only
    conditionally favorable to civilization, whereas it is destructive
    of it constitutionally, hence in need of reform.” “Our
    contemporaneous sexual reform wave has not yet assumed the
    position of this knowledge; on the contrary, notwithstanding its
    revolutionary aspect in some particulars, it is still under the
    ban of the traditional ideal of marriage”; continence before
    marriage is an “absurd” proposition!

    This new system of morals, fit for the barnyard, but for women the
    lowest degradation, is now to become the ideal of men, nay, even
    of women: “True motherly pride, true womanly dignity, are
    incompatible with the exclusiveness of the monogamic property
    principle. If our movement for sexual reform is to elevate us
    instead of plunging us into the mire, then this view must become
    part and parcel of our women.” “The picture of the motherly woman,
    of the woman with the pride of sexual modesty, instead of with the
    exciting desire of possession ... this picture must become the
    ideal of men, and sink down to the bottom of their soul and into
    the fibres of their nervous system; it must animate their fancy
    and awaken their sensual passions.”(20) We stand right in the
    midst of the world of beasts!

    This perilous moral teaching is allowed also in public lectures.
    On November 14, 1908, the “Allgemeine Rundschau” wrote: “Imagine a
    spacious concert-hall, brightly illuminated, every one of the many
    seats occupied, the boxes filled to the last place, the aisles
    crowded, by a most variegated audience: men and women, young
    maidens, youths with downy beard; gentlemen of high rank with
    their ladies, faces upon which are written a life of vast
    experience side by side with childish faces whose innocence is
    betrayed by their looks, and on the platform a university
    professor and physician, holding forth about the most intimate
    relations of sexual life: the unfitness of celibacy, the Catholic
    morals of matrimony, prostitution and prostitutes, the causes of
    adultery, ‘sterile marriage,’ onanism, and many kinds of
    perversities. The man is, moreover, speaking in a fashion that
    makes one forget the admonishments of conscience.”

    The city council of Lausanne, in its meeting of February 10, 1907,
    prohibited _Forel’s_ lecture as an attack upon decency and public
    morals, making reference in its resolution to _Forel’s_ ideas as
    laid down in his book. In protest, _Forel_ made a public
    statement, saying among other things: “If the council desires to
    be logical it would have to prohibit also the sale of my book.” We
    have no objection to make to his conclusion.


We stated that religion is man’s first duty. This applies not only to the
individual, but also—and this is forgotten too often—to the state. Man, by
his nature, and hence in all forms of his life, including his citizenship,
is obliged to have religion. He remains in all conditions the creature
which is dependent upon God. And does not the state, too, owe special
duties of gratitude to God? It owes its origin to God: the impulse to
found states has been put into the human nature by its Creator; the state
owes to God the foundation of its authority: in a thousand difficulties
the state is thrown upon His help. Therefore a public divine service is
found with all peoples. Does the state comply with this duty by silently
supporting a public atheism when it might do otherwise? by even becoming
its patron, when, posing as science, it ascends to the lecturing desk to
teach adolescing youth?

Of course, free-thought is of a different opinion, especially the one of
to-day. Its principle is: the state need not trouble itself about God and
Religion, that is the private matter of each individual. In the eyes of
free-thought the state is an imaginary being, hovering over the heads of
its citizens; though they may be religious, the state itself should have
no Religion. What absurdity! It is nothing short of nonsense to demand of
the members of a state, the overwhelming majority of whom hold Religion to
be true and necessary, that as a political community they are to act as if
their Religion were false and worthless, as if to deny and to destroy it
were quite proper. What else is the state but an organized aggregation of
its citizens? To make of religious citizens, a state without Religion is
just as absurd as a Catholic state composed wholly and entirely of
Protestant citizens. This leads us to a further consideration. The state
must protect its own foundations. Just as it must defend its existence
against enemies from without, it must protect itself against those enemies
from within, who, whether realizing the consequences or not, are by their
actions actually shaking its foundations. These foundations consist of
proper views on social and political principles, on morals and Religion.
If the state does not intend to abolish itself, it must not permit
doctrines to be disseminated which imperil these foundations and,
consequently, the peaceful continuance of the state. In fact, no state
power in its senses would permit a teacher, who directly attacks the
validity of the state order, to continue; it would retire every professor
of law who would dare to teach that regicide is permissible, or who would
with the oratory of a Tolstoy preach the unnaturalness of a state
possessing coercive power.


    As a rule, open advocates of _Socialism_ are kept out of
    college-chairs. And rightly so. So long as the adherents of
    Socialism see in the state but the product of the egotism of the
    ruling classes, and an institute for subjugating the masses, and
    in the obtainment of political power the means of doing away with
    this state of affairs, so long will it be impossible for the state
    to trust the education of the future citizen to a Socialist, nor
    can the latter, as an honest man, accept a position of trust from
    the state, much less bind himself by the oath of office to
    co-operate in the work of the state. Prof. _C. Bornhak_ makes the
    following comment: “The decisive point is not freedom in teaching,
    but the circumstance that the Socialist professor takes advantage
    of the respect connected with a state office, or of his position
    at a state institution, to undermine the state. A state that would
    stand for this would deserve nothing better than its abolition.”

    And _Paulsen_ similarly writes: “A state that would allow in the
    lecture rooms of its colleges Socialistic views to be taught as
    the results of science ... such a state will be looked for in
    vain.”


Hence it is certain the state cannot grant a freedom in teaching that
would jeopardize the foundation of its existence. It must consequently
recognize no freedom which, in lectures and publications, will seriously
injure public morality and religion. Morality and religion are, first of
all, the indispensable conditions for the continuance of the state.


    _Aristotle_ says the first duty of the state is to care for
    religion. _Plato_ proposes heavy penalty for those who deny the
    existence of the gods; a well-ordered state, he claims, must care
    first of all for the fostering of religion. _Plutarch_ calls
    religion the bond of every society and the foundation of the law.
    _Cicero_ declares that there can be neither loyalty nor justice
    without regard for God. _Valerius Maximus_ could say of Rome: “It
    has ever been the principle of our city to give preference to
    religion before any other matter, even before the highest and most
    glorious benefits.” _Washington_, in his speech to Congress in
    1789, declared religion and morality to be the most indispensable
    support of the commonweal. He stated that it would be in vain for
    one, who tries to wreck these two fundamental pillars of the
    social structure, to boast of his patriotism.


Without religion there can be no firm resistance by conscience against
man’s lower nature, no social virtues and sacrifices, there can only be
egotism, the foe of all social order. No secure state-life can be built
upon the principles that formed the basis of the French Revolution. So we
see, generally and instinctively, the endeavour to prevent as much as
possible anti-religious doctrines from being expounded directly to the
broad masses of the people. This of itself is tantamount to the
acknowledgment of their danger to the state. Yet, millions have tasted the
fruit of an atheistic science, and the poison shows its effect; they have
shaken off the yoke of religion; in its place dissatisfaction and
bitterness are filling their breast, and fists are clenched against the
existing order.


    _Bebel_ said in a speech in the German Reichstag, on September 16,
    1878: “Gentlemen, you attack our views in respect to religion,
    because they are atheistic and materialistic. I acknowledge them
    to be so.... I firmly believe Socialism will ultimately lead to
    atheism. But these atheistic doctrines, that now are causing so
    much pain and trouble for you, by whom were they scientifically
    and philosophically demonstrated? Was it by Socialists? Men like
    _Edgar_ and _Bruno_, _Bauer_, _Feuerbach_, _David Strauss_, _Ernst
    Renan_, were they Socialists? They were men of science.... What is
    allowed to the one—why should it be forbidden to the other?”

    The notorious anarchist _Vaillant_ said: “I have demonstrated to
    the physicians at Hotel-Dieu that my deed is the inexorable
    consequence of my philosophy, and of the philosophy of _Buechner_,
    _Darwin_, and _Herbert Spencer_.”

    The youthful criminal _Emil Herny_ read at his trial a memorandum
    wherein he said among other things: “I am an anarchist since 1891.
    Up to this time I was wont to esteem and even to idolize my
    country, the family, the state, and property.... Socialism is not
    able to change the present order. It upholds the principle of
    authority which, all affirmations of so-called free-thinkers
    notwithstanding, is an obsolete remnant of the belief in a higher
    power. I however was a materialist, atheist. My scientific
    researches taught me gradually the work of natural forces. I
    conceived that science had done away with the hypothesis of ‘God,’
    which it needs no longer, hence that also the
    religious-authoritative doctrine of morals, built upon it, as upon
    a false foundation, had to disappear.”


What political wisdom would it be to honor as science any doctrine that
becomes a social danger the moment it is taken seriously; what logic to
denounce those as dangerous who are putting into practice a science that
is hailed as the bearer of civilization!

One may object: How is the state to determine whether scientific doctrines
are warranted or not warranted? The state has the conviction that in its
political offices it has no organs for the cognition of scientific truth,
for this reason it leaves science to self-regulation. Only the scientist,
it is said, is able to revise the scientist.

Nothing but scholarly conceit can engender such ideas. Then any one would
have the right to pin upon himself the badge of the scientist and become
thereby completely immune. Thus, the bearers of practical political wisdom
are declared incompetent to recognize the chief foundation of their
state-structure; to realize, what daily experience and the experience of
centuries teaches, that disbelief in God, even if sailing under false
colors, undermines authority, that communism and upheaval of moral
conceptions are tantamount to social danger. They are directed to depend
for their information in such matters upon the latest ideas of impractical
scientists. The fact is, the matters at issue have, with hardly an
exception, long been decided. And where the Christian faith is concerned,
the Church and the Christian centuries tell us clearly enough, what has
hitherto been understood by Christianity. If the objection here advanced
were true, then the state would not have a right to decide in the matter
of exhibiting immoral pictures in show windows, without having argued the
matter previously with representatives of art. The state would not be
allowed to pronounce a death sentence because some scientists denounce
capital punishment: the state would have to expunge “guilt,” “expiation,”
and “liberty” from its penal code, because many recent scientists, by
rejecting the freedom of choice, have removed the dividing line between
crime and insanity, between punishment and correction.



Protection for Christianity.


Hitherto we have, in respect to religion, considered chiefly the rational
truths, which are the foundations of every religion and also common to
non-Christian creeds; the existence of a supermundane God and of a life
after death are the most important of them. The revealed Christian
religion contains, beside these truths, some others, which supplement them
and surround them like a living garland, viz., original sin, redemption,
resurrection, the divinity of Christ, grace and the Sacraments, the
existence of a Church with its God-given rights, indissolubility of
matrimony, etc. Should state-power protect the Christian and Catholic
religion by warding off attacks against it, though such attacks are made
in scientific form? This, too, in a state in which perhaps other
confessions are enjoying the freedom of worship?


    It would seem superfluous to propose this question specifically.
    If, according to the gist of our argument, religion is to be
    protected, what other religion can be meant than the Christian
    religion? That is the religion of our nations; none other is.
    While the stated distinction may have more of an academic than a
    practical interest, the discussion of this question will not be
    idle, if only for the reason that it will shed even more light
    upon our previous statements. Besides, there are manifest efforts
    to dislodge Christianity from the life of our people, and with it
    all true religion, under the pretext of opposing church-doctrines
    and dogmatism. The war against Christianity has not since the days
    of a _Celsus_ been waged as it is to-day.


We premise a principle of a general nature. Of conflicting religions and
views of the world, only one can be true; this is clear to every one who
still believes in truth. It is equally clear that this one truth only can
have the right to come forward and to enlist support in public life as a
spiritual power; error has no right to prevail against truth. Hence it
will not do to say simply: There are also the convictions of minorities in
the state; some claim that none of the existing religions is the right
one, others have dropped all belief in God; in our times we wish to
concede to any conviction the right to enter into competition with others,
provided mockery and abuse are barred. These remarks are quite true, in
the sense that neither the individual nor the state may directly interfere
with conscience or prescribe opinions: leaving entirely aside the question
whether any one really could have a serious conviction of atheism. The
foregoing is true also in the sense that public avowal of opinion must not
be hindered by individuals. To interpret this to mean that the state must
grant freedom to any expression of doctrine would be a grave misconception
of the social influence which false ideas are liable to exercise. Does the
state grant this freedom to any kind of medical practice, whether
exercised skilfully or awkwardly, conscientiously or unscrupulously?

Moral-religious error may in public life expect only _tolerance_—just as
many other evils must be tolerated, because their prevention would cause
greater evils to arise. This is the reason why the state may, and often
must, grant freedom of worship even to false creeds, because its denial
would give rise to greater harm to the public weal (_St. Thomas_, 2, 2 q.
10, 11). Freedom of teaching, likewise, must not be granted in the sense
of acknowledging that false doctrines and truth have equal rights; this
would amount to an assassination of truth. Freedom can be conceded to
error for the one reason only, that by not granting it there would be
engendered greater evils. Consequently, if a state-power, or the organs of
its legislative part, are convinced that the Christian religion is the
only true one, they cannot possibly concede to contrary doctrines the
right to pose as the truth and thus deceive minds; they may be granted the
same freedom in teaching only because restrictive laws can either not be
enforced at all, or not without creating a disorder that would give rise
to greater evils. Hence the lesser evil must be carefully ascertained.

With this general principle in mind, it is easily seen that a freedom
large enough to include an open attack on the fundamental, rational,
truths of religion and morals—this having been our subject hitherto—could
be conceded only if disbelief and atheism had gained so much power as to
make impossible its prohibition. In this case, however, the state should
be conscious of the fact that it allows the undermining of its
foundations. If, in another state, religious feeling were at so low an
ebb, that the freedom of the Christian truth could not be obtained in any
other way than by granting full freedom for everything, then even such
unlimited freedom would be a good thing to be striven for; of itself a
deplorable condition and contrary to God’s intentions, but good as the
lesser evil.

But let us return to the revealed religion. In the eyes of those who are
convinced that the Christian religion, namely, the Catholic religion, is
the only true religion, the ideal condition would be to have the entire
population united in its faithful confession; then matters would simplify
themselves in our case. But this ideal hardly exists anywhere. True, in
many countries the population is almost wholly Christian; but the
denominations are mixed, and many have separated at heart from
Christianity. What standards, then, should rule in this case?

Looking at it specially, the demand of ethical reason is no doubt this:
Nations and governments whose past was Christian, whose institutions and
civilization are still Christian, and an overwhelming majority of whose
members still think and believe in a Christian way, would fail in their
gravest duties if they would expose or permit the Christian religion to
remain unprotected against the attacks and the attempts at destruction by
a false science, or by conceding to the adversaries of Christianity equal
rights or even preference. The Christian religion will not be destroyed;
but whole nations may lose it, and its loss will in great measure be the
fault of those in whose hands their fate was laid. Here might be applied
_Napoleon’s_ well-known saying: “The weakness of the highest authority is
the greatest misfortune of the nations.”

It remains an anomaly that a state, the members of which for the most part
are Christians, should treat this religion with indifference, and tolerate
that its tenets and traditions be represented as fairy-tales and fables,
its moral law as a danger to civilization, and perhaps its divine Founder
as a victim of religious frenzy. If the state is the expression and the
_representative of its subjects_, then such disharmony between public and
private life is unnatural. Moreover, the Christian religion is held by the
majority of its citizens to be the most precious legacy of their
forefathers; they must demand from the state _protection for their
greatest good_. And this may be claimed with even greater right by
provinces where the population almost unanimously clings to the creed of
their ancestors; at the colleges in these parts the faithful people will
be entitled to protection more than elsewhere against dangers to its
inherited religion. It would be unnatural in this case to apply the
thoughtless principle of dealing uniformly with all provinces of the
state. The state is not a heap of uniform pebbles, but an organism
composed of different parts, each desiring to retain its own peculiar
life.


    Do not say this presumption does not admit of application to our
    conditions, the majority of the people of this age being long
    since estranged from Christianity. It is true, if we turn our eye
    only to the more conspicuous classes of society, the classes that
    control the newspapers and mould public opinion, this view might
    be admitted as to some countries. But if we look at the masses,
    those not infected by half-education, then this opinion is true no
    longer. And there are many who at heart are not so distant from
    faith as it would seem. In public life they pose as free-thinkers,
    but their domestic life bears frequently a Christian character.
    And often they approach more and more the faith, the older they
    grow. This is known to be the fact even of scientists. Instances
    are men like _Ampère_, _Foucault_, _Flourens_, _Hermite_, _Bion_,
    _Biran_, _Fechner_, _Lotze_, _Romanes_, _Littré_, and others.
    _Plato_ claimed that no one who in his youth disputed the
    existence of the gods retained this view to his old age.
    “Christianity,” observes _Savigny_ rightly, “is not only to be
    acknowledged as a rule of life, it has actually transformed the
    world, so that all our thoughts are ruled and penetrated by it, no
    matter how foreign, even hostile, to Christianity they may
    appear.”


It is a sign how deeply Christian religion has sunk its roots into the
heart, that it remains _the_ religion even for those who have turned away
from it. To be sure, for our nations Christianity is _the_ religion. For
them the religion of a _Confucius_ or _Zoroaster_ does not enter into
consideration; nor any of the products of modern religious foundations,
which would replace Christianity with substitutions of all kinds of
religious essences; they are on a level with the attempts at
reconstructing sexual ethics: both are regrettable delusions.
“Improvement” of Christian morality is tantamount to abandoning all
morals, and desertion from the Christian religion, amongst our people, has
always been apostasy from all religion. The Christian religion is so true,
that no one can renounce it inwardly and then find peace in a self-made
one. And all efforts aimed at displacing Christianity lead only to an
abandonment of all religion.

Look at the number of people from whom slander and insinuation have torn
their old religion to be replaced by another—a freer, higher religion;
their moral decadence soon bears testimony of the religious consecration
which has been given to them. Woe unto those authorities who, while able
to oppose, are indifferent, and who lend a hand in causing Christian
thought to withdraw more and more from our mental atmosphere, to be
replaced by another spirit, a spirit that will gradually control the
decision of the judge, the practice of the physician, the instruction of
the teacher, and thus more and more enter into the life of the people.


    It is not assured to those nations of Europe, whose public life is
    feeding to-day upon the remnants of their Christian past, that
    they will not relapse into a state of moral and religious
    barbarity. “Maybe civilized mankind, or our nation at least, is
    really losing its hold more and more upon definite moral
    standards,” so complains a modern pedagogue; “possibly the
    emancipation of sensuality will increase without end, perhaps we
    have passed forever the stage of true humanity and of a live
    idealism, and we shall henceforth glide downward.... These are no
    mere, feverish dreams; there is good reason for facing these
    possibilities with a determined eye, and no accidental or
    philosophical optimism can ignore them” (_Münch_).

    “It is quite possible,” we are told by another, “that much will go
    down in our old Europe during the next centuries; and the downfall
    will not be restricted by any means to Church and Christianity,
    and in the crises that will come Europe will hardly get the needed
    support from an æsthetic heathendom, from the Monists’ Union, or
    from the evidences of science” (_Troeltsch_).

    If it does not come to it, it will not be the merit of authorities
    who let the vessel of state drift rudderless toward the rocks of
    dechristianization.


They do not realize that they greatly endanger thereby also the
foundations of the state. _The foundations of our governments rest upon
Christianity._ The Christian faith created the state, created matrimony,
family, and the education of the youth; created the social virtues of
loyalty and of obedience. What we have of religion is Christian, what we
have of the religious support of morality is equally Christian;
“Christianity, Christian faith, Christian formation of life penetrates all
vital utterances of the Occidental world like an all-pervading element”
(_Paulsen_).

It is one of the first principles of political prudence not to shake the
foundations upon which the state rests. States and nations are not
ephemeral beings, existing from one day to the other, they are historical
structures measuring their lives by centuries; past generations join hands
with present generations, deeds and customs of the fathers live on in
their sons.

States must remain on the historical tracks on which they have travelled
to success, at least until the new track has stood the test of
reliability. So far anti-Christian philosophy has terribly shaken
governments; it has not yet proved itself a state-conserving principle.

It is a sad condition to see the guardians of states, devoid of historical
appreciation, allow their people to tear themselves away from the soil
wherein reposed the roots from which they drew life and strength. Sad,
too, that complaints are made of college-professors who abuse freedom in
teaching by constructing an unproved contradiction between knowledge and
faith, by misrepresenting Christian tenets, by lowering the prestige of
the Church, by distorting her historical picture. It would be regrettable
for a Christian state, if the complaint were justified that for the most
part our colleges have become places where religion is ignored; where the
name of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of mankind, is no longer mentioned;
where the name of God never occurs in history, in natural and political
science; where religion is considered the most unessential factor of
mental life, a factor that has nothing to offer, that can answer no
question—a treatment which, by the force of suggestion, must lead young
men to think that religion is of no account. It is a banishment which in
its effect is little different from an attack upon religion.


    Sadder still would it be if the following view were to prevail at
    our colleges: “A right of the student to see protected and not
    destroyed any views and convictions, including those of a
    religious nature, which he may bring to the university from his
    home surroundings, from his preliminary education, as it is
    asserted time and again in the frequent complaints about the
    dechristianizing of youth at the universities—does not exist and
    cannot exist, because it would be in contradiction to the very
    essence of the university and its tasks” (_Jodl_).

    Is not this the ethical principle of the bird of prey? Is it not
    allowed to guard the defenceless chick against the hawk? Christian
    people send their sons to the university, and demand that the
    education of the parental home be spared, that the inexperience of
    youth be not misused. The state must demand that the
    religious-moral education which it furthers in its public schools
    be not destroyed by the higher schools. Yet, all these rights must
    be silenced the moment the vision of the absolute freedom of
    teaching makes its appearance, since to refrain from
    dechristianizing the youth would be contrary to his tasks.


If such abuse in the management of the power of knowledge, within and
without colleges, is not counteracted by all possible means, then none
need be surprised when a science free from religion and Christianity is
followed by an elementary school free from religion, when in public and
preparatory schools the free-thinking teacher is telling the pupils that
there is no creation but only evolution, and that the gospels and biblical
history are poetical stories such as the Nibelungenlied and the Iliad and
Odyssey.


    We cannot be astonished to find the following rules advocated for
    the instruction in public schools: “Religious instruction in
    schools should not differ from the instruction in other subjects,
    namely, one of full freedom, bound only by recognized documents
    and personalities of religious literature and religious science.
    The school must teach that which is, it must present the tenets of
    all times and all nations in so far as this is possible within its
    modest compass.... But if the pupil should ask, What really is?
    What position should the teacher assume toward this question? In
    my opinion, he should speak in plain terms. He should say: There
    are people who believe all that is taught by the different systems
    of religion.... The child may further ask of the teacher whether
    he himself believes. No teacher who claims the confidence of the
    children should shirk the answer. He may confess his faith or
    disbelief, without need of worry. It cannot hurt his prestige in
    the eyes of the child, because, if for no other reason, either way
    he will find himself in an equally large and good company”
    (_Tews_).

    But we hear much more radical utterances. For instance, the
    official organ of teachers in a Catholic country urges defection
    from the Church in the following words: “How long will
    Social-Democracy, now so formidable, remain inactive against
    clerical arrogance? How much longer will it shirk a duty that is
    clear to the dullest eye? If the millions of our Social-Democrats,
    including the women and children, would break away from Rome, the
    priestcraft in Austria is as good as defeated. A grave
    responsibility rests upon the Social-Democratic leaders. Should
    they miss the moment to act, they will be judged by history!”
    (Deutsch-oesterreichische Lehrerzeitung, June 1, 1909).

    Another organ of teachers declares Christianity to be nothing else
    but _victorious heresy_, for which Christ had to lay down His life
    the same as _Giordano_, _Hus_, and countless others. “The subject
    of religion as taught in the preparatory schools is for the most
    part taken from ages whose customs and morals are—happily—no
    longer ours.” We see radicalism rampant in large circles of public
    school teachers, demanding noisily, excitedly, and, of course, in
    the name of modern science and enlightenment, the abolition of the
    divine service, of prayer, and religious instruction in school,
    giving as reason that, “as to matters of mental freedom no
    difference should be made between a university and a village
    school.” That our people will “carelessly waste their Christian
    patrimony, this is the great danger.”


Our argument is not that only Catholics should be professors, nor even to
limit the teaching office to Christians. But one thing must be demanded of
the college-teacher, that he possess the pedagogic qualifications to
render him competent of educating the hope of the Christian people. As a
rule this demands a religious, Christian disposition. One thing the state
must absolutely demand of the teacher, that he have appreciation for the
foundations of the Christian state; he who has no understanding for the
historical forms of the life of a nation, who even regards them with
hostility, should remain away from this vocation.

In the United States the Jesuit Order has five free universities, founded
and directed by the Order. Their professors are not all Catholics; there
are professors of other creeds, even Jews. All work in harmony to the
common end of the university.


    Men who sincerely and conscientiously strive for the interests of
    science will everywhere show not only consideration, but even
    understanding and respect, for what is true in the ideas of
    others. “I gaze,” so writes Prof. _Smolka_, “upon the likenesses
    of my venerable Protestant masters, under whom I studied at
    Göttingen. Thirty-seven years have passed since I went to them, in
    full confidence to find in their school the leaders who would be
    free from the influence of the Catholic view of the world. To
    their profound knowledge I owe, first of all, the emancipation
    from the prejudices I was raised in, from the views of an
    atmosphere devoted to Indifferentism in which I had passed my
    youth. Prof. _Waitz_ opened my eyes to the grandeur of the
    Catholic Church in the course of the centuries, in the repeated
    prostration of the Papacy and its ever-following rise to
    unsuspected heights, a fact unparalleled in the history of human
    institutions. Prof. _Lotze_ rebuked me at the very beginning of my
    studies at Göttingen for a slighting remark about scholastic
    philosophy: later he imbued me with profound respect for it and
    for the wealth of problems it embraces. These scientists,
    Protestants without exception and in exclusively Protestant
    surroundings, inoculated me with sincere love for scientific
    truth, regardless of the consequences it would lead to. They also
    introduced the youthful mind to the tried methods of scientific
    research, indicating the boundaries where the domain of research
    ends and the right of dogma, or arbitrary rule of subjective
    imagination, begins.”



Restriction of Right.


We need no further proof that the state is justified in restricting the
freedom of teaching, whenever demanded by the business of the state as
described above. Restriction of this kind can be considered unjustified
only by a state theory of liberalism, which holds that the object of the
state consists in merely protecting individual liberty, no matter if this
liberty should lead to the gravest injuries so long as it does not affect
the freedom of others; a theory which changes the state community from an
integral organism into a conglomeration of autonomous individuals.
_Lasalle_ scornfully termed this theory the “nightwatchman idea” of the
state. The state has the right and the duty to exert a necessary influence
upon the pursuit of science, especially at the universities. Against it
the pleading of _autonomy of the college_ and its teacher will not hold.
They have a certain autonomy, that was even greater in former times. An
important part of it is the right to propose appointments for vacant
chairs. It must be admitted that this method of appointment is proper; it
vouches for the scientific fitness of the appointee, and will prove a
protection against the exercise of undue political influence and
ministerial absolutism, provided that this method is impartially
exercised. But an autonomy that disputes the right of the state to protect
its interests, where free science conflicts with it, that would demand, as
has been asserted, that “no infringement of the freedom in teaching must
be deduced from the official position as teacher,”—such autonomy would be
a palpable misconception of the dependency of the college-teacher and of
the social service of science. The rules that apply to other,
non-judicial, officers should apply to teachers appointed by the state,
and offences in their office, or conduct injurious to the purpose and the
dignity of their office, should be treated similarly as in the case of
other public servants. Nor should members of the legislature be forbidden
to defend the rightful interests of their constituents in regard to
schools. They are elected by the people for this purpose, and the people
have a claim on the schools, which are supported by their taxes and to
which some of their greatest interests are attached.


    It has been demanded to concede to college-teachers the
    independence and immunity of judges. This, however, would be
    overlooking the vast difference between professors and judges. The
    judge has to render legal decisions in concrete cases, according
    to existing laws; in order to lessen the danger of his being
    guided by outside considerations he is given a large measure of
    independence. But what questions has the college-professor to
    decide? Mathematical or physical questions? There his
    incorruptibility is not in such danger that he must be made
    independent of government. Religious and moral questions,
    questions of views of the world? These he is not compelled to
    decide. Neither state nor people have appointed him to question,
    time and again, the fundamental foundations of human life, and to
    render decisions which nobody requested.


It is not clear why science, pleading its independence, should oppose
justified restrictions. As a matter of fact _this independence does not
exist anywhere_. Numerous are the considerations, often unwarranted, it is
actually tied to, yea, often tied to by its own hands. He who is familiar
with scientific doings, especially academic doings, knows numbers of such
ties—there is the professional opinion in scientific circles; woe unto him
who in his scientific works dares to confess a supernatural view of the
world!—ties of the predominance of certain leaders or schools, without or
against whose favor it is difficult to attain recognition, approval, or
position; the ties of parties and cliques in an academic career; the tie,
too, of that insinuating power of the state that confers much-desired
decorations and titles.


    “Where is this freedom of science?” asks a modern academic
    teacher. “Some will say science and its teaching are free in our
    country. True, it is so written on paper. But those charged with
    keeping this principle inviolate are human. For instance the
    monists have the chief voice in appointments to zoölogical chairs.
    They will propose only scientists who are not opponents to the
    monistic faith. Far be it from me to assume any _mala fides_. They
    simply believe that only their faith is the proper one to promote
    science. But I ask again, where is the freedom of science?”
    (_Dahl_).

    _H. St. Chamberlain_ tells of an amusing incident in his life:
    “Many years ago, when I desired to devote myself to an academic
    career, a chemist said to me: ‘My dear fellow, since you belong to
    the profession, I tell you as a friend that it is not enough for
    you to be proficient: you should try, first of all, to marry the
    daughter of one of the professors, of a privy counsellor if
    possible.’ ‘This advice comes too late,’ I replied, ‘I am already
    married.’ My well-wisher was visibly shocked. ‘What a pity! Too
    bad! You don’t realize what an influence this has here upon one’s
    career.’ What trouble I had to obtain even the _venia docendi_!
    and then I stuck fast and could not budge despite all achievements
    until I undertook to marry the daughter of one of the
    ‘head-wirepullers’; then things were fixed within three months. I
    may have looked at him in a peculiar way, for his wife was a
    veritable Xanthippe, and, he added with a laugh: ‘You know I am
    all day at the laboratory, from morning until late at night.’ ”
    There is nothing new under the sun. In the year of grace, 1720,
    _Johann Jacob Moser_ started his lectures in Tuebingen, but could
    get no audience. “No wonder, even a cleverer man than I would not
    have fared better at that time, when everything depended on
    nepotism.” The young man had crossed Chancellor _Pfaff_ by
    rejecting a marriage arrangement (_Horn_).

    One will find these things very human. Moreover, it would be
    unwarranted to assume that they happen always and everywhere. But
    they prove that the pursuit of science rests also on general human
    grounds, and does not always remain aloft, in the ethereal heights
    of pure truth.



The Freedom of Teaching in History.


When we said that it is the duty of the state to protect the common
benefits of life against injury by freedom in teaching, and to stand guard
over its Christian past, we stated nothing but what has been the
conviction of the Christian nations and their rulers up into the
nineteenth century. Absolute freedom in teaching cannot plead the support
of history, it is only of yesterday. History shows it to be the natural
child, not of the first awakening of the consciousness of freedom, but of
_the de-Christianizing of the modern state_. Its official entry coincides
with the increasing de-christianizing of public life during the nineteenth
century, after the modern state adopted more and more the principles of
liberal thought. A naturalistic view of the world, without faith, was
struggling for supremacy; science had to proclaim it as higher
enlightenment, and vehemently urged freedom in its behalf. The state
receded step by step, confused by the commanding note in the new demands,
by high-sounding words about the rights of science; it allowed itself to
be talked into the belief that it must become the leader in the new
course, and it took the banner that was forced into its hands. It has
always been so; claims presented with impudence will intimidate, and
assume in the eyes of many the appearance of right.


    In so far as it signifies the removal of the religious-moral bars
    in teaching, the freedom in teaching developed first in Protestant
    Germany, together with the increasing change of universities into
    state institutions. Reformation and the ensuing _Enlightenment_
    had gradually prepared the way for it. Neither the rationalism nor
    the pietism of the eighteenth century could have an understanding
    for the tenets of the faith. In addition there was the confusion
    engendered by the multiplication of Protestant denominations, none
    supported by an overtowering spiritual authority; it led more and
    more to the parting between science and religious confession;
    political reasons, too, made it desirable to disregard
    confessions. Thus the severance of science from religion increased
    and the “freedom of teaching” in this sense was finally adopted
    also by Catholic states as an achievement.

    The enlightenment that had developed outside of the universities
    made its entry into the halls of universities chiefly under the
    Prussian Minister _von Zedlitz_, a champion of enlightenment and a
    friend of the philosophers _Wolff_ and _Kant_. That the
    universities at that time were controlled by free-thinkers is
    illustrated by a saying of _Frederick II._ On January 4, 1774,
    _von Zedlitz_ asked of the king whether _Steinhauss_, M.D., should
    be denied the appointment for professor extraordinary at
    Frankfort-on-the-Oder, for the reason that he was a Catholic. The
    king decreed in his own handwriting that “This does not matter if
    he is clever; besides, doctors know too much to have belief”
    (_Bornhak_).

    In the year of the Revolution, 1848, freedom of teaching became a
    political catch-word. “The terms freedom of teaching and freedom
    of learning, that became popular in 1848, when any phrase
    compounded with freedom could not be often enough repeated, have
    been ever since reminiscent of barricades, and men who have
    witnessed those times become nervous at their mere sound”
    (_Billroth_).

    What was understood by freedom in teaching at the turning point of
    the eighteenth century is shown by the demand of _Thomasius_ for
    “freedom of doctrines that are not against God and the state.” The
    first move was to break away from _human_ authorities, _Aristotle_
    and others. Thus the Kiel University, by its regulation of January
    27, 1707, ordered that “no faculty should enslave itself to
    certain principles or opinions, in so far as they are dependent on
    a human authority” (_Horn_).

    In Göttingen and Halle freedom of teaching also became the maxim,
    and “_Libertas sentiendi_,” as _Münchhausen_ declared, “was open
    to every one and not restrained by statute, except that there
    should be taught nothing _ungodly_ and _Unchristian_.” In those
    days this restriction was looked upon as a matter of course. It is
    known that _Kant_ was disciplined by Minister _Woellner_ in 1794,
    because of his treatise on religion; at Koenigsberg this reproof
    was accepted with good grace, and both the philosophical and the
    theological faculties pledged themselves not to lecture on
    _Kant’s_ religious philosophy. As recently as the middle of the
    nineteenth century a restriction in this sense was ordered by the
    Prussian Minister _Eichhorn_, and the restriction was observed.
    The Materialist _Moleschott_ was cautioned in 1845 by the Senate
    of Heidelberg University, and in reply he resigned his post; in
    the following year at Tübingen _Büchner’s venia legendi_ was
    cancelled, because, as he himself stated, “it was feared I would
    poison with my teaching the minds of my young students” (_Horn_).

    In 1842, _Bruno Bauer_, the radical Bible-critic, was removed by
    the Prussian faculties from the academic chair because of his
    writings. _D. Strauss_ lectured on philosophy at Tübingen, but was
    forced to resign when the first volume of his “Life of Jesus”
    appeared in 1835. Later on, when called by the authorities of
    Zurich to the chair for Church history and dogmatics, an emphatic
    protest of the people made the appointment impossible.


While showing a regrettable indifference for attacks against religion, the
modern states, inoculated with the principles of Liberalism, have not
entirely forgotten their traditions. Many sections in their penal codes
still protect religion, not only against defamation, but, as is the case
in Austria, also against public anti-Christian propaganda, and the
“religious-moral education” in public schools is made compulsory by law.
Of course there is a contradiction, between the conviction of the state
that the principles of morals and religion must be preserved, and the
grant of full freedom to an anti-religious misuse of science, whose effect
upon the masses is unavoidable. It is a contradiction to tear down the dam
at the river and then erect emergency levees against the onrushing flood.
The amazing presumption, that holds inviolate and sacred everything that
poses under the name of science, is the fault of it all.



Freedom of Teaching and Party Rule.


In some countries the complaint is heard that a certain faction has
obtained control of the universities, and so exercises its control that
those who are not of its bent of mind are excluded from both teaching and
taking part in the administration of its affairs, despite the fact that
freedom in teaching and learning has been guaranteed by the state. It is
the faction that professes free-thought and cultivates the freedom of
science in this sense. This condition forces students faithful to their
religion to study in a strange atmosphere, and they are looked upon as
strangers. The parties so accused seek to disclaim these charges as
unjust; for they feel that, if justified, it would disclose an unlawful
condition of things. Nevertheless the facts are so notorious, that all
protestations will be without avail.


    These facts must be painful to the sense of justice, order, and
    good-fellowship; and to this sense it is not pleasing to deal
    further with matters which have often been the cause for indignant
    resentment, and to go into concrete details. We shall but briefly
    recall to mind how persistently candidates for academic positions
    are pushed aside when they are known to be of staunch Catholic
    mind. This is borne out by their trifling percentage among the
    large number of college-teachers; by the high pressure that is
    often needed to lift the embargo for a _Catholic_; by assaults
    which not seldom resulted in physical violence. This small number
    is glaringly emphasized by the considerable, even disquieting,
    number of college lecturers of Jewish extraction. Furthermore,
    there is the improper usage that the theological faculty is passed
    over at the annual election of the rector, and likewise, that
    teachers even of lay-faculties are excluded from academic offices
    when they profess themselves openly as Catholics.

    Catholic students have seen themselves treated as strangers at
    more than one university; they were not given the usual
    privileges, and were accorded rights only in the proportion that
    their number had to be reckoned with. Their corporate bodies were
    ignored, self-evident rights either denied or grossly violated.

    As to the small number of religious-minded lecturers at colleges
    it is not to be denied that the number of those who combine
    fervent religious persuasion with high scientific efficacy is not
    considerable these days. Their long suppression furnishes a reason
    for it, but not the only one. A modern university professor
    rightly states: “While there never has been a want of courageous,
    determined confessors of the Catholic faith who have occupied a
    prominent, even leading, position in the progress of science, in
    the perfection of methods and means of scientific research, they
    were and still are the exception. They were men of _self-reliance
    and independent_ judgment, who were able to exempt themselves from
    an humble submission to the powerful view of the world, which
    emanates from the hatred of Christianity and prevails in educated
    circles. The issue is still the same secular contrast between the
    two views of the world, which _St. Augustine_ illustrated with
    unsurpassed mastery as long as fifteen hundred years ago. But the
    view of the world which has been in the ascendant in scientific
    circles long since, has certainly nothing in common with
    scientific research.”


Our task, however, is not to examine the facts, but to prove that such
conditions are unlawful, no matter where and when found. We do not wish to
discuss further the fact that a university polity, exclusively in the
spirit of a liberalism that gradually goes over into radicalism, would
constitute a grave danger for Christian traditions. Indifference to the
Christian and every other religion, or to an extent direct rejection, must
make it appear more and more inferior and obsolete in the eyes of educated
circles; this view will then easily find its way to the people. Nor do we
intend to enlarge upon a second point, viz., the interest of science
itself. The kernel of liberal research in the province of the spiritual is
a frivolous agnosticism, with a rigid bondage to its naturalistic
postulates, with which we have become sufficiently acquainted. Principles
of this kind are poison for true science. For this reason alone it is
necessary that a Christian philosophy be placed by the side of a
philosophy in fear of metaphysics, one that never extends beyond puzzles
and problems; that a history guided by Christian principles be placed
alongside of one inspired by anti-ecclesiastical sentiment; in general
that a spirit of veracity assert itself, which would give an example, from
the home of highest culture, not of vain arrogance, but of that mental
firmness which, conscious of the limits of human knowledge, is also ready
to believe. How can our universities remain the seats of sterling mental
life, if the highest power of truth that has ever been, the Christian
religion, is ignored there, and even maligned; and if in its stead is
cultivated a philosophical-religious research which leads only to the
negation of everything that hitherto was our ideal, and which gives birth
to a mental anarchy, which, before the forum of history, makes it a
principle of pauperization.

One point to be particularly emphasized is the _violation of rights and
the oppression of mental liberty_, resulting from a party-rule in the
realm of higher education. Under a government of law every one, assuming
he possesses the necessary qualification, has an equal right to teach:
this is elemental to freedom of teaching. The state with its institutions
exists for the benefit of all classes, not for one certain class that has
formed the notion that it is the sole bearer of science. Enemies of the
state should be excluded from teaching, but not good citizens. Nor can it
be demanded, as a necessary preliminary for academic teaching, that one
must subscribe to the catch-phrases of any particular party, and so
discard one’s religious belief. And there is the violation of the rights
of faithful Christian people. Since their money in the form of taxes
maintains to a large extent the schools and their teachers, they surely
can demand a conscientious administration of their interests, and a
representation of the Christian view of the world, in a way becoming its
past and its dignity; Christian people can demand that their sons receive
an education in consonance with their Christian convictions, and that the
universities will train officials, physicians, and teachers, in whom they
may have confidence. If there are no other but state universities in a
country, and these are monopolized by a free-thought party, then a
condition of mental bondage will arise for those of a different mind. They
are compelled either to have their sons forego the learned profession, or
else expose them to an atmosphere wherein they see danger of a religious
and moral nature, in ideas, association, and example. No right is left to
them, but the right to pay taxes toward the budget of education, and then
to look on how an irreligious party is striving to turn the higher schools
into training camps of obligatory liberalism, and to monopolize the entire
mental life for this purpose. Now and then there is great indignation
against state monopolies; it is said, shall the state determine what kind
of cigars I should smoke, and what I am to pay for them! Now, then, where
is freedom if the majority of the Christian population is to be forced
into taking mental nourishment it does not desire and rejects, and pay for
it besides? If we recall to mind the past, which gave birth to the most
venerable universities of the present, a sorrowful feeling comes over us.
We see how far our colleges have deviated from their original purpose, how
our governments have lost their old traditions. Promotion of the Christian
religion and of the fear of God, was the lofty aim which their founders
had in mind.


    In bestowing the charter upon Vienna University, Duke _Albrecht_
    stated that he beheld in the university an institution “whereby
    the glory of the Creator in heaven and His true faith on earth
    would be furthered, knowledge would be increased, the state
    benefited, and the light of justice and truth brightened.” And
    when, in 1366, he donated property to the university, he declared
    the object of the donation to be “that the university may increase
    the prosperity of the entire Church.”

    When Leopold I, on April 26, 1677, signed the charter of Innsbruck
    University he declared that he founded this university
    pre-eminently for the protection and prosperity of the Catholic
    Religion, as a means for its preservation, and also that many of
    those who had lost the faith might be led back to religion, for
    the honour and the glory of the Tyrol.

    In the charter of Tübingen University, _Eberhard_ of Württemberg
    states: “I believe I can do no better work, none more helpful to
    gain salvation, none more pleasing to the eternal God, than to
    provide with special diligence and emulation for the instruction
    of good and zealous young men in the fine arts and sciences, to
    enable them to recognize God, to know, to honour, and to serve Him
    alone.” “In those days there was no hesitation to assign to
    science the loftiest vocation and to declare ... that, coming from
    God, science should also lead back to Him as its origin.... The
    school was charged to work for the spread and the defence of the
    true belief. Christian truth was once queen at these universities;
    now, she has only too often become a stranger, to be denounced at
    times if she attempts to knock at the portals of her old home”
    (_Probst_).



Free Universities.


Another manner, to provide proper freedom of teaching, is open to the
modern state by incorporating free universities. Unlike the state
institutions, they are not directly controlled by the state, but are
independent of it in their internal affairs; they are founded and managed
by private persons or societies. Universities of this kind are found in
Belgium and in England, to some extent in France, but their home is
chiefly in the United States. At the head of the free university of the
United States is the president, with a governing body and a board of
trustees elected from members of the university; they appoint teachers,
prescribe schedules of study and examinations, and conduct its business.
True, the state cannot relinquish its right to oppose a system of teaching
dangerous to the common weal; it will also provide that those to be
licensed to practice the professions possess the necessary education and
training; but the state refrains from further interference in the
management of free universities.

It is no doubt difficult to establish by private means universities
equally efficient with those of the state; in the countries of Middle
Europe this undertaking is perhaps more difficult than elsewhere, but the
possibility is there, and it is even realized in some places. This,
however, is not a question to occupy us here; we merely wish to declare,
if similar foundations are about to be undertaken, and the necessary
conditions are present, then the state must not prevent them, it must
grant freedom in teaching.

True, the state is obliged to assist its subjects in acquiring material
and spiritual goods, but only in so far as private means are insufficient
thereto: the state must only act in a supplemental way. If it does that
which its citizens themselves are able to do, then the state is needlessly
abridging their free right. This includes the establishment of schools and
the teaching in them. Presuming fitness, everybody has a _natural right_
to teach others; hence, also, to found schools, whether by himself or
jointly with others. Furthermore, instruction is a part of education, even
at the university; it could hardly be said of the graduate of the
preparatory school that his education is completed. Education, however, is
a matter for the parents. Their rights would be infringed upon, if
needlessly forced by the state to intrust their sons exclusively to the
state colleges and to their method of teaching. How could the state’s
exclusive right to teach be proved? Does the pursuit of science belong to
its domain? No one will care to claim this. If science were to be allotted
to the jurisdiction of any one body, the Church would be the first to
enter into consideration, because of her international and spiritual
character. Or is this right to be conceded to the state because it is to
be the bearer of culture? The state is to promote culture, but not to
prescribe a certain brand of it. The argument that private universities
cannot be founded and conducted in the proper way is certainly not borne
out by the facts.

Even if the state, owing to its superior facilities, could provide better
universities than private effort, it would not be entitled to the
monopoly; the fact of being able to do something better does not secure
the sole privilege of doing it. Moreover, in order to attract students,
free universities will have to emulate state universities. The right of
the state to found universities will of course not be disputed; but this
right must not deteriorate into a disguised monopoly, that would grant
privileges to its own universities, and deny them to free universities in
order to put them out of existence. At any rate, the state will always
retain considerable influence over the studies at free universities. It
may require certain standards in candidates for political and professional
positions, for judges and lawyers, teachers at state schools, physicians;
it may insist upon state examinations, or it may make its stipulations for
recognizing the examinations and academic degrees of the free schools.

By free schools of higher learning, a greater degree of freedom in
teaching and in learning would be assured, or, speaking generally, a
greater freedom in the intellectual life. If these higher institutions of
learning are exclusively in the hands of the state, it cannot fail that
the higher intellectual life will be dangerously dependent upon the state,
or fall into the control of a dominating clique. As an example might be
cited the restrictions placed upon jurisprudence by Prussia in the
eighteenth century; the long-continued control of Hegelian philosophy; the
Université Impériale of Napoleon; the predominance of anti-Catholic
thought in our own schools. Universities, founded upon a positive,
Christian basis, would surely be a comfort for thousands.

No need to say that such foundations may also be undertaken by the Church.
This right cannot be denied to the Church, just as little as to any other
corporation. Nay, much less! Because of its intellectual and international
character science is most closely related to the Church. The latter,
furthermore, has an eminent, historical right; no one has done more for
the foundation and promotion of the European universities than the Church.


    A remarkable and at the same time _characteristic attitude_
    towards free, particularly Catholic, universities is assumed by
    Liberalism. The stereotyped objection to Catholic universities is
    known; it can be reduced to this formula: At a Catholic university
    there can be no freedom in research nor freedom in teaching; but
    without them there can be no science; consequently, a Catholic
    university is a contradiction. It is the same old song: there is
    but one science, there is but one freedom—the free-thought that
    rejects belief. If it is really so obvious that a Catholic
    university is a contradiction to science, hence incapable to
    foster it, why the excitement? Either such universities are
    incompetent, or they are not. Let the experiment go on; the result
    will tell. If the result is certain, as is claimed, very well, one
    may serenely await it. Liberalism shows itself again here in the
    shape of that nasty hybrid of freedom and intolerance for which it
    is known. It is the head of Janus with its two faces: the one
    showing the bright mien of freedom, the other the sinister scowl
    of an intolerant tyrant. They shout for freedom, freedom they
    demand; Church and Revelation are put under the ban, because they
    restrain freedom. The state is denounced as soon as it wants to
    interfere. But if others attempt research free and independently,
    though not just so as Liberalism would like, then tyranny
    immediately takes the place of liberty, the herald of freedom
    resorts to oppression, and those who just now proclaimed the
    independence of universities from the state, who protested against
    the interference of the state in science, turn about and loudly
    call for the help of the state, avowing that science can thrive
    only under state control.



The Church and the Universities.


In discussing the position of the social authorities toward freedom of
teaching, we have chiefly considered the state. Of the Church we shall say
but a brief word. It will suffice to recall what has been said previously;
what has been stated about the relation of the Church to freedom of
research, applies in many respects equally to freedom of teaching. Little
will have to be added. The Church, and the Church alone, has received from
her divine Founder the command to preserve the doctrine of revelation and
to proclaim it to mankind. “Going, therefore, teach ye all nations”—this
is the commission of the Lord.

For this reason the teaching of the revealed truth, Theology, is the
privilege of the Church. But the rest of the sciences will not be exempt
from the obligation to listen to the admonition of the God-appointed
authority, in all cases where religious grounds are invaded. To the Church
is intrusted the religious-moral guidance of her faithful; she cannot
remain indifferent, when in the public teaching of science a system is
followed detrimental to the Christian principles of the faithful. And
whoever has entered the Church by baptism, remains subject to her
authority in all matters within her sphere.

The state must acknowledge these rights of the Church, or else forfeit its
claim to be a Christian state; these rights, belonging to the essence of
the Christian religion, are guaranteed by God, and are independent of
human sanction. Hence, in case of clashes in this respect, the state must
listen to the grievances of the Church; this will chiefly concern
Theology, rarely other sciences. Thus it would be partially correct to say
that the theological faculties are subject to the Church, but those of the
rest of the sciences to the power of the state. But only partially;
spiritual interests cannot be marked out by faculties. Interests of faith
may be also violated in other faculties: then cases may arise which lose
their purely worldly character, and extend into the religious sphere of
the Church. If a professor should lecture on a matter touching closely
upon interests of faith, for instance, Catholic Canon law or philosophy,
and should show bias against Church and Christianity, deny its authority,
distort and attack its tenets—then this would constitute an evident wrong
to the Church and a flagrant violation of the interests which to guard it
is her duty, especially in a country overwhelmingly Catholic. In that case
the Church would be entitled to make expostulation.

In rejecting the protests of the Church in such cases, as being the
interference of a foreign power, the state would thereby prove that it
misunderstands both, the religious vocation of the Church and the proper
relation between state and Church. For the faithful, whom the state calls
its subject, are also the subjects of the Church, they are the lambs and
sheep the Church is to feed, in obedience to divine command. Church and
state having in common the same subjects, and being closely connected for
so long a time that it has become historical, it would be unnatural if
they were to treat each other as strangers, such as might be expected in a
heathen country, Japan, for instance. The nature of the case and the weal
of the people demand harmonious action in such matters. It cannot be
denied, moreover, that the Church commonly meets the state government to
the extreme limit of her ability. About the divine rights of the Church
opinions differ, but those able to fully appreciate the precious benefits
of religion and morality will regard it as one of the greatest boons to
humanity, that there exists within its fold an organization which protects
with fearless, awe-inspiring majesty these benefits against all attacks,
even against the state and its all-devouring policy of utility, and in
this way defends the mental dignity of the human individual against
oppression by the reckless reality of external life.


    Just to show how an avowed free-thinker appreciates the
    significance of a commanding spiritual force as against the state
    we will quote the French positivist _A. Comte_, who declares: “The
    absorption of the spiritual by the worldly power is a return to
    barbarity; the separation of the two powers, however, is the
    principle for mental uplift and moral dignity.” “True,” says he,
    “men struggle in blind aversion against spiritual power of any
    kind; yet it will even then prevail, though in a mistaken way.
    Professors, authors, and newspaper writers will then pose as the
    speculative leaders of mankind, although they lack all mental and
    moral qualification for it” (Cours de philosophie positive).

    Short-sighted perception may upbraid the Catholic Church; but a
    far-sighted judgment will have to concede that mankind owes
    gratitude to the Church and the Papacy. A noted Protestant writer
    remarks: “But for the Papacy the Middle Ages would have fallen a
    prey to barbarity. Even in our day the liberty of nations would be
    threatened with greatest danger if there were no Papacy. It is the
    most effective counterpoise to an omnipotent power of the state.
    If it did not exist, it would have to be invented” (_Hübler_).





FIFTH SECTION. THEOLOGY.




