Chapter II. The Unscientific Method.


The efforts of liberal science, to remove more and more from its scope the
supernatural powers, show clearly that man may feel the truth to be a
yoke, and that he may attempt to free himself from this yoke by opposing
the truth and by substituting postulates for knowledge. Sceptical,
autonomous subjectivism, the philosophy of liberal free thought, has
changed the nature of human reasoning, and its relation to truth, and
perverted it to its very opposite. No longer is the human mind the vassal
of Queen Truth, as _Plutarch_ put it, but the autocratic ruler who
degrades truth to the position of a servant. Thus liberal freedom of
thought becomes the principle of an unscientific method, because it loses,
by false reasoning and false truth, the first condition of solid and
scientific research; furthermore, by treating the highest questions with
consequent levity, it betrays a lack of earnestness which again renders it
unfit for scientific research in serious matters.



False Reasoning.


“The philosophical thinkers of to-day,” says an admirer of _Kant_, _A.
Sabatier_, “may be divided into two classes, the pre-Kantian and those who
have received their initiation and their philosophical baptism from
_Kant’s_ Critic.”

The Christian philosophy of a _St. Thomas_, which is, as even
representatives of modern philosophy are constrained to admit, “a system
carried out with clear perception and great sagacity” (_Paulsen_),
contains many a principle, the intrinsic merit of which will be fully
appreciated only when contrasted with the experiments of modern
philosophy. An instance is the principle of the old school, that cognition
is the likeness of that which is cognized. Apart from the cognition by
sense, we are given here the only correct principle, coinciding with the
general conviction that reasoning is the mental reproduction of an
objective order of existence, independent of us, even in our conception of
the metaphysical world. Thinking does not create its object, but is a
reproduction of it; it is not a producer, but a painter, who copies the
world with his mental brush within himself, sometimes only in the
indistinct outlines of indefinite conception, often, however, in the sharp
lines of clear cognition.

If, according to its nature, thinking is subject to standards and laws
given it by an objective world, then subjective arbitrariness, a method of
thought which, while pretending to be a free producer of truth, yet
determines it according to necessity or desire; and, even more so, a
method of thought which feels itself justified to hold an opinion upon the
same question in one way to-day, and another and entirely opposite one
to-morrow, is wholly incomprehensible: just as incomprehensible as if a
draughtsman, attempting to draw a true picture of St. Peter’s Church,
would not follow the reality but prefer to draw the picture at random,
according to his fancy and mood.

We have stated these fundamental principles already at the beginning of
our book, we have also set forth how greatly liberal freedom of thought is
lacking the first presumption of any proper science, namely, the clear
perception that there is an objective truth in philosophical-religious
questions, to which we must submit, there, in fact, most of all.

No! We also want autonomy of thought, especially in questions of
metaphysics, where, anyway, there can only be postulates! so shouted
_Kant_ to the modern world on the threshold of the nineteenth century.
There are no stable truths, everything is relative and changing, adds the
modern theory of evolution. At last there is freedom for thought and
research, freedom from the yoke of absolute truth! Behold the aberrations
of an unbridled rush for freedom which moves the world of to-day. This
unruly hankering for a freer existence than allowed by their nature and
position, makes unbearable to many modern children of man the idea of iron
laws of truth and marked boundaries of thought. Revelling in the
consciousness of their sovereign personality, they want to measure all
things by their individuality, even religion, philosophy, truth, and
ethics. Only that what is created and experienced by them within the
sanctuary of their personality, only what is made important and legitimate
by their sentiment, is truth and of value to them. _Autonomism_ thus
changes unnoticeably into _individualism_; the own individuality, in its
peculiar inclinations, moods, and humours, its exigencies and egotistical
aims, its infirmities and diseases—they have, under the name of
_individual reason_, become the law of thinking and reasoning.



Without Knowledge of the Human Nature.


“Varied, according to character, are the demands made by heart and mind,”
assures us a representative of modern philosophy, “corresponding to them
is the image of the world to which the individual turns by inner
necessity. He may waver hither and thither, uncertain as to himself; at
last, however, his innermost tendency of life will prevail and press him
into the view of the world corresponding to his individuality. Upon its
further development worldly and local influences will play a very
important part. But the deciding factor in giving the direction is
personality.” “And,” continues Prof. _Adickes_, “the sharper and more
one-sided a character type is brought to expression, the more it will be
urged into a certain metaphysical or religious tendency, and this man will
find no rest, nor feel himself at home in the world, until he has found
the view of life that fits him. Nor does man assemble his metaphysics with
discrimination on the grounds of logical necessity, choosing here,
rejecting there, but it grows within himself by that inner compulsion
identical with true freedom.” Hence, not unselfish yielding to truth, no,
the inclinations of heart and mind, the “personality” must form the view
of the world. Let every type of character therefore develop itself sharply
and one-sidedly, let every one get the view of the world corresponding to
himself, without regard to objective truth and logical necessity. This
precisely is the “true freedom.” “For when is a man more free, than when
he chooses and does—without any compulsion, even resisting compulsion—what
his innermost soul is urging him to choose and do? How could he be more
true to himself, more like himself?” With such a freedom “the outer
compulsion” of an absolute truth, to say nothing of the duty to believe,
will not agree. “The core of one’s very being,” so _Harnack_ informs us,
“should be grasped in its depths, and the soul should only know its own
needs and the way indicated by it to gratify them.” “According to my
character,” says _Adickes_ again, “is the world reflected within myself by
intrinsic necessity just as my creed represents it, and no opponent is
able to shake my position by arguments of reason or by empirical facts.”

Hence it is not only true, as has been known from the beginning, that the
inclinations of the heart are trying to prevail upon reason to urge their
desires, and to oppose what displeases them, and that reason must beware
of the heart—no, inclination and character are now directly called upon to
shape our religion and view of the world. Every type of man, every period,
may construct its own philosophical system, or, if this is beyond it, at
least its own ideas; it may also shape its own Christianity, according to
its experience. As the individual chooses his clothes, and puts his
individuality into them, in like manner may the individual put on the view
of life that fits him.

These principles represent the apostasy from objective truth, and, at the
same time, the apostasy from the _principles of true science_: their first
demand, the proper understanding of truth, is perverted into its very
opposite. A necessary quality of scientific research is exactness;
exactness, however, demands most conscientious cleaving to truth; scale
and measure are its instruments. The reverse of exactness is to cast away
scale and measure, to turn eye and ear, not toward reality, but toward
one’s self, so as to observe personal wishes and inclinations, and then
shape the results of the “research” accordingly. This may be a method of
freedom, but it cannot be the method of science. The very thing that true
research would eliminate in the first place, viz., to have the decision
influenced by hobbies and moods, is most important in the method of
individualism; objectiveness, deemed by true science the highest
requirement, is to that method the least one: what true science first of
all insists on, namely, to prove that which is claimed, this method knows
but little of. It recalls the method of the gourmet who selects that which
gratifies his taste: it may be likened to the dandy picking frock-coat and
trousers that suit his whim. True research, with a firm hand at the helm,
aims to direct its craft so as to discover new coasts, or at least a new
island; the exploring done by liberal research is like casting off the
rudder to be tossed by the waves, for its task is only to hold to the
course which the waving billows of individual life give to it. True
science, finally, seeks for serious results, able to withstand criticism:
the research by individualism produces results which, as individualism
itself confesses, must not be taken seriously. They are the subjective
achievements of amateurs, creations of fashion, cut to the pattern of the
ruling principle: _nihil nisi quod modernum est_. A science that professes
such a method is beyond a doubt unfit to play a beneficial part in the
endeavour of mankind.

Do not say: but it is not claimed that religion and view of life are
matters of scientific research: on the contrary, they are always
distinguished from science. It is true, this is not infrequently claimed.
But it is also known how energetically just these matters are appropriated
by science. Is it not exactly this sphere in which free research is to be
active? Is it not its aim to construct a “scientific view of the world,”
as opposed to the Christian belief? Is there not the conviction that
science has already carried much light and enlightenment into this very
sphere, that it has upset the old tenets of faith?

And what an amount of _ignorance of human nature_ underlies these
principles! It is the same complete misconception that has always
characterized liberalism, and which it has also manifested in economical
matters. There, too, it demanded boundless freedom for all economic
sources, ignoring man’s disordered inclinations that will work disorder
and destruction if not restrained by laws. In a similar manner they dream
that man, if left to the unrestrained influence of his personality, will
soar without fail to the heights of the pure truth. They know no longer
the maxim once engraved by the wisdom of the ancient world upon Delphi’s
sanctuary: “Know thyself”! They no longer know the beguiling and benumbing
influence exerted upon reason by inclination, how it fetters the mind.
_Amor premit oculos_, says Quintilian. The thing we like, we desire to
establish as true; favourable arguments are decisive, counter arguments
are ignored or belittled, inclinations guide the observation, determine
the books and sources drawn from. If we meet with something unsympathetic,
something that interferes with the liberties we have grown fond of, it
takes a rare degree of unselfishness to love the painful truth more than
one’s self. It is easy to leave cool reason in control in mathematical
speculations: they seldom affect the heart; quite different, however, in
questions of philosophy and religion that often have vexatious
consequences.


    We have to concede that _D. F. Strauss_ was right when he wrote:
    “He who writes about the Rulers of Nineveh or the Pharaohs of
    Egypt, may pursue a purely historical interest: but Christianity
    is a power so alive, and the question of what occurred at its
    origin is involved in such vast consequences for the immediate
    present, that the inquirer would have to be dull-witted to be
    interested only in a purely historical way in the solution of
    these questions.” But we must also regret that this personal
    interest has misled him, for one, into pernicious ways.

    In view of the frequent assurances of the noted historian, _Th.
    Mommsen_, that he hates the sight of old Christian inscriptions(9)
    we may perhaps welcome it in the interest of history that he
    refrained from writing the fourth volume of his Roman history,
    wherein the Origin of Christianity was to be treated. One of his
    biographers asserts that the downfall of paganism through
    Christianity was a fact not to _Mommsen’s_ liking, that “a
    description of the decomposition of all things ancient, and the
    substitution therefor of the Nazarene spirit would not have been a
    labour of love.”(10) And again, when we see the well-known
    historian of philosophy, _F. Ueberweg_, in a letter to _F. A.
    Lange_, denouncing from the bitterness of his heart “the miserable
    beggar-principle of Christianity,” and the “surrendering of
    independence and of personal honour in favour of a servile
    submission to the master, who is made a Messiah, nay, even the
    incarnate _Son of God_,” then we may well dread the historical
    objectivity of a man of such notions in writing about the religion
    of Jesus Christ.

    With reference to the chief subject of psychology, the noted
    psychologist, _W. James_, writes with utmost frankness: “The soul
    is an entity, and truly one of the worst kind, a scholastic one,
    and something said to be destined for salvation or perdition. As
    far as I am concerned, I must frankly admit that the antipathy
    against the particular soul I find myself burdened with, is an old
    hardness of heart, which I cannot account for, not even to myself.
    I will admit that the formal disposition of the question in
    dispute would come to an end, if the existence of souls could be
    used for an explanatory principle. I admit the soul would be a
    means of unification, whereas the working of the brain, or ideas,
    show no harmonizing efficacy, no matter how thoroughly
    synchronical they be. Yet, despite these admissions, I never
    resort in my psychologizing to the soul.”


If we read such statement, if, in addition, we remember the
popular-philosophical science of men like _Haeckel_, particularly perhaps
the literature which he recommends for information about Christianity, and
of which he himself makes use; if we have read _Schopenhauer_,
_Nietzsche_, or the “Philosophy of Races” of a _Chamberlain_,—we can no
longer be at a loss what to think of the “rule of reason” and of the
“search for pure truth.” Observe, also, the restless haste of those who,
having turned their back upon the Catholic Church, now proceed to attack
her, observe their agitated work and incitement, how they rummage and
ransack the nooks and corners of the history of the Church in quest of
refuse and filth, and if the find is not sufficient how they even help it
along by forgery, all this to demonstrate to the world that the grandest
fact in history is really absurdity and filth;—then one will understand
what instincts may be found there to guide “reason and science.” How even
sexual impulses are trying to shape their own ethics we shall not examine
here. _F. W. Foerster_ relates: “I once heard a moral pervert expound his
ethical and religious notions; they were nothing but the reflection of his
perverse impulses. But he thought them to be the result of his reasoning.”
Is there not known in these days the inherited disorder of the human heart
as characterized by the Apostle in the words: “But I see another law in my
members, fighting against the law of my mind, and captivating me in the
law of sin (Rom. vii. 23)”? The Ancients knew it. The wisdom of _Plato_
knew it, who speaks of the “pricks of sin, sunk into man, coming from an
old, unexpiated offence, giving birth to wickedness.” The wise _Cicero_
knew of it: “Nature has bestowed upon us but a few sparks of knowledge,
which, corrupted by bad habits and errors, we soon extinguish, with the
result that the light of nature does nowhere appear in its clearness and
brightness.” Truth is often disagreeable to nature. And if not subdued and
ruled by strong discipline, nature proceeds to oppose the truth. Only to
lofty self-discipline and purity of morals is reserved the privilege of
facing the highest truths with a calm eye. “Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God.”



Mental Bondage.


Of this wisdom the admirer of liberal freedom knows little. Instead of
distinguishing the good from the evil in man, of unfolding his inner
kernel, the pure spirit, and making it rule; instead of demanding, like
_Pythagoras_, discipline as a preparatory school for wisdom, he has
learned from _Rousseau_, the master of modern Liberalism, that everything
in man is good. Depravity of nature, original sin, are unsympathetic
things to his ear. Even _Goethe_ wrote to _Herder_, when _Kant_ had in his
religious philosophy found a radical Evil in man: “After it has taken
_Kant_ a lifetime to clean his philosophical gown of many filthy
prejudices, he now outrageously slabbers it with the stain of the radical
Evil, so that Christians, too, may be enticed to come and kiss the seam.”
Instead of exhorting for a redemption from internal fetters, as the sages
of all ages did, the principle of wisdom now proposed is to quietly let
individuality develop, with all its inclinations. They call this freedom.
Is it not the freedom whereof the slave of sensuality avails himself to
form his theory of life? It, too, “grows up in man with that inner
compulsion which is identical with true freedom” (_Adickes_).

Freedom this may be. But _only external freedom_, the only freedom they
often know. They are unaware that they forfeit thereby the real, the inner
freedom. “Thou aimest at free heights,” admonishes even the most impetuous
herald of freedom, “thy soul is athirst for stars. But also thy wicked
impulses are athirst for freedom. Thy wild hounds want to be free, they
bark joyfully in their kennel when thy spirit essays to throw open all
dungeons.”(11) They think to be free and speak of the self-assurance of
individual reason, and they cannot see that the mind is in the fetters of
bondage.

Else how is it that the atheistic free science, considered in general,
arrives with infallible regularity at results that obviously tend to a
morally loose conduct of life? How is it, that it tries throughout to
shirk the acceptance of a personal God, and is at home only in open or
disguised atheism? that it so persistently avoids the acceptance of
anything supernatural? Why does it in its researches never arrive at
theism, which has as much foundation at least as pantheism and atheism?
Why does it, nearly without exception, deny or ignore the personal
immortality of the soul and a Beyond; why does it never reach the opposite
result which, in intrinsic evidence, ranks at least on a par with it? Why
is it not admitted, that the will is free and strictly responsible for its
acts, although this fact is borne out by the obvious experience and
testimony of mankind? Why does it so regularly arrive at the conclusion
that the Christian religion has become untenable, and needs development;
that its ethics, too, must be reformed, more especially in sexual matters?
Why does it not defend the duty to believe, but reject it persistently? A
striking fact! The matters in question here concern truths that impose
sacrifices upon man, whereas their opposites have connections of intimate
friendship with unpurged impulses. It may be noted also that this same
science, that announces to the world these results of research, meets with
the boisterous applause from the elements that belong to the morally
inferior part of mankind.


    _St. Augustine_ prays: “Redeem me, O God, from the throng of
    thoughts, which I feel so painfully within my soul, which feels
    lowly in Thy presence, which is fleeing to Thy mercy. Grant me
    that I may not give my assent to them; that I may disapprove of
    them, even if they seek to delight me, and that I may not stay
    with them in sleepiness. May they not have the power to insinuate
    themselves into my works; may I be protected from them in my
    resolution, may my conscience be protected by Thy keeping.” It is
    the realization of the want of freedom of the human reason, the
    only way to the liberation from the fetters of our own
    imperfection. He, who has seriously begun to take up the struggle
    with his inner disorders, will, by his own experience, pray as
    _St. Augustine_ prayed.


Recognizing this fact, man will try to rise above himself, to cleave to a
superior Power and Wisdom, who, in purer heights, untouched by human
passions, holds aloft the truth, in order to rise thereby above his own
bondage; he will understand the necessity of an authority clothed with
divine power and dignity, so that it may hold in unvanquished hands the
ideal against all onslaughts of human passions. He will without difficulty
find this power in the religion of Jesus Christ and in His Church: in Him,
who could not be accused of sin, who by His Cross has achieved the highest
triumph over flesh and sin, who has surrounded His Church with the bright
throng of saints. And if he sees this religion and Church an object of
persecution, he will behold in it the signature of its truth. For truth is
a yoke despised by sensualism and pride, and the spiritual power that
contends for purity and truth will be hated.



Without Earnestness.


The regrettable conception of truth proper to the modern freedom of
thought, leads to that flippancy with which our time is prone to treat the
highest questions. Why conscientiousness and anxious care? All that is
needed is to form one’s personal views; there is no certain, generally
valid, truth in religious matters. Hence there is often in this sphere of
scientific research a method wholly different from that in use anywhere
else. In history, philology, natural science, there is a striving for
exactness, but in these matters exact reasoning is replaced only too often
by discretionary reasoning, by loose forming of ideas; in the very domain
which has ever pre-eminently been called the province of the wisdom of
life, there is now in vogue the method of flippancy.

True wisdom is convinced that reason has not been given to man to grope in
the dark in respect to the most momentous questions of life; that reason,
though limited and liable to err, is given him to find the truth. True
wisdom knows its difficulties when the matter in quest is metaphysical
truth: it knows how, in this case, more than in any other, reason is
exposed to the influence of inclinations from within, and to the power of
error and of public opinion from without; that in these matters, least of
all, reason is not in the habit of taking the truth by assault. True,
there are intuitions, and inspiration by genius—they have their rights,
but they are the exceptions. The ordinary, and only safe, way is to
advance cautiously, by discoursive thinking, from cognition to cognition,
otherwise there is danger of a sudden fall from the steep path.

In the early Christian ages this insight led to careful cultivation and
application of certain methodical means of thinking and terms of
expressions, to definitions, distinctions, and forms of syllogism, with
that “insulting lucidity,” in the words of a modern philosopher, which
gives to them the stamp of scrupulousness. The same insight into the
cognitive weakness of reason leads to the noble union between science and
modesty.

What, however, do we see in modern philosophic-religious thinking? Often
unsolidity, with hardly a remnant of the principles of the serious pursuit
of knowledge.

The autonomous freethinker of these days lacks chiefly humility and
modesty. The ancient Sage of Samos once declined the name of “sage,”
saying that God alone is wise, while man must be content to be
wisdom-loving (φιλόσοφος). Not always so the sages of modern times.


    _Kant_ believed of his system: “Critical philosophy must be
    convinced that there is not in store for it a change of opinions,
    no improvement nor possibly a differently formed system, but that
    the system of criticism, resting on a fully assured basis, will be
    established forever, indispensable for all coming ages to the
    highest aims of mankind.” _Hegel_, in turn, was no less convinced
    of the indispensability of his doctrine. In the summer term of
    1820 he began his lectures with the words: “I would say with
    Christ: I teach the truth, and I am the truth.” Yet, to
    _Schopenhauer_ _Hegel’s_ philosophy is nonsense, humbug, and
    worse. _Schopenhauer_ knew better, and was convinced that he had
    lifted the veil of truth higher than any mortal before him; he
    claimed that he had written paragraphs “which may be taken to have
    been inspired by the Holy Ghost.” Shortly before his death he
    wrote: “My curse upon any one, who in reprinting my works shall
    knowingly make a change; be it but a sentence, or a word, a
    syllable or a punctuation point.” _Nietzsche_ held: “I have given
    to the world the most profound book in its possession.” To the
    eyes of this philosophy, modesty and humility are no longer
    virtues. _B. Spinoza_, a leader in later philosophy, states
    expressly: “Humility is no virtue; it does not spring from reason.
    It is a sadness, springing from the fact that man becomes aware of
    his impotence.”


An arrogant mind is not capable of finding the higher truth with
certainty; conscientious obedience to truth, unselfish abstention from
asserting one’s ego, and one’s pet opinion, can dwell only in the humble
mind. Here applies what _St. Augustine_ said of the Neoplatonists: “To
acquiesce in truth you need humility, which, however, is very difficult to
instil into your minds.”(12)

When God’s authority steps before scientists and earnestly demands faith,
they will talk excitedly about their human dignity that does not permit
them to believe; about reason being their court of last resort that must
not know of submission; and if the Church, in the name of God, steps
before them, they become abusive.

Men who have scarcely outgrown their minority often feel it incumbent upon
themselves to furnish humanity with new thought and to discard the old.
_D. F. Strauss_, a young under-master of twenty-seven years, writes his
“Life of Jesus, critically analyzed” (1835); he tells the Christian world
that everything it has hitherto held sacred is a delusion and a snare; he
feels the vocation to “replace the old, obsolete, supernatural, method of
contemplating the history of Jesus with a new one,” which changes all
divine deeds into myths. Hardly out of knickerbockers and kilts, they feel
experienced enough to come forth with novel and unheard-of propositions on
the highest problems. In business and office, as in public service,
sober-mindedness and maturity are demanded; but to work out the ultimate
questions of humanity, inexperience and lack of the deeper knowledge of
life do not disqualify in our time. If _Schiller’s_ complaint of the
Kantians of his time was that, “What they have scarcely learned to-day,
they want to teach to-morrow,” what is to be said of those who teach even
before they have learned? And what superficial thinking do we meet in the
philosophy of the day! Lacking all solid training, they proceed to
construct new systems, or at least fragments of them. As regards their
competence, one is often tempted to quote the harsh words of a modern
writer: “I believe _Schopenhauer_ would have formed a better opinion of
the human intellect, had he paid less attention to authors and
newspaper-writers, and more to the common sense evinced by men in their
work and business” (_Paulsen_).

It would be highly instructive to take a longer journey through the realm
of modern philosophy, in so far as it touches upon questions concerning
the theory of the world, or even liberal Protestant theology, so as to
subject to a searching criticism the untenable notions and attempts at
demonstration even of acknowledged representatives of this science,
whereby they generally do away with God and miracles, the soul and
immortality, freedom of the will, the divine moral laws, the Gospel, the
divinity of Christ, and so much more, and show what they offer in place of
all this. It would disclose an enormous lack of scientific method: instead
of assured results they offer questionable, even untenable theories; in
place of proofs, emphatical assertions, imperatives, catch phrases; or
else arguments which under the simplest test will prove miscarriages of
logic. These philosophers vault ditches and boundaries with ease, and
derive full gratification from imperfect and warped ideas. Of course,
exactness in philosophical thinking is not a fruit to be plucked while out
taking a walk; it is the product of serious mental work, of sterling
philosophical training, which, alas, is wanting to-day in large circles of
scientists.

As an instance, we point to the method described in a previous chapter, by
which all supernatural factors are rejected by the arbitrary postulate of
“exclusively natural causation,” without valid proofs, based only upon the
arbitrary decision of so-called modern science—in the gravest matter an
unscientific process that cannot be outdone.

Another instructive instance, of serious matters treated with levity, is
furnished in the unscrupulous way in which the Catholic Church, her
teaching, institutions, and history, are passed upon in judgment by those
having neither knowledge nor fairness.



Without Reverence.


True wisdom accepts advice and guidance. It feels reverence for sacred and
venerable traditions, for the convictions of mankind on the great
questions of life, and greater reverence still for an authority of faith
that has received from God its warrant to be the teacher of mankind, and
which has stood the test of time. True wisdom is convinced that continuity
in human thinking and in knowledge is necessary. Life is short, and gives
to the individual hardly time to attain mental maturity. Philosophy, and
this is the matter before us at present,—philosophy can never be the work
of a single person; it is the achievement of centuries; succeeding
generations, with searching eye and careful hand, building further upon
the achievement for which past ages have laid the foundations. By nailing
together beams and boards the individual may erect a house good enough for
a short time to serve his sports and pleasures; and if wrecked by the
first storm, it may be replaced by another. But the building of massive
and towering cathedrals that last for ages required the work of
generations. And only skilful and experienced hands may do the work; haste
is out of place here. The ancient sages of Greece, _Plato_, _Pythagoras_,
and _Aristotle_, had this reverence for the philosophical and religious
traditions of the past. These representatives of true wisdom did not
consider philosophy and theology as the product of individual sagacity,
they did not attempt to be free rulers in the realm of thought; on the
contrary, they looked upon wisdom as the patrimony of the past, which it
was their duty to preserve.


    They pointed to their venerable traditions, however meagre they
    were. “Our forefathers,” says _Plato_, “who were better than we
    are, and stood nearer to the gods than we, have handed down to us
    this revelation.”(13) That the testimony of the great sages, to
    the effect that the most essential elements of their philosophy
    had their origin in religious traditions, is based upon truth and
    not on fancy has been proven by _O. Willmann_, whose knowledge of
    ancient civilization was very extensive, in his monumental
    “History of Idealism.” Delhi, the home of mysteries, the
    generations of priests in ancient Egypt, the doctrinal traditions
    of the Chaldeans, the Magi of Medes and Persians, and the wisdom
    of the Brahmins of ancient India are witnesses to the fact. “The
    Ancients were correct,” says _Willmann_, “in tracing their
    philosophy to earliest traditions ... they knew what they owed to
    their forefathers better than we do. They direct our astonished
    eyes to a very ancient reality, to a towering remoteness of living
    thought.” This fact is very much against the taste of our
    times.... An inherited wisdom, springing from an original
    revelation, adapted to the nations, shining with renewed
    brightness in true philosophy, is quite the opposite to a
    philosophy that seeks the source of mental life only in isolated
    thinking; that thinks its success to be conditioned upon
    unprepossession; that holds the refutation of tradition to be the
    test of its strength.


Unfortunately this latter view is widespread in our time. Research is
often directed, not by reverence for the wisdom inherited from many
Christian centuries, but by the mania, unwise and fatal alike, of seeking
new paths. “Love of truth,” so we are told, “is what urges on the great
leaders of humanity, the prophets and reformers, to seek new and untrodden
paths of life. ‘Plus ultra’ is the rallying-cry of these pathfinders of
the future, who are clearing the way for the mental life of mankind. No
authority can restrain them, no prejudice, however holy: they are
following the light which has dawned upon their soul” (_Paulsen_).

And a multitude discover this light in their souls, and join the prophets
and pathfinders! Everybody goes abroad looking for untrodden paths; from
all directions comes the cry: Here and there, to the right, to the left,
is the right way! Do we not only too often see self-willed and
self-satisfied thinkers, whose shortsighted conceit gets within the four
walls of their study puffed up against God and religion, offer us for holy
truth the fanciful products of their narrow brains? Do we not see, only
too often, champions of shallow reasoning, without discipline of thought
and without ethical maturity, recommending their undigested efforts as the
wisdom of the world? Youthful thinkers there are in numbers, each of whom
claims that he at last has succeeded in solving the world riddle; they
offer us new theories of the world, new ideas on ethics, on law and
theology, for a few dollars per copy or less. The holy abode of truth has
become the campus for saunterers, each eager to displace the other so that
he may be sole proprietor, or at least a respected partner. Day by day new
solutions of “problems,” “vital questions,” or at least “outlines” of
them; new “views of the world”; new forms of religion and of Christianity
for the “modern man”; “reforms” of marriage and of sexual ethics, and so
on. Truth had not been discovered until the newcomer puts his pen to the
paper. Every one is free to join in. Yea, more, he may not only join in,
but lash those who do not applaud him. According to this notion, nothing
has a right to exist, no “sacred prejudice” may be claimed once this
self-appointed representative of science takes the field for “research.”
Behold the Christian truth, it has stood the test of centuries: but it
cannot resist these scientific freebooters, they rush over it with banners
flying.

Severe speech would here be in order. A painful spectacle, these doings of
modern thought in the sacred precincts of truth. “Put off the shoes from
thy feet; for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground,” we imagine
to hear; yet this sanctuary of truth has been made a profane place of
bartering.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

While still a pagan, but moved by his desire for truth, the philosopher
_Justin_ went to the schools of his day to seek the solution of his doubts
and queries. First he turned to a Stoic, but as he taught nothing of God,
_Justin_ was unsatisfied. He next went to a Peripatetic teacher, then to a
Pythagorean, but failed to find what he desired. The Platonist at last
gave him something. Walking alone along the beach, and musing over
_Plato’s_ principles, he met an old man who referred him to the truth of
Christianity, to the Prophets and the Apostles: “They alone have seen the
truth and proclaimed it unto man, they were afraid of no one, knew no
fear; yielded to no opinion; filled with the Holy Ghost, they spoke only
what they saw and heard. The Scriptures are still extant, and he who takes
them up will find in them a treasure of information about principles and
ultimate things, and all else the philosopher must know, if he believes
them.”(14) And _Justin_ found truth and peace, and bowed to the yoke of
the doctrine of Jesus Christ.

What a striking contrast between this serious love of truth in the days of
passing heathendom, and the uncontrolled thinking of so many in our
Christian age! To them truth is no longer a sacred treasure, a yoke to be
assumed in reverence; it has become the plaything of their impressions and
inclinations. Indeed, they consider it a burden to accept the old
Christian truth, with which they meet on all their ways.




