Chapter IV. Accusations And Objections.


Among the notable facts in history one stands out prominently, it is more
remarkable than any other, and evokes serious thought. It is the fact that
the Christian religion, especially its foremost representative, the
Catholic Church, concerning which every unbiassed critic is bound to admit
that none has made more nations moral, happy and great than this Church;
that nowhere else has virtue and holiness flourished more than in her;
that no one else has laboured more for truth and purity of morals; that
nevertheless there is not, and never was, an institution which has more
enemies, which has been more persecuted, than the Catholic Church. This
fact will suggest to every serious-minded critic the question, whether we
have not here focussed that tremendous struggle, which truth and justice
have ever waged in the bosom of mankind against error and passions—an
image of the struggle raging in every human breast. The Church recognizes
in this fact the fulfilment of the prophecy of her Founder: “And ye shall
be hated by all men for my name’s sake” (Luke xxi. 17). And the Church may
add, that in her alone this prophecy is being fulfilled.



The Enemy of Progress.


In her journey through the centuries the Church has had to listen to many
accusations because she, the keeper of the truth entrusted to her care,
has refused to respond to the demand to accept unconditionally the ideals
devised by existing fashions. _Cantavimus vobis et non saltastis_ (we have
piped to you and you have not danced). Therefore the Church has been
called reactionary; the heretics of the first centuries of Christianity
denounced her as the enemy of the higher gnosis; a later period denounced
her as an enemy of the genuine humanism, in the eighteenth century she was
denounced as the enemy of enlightenment, to-day she is denounced as the
enemy of progress. Again the Church is accused before the judicial bar of
the children of the age. They desire to eat plentifully from the tree of
knowledge, but the Church, they say, prevents them. They wish to climb the
heights of human perfection, to ascend higher than any preceding
generation, but the Church holds them back. She will keep them in the
fetters of her guardianship. And with a keen, searching eye the smart
children of our age have looked the old Church over, taking notice of
everything, anxious to put her in the wrong.

Their charges do not fail to make an impression, even on the Church
herself. She wishes to justify herself before the plaintiffs, and still
more before her own children who trust in her. Thus she has not hesitated
in declaring loudly on most solemn occasions that _she is not an enemy of
noble science_ and of human progress, and with great earnest she takes
exception to this charge.

No wonder, one might say, that the Church makes such assurances. It is
time for her to realize that unless she can clear herself from it this
accusation will be her moral ruin at a time when the banner of progress is
held aloft, and when even the Catholic world shares in that progress.
True, but let us not forget this: if there is anything characteristic of
the Catholic Church it is her frankness and honesty. She is not afraid to
proclaim her doctrines and judgments before the whole world; she leaves
her Index and Syllabus open for inspection, openly avowing that she is the
irreconcilable enemy of that emancipated freedom proclaimed by modern
liberalism as the ideal of the age. It is the honesty which she inherited
from her Founder, who told the truth to friend and enemy, to His disciples
and to the Scribes, to _Nicodemus_, that lonely night, and to _Caiaphas_.
With the same straightforwardness the Church declares that she feels not
enmity but sympathy toward civilization. A fair-minded critic will admit
here again that the Church is in earnest. “Far from opposing the fostering
of human arts and sciences, the Church is supporting and promoting them in
various ways,” declares the Vatican Council. “The Church does not
underrate nor despise their advantages for human life: on the contrary, it
avows that they, coming as they do from God, the Master of the sciences,
also lead to God by aid of His grace, when properly used” (Sess. III, c.
4). The Church has put this accusation on the list of errors of the age
condemned by _Pius X._ (Sent. 57). She feels the charge as an injury.



The Testimony of History.


Nevertheless, in anti-ecclesiastical circles it is taken very often for an
established fact that the Roman Church has ever tried her best to hamper
the progress of science, or has suppressed it, or at least scowled at it.
How could it be otherwise? they say. How could she favour the progress
made in enlightening reason or in advancing human knowledge? Must she not
fear for its intellectual sway over men whom she keeps under the yoke of
faith? Must she not fear that they might awaken from the slumber in which
they were held prisoners by the suggestive force of her authority, held to
be transcendental; that they might awaken to find out the truth for
themselves? And what is the use of science? He that believes will be
saved: hence faith suffices. If we wish to hear the accusation in the
language of militant science, here it is: “Outside the monastic
institutions no attempt at intellectual advancement was made (in the
Middle Ages), indeed, so far as the laity were concerned, the influence of
the Church was directed to an opposite result, for the maxim universally
received was, that ‘ignorance is the mother of devotion’ ” (_J. W.
Draper_, History of the Conflict between Religion and Science).

This is the train of thought and the result of anti-ecclesiastical
a-priorism and its historical research. Are the plain facts of history in
accord with it? The first and immediate task of the Church is certainly
not to disseminate science: her task, first of all, lies in the province
of morals and religion. But as she is the highest power of morality and
religion, she stands in the midst of mankind’s intellectual life, and
cannot but come in contact with its other endeavours, owing to the close
unity of that life. Hence, let us ask history, not about everything it
might tell us in this respect, but about one thing only.

We do not wish to show how the Church, headed by the Papacy, has become
the mother of Western civilization and culture. Nor shall we enumerate the
merits of the Church in art, nor point out the alertness she has certainly
shown, in her walk through the centuries, by taking up the intellectual
achievements of the time and assimilating them with her moral and
religious treasure of faith, withal preserved unchanged. The old Church
had done this with the treasures of ancient learning and science; “this
spirit of Christianity proved itself by the facility with which Christian
thinkers gathered the truth contained in the systems of old philosophy,
and, even before that, by assimilating those old truths into Christian
thought, the beginning of which had already been made in the New
Testament. They were appropriated, without hesitating experiment, without
wavering, and were given their place in a higher order” (_O. Willmann_,
Gesch. des Idealismus, 2d ed., II, 1907, 67). This, she unceasingly
continues to do, as proved by the high standard of Catholic life and
Catholic science at the present, a fact not even disputed by opponents. We
point only incidentally to _the foundation and the fostering of primary
schools_ by the Church. It is an historical fact that public education
began to thrive only with the freer unfolding of the Church.


    The first elementary schools were those of the monasteries. Later
    on there were established after their pattern the cathedral and
    chapter schools, then the parish schools. Still later there came
    the town and village schools—all of ecclesiastical origin, or at
    least under the direction of the Church and in close connection
    with her. As early as 774 we find an ecclesiastical school law, to
    the effect that each Bishop should found an ecclesiastical school
    in his episcopal town and appoint a competent teacher to instruct
    “according to the tradition of the Romans.” _Eugene II._ ordained
    in 826 anew that efficient teachers should be provided for the
    cathedral schools wherever needed, who were “to lecture on the
    sciences and the liberal arts with zeal.” “All Bishops should have
    the liberal arts taught at their churches,” was a resolution of
    the Council held in Rome in 1079 by _Gregory VII._ We read in the
    acts of the Lateran Synod of 1179: “Inasmuch as it behooves the
    Church, like a loving mother, to see to it that poor children who
    cannot count upon the support of their parents should not lack
    opportunity of learning to read and make progress, there should at
    every cathedral church be given an adequate prebend to the
    teacher—who is to teach the clerics of this church and the poor
    pupils gratuitously” (_E. Michael_, Gesch. des Deutschen Volkes
    II, 1899, 370). School education flourished more and more; in the
    thirteenth century it was in full bloom. In Germany even many
    unimportant places, market towns, boroughs, and villages had their
    schools at that time. In Mayence and its immediate neighbourhood
    there were, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, seven chapter
    schools; at Muenster at least four schools; the clerical schools
    at Erfurt had an attendance of no less than 1,000 pupils. About
    the year 1400 the diocese of Prague alone had 460 schools. In the
    middle Rhine district, about the year 1500, many counties had an
    elementary school for every radius of two leagues; even rural
    communities with 500 to 600 inhabitants, like Weisenau near Mainz,
    and Michaelstadt in Odenwald, did not lack schools. (_J. Janssen_,
    Gesch. des Deutschen Volkes, 15th ed., 1890, 26; cf. Michael, 1.
    c. 402, 417-419; _Palacky_, Gesch. v. Boehmen, III, 1, p. 186).
    Even in far-off Transylvania there was, as early as the fourteenth
    century, no village without a church and a school (_K. Th.
    Becker_, Die Volksschule der Siebenbuerger Sachsen, 1894, y;
    Michael, 430). There is no doubt that this flourishing state of
    schools was due in the first place to the stimulus, support, and
    unselfish effort of the Church.


But we will not dwell longer on this subject. We wish, however, to point
out more plainly something more closely related to our subject, viz., _the
attitude of the Church towards the universities_, at a time when the most
prominent nurseries of science were first coming into existence and
beginning to flourish, when they began to exert their influence upon the
civilization of Europe. Here, in the first place, it should become clear
whether it be true that the Church has ever looked upon the progress of
science with suspicion or even suppressed it. History teaches, in this
instance again, that no one has shown more interest, more devotion, more
readiness, to make sacrifices in promoting the establishment and growth of
the university, than the Church.

When, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the thirst for knowledge,
stronger than at any time in history, made itself felt in the Christian
countries of Europe, there were erected in the universities great
international homes of science, so as to gratify the deeply felt need of
education. And thousands hastened to these places to acquire the knowledge
of the period, overcoming all difficulties, then much greater than now. A
recent writer remarks about this not without reason: “The academic
instruction met on part of the thronging thousands with a psychic
disposition more favourable than at any other time. In a way it was here a
case of first love” (_W. Muench_, Zukunftspaedagogik, 1908, 337). At the
universities of the Middle Ages there were taught theology, ecclesiastical
and civil law, the liberal arts, and medicine. But not in the manner that
all four faculties were everywhere represented. Theology especially was
quite frequently lacking, though the aim was to have all sciences
represented. What since the beginning of the thirteenth century was first
of all understood by a university were _studia generalia_—then the usual
name for universities, in contradistinction to _studium particulare_.
Universities enjoyed the privilege of having their academic degrees
honoured everywhere, and their graduates could teach anywhere. The
universities were of an international character. Hence it happened that at
the German universities there were sitting in quest of knowledge by the
side of Germans also foreign youths, from Scotland, Sweden, and Norway,
from Italy and France, all contending for academic honours—a moment which
unquestionably contributed in no small degree to the improvement of
education.

Prior to the Reformation, universities were not state institutions, as
they are at present in Europe, but free, independent corporations. They
were complete in themselves, they made their own statutes, had their own
jurisdiction, and many other privileges. The modern university enjoys but
a small remnant of those ancient prerogatives. In a public speech, made in
the presence of the Duke of Saxony, the Leipsic professor, _Johann Kone_,
could say in 1445: “No king, no chancellor, has any right to interfere
with our privileges and exemptions; the university rules itself, and
changes and improves its statutes according to its needs” (_Janssen_, 1.
c. 91).

Up to the year 1300 there were no less than 23 universities established in
Italy, 5 in France, 2 in England, 4 in Spain, and 1 in Portugal. “Had all
intentions been realized, Europe would have had by the year 1400 no fewer
than 55 universities, including Paris and Bologna. But of 9 of them there
are extant only the charter deeds that were never executed. At any rate,
there were 46 of them, of which 37 or 39 existed at the turn of the
fourteenth century; a considerable number, which was not known till recent
years” (_Denifle_). Germany, Austria, and Hungary shared in 8: Prague,
Cracow, Vienna, Fuenfkirchen, Ofen, Heidelberg, Cologne, and Erfurt.
Within fifty years, from 1460 to 1510, no less than 9 universities were
founded in Germany—a clear proof of the generous enthusiasm for science of
that period.

By their fostering and founding of universities, secular princes have won
the lasting gratitude of posterity, and so have the municipalities of a
later period for showing an even greater zeal than those princes. But it
was indisputably the Church that bestowed upon these homes of learning and
culture the greatest benevolence and support for their foundation and
maintenance.

In the first place, history shows that the majority of them were founded
by _Papal charters_. Since universities were understood to have the power
of conferring degrees of international value, they had to be universally
acknowledged; this could be effected only by an authority of universal
recognition; hence by the Roman-German Emperor—as the supreme prince of
the world-wide Christian monarchy, or by the Pope, who was considered in
the first place. He was the general Father and Teacher of Christendom;
this is why Papal charters were so zealously sought after, in addition to
imperial charters. Of the 44 universities called into existence before the
year 1400, 31 were founded by Papal charters. A similar condition
prevailed in the fifteenth century and afterwards, up to the Reformation.
This was no interference in foreign affairs: such an interpretation would
have caused just surprise in the Middle Ages. That the highest spiritual
power on earth should have the first claim in education was a matter of
general concession. And certainly the manner in which the Church made use
of this right, to speak with an historian of the universities, forms “one
of the most important, and by no means least inglorious, parts of an
activity so manifold and difficult” (_V. A. Huber_, Die Englischen
Universitaeten, I, 1839, p. 14).

These Papal charters breathe a warm _benevolence_ for science. Everywhere
we find the wish expressed, that studies thrive in those places which are
most suitable for the effectual spread of science, and that the different
countries have a sufficient number of scientifically trained men.


    Read, for instance, the charter given by Pope _Boniface VIII._ to
    Pamiers and Avignon, or the Letter of Privileges granted to
    Coimbra by _Clement V._ (apud _Denifle_, 793, 524), or _Pius
    II.’s_ Bull founding the university of Basle. The Pope says here
    about the aim of science: “Among the various blessings to which
    man may by the grace of God attain in this mortal life, the last
    place is not to be given to persevering study, by which man may
    gain the pearl of the sciences, which point out the way to a good
    and happy life, and by their excellence elevate the learned men
    above the uneducated. Science makes man like to God, and enables
    him to clearly perceive the secrets of the world. It aids the
    unlearned, it elevates to sublime heights those born in the
    lowliest condition.” “For this reason the Holy See has always
    promoted the sciences, given them homes, and provided for their
    wants, that they might flourish, so that men, well directed, might
    the more easily acquire so lofty a human happiness, and, when
    acquired, share it with others.” This was the longing desire that
    led to the opening at Basle of “a plentiful spring of science, of
    whose fulness all those may draw who desire to be introduced into
    the study of the mysteries of Scripture and learning.” Even prior
    to this, the same Pope had written to the Duke _Louis of Bavaria_:
    “The Apostolic See desires the widest possible extension of
    science,” which, “while other things are exhausted by
    dissemination, is the only thing that expands the more the greater
    the number of those reached by it” (apud _Janssen_, 1. c, p. 89).


But the Church was not satisfied with granting charters. She also gave
very _substantial material aid_ to most of the universities. The Popes
maintained two universities at Rome, one of them connected with the Papal
Curia, a sort of court-school. It was founded by _Innocent IV._, in order
that the many who came to the Papal court from all parts of Christendom
might satisfy also their thirst for knowledge. Theology, law, especially
civil law, medicine, and languages, including Oriental languages, were
taught there. Besides this there was another university at Rome, founded
by _Boniface VIII._ for a similar purpose: it did not flourish long,
though in 1514 it counted no less than eighty-eight professors. Many
attempts to found or support universities would have proved abortive had
not the Popes provided for the salaries of professors by prebends and
stipends, and by allotting to that end a portion of the income of priests
and churches. Bishops, too, proved themselves zealous patrons of the
universities (_Paulsen_, Gesch. des gelehrten Unterrichts, 2d ed., I,
1898, p. 27).


    Thus, to cite a few examples of German universities, there was in
    1532, with the consent of the Archbishop _Arnest_, a contribution
    raised by the clergy for the endowment of the university of
    Prague, to which the various cloisters and chapters, especially
    those at Prague, contributed. With the money thus raised the
    Archbishop purchased property, the income from which was to
    provide salaries for the professors. Twelve professors received
    from _Urban V._ the canonicates of the church of All Saints
    (_Denifle_, 598). Erfurt university was given 4 canonicates,
    Cologne 11, Greifswald still more. Similarly Tuebingen, Breslau,
    Rostock, Wittenberg, and Freiburg were cared for (_Kaufmann_, Die
    Gesch. der Deutschen Universitaeten, II, 1896, p. 34, _seq._).
    Vienna found a benefactor in the pastor of Gars, who on October
    13, 1370, founded a purse for 3 sublectors and 1 scholar.
    Heidelberg received 10 canonicates. Its great benefactor was the
    learned _Johann von Dalberg_, first curator of the university, and
    later Bishop of Worms. Under him Heidelberg reached the zenith of
    its lustre, and laid the foundation of almost all that has won it
    the reputation it at present enjoys. By his co-operation the first
    chair of Greek was founded; to him the foundation of the college
    library is due, which later on gained world-wide fame under the
    name of “Palatina.” He further collected a private library, rich
    in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew books, the use of which was open to
    all scientists. “The Rhenish Literary Society” attained its
    greatest prominence under his direction (_Janssen_, 1. c.
    100-105). Ingolstadt, too, obtained its needed income by the
    donation of rich church-prebends, to such an extent that the
    “endowments netted the university about 2,500 florins,” a very
    large sum for that time (_Kaufmann_, 1. c. 38). _Prantl_ also
    admits in regard to Ingolstadt: “The Papal Curia did its best to
    furnish the university” (Gesch. der Ludwig-Maximilian in
    Ingolstadt, 1872, I, 19, apud _Janssen_, 1. c. p. 9).


It is true, the Church then owned much property. But it is just as true
that she was ever ready to support science and colleges out of this
property. Pope and clergy were also taking incessant pains to make it
possible for _poor students_ to attend the university, not only for
theological students, but for those of all the faculties, to give an
opportunity to rich and poor alike to enjoy the advantages of higher
education. Stipends and legacies of this kind are numerous. Even in our
own days many a son of an _alma mater_ owes the stipend he enjoys to
endowments made by the Church. In the course of time there were
established at most of the universities so-called _colleges_ for the
purpose of offering shelter and maintenance to poor students.


    These colleges contributed essentially to the flourishing
    condition of the university. Thus _Albrecht v. Langenstein_
    suggested, at the founding of Vienna university, to the Duke,
    _Albrecht of Austria_, the establishment of such colleges,
    inasmuch as the continuance of the university was dependent on
    them, and stated that Paris owed its prosperity to them
    (_Denifle_, 624).

    The Popes set here the best example. _Zoen_, Bishop of Avignon,
    had provided in his testament that eight students from the
    province of Avignon should be maintained at Bologna by his
    successors from their estates at Bologna. These estates, however,
    were sold later on. _John XXII._ then interfered in favour of the
    students injured thereby and annulled the deed of purchase. The
    income was set aside and increased to an amount sufficient for
    thirty scholars; later on the Pope endeavoured to raise their
    number to fifty. At the same celebrated academy, which, next to
    Paris, had long been a beacon of science sought from near and
    afar, _Urban V._ founded a home for poor students and directed the
    appropriation of 4,000 gold ducats a year for it. From June 16,
    1367, to June 15, 1368, the home received an appropriation of
    5,908 ducats in gold and 155 baskets of cereals. His successor,
    _Gregory XI._, set himself to the task of completing the work
    begun. Out of the income of the Church he ordered appropriated in
    the future 1,500 ducats a year for thirty students, of whom one
    half were to study Canon Law, the other half Civil Law. He then
    decreed the purchase of a home for 4,500 ducats in gold, and
    ordered to pay out immediately 4,000 florins in gold for the next
    school year. Besides the college named, _Urban V._ had founded one
    at Montpellier for medical students, and another, which had its
    seat at first at Trets, later at Monosque. During his pontificate
    this Pope maintained no less than 1,000 students at various
    institutions. Toulouse also had several colleges for poor
    students, founded by high princes of the Church. In the year 1359
    _Innocent VI._ devoted his own home at Toulouse with all its
    possessions and its entire income to twenty poor students, ten of
    whom were to study Canon Law and ten Civil Law. For their further
    maintenance he ordered given to them, besides other things, 25,000
    florins in gold “manualiter” (_Denifle_, 213 _seq._, 308 _seq._,
    339).


Finally, nearly all universities, whether they owed their existence to
ecclesiastical or civil power, received many and far-reaching _privileges_
from the Popes. Not the least one was for clerical students the
dispensation to free them from the requirement of residence for the
enjoyment of their benefices, which made it possible for them to study in
remote university towns, where they were free to study not only theology,
but other sciences as well. This dispensation was quite common.
Furthermore, the Popes protected in the most energetic way the
universities in their privileges and freedom every time they were applied
to for aid.


    This happened, for instance, at Bologna. The students there had
    their free guilds. The municipal authorities began to restrict
    their privileges by forbidding native students under heavy
    penalties to study outside of Bologna, which was later on extended
    to the alien students. The professors sided with the city.
    _Honorius III._ in 1220 called upon the latter to repeal those
    statutes; if they wanted to confine the students to the city, it
    should be done by clemency, not with severity and coercion. The
    city relented. But we see again in 1224 the students appeal, for
    the third time since 1217, to the Pope, begging for protection.
    The tension had grown; the city was actually beginning to use
    force. _Honorius_ sharply rebuked the city for this action,
    threatening excommunication if the authorities continued to
    suppress freedom. The city yielded completely, and the freedom of
    the students was saved, thanks to their protector. Later on the
    Popes had to interfere again. _Clement V._ had already ordered the
    Bishops to protect the students at Bologna. His successor, _John
    XXII._, received complaints that privileges of students in Italy
    were being violated by authorities and citizens of the city.
    Against the Podesta of Bologna especially complaints were made.
    The Pope, in 1321 and 1322, bade the Bishops and Archbishops to
    take measures against those who _directe et indirecte impedire
    dieuntur, ne ad praedictum studium valeant declinare contra
    apostolica et imperialia privilegia_. He appointed at Bologna a
    special protector and conservator of the university. Some years
    after, when the Podesta declined to take the _juramentum de
    observandis statutis ejusdem studiis factis et faciendis_, he was
    commanded to take the oath.

    At Orleans there was a flourishing law school; especially its _jus
    civile_ was famous. Professors and students were granted by
    _Clement V._ the privilege of an autonomous university with the
    right of free corporation, with the power to suspend lectures in
    case they could get no satisfaction for any wrong done them. These
    privileges were a thorn in the eye of the city; its citizens even
    allowed violence to be done the university. Then _Philip the Fair_
    interfered, but in a way which indicates that he did not know
    sufficiently the university life of the Middle Ages. Moreover, he
    annulled the granted free fellowship, and put professors and the
    students under civil supervision. But this was not tolerated in
    those days. The king had at the same time given many privileges,
    but they were disregarded. In 1316 professors and students left
    Orleans and the university ceased to exist. The first act of _John
    XXII._ upon ascending the Papal throne was to restore this school,
    the French king himself having begged his support in the matter.
    The king’s suggestion to take the privilege of free fellowship
    from the professors and students was rejected by the Pope. The
    Pope reaffirmed all privileges granted to the university,
    whereupon the professors and students returned, to inaugurate the
    most brilliant epoch of their college.


Considering these facts, one may subscribe to the judgment of _Denifle_
which he pronounces at the conclusion of his thorough treatise on the
universities of the Middle Ages: “So far as the foundation of the
universities can be spoken of, its merit belongs to the Popes, to secular
rulers, clergy, and laity. But that the lion’s share belongs to the Popes
every one must admit who has followed my presentment, which is exclusively
based on documents, and who examines history with impartiality” (Ib. 792
_seq._). Even _Kaufmann_, who is very unfavourably disposed towards the
Church, cannot deny that “numerous Popes have shown warm interest for the
fostering of sciences during those centuries, and were for the most part
themselves prominent representatives of science” (Ib. 403).

That the mediæval universities in some points, though not in all, were
inferior to modern universities, was not their fault. No good judge of
human conditions could expect it to be otherwise. The experience and
efficiency of the mature man is not attained at once, but only after the
exertions and experiments made by him during the period of youth and
development. At a time when all the experiences in the field of school
legislation, which are the property of the present day, had yet to be
collected, when the relation between lower and higher schools had not been
regulated in all respects, at that time it was not possible to be in the
position we are in to-day. Future critics of our times will see in our
present educational systems many gross defects, which often are not hidden
even to our own eyes. But it would be arrogance for them to belittle our
efforts, the fruits of which they will once enjoy without any merit on
their part. The university of yore conformed to the educational purposes
of that period; it was the focus of intellectual life, perhaps to a larger
degree than is the case to-day. This suffices. Moreover, the number of
professors was quite considerable, that of the students even more so. In
Bologna in 1388 the number of professors was 70, not including the
theologians, among them 39 jurists; in Piacenza there were from the years
1398 to 1402 71 professors; among them were 27 teachers of Roman law and
22 teachers of medicine (_Denifle_, 209, 571).

In regard to the zeal displayed by the Church in promoting universities,
it might be objected that she was caring in the first place for
_theology_, not for the other sciences, and that the universities then had
chiefly been established for theological students. This, however, is not
the case. The universities especially favoured by the Popes were first of
all law schools, chiefly of civil law, or medical schools. Those at
Bologna, Padua, Florence, and Orleans were principally law schools; in
Italy, in general, chief attention was paid to jurisprudence, particularly
to Roman law. Montpellier was essentially a medical college; it attained
during the thirteenth century preponderance even over Salerno. The
assertion has been made that the vigorous life at this medical college was
owing to its independence of Rome (_Haeser_, Lehrbuch der Geschichte der
Medizin, 1, 655. Cfr. _Denifle_, 342). But _Denifle_ has proved that
“clerical organs have been the moving spirits of the medical college at
Montpellier.”

Nor did the Papal charter deeds exclude any profane science. The common
formula, which always prevails, authorizes to teach indiscriminately _in
jure canonico et civili necnon in medicina et qualibet alia licita
facultate_. Only one science was frequently excepted, and that was just
theology. Of the forty-six high schools that had been established up to
the year 1400, about twenty-eight, therefore nearly two-thirds, excluded
by their charter the teaching of theology. At first a number of
universities sprang up merely as law schools, others as medical schools,
and there was then no need to include the science of theology in the
schedule of studies. Furthermore, Paris was ever since the twelfth century
looked upon as the home and the natural place for theology (_Denifle_, 703
f.). Hence the benevolence of the Church towards the universities was not
merely determined by selfish interest.

Or was it, nevertheless? May the Church not have bestowed so much care on
the homes of science in order to increase her own influence thereby, and
also with an eye to the future? This assertion has been made. But this
assertion is an injustice and it is against the testimony of history. The
Popes very often issued their charter deeds only then, when request was
made by worldly rulers and by the cities themselves. Hence there was no
hurried self-assertion. And the Church has never denied the right to
worldly powers to found their own high schools. The theologians of the
thirteenth century expressedly declared it to be the duty of princes to
provide for institutions of learning (Cfr. _Thomas of Aquin_, De regimine
principum, I, 13; Op. contra impug. relig. 3).


    Thus up to the year 1400 nine high schools had received no
    charters at all, ten only imperial charters or charters from their
    local sovereigns. If the Popes had cared only about their
    influence, why then did they treat such colleges with the same
    benevolence? Spain’s first college was founded at Paleneia in the
    years 1212-1214 by _Alfonso VIII._ without asking the Pope. When
    soon afterwards it was in trouble it was _Honorius III._ who aided
    _Alfonso’s_ successor in restoring it, by assigning some
    ecclesiastical income to its professors. When the college was
    nearly wrecked and Rome once more applied to for help, _Urban IV._
    lent an aiding hand because he did not want _ut lucerna tanta
    claritatis in commune mutorum dispendium sic extincta remaneat_.
    _Frederick II._ had founded a university of his own. When it
    failed it was _Clement IV._ who urged _King Charles_ of Anjou to
    re-establish it. _In eodem regno facias et jubeas hujusmodi
    studium reformari_ (_Denifle_, 478, 459). This is not the language
    and action of one who is only ruled by the passion to spread his
    own influence, and not guided by benevolence for science.

    But it is true, in supporting the higher schools the Church did
    not aim at science as its ultimate object; it was her view that
    science should serve the material welfare of man, but still more
    the highest ethical and religious purpose of life. This in general
    was the conception of the entire Middle Ages. At that time it
    would have been considered curious to seek a science ultimately
    for its own sake.


And the universities repaid the Church by gratitude and devotion. The
effort has been made to demonstrate that the modern separation of science
from religion had already begun in the Middle Ages, and had showed itself
everywhere; this tendency for autonomy “appeared at first only timidly and
in manifold disguises” (_Kaufmann_, 14). How easy it is to find such
disguises may be shown by an example. The university of Paris had after
the death of _St. Thomas_ asked for his remains. _Kaufmann_ holds that the
notion of the autonomy of science had found sharp expression in the
memorandum wherein the university stated the motive of its request. Now
how does this harmless document sound? “Quoniam omnino est indecens et
indignum ut alia ratio aut locus quam omnium studiorum nobilissima
Parisiensis civitas quae ipsum prius educavit nutrivit et fovit et post
modum ad eodem doctrinae monumenta et ineffabilia fomenta suscepit ossa
... habeat.... Si enim Ecclesia merito ossa et reliquias Sanctorum honorat
nobis non sine causa videtur honestum et sanctum tanti doctoris corpus in
perpetuum penes nos habere in honore.” Evidently the university requests
the relic for itself, or rather for the Parisiensis civitas, not in
opposition to the Church, but in opposition to other cities, altera natio
aut locus. I wonder if the Parisian admirers of St. Thomas ever dreamed
that they would one day be put in the light of forerunners of liberal
science, because of their pious application for the bones of their great
teacher? This is tantamount to carrying one’s own idea into the fact.
_Denifle_, probably the most competent judge of the affairs of mediæval
universities, writes as follows: “If we weigh the different acts which
suggest themselves to us in these various foundations, and if we compare
them with one another, there is revealed to us, in the realm of history of
the foundation of mediæval universities, a wonderful harmony between
Church and State, between the spiritual and material. This is the reason
why the universities of the Middle Ages appear to us as the highest civil
as well as the highest ecclesiastical teaching institutions.
Fundamentally, they are the product of the Christian spirit which
penetrated the whole, wherein Pope and Prince, clergy and laity, each held
the proper position” (l. c. p. 795).

One consequence of this relation between the universities and the Church
was that “they attained their greatest prosperity as long as the unity of
Church and faith remained unimpaired, and that, at the time of the
Reformation, they all sided with the Church with the exception of two,
Wittenberg and Erfurt. Torn away from their ecclesiastical and established
basis only by violent means, they were led to the new doctrine, but really
succumbed to it only when their freedom had been curtailed and they had
been reduced to state institutions” (_Janssen_, l. c. p. 91). They had
been, as the learned _Wimpheling_ wrote at the close of the sixteenth
century, “the most favoured daughters of the Church, who tried to repay by
fidelity and attachment what they owed to their Mother” (De arte
impressoria, apud _Janssen_, l. c. 91).



A False Progress.


Hence history cannot subscribe to the accusation that the Church is the
enemy of progress. How then does it happen that this accusation is made so
frequently? The idea suggests itself that there may be here a different
meaning given to the word “progress,” that the Church opposes a certain
kind of progress which her enemies call “the” progress. And this is the
actual fact. If we examine the proofs which are to show the hostile
attitude of the Church, we meet at every step _Galileo_, the Copernican
system, the Syllabus, and Index. But this appears only on the surface,
which hides beneath it something that is easily overlooked by the cursory
glance. And this is the precise definition of scientific and civilized
progress. Progress has ever been an ideal of powerful attraction. The
noblest and best of men have ever displayed the most earnest endeavour
onward and upward. In our times, however, this ideal comes forward
differently garbed, in the name of the new view of the world, and
resolutely censures as reactionary everything that will oppose it. What is
this definition?

Since the _theory of evolution_ of _Lamarck_ and _Darwin_ entered biology,
it has also more and more invaded other branches of science. The principle
is now that everywhere, in the organic or inorganic world and in the whole
province of human life there is a gradual growth and change—nothing
permanent, nothing definite and absolute. Uninterrupted evolution
hitherto; hereafter restless development; especially in the greatest good
belonging to human life, thought, philosophy, and chiefly religion. Here,
too, there are no forms nor dogmas which evolution in its continual
development does not evolve and elevate. This idea of evolution is
supplemented by subjectivism with its _relativism of truth_: all views,
especially philosophical and religious “Truths,” are no longer the
reproduction of objectively existing things, but a creation of the
subject, of his inner experience and feeling; hence each age must proceed
to new thought of _its own_.


    “The methods of scientific research,” we are told, “are determined
    by the idea of evolution, and this applies not only to natural
    sciences but also to the so-called intellectual sciences,—history,
    philology, philosophy, and theology. The idea of evolution
    influences and dominates all our thoughts; without it progress in
    the field of scientific knowledge is quite impossible.” We read,
    for instance, in the modern history of philosophy: “The rise and
    fall of a system is a necessary part of universal history; it is
    conditioned by the character of its time, the system being the
    understanding of that time, while this understanding of the time
    is conditioned by the fact that the time has changed.” At
    _Roscellin’s_ time the nominalists were intellectually inferior;
    but where there is question of undermining the militant Church of
    the Middle Ages the nominalists will be considered to have been
    the greater philosophers. In this the realists “by the futility of
    their struggle proved that the time for nominalism had arrived,
    hence that whoever favours it understands the time better; that
    is, more philosophically. After the beginning of the Renaissance
    we notice an attempt at philosophizing in such a way as to ignore
    the existence of divine wisdom taught by Christianity. The
    pre-Christian sages had done so: to philosophize in their spirit
    was therefore the task of the time, and those who had a better
    understanding of the time philosophized that way better than by
    the scholastic method; though their method may appear reactionary
    to unphilosophical minds” (_J. E. Erdmann_, Grundriss der Gesch.
    der Philosophie, 3d ed., I (1878), 4, 262, 434, 502). This is a
    frank denial of any truth in philosophy: the more neological and
    modern a thing is, the more truth there is in it! Realism was
    right in _Roscellin’s_ time, but a later period had to sweep it
    away. The Christian religion was right for the Middle Ages, but
    when the Greek authors began to be read again it was no longer
    modern.

    Apostasy from the faith is considered a mark of progress. “Italian
    natural philosophy,” we are told, “reached its pinnacle with
    _Bruno_ and _Campanella_, of whom the former, though the older,
    appears to be more progressive on account of his freer attitude
    towards the Church” (_R. Falkenburg_, Gesch. der neueren
    Philosophie, 5th ed. (1905), page 30, _seq._). Hence evidently
    further development of Christianity, too, is demanded. According
    to subjectivistic views it was hitherto only an historical product
    of the human intellect: hence “onward to new and higher forms
    corresponding to modern thought and feeling, onward to a new
    Christianity without dogmas and authority!” “Break up those old
    tablets,” spoke _Zarathustra_.


Such is progress in thought and science, for which the way must be opened.
That the immutable dogmas of Christianity, that the task of the Catholic
Church to preserve revelation intact, are incompatible with it, that the
Church appears reactionary, and as an obstacle to this progress, is now
self-evident. Here we have the _deeper contrast between progress, in the
anti-Christian sense, and the essence of Christianity_ in general, and,
especially, of the _Catholic Church_.


    “It is frankly admitted that the issue is the struggle between the
    two views of the world—between the Christian, conservative
    dogmatism and the anti-dogmatic evolutionary philosophy” (Neue
    Freie Presse, Jun. 7, 1908). Faith according to its very essence
    is immutable and stationary, science is essentially progressive:
    they had therefore to part in a manner which could not be kept a
    secret. “A divine revelation must necessarily be intolerant of
    contradiction, it must repudiate all improvement in itself” (_J.
    Draper_, History of the Conflict between Religion and Science,
    VI). “The great opposition between the rigid dogmatism of the
    Roman Catholic Church and the ever progressing modern science
    cannot be removed” (Academicus, l. c. 362). So say the opponents
    of the Church.


There is no error, says _St. Augustine_, which does not contain some
truth, especially when it is able to rule the thought of many. Hence its
capacity to deceive. The same is true in the present case.

There is evolution and progress in everything, or at least there should
be. The individual gradually develops from the embryo into a perfect form,
though it becomes nothing else than what it had formerly been in its
embryonic state. Mankind advances rapidly in civilization; we no longer
ride in the rumbling stage-coach but in a comfortable express train, and
the tallow candle has been replaced by the electric light. Thus we demand
progress also in knowledge and science, and even in religion. Many things
that were obscure to older generations have become clear to us; we have
corrected many an error, made many discoveries which were unknown to our
ancestors. Many doctrines of faith, also, appear to our eyes in sharper
outlines than before; of many we have a deeper understanding, discovered
new relations, meanings, and deductions. Thus there is progress and
development everywhere.

But it would be erroneous to conclude from all this that there cannot be
any stable truths and dogmas, that progress to new and different views and
doctrines is necessary. By the same right we might conclude that the main
principles of the Copernican system cannot be immutable, because they
would hinder the progress of science. Progress certainly does not consist
in throwing away all certainty acquired, in order to begin anew. Or does
it really belong to progress in astronomy to again give up _Copernicus_,
to go back to _Ptolemy_ and let the sun and all the stars revolve again
around the earth? Does not progress rather consist in our studying these
astronomical results more closely, in building up the details, and, first
of all, in trying to solve new problems?

The champion of the faith will reply: Just as established results do not
hinder the progress of science, just so do the doctrines of faith not form
an obstacle to progress and evolution. The fixed doctrines of the faith
themselves, in themselves and in their application to the conditions of
life, offer rich material for the growth of religious knowledge. And there
is the immense field for progress in the profane sciences. If any one
should say that the believing scientist, who is bound by his dogmas, can
do nothing further but reiterate his old truths, one might in turn argue:
Then the astronomer bound by the fundamental rules of the Copernican
system could have only the monotonous task of drawing over and over again
the outlines of his system, while the mathematician who holds the
multiplication table to be an unalienable possession would not be allowed
to do aught but to repeat the multiplication table.

Or the argument may be put thus: We have made great progress in the
material province of civilization, in science and art; “can an old
religion suffice under these new and improved conditions, a religion which
originated at an age when these conditions did not exist? This
contradiction is shocking.... Progress in culture demands progress in
religion.... We want a more perfect religion, a higher religion”
(_Masaryk_, Im Kampf um die Religion, 1904, 29). Note the logic of this
demonstration. We no longer light our rooms by the dim light of a small
oil lamp, we walk no longer at night through dark narrow lanes, but
through brightly illuminated avenues, does it follow from this that it can
no longer be true that Christ is the Son of God, nor that He has worked
miracles, or founded a Church, and a new religion is therefore necessary?
We have made progress in our knowledge of history; we know a good deal of
Rome and Carthage, of the civilization of ancient Egypt and of Greece, and
of their mutual relations; we have other fashions of life than our fathers
had, we build and paint differently—our political life, too, has grown
more complicated; does it follow from all this, that it cannot be true
that we are created by God, that we must believe a divine revelation,
hence a new religion is necessary? Progress and evolution to consist in
ever abandoning the old and advancing to new and different views—this is
_absurd_. Absurd, in the first place, because it is no _progress_ at all,
but a retrogression, a hopeless alternation of forwards and backwards.
There can be no progress if I am always withdrawing from my old position;
progress is possible only by retaining the basis established and then
advancing therefrom. And _evolution_ is not a continuous remodelling and
shaping anew, but a continuance in growth. Evolution means that the embryo
unfolds, and by retaining and perfecting the old matter gradually becomes
a plant; evolution is in the progress from bud to blossom; but not in the
changing mass of clouds, swept away to-day by the current wind and
replaced to-morrow by other clouds. An absurdity, also, for the reason
that it violates all laws of reason, that once there was a revelation of
God to be believed, but that this is no longer true.

Furthermore, the demand to follow always “the ideas of the period”
suggests the question: Who is to represent the period? Who represented
Greece, the sophists or _Plato_? Who was representative of the first days
of Christianity, the Roman emperors or the martyrs? Will not the passage
in _Goethe’s_ Faust apply in most cases: “What they call the spirit of the
times is but their own mind wherein the times are reflected”? True, if
progress is taken to be the overstepping by human reason of the eternal
standards of immutable truth and the barriers of faith, if it is to be the
attempt at emancipation from God and religion, then there is no more
resolute foe of progress than the Christian religion, than the Catholic
Church. But this is not progress but loss of the truth, not higher
religion but apostasy, not development of what is best in man, but
retrogression to mental disintegration by scepticism.



The Syllabus.


In the eyes of many it is especially the Syllabus of _Pius IX._ by which
the Catholic Church has erected a lasting monument to its enmity to
civilization. It is the Syllabus, we are told, in which _Pius IX._ has “ex
cathedra condemned the freedom of science” (_W. Kahl_,
Bekenntnissgebundenheit und Lehrfreiheit, 1897, 10); “in which modern
culture and science is being cursed” (_Th. Fuchs_, Neue Freie Presse, Nov.
25, 1907); in which “the most general foundations of our political order,
the freedom of conscience, are rejected” (_G. Kaufmann_, Die Lehrfreiheit
an den deutschen Universitaeten, 1898, 34); “in which it has simply
anathematized the achievements of the modern concept of right” (_F. Jodl_,
Gedanken über Reformkatholizismus, 1902, 5); the Syllabus “strikes blows
against the autonomy of human development of culture, it is a _non
possumus_, I cannot make peace, I cannot compromise with what is termed
progress, liberalism, and civilization.” The Syllabus is a favorite stock
argument of professional free-thinkers and agitators, and the one with
which they like to open the discussion. For this reason we must say a few
words about it.

When a Syllabus is spoken of without any distinction, the Syllabus of
_Pius IX._ is meant. It is a list of eighty condemned propositions which
this Pope sent on December 8, 1864, to all the Bishops of the world,
together with the encyclical letter “Quanta Cura.” _Pius IX._ had, prior
to this, and on various occasions, denounced these propositions as false
and to be repudiated. They were now gathered together in the Syllabus.
They represent the _program of modern liberalism_ in the province of
religion and in politics in relation to religion. They are repudiated in
the following order: Pantheism; liberal freedom of thought and of
conscience as a repudiation of the duty to believe; religious freedom as a
demand of emancipation from faith and Church; religious indifferentism;
the denial of the Church and of her independence of the state; the
omnipotence of state power, especially in the province of thought. The
single propositions are not all designated as heretical, hence the
contrary is not always pronounced to be dogma; they are rejected in
general as “errors.” It is not necessary to discuss here the question
whether and to what extent the Syllabus is an infallible decision. Suffice
it to say it is binding for believing Catholics.

Has the Catholic any reason to be ashamed of the Syllabus?

It was a resolute deed. A deed of that intrepidity and firm consistency
which has ever characterized the Catholic Church. With her fearless love
of truth the Church has in the Syllabus solemnly condemned the errors of
the modern rebellion against the supernatural order, of the naturalization
and declaration of independence of the human life. For this reason the
Syllabus is called an attack upon modern culture, science, and education,
upon the foundations of the state. Is this true?

It is, and it is not. All that is good and Christian in modern culture is
not touched by the Syllabus; it strikes only at what is anti-Christian in
our times and in the leading ideas of our times. It does not condemn
freedom of science, but only the liberal freedom which throws off the yoke
of faith; it does not repudiate freedom of religion and conscience, but
the _liberal_ freedom which will not acknowledge a divine revelation nor
take the Church as a guide. Not the foundations of modern states are
attacked, but only the liberal ideas of emancipation from religion, and of
opposition to the Church. The Church proclaims to the world only what has
been known to all Christian centuries, that, just as the single individual
is bound to have the Christian belief and must lead a Christian life, so
are nations and organized states; that the human creature is subject to
the law of Christ in all its relations. Nor does she contend against
genuine progress in science, education and in the material domain, but
merely against liberal progress towards the irreligious materialization of
life.

This emancipation from the Christian faith poses mostly under the
attractive and deceptive name of “modern progress.” Indeed, it has ever
been the pretension of liberalism to look upon itself as the sole
harbinger of civilization, to claim the guidance of intellectual life for
its aim, and to stigmatize as a foe of culture any one that opposes the
dissemination of its anti-Christian humanism. It is also an expert in
giving to words a charm and an ambiguous meaning that deceive.
Emancipation from religion is “progress” and “enlightenment.” Everything
else is reactionary. Its infidelity is freedom of conscience and thought.
Everything else is “bondage.” Only its secular schools, its civil
marriage, its separation of Church and State are “modern.” Everything else
is obsolete, hence no longer warranted. For the Church to defend her
rights is arrogance; when the Church uses her God-given authority for the
good of the faith, she practises intellectual oppression; the Catholic who
lets himself be guided by his Church is called unpatriotic, bereft of his
civil spirit.

What striking contrast to the honesty in which the Church presents her
doctrines frankly before the whole world, without disguise or artifice.
The reason is that she has sufficient interior strength and truth to
render it unnecessary for her to take refuge in disguise or present the
truth in ambiguity.


    The clearest evidence of the Church’s hostility to culture is the
    condemnation of the 80th thesis of the _Syllabus_, so it is said.
    It is the thesis that the Pope can and must reconcile himself to,
    and compromise with, progress, liberalism, and modern
    civilization. This is a condemned proposition, hence the contrary
    is true: the Pope of Rome cannot, and must not, reconcile himself,
    nor compromise with, liberalism and modern civilization. Here we
    have the frankly admitted hostility against progress, education,
    and science—it is the watchword of the Papacy.

    This conclusion can be arrived at only by pushing aside all rules
    of scientific interpretation. What progress is this, with what
    civilization can the Papacy not be reconciled? The progress of
    modern liberalism. The heading of the paragraph containing this
    proposition states expressly that “errors of modern liberalism”
    are to be condemned. This becomes clear by the Allocution
    “Jamdudum cernimus” of March 18, 1861, from which this
    condemnation is taken. There it is stated: “It is asked that the
    Pope of Rome reconcile himself with progress, to liberalism as
    they call it, to the new civilization, and compromise with
    them.... But now we ask of those inviting us to be reconciled with
    modern civilization, whether the facts be such as to tempt the
    Vicar of Christ on earth ... to connect himself with the
    civilization of to-day without the greatest injury to this
    conscience ... a civilization that has caused the dissemination of
    numerous despicable opinions, errors, and principles in conflict
    with the Catholic religion and its doctrines.” Of course a
    civilization cut off from any true Christianity by education and
    science, by family life and political life, a progress, trying to
    stop the activity of the Church in every sphere and attacking her
    in their speech, in newspapers, and in schools, cannot demand of
    the Papacy to join hands with them. No Christian, whether Catholic
    or Protestant, can profess this “progress.” We have here at the
    same time a specimen of how they proceed in interpreting the
    propositions of the Syllabus in order to discover in them all
    possible absurdities. Many propositions are short sentences taken
    from the work of an author, or from previous Papal declarations.
    Hence they must be understood in the sense of those sources.
    Furthermore, attention must be paid to what is specially
    emphasized. Then, again, we must remember that by repudiating a
    proposition only the contradictory is asserted, but not the
    contrary; to conclude this would be to conclude too much. For
    instance, the seventy-seventh condemned proposition reads: “In our
    times it is no longer to any purpose that the Catholic religion
    should be the sole religion of the state to the exclusion of all
    other confessions.” According to some, _e.g._, _Frins_, the
    contradictory is thus formulated: “In our times also it is still
    to the purpose....” According to others, however, _e.g._,
    _Hoensbroeeh_ and _Goetz_: “In our times also it is
    beneficial....” Thus while _Hoensbroech_ and _Goetz_ make the
    ecclesiastical doctrine appear to read that it would be beneficial
    to hold fast to the Catholic as the sole religion of the state
    under all circumstances even to-day, the actual opposite is the
    doctrine, that this may be yet to the purpose under certain
    circumstances. While no reasonable man could object to the latter,
    the former is eagerly exploited against the Church (_Heiner_, Der
    Syllabus, 1905, p. 31, _seq._; cf. _Frins_, Kirchenlex, 2d ed.,
    XI, 1031; _Hoensbroech_, l. c. 25; _Goetz_, Der Ultramontanismus,
    1905, 148).


Of course it may be taken for granted that the Syllabus is distasteful to
modern liberalism, which is branded there as one of the errors of the day.
Yet the Church cannot be censured for not becoming unfaithful to her
vocation of preserving the patrimony of Christianity to mankind, or for
acting as the invincible defender of the Christian religion in the
universal struggle between truth and error, even though the latter pose
with great assurance.



The Condemnation of Modernism.


The great excitement caused in intellectual circles by the Syllabus of
_Pius IX._ was aroused again, though not with the same intensity, when
some years ago the news of another Syllabus was circulated through the
world, and the excitement increased when the rumour was followed by the
publication of the encyclical “Pascendi Dominici gregis.” Indeed, the new
event was not very unlike the former: in the 60’s Rome’s sentence was
directed against the Modernism of that period, which called itself
liberalism. The excitement caused by its condemnation was more intense,
because it struck directly at the principles governing the liberal
politics against the Church, which principles were claimed to be the
foundation of the modern state. Now the Modernism repudiated by the
Church’s voice was nothing more than the old humanistic, fundamental,
errors of liberalism, but put in the form of a religious and philosophical
view of the world, and in Catholic garb: it meant man detached from
everything supernatural, and dependent alone on himself in his
intellectual life, more especially in his religious life.

Now, as then, similar charges were raised: The Church is the
irreconcilable foe of modern achievements and the opponent of them; “the
encyclical aims at modern intellectual life in all its phases and forms”
(XX. Jahrh., 1908, 568). Now, as then, we have the same ambiguity of the
terms “modern” and “progress.”

What was condemned by the Church? The document “Lamentabili sane exitu,”
issued by the teaching authority of the Church on July 3, 1907, is
entitled “A Decree of the Holy Congregation of the Roman and General
Inquisition or the Holy Office,” which has to watch over the unadulterated
preservation of the faith. The decree soon was christened the “New
Syllabus,” because of its similarity with the Syllabus of _Pius IX._ In a
similar way it condemns sixty-five propositions against the inspiration
and the historical character of Holy Scripture, against the divine origin
of revelation and of faith, against the divinity of Christ, His
Resurrection and His atoning death, against the Sacraments, and against
the Church. These are component parts of the philosophical religious
system of thought which soon after was set forth and condemned by the
encyclical “Pascendi,” of September 8, 1907.

Modernism is essentially philosophy, combining modern _agnostic-autonomous
subjectivism_ with _evolutionism_, and applied to the Christian religion,
which thereby becomes disfigured beyond recognition. Its chain of thought,
excellently stated by the encyclical, starts with the proposition that the
supernatural is beyond the knowledge of man, and hence man cannot know
anything of God. The faith which unites us to God is nothing but a
feeling, born of a blind impulse, which may be considered a divine
revelation. If this religious feeling is expressed in forms, the result is
“doctrines of faith”; for Christian “dogmas” are this and nothing more,
images and symbols of the noble and divine, hence they are of human origin
and are changeable according to the disposition and the degree of learning
of the individual, as well as of the times. There is no dogmatic
Christianity, in the sense of an immutable religious doctrine, nor is
there any absolutely true religion, for religion is but a variable
feeling, that has nothing to do with cognition and knowledge. For this
reason they never can come in conflict. The Christian religion originally
was nothing else but the religious experience of Christ, who was not God
but a man; in the course of time it has undergone changes which are
reflected in the shaping of Christian dogma. Holy Scripture is, similarly,
the expression of the religious experience of its human authors; the
Sacraments are symbols, arousing religious sentiments; the Church is not
founded by God, and only has the task of regulating the development of
Christianity, and of sanctioning at any time whatever religious
experiences the changeable spirit of progressive civilization may produce.

This is Modernism, as represented chiefly in France, Italy, and to an
extent also in England; in Germany it did not appear as a system, but even
there its spirit became quite apparent. Thus, Modernism is nothing else
but the systematic arrangement of those ideas which we have hitherto met,
in various places, as the fundamental principles of modern religious
thought opposed to Christianity. It is subjectivism with its autonomy of
the human subject, its agnosticism, its relativism of truth, sailing under
the name of “historical method of thought” and “progress,” and, finally,
with its freedom of thought and conscience which rejects all authority. It
is _Kant_ in the robe of a Catholic theologian. Ultimately it is nothing
else but the shocking negation of everything supernatural, hence complete
apostasy. “The salient point is recognized,” says _Troeltsch_, “the enemy
is the modern historical method of thought, the concept of evolution, the
theory of inner experience and relativism as applied to religion, the
negation of supernaturalism as taught by the old Church” (l. c. 22).
Hence, was it not manifest that the Church had to take measures against
this positive denial of Christianity as a whole, the more so as the
uneducated could be easily deceived by it? Every organism will throw off
excrescences, the more energetically the stronger it is. Any religion
lacking this strength is doomed. That the Papal declaration aroused such
opposition must not be wondered at; it hit once more the central idea of
the anti-Christian view of the world. The judgment was not passed against
modern intellectual life, but only against the grave errors inherent in
it; the Church did not condemn progress, nor the increase and deepening of
knowledge of the truth; not the enrichment of the life of the mind, of
feeling, and the will, but only pretended progress; she did not condemn
the historical method nor the idea of evolution, but their false
application, which dissolved anything and everything in growth, purely
natural growth at that, without acknowledging a revelation of absolute
truths.


    Orthodox Protestants have openly praised this bold deed of the
    Pope as highly meritorious for the preservation of the Christian
    faith. Thus the South African Church Quarterly Review (Episcopal)
    of January, 1908, said: “The Syllabus and Encyclical of _Pius X._
    against Modernism are deserving of the respectful consideration of
    all Christians.... At the present stage of history the opposing
    factors are driving with great speed towards a fierce and resolute
    struggle between Christ and anti-Christ. All who sincerely love
    Christ, our Lord, must rally under one flag.... Narrow-minded
    hostility towards the Pope must give way to the desire to be
    united with the great community which is fighting so valiantly for
    the old faith of our fathers.... One must be blind, to misjudge
    the tremendous influence exerted by the last deed of the Pope in
    favour of the faith.”

    Even the Evangelical “Kirchenzeitung” admitted that the encyclical
    is “directed chiefly against the more or less unchristian modern
    views of the world ... which we must combat.... Undoubtedly it is
    not only the Pope’s right to lay bare the unchristian tendency of
    these ideas and their incompatibility with the Christian faith,
    but it is also his duty and his merit” (November 29, 1908, n. 48).


Puny men, entangled in the ideas of their time and surroundings, are
easily led to take for their standard the thoughts and actions of their
age. They often imagine that they possess not a little strength and
independence, when they are intellectually entirely dependent and unable
to rise above their time. “It is the fashion, others think that way,
therefore I must think so, too”; these are often the principles of their
wisdom, and they ask the Church to do likewise. The Church, however, looks
back upon a long history, and numerous ideas and opinions she has seen
arise and vanish. And whoever can look back upon a great experience, and
moreover carries in himself the call to lead the times, feels no restless
impulse to be carried away by changing doctrines.



The Index.


Whenever the subject of Rome’s enmity to science and progress of culture
is discussed, there invariably appears on the scene, beside Syllabus and
_Galileo_, also the Index. The latter is held by many to be Rome’s
permanent means of hindering the progress of humanity in general, and the
free scientific activity of the Catholic in particular, and to annihilate
the freedom of teaching and learning (_Hoensbroech_, Die Kath. theol.
Fakultaeten, 1907, 40 _seq._). They say “the Congregation of the Index has
no pity nor consideration for the classical works of literature, and
condemns in the name of religion the most admirable products of the human
intellect” (Grande Dict. univ. du XIX. siècle, IX, 640, apud _J. Hilgers_,
Der Index der Verb. Buecher, 1904, 166; much of what we shall say on this
topic is taken from this work by _Hilgers_).


    This statement again reminds that the accusations against the
    Catholic Church and her institutions are to be considered with
    caution, because of the ignorance of her opponents in Catholic
    things. This is especially true of the Index. Thus the above
    assertion is false. _Dante’s_ “Divina Commedia” (the work referred
    to) is neither forbidden nor needs approval nor correction: of the
    classical literature of the world little or nothing is forbidden;
    even morally offensive books, that are considered classical, may
    without ecclesiastical permission be read for the sake of their
    elegant diction, whenever their reading is required by one’s work
    or duty of teaching.

    A few examples of the _incredible ignorance_ alluded to will
    suffice. In the “Grande Dictionnaire Universel du XIX. Siècle” it
    is actually stated that the works of _Albert the Great_ were
    condemned by a decree of April 10, 1666. What does the Index
    really forbid? It states: “_Alberto __ Magno, diviso in tre libri,
    nel primo si tratta della virtu delle herbe, nel secondo della
    virtu delle pietre, e nel terzo della virtu di alcuni
    animali._—Albert the Great, in three parts: the first treats of
    the virtue of plants; the second, of the virtue of stones; and the
    third, of the virtue of some animals.” It is the title of a little
    superstitious book, attributed to “Albert the Great” by an unknown
    author.

    The first edition of the Index of _Leo XIII._ in 1900 was sold out
    in less than a year; a second edition followed in 1901, and, like
    the first, could be had at all booksellers, at a very moderate
    price. In December, 1901, there appeared in the Anglo-American
    weekly, “The Roman World,” an article which says that it is
    difficult to obtain this list of notorious books forbidden to
    Catholics, unless one be a Church official, since only a few
    copies are printed and even these are not handled by general
    book-dealers; hence that no details could be given about the
    purchase of the copy referred to; but it was quite evident that it
    had commanded a good price. “The copy in question, a model of fine
    printing, might be worth about $40 to $50, but owing to its
    rareness, it had undoubtedly cost $400. The history of this famous
    Index is interesting. The one who first hit upon the idea was
    _Charles V._ of Spain, about 1550. The first compilation of the
    book-list was made by the university of Louvain in 1564, Pope
    _Paul IV._ assuming the direction of the edition. It remained for
    357 years in the hands of the Pope.” Every one of these statements
    is false. And just as false is the statement that the “Syllabus
    condemns not only a book written by a Pope, but by Pope _Leo
    XIII._ himself.” Still it could not surprise us, since even
    David’s psalter is on the Index! When the Index of _Leo XIII._ was
    published, Dr. _Max Claar_ wrote from Rome to the “Neue Freie
    Presse” of Vienna: “On the old Index we find among other things
    the Psalms of King David and the Divina Commedia of _Dante_.” We
    have already stated that the latter was never on the Index. But
    how in the world could this man find Holy Scripture condemned on
    the Index? Perhaps he found this passage: “Il salmista secondo la
    biblia” and “Salmi (sessanta) di David.” The first is a
    superstitious booklet, the second is a translation of sixty Psalms
    of David by the heretic, _Giovanni Diodati_. The learned doctor in
    all seriousness mistook them for the Psalms of David (_Hilgers_,
    167, _seq._).


What then is the Index, and how is it to be judged?

Ever since the Apostle of the Nations had at Ephesus the superstitious
books burned under his eyes, the Holy Fathers, Bishops, and Councils since
the first centuries of Christianity have been careful to keep from the
faithful writings hurtful to faith and morals. Thus even in the olden time
we find several catalogues of forbidden books, then followed the Indices
of the Middle Ages. In the year 1571 a special Congregation of Cardinals
was formed, the “Congregation of the Index,” which has ever since had
charge of the ecclesiastical book-laws. The last edition of the Index,
obligatory for the whole Church, emanated from _Leo XIII._ The title of
the work now in force reads, “The Index of Forbidden Books, revised and
published by order of and in the name of Leo XIII. 1900.” It is divided
into two parts. The first and shorter part contains the general book
regulations, giving in short paragraphs the rules on various classes of
forbidden books, the permission required for reading them, the examination
to be made previous to the publication of certain books. The second part
enumerates the writings forbidden by special decree—the Index in the
particular sense, and the part most often considered. But it is second in
importance to the first, because by far not all books dangerous to faith
and morals are named in it. Most such books are forbidden by the general
laws contained in the first part, without mentioning the many which are
forbidden by mere common sense.

Ecclesiastical legislation on books is composed of two factors: first, the
previous censorship—certain books must be examined by ecclesiastical
authority before their publication. Second, the prohibition of books
already published.

The previous scrutiny in general is delegated to the Bishop; all books
dealing with morals and theology must be submitted. The license to print
the book is to be given if the book is in accord with the teaching of the
Church, in so far as determined by ecclesiastical authority, the decision
based on it rests solely with the censor; if the author of the book should
fail to see that the passages objected to need revision he may try to
clear himself by stating his reasons; however, he is also free to submit
his work to another Bishop and to look for a printer in the latter’s
diocese. If one looks over the numerous books bearing the ecclesiastical
imprimatur, he will readily notice how much freedom is given, if the
author keeps within the doctrine of the Church.

The _condemnation_ of a book never strikes at the person of the author,
nor at what he has intended to express by the passages objected to;
judgment is passed only upon what is actually expressed in them. Hence it
is not necessary to give to the author himself a hearing, or a chance to
explain. The reason is that the judgment is rendered on the sense of the
passages, not on the meaning of the author. In general those books and
periodicals are forbidden which are likely to do serious damage to faith
and morals. The isolated cases of indicting the works of Catholic authors
in the nineteenth century—we may mention _Lamennais_, _Hermes_,
_Guenther_, _Loisy_, and _Schell_—show that the Church proceeds but slowly
and with consideration against the author involved.

To appreciate the Index properly, one must try to grasp without prejudice
the _purpose_ the Church has in view. This purpose is to protect the
faithful from error and from moral contagion, and to preserve the faith
intact. “What is more precious than souls, what more precious than the
faith? But both suffer damage from such reading.” Such was the judgment of
the Council of Ephesus when it drew up its book-decrees; such was the
judgment of an _Augustine_, of _Leo the Great_, and of the Holy Fathers;
such is still the judgment of the Church. Books and writings that offend
against morals are a menace to her faithful. They become infected with
wrong ideas; they are as a rule not in a position to distinguish by
themselves the false from the true, and for the most part they are not
morally strong enough to resist the allurements of error. It may also
happen that certain thoughts are true in the abstract, yet for the time
being would be a danger for many. Now, it is the right and duty of any
social authority, beginning with the head of the family and up to the
government, to protect with strong hand the precious possessions of its
subjects.

The state keeps under control the sale of poison and dynamite, keeps out
contagious diseases from its boundaries—it protects the possessions of its
subjects. European states have for centuries claimed the right to censure
books, and have used it much more rigorously than the Church ever did, to
say nothing of the censures of the Protestant Church of former times (see
abundant proof apud _Hilgers_, 206-402). The modern state also, despite
the great freedom granted to the press, cannot entirely forego its sense
of responsibility. It restricts the freedom of the press by censorship,
and by preventive measures often not less drastic than the censure itself,
and it always regards the confiscation of particularly dangerous writings
to be a matter of course. It puts under censure school-books, political
posters, and theatrical plays, and does not tolerate any socialistic
literature in the soldiers’ barracks. And do we not take it as a matter of
course if a father forbids his child to associate with dangerous
playmates, and takes bad books from its hands? We cannot find fault with
the Church if she seeks to protect her children, if she represses the
promiscuous dissemination of false ideas and doctrines, and if she takes
dangerous books under her control. “Feed my lambs, feed my sheep,” was the
command given to the Church.

The objection should therefore not be made that “such precaution is proper
when dealing with children but not with men; especially since the thinking
elements among the Catholics of the Germanic tongue or origin are too
profound and firm in their faith to warrant a fear of the effects of
unrestricted free research” (from the petition of the so-called
“Index-league” of Muenster). This perusal may become dangerous even for
highly educated men, else how could Modernism break so forcefully into the
Church? Manifestly only because learned theologians did not possess that
firmness of Catholic faith and Catholic knowledge which would prevent them
from being deceived by the misleading ideas of modern philosophy, and of
the new Protestant theology. Moreover, all forbidden books may be read
upon obtaining the necessary permission.

“Preserve the deposit of faith,” the Church has been told. She cannot look
on silently when her doctrines are being falsified and denied, when the
most venerable sphere of theology is made the stamping ground for immature
minds and a laboratory for all kinds of experiments. When _Zola’s_ novel,
“Rome,” had been put on the Index, the atheistic literary critic,
_Sarcey_, made the following comment: “If my own criticisms of literature
are regarded by many people as highest decisions, why should a positive
criticism be looked upon as monstrous just because it comes from the Pope?
It is my aim to guard good taste in literature, and it is the aim of the
Pope to guard the true faith” (Allgemeine Rundschau, 1908, 828). Every
social authority must interfere when its foundations are attacked. A
church that tolerates false doctrines cannot be the teacher that Christ
sent to the nations. As a matter of fact the Index has from the first
helped in no small degree to keep the Catholic doctrine pure, to induce
caution in reading certain authors, and to keep awake in the faithful that
aversion against immoral and irreligious writings which is the
characteristic of Catholics, and which has rescued the faith for
thousands.

To judge the Index fairly one must be convinced that the preservation of
true Christian doctrine is its highest aim. Then the zeal of the Catholic
Church will be intelligible. Of course, he who thinks that the true weal
of mankind consists in the speedy emancipation from all Christian dogma,
he who holds the task of science to be the establishment of a new
“scientific view of the world,” he who no longer knows faith, will see in
the Index nothing but restraint. But, whoever is of a different view will
not take offence at the restriction of the freedom of writing and reading
when it is productive of higher good. Freedom of science cannot be
unrestricted, especially in regard to teaching; the welfare of humanity
must be considered. Moreover, the Index concerns almost exclusively
theology and some branches of philosophy, the rest of the profane sciences
but little or not at all; the scientific works prohibited, however, are
not removed from scientific perusal: only permission is necessary, and
this is granted without difficulty and without cost.

It is true, an error on the part of the Church authorities is not
impossible. We know of such a case, putting on the Index the writings of
_Copernicus_, in 1616. But just the circumstance that history knows of but
one such case of importance is a clear testimony to the Holy Ghost’s
direction of the teaching office even when it is rendering non-infallible
decisions. Besides, the damage that might result from a few mistakes would
not be so great as the damage resulting if everything were allowed to be
written and read.

The Catholic scientist who appreciates the supernatural mission of his
Church will _yield to her guidance in humble confidence_, he will practise
this submission to the Church by requesting permission for reading
forbidden books, and by this spirit he will obtain God’s blessing on his
work.


    In doing so he may recall to mind the edifying words of _St.
    Francis of Sales_, in the preface to his treatise on the errors of
    the Lutherans and Calvinists, where he gives the assurance of
    having conscientiously asked for and received permission to read
    their writings. “We fervently request our Catholic readers,”
    writes the Saint, “not to let an evil suspicion against us arise,
    as if we had read the forbidden books in spite of the prohibition
    of holy Church. We are able to assure them in all truth of having
    done nothing forbidden to a good Christian, and of having taken
    every precaution due in a matter of so vast importance, so as not
    to incur in any way the very just censures of the Church, nor in
    any manner to violate the profound reverence we owe to her.” The
    permission granted him, dated July 16, 1608, is still extant;
    likewise one asked by _St. Charles Borromeo_.


The Catholic scientist also will readily ask the ecclesiastical Imprimatur
for certain of his works. If a careful author before publishing a work
submits the proofs to a friend of his profession, taking his comment for a
guide, why should we deem it intellectual bondage if the Catholic
scientist, in matters of faith and morals, submits his work to the formal
approval of his Church, which to him is a higher authority than any other?
and does this willingly, as in consistency with his Catholic
conviction?(5)

_Via stulti recta in oculis ejus, qui autem sapiens est audit consilia_,
says the Wise Man. It is characteristic of the fool to be wise in his own
eyes, and stubbornly to cling to his own judgment; but the prudent man
seeks advice, and suffers his attention to be called to his mistakes.

The believing scientist, too, will submit to correction; should the rare
case fall to his lot to have the Church condemn his work, he will know how
to be generously obedient. Splendid examples are blazing the way for him.
“Were we to draw up a list of the scientists, who, in a similar critical
position as _Fénelon_, found strength in the virtue of obedience, and on
the other hand a list of all those whose subjective scientific views did
not allow them to submit, then we should perceive at a glance that their
proud persistence in their own opinion has been injurious to true wisdom
in the same degree as humble submission proved a benefit to science”
(_Hilgers_, 412). Finally, he who is convinced that the Christian faith is
the greatest heritance of truth from the past, which must be preserved in
him, he will take no offence if the Church is not impressed even by names
like _Kant_, _Spinoza_, _Schopenhauer_, _Strauss_, men much featured as
the captains of modern science and philosophy. In the eyes of the Church
nothing is genuine and true science that is contrary to the testimony of
God, and errors are errors even then when their perpetrator is receiving
cheers and applause. Just as the state prohibits the physician from
designedly assisting any one to commit suicide, even though the physician
be a noted scientist, just so the Church opposes any one who assaults
God’s truth, be he journalist or philosopher.


    Frequently the _great number of forbidden books mentioned by the
    Index_ is pointed out. The Index of 1900 contains about 5,000
    titles belonging to the last three centuries; of these about 1,300
    belong to the nineteenth century. Quite a small number,
    considering the immense literature of the world. Yet it will look
    even smaller when compared, for instance, with the censure of
    books by the _Prussian state_.

    In the year 1845 there appeared the following catalogue: “Index
    _librorum prohibitorum_, Catalogue of the books forbidden in
    Germany during 1844-1845, first volume.” The second volume was
    issued in 1846. The list is not complete: it does not contain, for
    instance, the names of prohibited newspapers and periodicals. Yet
    it contains 437 writings, forbidden by 570 decrees, _i.e._, two or
    three times as many as the entire number of German books of the
    nineteenth century enumerated by name in the Roman Index. The
    “Historisch-Politischen Blaetter” of 1840 contain an article
    beginning thus: “_Veritas odium parit._ In Prussia there are now
    prohibited nearly all Catholic journals and periodicals, and in
    order to begin the matter _ab ovo_ they have grasped a welcome
    opportunity to throw interdicts at wholesale against works not yet
    published, or to render their circulation difficult to a degree
    amounting to prohibition.”

    How the Prussian censorship proceeded in those days may be
    illustrated by another example. “At the time of the Vatican
    Council a publisher, _Joseph Bachem_, came to Dr. _Westhoff_,
    rector of the Seminary of Cologne, a man of venerable years, and
    told him of his misgivings about the dogma of the infallibility.
    In his youth he had been taught the maxim that that is Catholic
    which has been taught always, everywhere, and by everybody; yet he
    had until recently never found the doctrine of Papal Infallibility
    taught, neither in schools nor in text-books. Then the reverend
    old rector took the visitor by the hand and led him into the
    library of the seminary, where he showed him not less than sixteen
    catechisms that had been in use in the Archdiocese of Cologne
    during the eighteenth century, and which stated without exception,
    clearly and convincingly, the doctrine of Papal Infallibility in
    matters of faith and morals. The publisher in utter astonishment
    then asked how it was that this doctrine was not taught in later
    editions. Dr. _Westhoff_ referred him to the Prussian censure,
    enforced until 1848, which had expunged this doctrine from all
    Catholic catechisms. From that moment _Bachem_ no longer wavered
    in his opinions” (Koelnische Volkszeitung, September 7, 1893).

    One may also remember _Bismarck’s_ press-campaign during the
    _Kulturkampf_. Professor _Friedberg_, Prussian court canonist,
    instigated this campaign, and in many ways devised the plan of
    attack. This much-praised liberalism—how tyrannically it proceeded
    against the Catholic press! The Frankfurter Zeitung in those days
    took a census of convictions due to the press law. According to
    the census, which “does not by far claim to be complete,” there
    were of newspaper editors sentenced in 1875—21 in January, 35 in
    February, 29 in March, 24 in April; in four months 137 newspaper
    writers were either fined or sent to jail. During the same period
    30 newspapers were confiscated (Staatslexikon, IV, 550). This is
    not all. “We could mention at least three instances,” says _P.
    Majunke_ in his History of the Kulturkampf, “where agents of the
    Berlin secret police have succeeded in obtaining a position on the
    editorial staff of Catholic papers, staying for a year or more.
    Besides serving as spies these fellows had to perform the task of
    _agents provocateurs_, viz., to incite the editors of Catholic
    papers to extreme utterances, similar to the denunciations
    suggested to correspondents of foreign Catholic organs for their
    papers.” This happened in a civilized state, despite its
    constitutional freedom of the press, by order of the same
    liberalism which always pretends to be full of righteous
    indignation when the Church prohibits books and puts them on the
    Index.

    Towards the end of the last century, again with the aid of
    liberalism, laws against the socialists were drawn up. After they
    had been passed war was waged against socialistic literature. In
    the year 1886 there appeared a real Index Librorum Prohibitorum,
    its title read, “Social Democratic publications and societies
    prohibited by the imperial law against the dangerous designs of
    Social Democracy,” which law had then been in force eight years. A
    supplementary list was published two years later, in 1888.
    _Hilgers_ makes this comment on it: “How many additional pamphlets
    have been condemned in the time from March 28, 1888, to September
    30, 1890, we cannot state.” According to the foregoing official
    statement the average is 130 a year. Hence we assume that the
    printed matter prohibited during the twelve years that the law was
    in force amounted to between 15,000 and 16,000. This number of
    social democratic pamphlets forbidden within twelve years exceeds
    by far the number of all books prohibited by the Roman Index in
    the course of the entire nineteenth century—books that are the
    products of all countries in the world and dealing with all
    branches; the number of these German prohibitions is ten times
    that of Roman prohibitions. Indeed, in the course of a year and a
    half the new German Empire prohibited more writings of Germans
    than Rome had prohibited during the entire past century. We may
    mention here _Goethe_. In the atheism dispute, at the end of the
    eighteenth century, decision was rendered upon _Goethe’s_ advice
    against the philosopher _Fichte_; _Fichte_ was discharged in spite
    of petitions and mediations in his favour. The liberal Grand Duke
    _Karl August of Saxony Weimar_ granted in 1816, after the French
    conqueror had been overthrown, freedom of the press. Professor
    _Oken_ of Jena availed himself of this privilege, and printed in
    his “Isis” contributions complaining about the government.
    _Goethe_ had to advise what should be done against it. He thought
    that the paper should have been suppressed by the police at its
    very first announcement; “the measure neglected at the beginning
    is to be taken immediately and the paper is to be prohibited. By
    prohibiting the ‘Isis’ the trouble will be stopped at once”
    (Briefwechsel des Grossh. _Karl August v. Sax.-Weimar-Eisenach_
    mit _Goethe_, II, 1863, 90). And this was done, in spite of the
    freedom granted the press.

    _Frederick II._ is called the Royal Free-thinker; and yet the
    general introduction of the book censure into Prussia occurred
    precisely during his reign. The first general censure edict was
    issued in 1749 and remained in force till the death of the king.
    All books, even those printed in foreign tongues, were subject to
    the censure. Even all episcopal and Papal proclamations were
    subjected to the royal censure. That the leaders in the
    Reformation and their successors were not prevented by their
    avowal of the principle of free research from exercising rigorous,
    often tyrannical, censure, not only against the Catholics but also
    against their fellow reformers, is well known.

    _M. Lehmann_ writes in the Preuss. Jahrb. 1902: “It claims to be
    infallible, this Papal Church, it wants to be to the faithful
    everything, in science and even in nationality. It offends every
    nation. The Index in the shape given it in 1900 by the present
    Pope proscribes the ‘Oeuvres du Philosophe de Sanssouci,’ _Kant’s_
    ‘Critique of Pure Reason,’ _Ranke’s_ ‘History of the Popes,’ the
    greatest German king, the greatest German philosopher, and the
    greatest German historian” (1902, no. 8).

    As to _Frederick II._, his own works appeared only after his death
    in 1788, and even then only in part; later on there were other
    editions. None of these is put on the Index. On this list we find
    since 1760 the “Oeuvres du Philosophe de Sanssouci.” Under this
    title appeared at first three volumes, in but a few copies,
    intended for the most intimate friends of the king. The first
    volume he soon withdrew and had it burned of his own accord; it
    contained the “Palladion” an imitation of Voltaire’s “Pucelle,” a
    salacious work throughout. In 1762 a new edition was issued. It
    also contains a philosophical treatise denying the immortality of
    the soul; this treatise was also published separately and
    specially prohibited in 1767. A third work put on the Index is a
    spurious attack on the Popes published by order of King _Frederick
    II._, with a preface by him. Its author is said to have been the
    French abbé _Jean Martin De Prades_, reader to the king. These are
    the indicted works of _Frederick II._, all written in French and
    in substance French Voltairianism. Thus came the greatest German
    king on the Index!

    _Ranke’s_ “Roemische Paepste” is on the Index, because the book
    belittles the constitutions and doctrines of the Catholic Church:
    not because of the true things the author says about Popes. _Von
    Pastor’s_ “History of the Popes” is not on the Index,
    notwithstanding the bitter truths he writes about Popes _Alexander
    VI._ and _Leo X._

    He who knows even the fundamental ideas of _Kant’s_ “Kritik der
    reinen Vernunft” will see that not only the Catholic Church, but
    every Christian denomination, might forfeit its existence if it
    showed itself indifferent towards it. Heresies are especially
    dangerous to the uneducated when they bear the names of authors of
    scientific repute. But the Church willingly grants the permission
    to read them when there is reason for it. Moreover, it was not
    Rome alone that took steps against _Kant_. This was done by the
    Prussian king _Frederick II._ also. One may recall his cabinet
    order, under minister _Woellner_, against Kant’s “Religion
    innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft.” Similarly the works
    of _Spinoza_ were proceeded against, whereas his indictment by
    Rome now calls forth protest because he has since been assigned a
    prominent place among philosophers. _Freudenthal_ registers a list
    of 500 sharp prohibitions issued against _Spinoza’s_ works during
    the years 1556-1580: they were condemned by the states of Holland,
    by the court, by synods and magistrates. Those judgments were
    passed during a period when the competent authorities had views
    different from those of to-day; when the state deemed it its duty
    to oppose the undermining of Christianity. The state’s judgment
    has changed in many ways, Rome’s judgment has remained the same.
    But the works of _Kant_ and _Spinoza_ likewise have remained the
    same, and so is Christianity, against which they occupy an
    irreconcilable position, still the same.


“In the moral world nothing can support that cannot also resist” is a
truthful saying of _Treitschke_: it is also the principle of the Catholic
Church. Without ever surrendering to the unchristian tendency of a time,
she opposes error with unsubdued courage. If this be intolerance, it is
not intolerance towards erring men but towards their errors, it is the
intolerance that the gardener shows in uprooting harmful weeds, it is the
intolerance of the physician towards disease. Obedience to the Index makes
high moral demands upon the Catholic. But it has been characteristic of
the Christian religion and of its faithful children never to shrink before
any moral action where it appeared demanded. And if the preservation of
moral purity exacts conscientious discipline, this is also true of the
preservation of the pure faith, especially at a time when a neo-paganism
in league with an uncontrolled mania for reading is threatening in many
forms.



Galileo, and Other Topics.


_Galileo Galilei_—but few names have achieved equal fame. Men like
_Alexander_ and _Cæsar_, like _Homer_ and _Dante_, have scarcely succeeded
in writing their names with a sharper pencil on the tablet of history than
the astronomer of Pisa. His grand discoveries in natural science have done
little to crown his temples with the wreath of immortality—it was the fate
of his life that did it. And one may add: if this fate had been caused by
the French government, or by a Protestant General Assembly, he would never
have obtained his position in history; but since this lot came to him by
the human limitation of a Roman Church authority, his name is not only
entered on the calendar of the anti-Roman journalist, it also stands
surrounded with the halo of a Martyr in the esteem of serious scientists,
who see in _Galileo_ and in the consequent condemnation of the Copernican
system the proof that dogma and science cannot agree, that the Catholic
Church assumes a hostile attitude toward science. Whenever this theme is
mentioned, _Galileo’s_ ghost is paraded. For this reason we cannot pass by
this fact of history. To a son of the Church they are unpleasant
recollections, but this shall not keep us from looking history firmly in
the eye.

There are some other charges brought forth from history, but the _Galileo_
case overshadows them all. We shall touch upon them but briefly, and then
return to _Galileo_.

Attention is called to the Church’s condemnation of the _doctrine of
Antipodes_. The Priest _Vigilius_ was accused in Rome, in 747, of having
taught that there exists another world under the earth, and other people
also, or another sun and moon (_quod alius mundus et alii homines sub
terra sint seu sol et luna_). Such was his doctrine as stated by Pope
_Zacharias_ in his reply to _Boniface_, the Apostle of Germany, in which
he said that he had cited _Vigilius_ to Rome in order that his doctrine be
thoroughly investigated: if it should turn out that this had really been
taught by him, he would be condemned. Further particulars of his teaching
are unknown, because it is mentioned only in the above passage. The
assertion ascribed to him is that there is another world besides this one,
with other inhabitants and with another sun and moon—an assertion
scientifically absurd and dogmatically inadmissible, as this might call in
question the common descent of mankind from one pair of parents. The
anxiety and rebuke of the Pope is directed solely against the latter
point. The condemnation of _Vigilius_ has never taken place, for he
remained in his office, won great respect, was elevated to the bishopric
of Salzburg, and later canonized by _Gregory IX._ Had a condemnation of
his particular doctrine taken place, this would not have involved the
condemnation of the antipodean theory, in the sense that the side of the
globe opposite to us is also inhabited by human beings, a proposition
which does not conflict with any doctrine of faith. The doctrine described
above has another tendency. The entire case is hidden in obscurity
(_Hefele_, Conc. Gesch., 2d ed., III, 557 _seq._).

Furthermore, it has been said that at the time when the universities were
in close union with the Church, medical science could not advance because
the Church had prohibited human _anatomy_ (Prof. _J. H. van’t Hoff_, Neue
Freie Presse, December 29, 1907). In amplification it was said: “_Boniface
VIII._ had forbidden every anatomical dissection of a body” (_O.
Zoeckler_, Theologie und Naturwissenschaft, 1877, I, 342). What is true of
this assertion?


    In the first place, _Boniface VIII._ did not forbid anatomy. He
    merely prohibited in 1299 and 1300 the hideous custom then
    prevailing regarding the bodies of noblemen who had died away from
    home: they were disembowelled, dissected, and boiled, for the
    purpose of removing the flesh from the bones so that the latter
    could be transported the more easily. This process had nothing to
    do with anatomy. The wish to possess the bones of the dead did not
    seem to the Pope a sufficient reason for treating the human body
    in such a way (Cfr. _Michael_, Gesch. des deutschen Volkes III,
    1903, 433). Nor does history know of any other prohibition of
    anatomy by the Church. It tells us, however, that _Frederick II._
    in his excellent rules for the benefit of his Sicilian kingdom in
    the regulation of medical science among other things emphasizes
    the study of surgery: he ordered that no one be allowed to
    practise surgery who could not show by attestation of his
    professors that he had studied surgery for at least one year,
    especially that he had learned at school how to dissect bodies; a
    physician must be perfect in anatomy, else he may not undertake
    operations (_Michael_, l. c. 430). This was done and practised
    under the eyes of the Church. The accusers also seem ignorant of
    the fact that bodies of those executed were given to universities
    for dissection. In the year 1336 the medical students of
    Montpellier, the famous medical school under the immediate
    direction of the Church (see above, page 154) were granted the
    privilege of obtaining once a year an executed criminal’s body for
    dissection. The same privilege was extended to the medical
    students of Lerida by King _Juan I._ on June 3, 1391, who decreed
    that the delinquent should be drowned _pro speriencia seu anatomia
    fienda_ (_Denifle_, Die Universitaeten des Mittelalters, I, 1885,
    507).

    The story is also circulated that the fourth Lateran Council in
    1215 prohibited monks from studying natural sciences and medicine
    (Deutschoester. Lehrerzeitung 15th Dec., 1909). It will suffice to
    quote this particular decree of the Lateran Council: “No clergyman
    is allowed to pronounce capital sentence, nor to execute it, nor
    to be present at its execution. No clergyman is allowed to draw up
    a document concerning a death sentence: at the courts this should
    be done by laymen. No clergyman is allowed to assume command of
    Rotarians (freebooters), of archers or any others who shed human
    blood; no subdeacon, deacon, or priest is allowed to practise that
    part of surgery by which cutting and burning is done, nor must any
    one pronounce a benediction at an ordeal” (_Hefele_, Koncil.
    Gesch., 2d ed., V, 1887, 887). This will thoroughly dispose of
    that charge.

    Just as briefly may we settle the story of _Columbus_ having been
    excommunicated because of his intention to discover new lands. It
    is said that the “Spanish clergy denounced his plans as against
    the faith, and that the Council of Salamanca excommunicated him”
    (_W. Draper_, ibid. 163). This is a fairy tale. The truth is, that
    King _Ferdinand_ and Queen _Isabella_ referred the plans of the
    bold Genoese to a council of scientists and ecclesiastical
    dignitaries, which was held in the Dominican Monastery of
    Salamanca, _Columbus_ being present. There never was a Council of
    Salamanca. _Weiss_ writes in his “History of the World”: “Much has
    been surmised concerning the objections and their refutation. It
    is only certain that the majority rejected the plan as impossible
    of execution, and that _Columbus_ won over a minority of them,
    especially the priests, among whom the learned Dominican _Deza_
    deserves mention” (Weltgesch. VII, 187). _Denthofen_, in his
    biography of _Columbus_, says: “The Dominican Fathers supported
    him during the long time the conference lasted, and even defrayed
    the expenses of his journey. Father _Diego de Deza_, chief
    professor of theology, was convinced by the reasons of _Columbus_,
    and in turn convinced the more learned of his confrères. The
    majority, however, thought the idea but a phantom, while others
    deemed it impracticable. The conference adjourned without coming
    to any definite decision” (Christof Columbus, Eine biographische
    Skizze ..., 1878, 21). _Columbus_ found his warmest friend in the
    learned Father _Juan Perez_, Guardian of the Franciscan Monastery
    of St. Maria de la Rabida. Within the quiet walls of this cloister
    _Columbus’_ plans were disclosed for the first time in Spain, and
    admired and resolved upon. _Perez_ spoke untiringly to Isabella in
    favour of the plan, and even aided _Columbus_ in gathering men for
    his crew. This is the fact about the anathema the Church is paid
    to have pronounced on _Columbus_.

    But let us return to _Galileo_.(6)


_Galileo Galilei_, the great Italian physicist, was born in 1564, at Pisa.
At first he was professor in his native town, then at Padua, where he
taught the doctrine of _Ptolemy_, although at that time there was no
obstacle to accepting the Copernican system. In 1611 he became
mathematician at the court of _Cosimo II._ at Florence. His talents and
happy discoveries soon won fame. In general he was more of a physicist
than an astronomer; his astronomical discoveries were, almost without
exception, of a kind that did not presuppose a thorough astronomical
training. As is known, he was not the original inventor of the telescope,
though with its aid he achieved some of the most important of his
discoveries; for instance, that of the satellites of Jupiter. The
telescope was invented in Holland.

When he went to Rome, in 1611, he was received with great honour. In one
of his letters from there he wrote: “I have received marked favours from
many Cardinals and prelates here, and from several princes. They wanted to
hear of my inventions, and were all well pleased.” The Jesuits gave a
special reception in his honour at the Roman College. This shows in what
esteem science was then held at Rome. But five years later _Galileo_
returned to the Eternal City under quite different circumstances. What had
happened? In 1612 he had issued a treatise on “The History and Explanation
of the Sun-spots,” in which he declared unreservedly for the Copernican
system. And this caused the change. True, _Copernicus_ himself was a
Catholic Priest, and had dedicated his principal work to Pope _Paul III._
But it was generally supposed that he had brought forward the doctrine
only as an hypothesis, only to illustrate and facilitate calculations, not
claiming for it absolute certainty. This assumption was based on the
preface of the first edition of his book, containing assurance to that
effect. That preface, however, was not the work of _Copernicus_, but had
been smuggled into the book by the Protestant publisher _Osiander_,
without the author’s knowledge, because _Osiander_ feared _his own_ church
authorities.

_Galileo_ spoke in quite another tone. He defended the doctrine as true.
He soon aroused opposition. Men standing for the geocentric theory were
opposed by others, siding with _Galileo_ for the solar system, such as the
learned Benedictine, _Castelli_. _Galileo’s_ great bitterness and sarcasm
in dealing with his opponents aggravated the quarrel with the “partisans
of _Aristotle_.” Extreme irritability and love of praise were prominent
traits of _Galileo’s_ character.

It was the custom of that time to bring Scripture into controversies about
nature. This was done also in _Galileo’s_ case. Passages were quoted
against him, referring to the “rising and setting sun,” to the “earth that
never moves,” of _Joshua’s_ “commanding the sun to stand still.” This
prompted _Galileo_ to cross over into the field of theology himself. In a
letter to _Castelli_ in 1613 he says: “Holy Writ can never lie nor err; on
the contrary, its sayings are absolute and incontestable truth; but its
interpreters are liable to err in various ways, and it is a fatal and very
common mistake to stop always at the literal sense” (_Kepler_, even prior
to _Galileo_, had interpreted the respective passages of the Scriptures
properly and with surprising skill; especially in his introduction to his
“Astronomia nova.” Cfr. _Anschuetz_, Johannes Kepler als Exeget.
Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie, XI, 1887, 1-24).

Correct as these arguments were, it was nevertheless imprudent for the
court mathematician to trespass upon grounds regarded by theologians as
their own, instead of furnishing natural scientific proofs. Thus the
matter was brought to Rome before the Congregation of the Inquisition.
_Galileo_, worrying about his case, went voluntarily to Rome, in 1615. He
failed to assuage the opposition against his theory, though he says he was
received favourably by the princes of the Church. Moreover, heedless of
the admonition of his friends, he pursued the matter with indiscreet zeal,
with vehemence and impetuosity, practically provoking a decision. Cardinal
_Bellarmin_ opposed the haste with which the matter was being pressed; the
Jesuit _Grienberger_ thought that _Galileo_ should first set forth his
proofs, and then speak about the Scriptures. Had scientific proofs been
brought forth, theological difficulties would have been easily cleared
away; but scientific proof was lacking, and what there perhaps was of it,
_Galileo_ failed to offer.

The right of the Congregation to take up the matter can hardly be denied,
for although the matter was one of natural sciences, yet, by introducing
theology and Scripture, it had assumed the character of theology and
exegesis. _Galileo_ personally was dealt with very leniently. During the
discussions of 1616 he was never cited before the bar of the Inquisition,
nor was his exterior freedom in any way restricted. Only one thing was
done: he was cautioned by Cardinal _Bellarmin_, “by order of the Holy
Congregation,” not to adhere to, nor teach any longer, the Copernican
theory. The documents of the case say that “_Galileo_ submitted to this
order and promised to obey.” The Congregation of the Index prohibited,
March 5, 1616, all books defending the Copernican theory, declaring the
doctrine to be against Holy Scripture. Even the work of _Copernicus_ was
prohibited _donec corrigatur_—until it be corrected. A decision of the
year 1620 declared which passages should be corrected. They are those in
which the author speaks of his theory not as an hypothesis but as of an
established truth: _non ex hypothesi, sed asserando_. The Protestant
_Kepler_, upon hearing this, wrote: “By their imprudent acts some have
caused the work of _Copernicus_ to be condemned, after it had been left
unmolested for nearly eighty years; and the prohibition will last at least
till the corrections are made. I have been assured, however, by competent
authority, both ecclesiastical and civil, that the decree was not intended
to put any hindrance in the way of astronomical research” (_A. Mueller_,
J. Kepler, 1903, 105). The reproach of imprudence was intended for
_Galileo_.

To teach the doctrine as an hypothesis was permitted even to _Galileo_,
and this left the way clear for the development of the hypothesis, because
whatever showed the usefulness of the hypothesis was sure to increase its
value as a truth, but _Galileo_ would not keep within these limits.
Instead of showing in a Christian spirit a submission to Providence, which
even an erring authority may demand, he openly violated his promise and
disobeyed the command he had received. In the spring of 1632 there
appeared at Florence his “_Dialogue on the two most important systems of
the world_.” It contained an open, though by no means victorious, defence
of the Copernican system—seeking to hide under a confidence-inspiring
mask. It contained many passages of caustic sarcasm, with the evident
intention of arousing public opinion against the attitude of the Roman
Congregations. It was a flagrant _violation of the command given him
personally_.

The Pope under whom the proceedings against _Galileo_ took place was
_Urban VIII._, who, when a Cardinal, had followed _Galileo’s_ discoveries
with enthusiasm, though never partial to the system of _Copernicus_, and,
in accord with the custom of the age, he had written an ode to _Galileo_.

Cited to Rome, _Galileo_ came only after repeated urging, on February 14,
1633. The story of his having been imprisoned and tortured on this second
visit to Rome is false. _Galileo_ wrote on April 16 of that year: “I live
in an apartment of three rooms, belonging to the Fiscal of the
Inquisition, and am free to move in many rooms. My health is good.” This
stay in the apartment belonging to the Inquisition lasted but twenty-two
days; after that _Galileo_ was allowed to live in the palace of the
Ambassador of Tuscany. During his whole life _Galileo_ was never even for
an hour in a real prison.

_Galileo’s_ demeanour before the Inquisition bespeaks little truthfulness
and manliness. It makes a painful impression. Many other events in his
life cast dark shades of insincerity upon his character, especially his
relations with _Kepler_. While in his dialogue he openly defended the
truth of the Copernican system, while he had written, time and again, that
the theory had been demonstrated by “forceful, convincing arguments,”
whereas nothing but insignificant reasons could be pleaded for the
contrary, he now assumes the attitude before the Inquisition of denying
that he had championed that theory, at least not consciously; that he had
never taught that doctrine otherwise than hypothetically. And this he
asserts although he had taken the oath to say nothing but the truth. We
even hear him declare that he considers the doctrine to be false, and that
he was ready to refute it at once.

The judges were convinced of the untruthfulness of the defendant. In those
times, in order to obtain further confessions, especially when the accused
had been previously convicted of guilt, torture was resorted to. This
regrettable practice was then in vogue at every European court; the
Inquisition, too, had adopted it, but strict rules were laid down to guard
against abuses. Very old persons were exempt from the rack; they were only
threatened with it. This happened also in _Galileo’s_ case, he was never
actually put on the rack. Moreover, one can safely presume that this
threat did not terrify him much. His reading must have enlightened him on
this point, and even without it he must have known the practice by his
active intercourse with those theologians of the Curia who were friendly
to him. In fact, he clung obstinately to his denial, to the very end of
the hearing, although it must be surmised that he would not have
aggravated his case by confession. The commissioner of Inquisition,
_Macolano_, at the first stages of the trial had expressed his hope that
in this event “it would be possible to show indulgence to the guilty, and
whatever the result might be, he would realize the benefit received, apart
from all other consequences to be expected from a desired mutual
satisfaction” (Letter to Cardinal _Fr. Barberini_, April 28, 1633).

On June 22 _the final verdict_ was rendered: it told the defendant: “Thou
art convicted by the Holy Congregation of being suspected of heresy, to
wit, to have held for true, and believed in, a false theory, contrary to
Holy Writ—which makes the sun the centre of the orbit of the earth,
without moving from east to west, and which lets the earth, on the other
hand, move outside the centre of the world, and to have believed that an
opinion may be considered probable and be defended, though it had been
expressly declared to be contrary to the Scripture.” _Galileo_ was
declared suspect of heresy, because, in the opinion of the judges, he had
assumed that a doctrine in contradiction to the Scriptures might be
defended. _Galileo_ retracted by oath. That upon retraction he arose and
exclaimed, stamping with his foot, “_Pur si muove!_” (“and yet it does
move!”) is a fable. He was sentenced to be jailed in the Holy Office. But
already the next day he was allowed to go to the palace of the Grand Duke
of Tuscany and to consider that palace his prison. Soon after he departed
for Siena, “in the best of health,” according to the report of the Tuscan
ambassador, _Niccolini_, and there took up his abode with his friend the
Archbishop _Piccolomini_. After a lapse of five months he was allowed to
return to his villa at Arcetri, near Florence, where he remained, with the
exception of occasional visits to Florence, till his death. Two of his
daughters were nuns in the nearby cloister of S. Matteo. His literary
activity was not suppressed by the surveillance of the Inquisition. His
lively and fertile mind, cut off from polemics, turned to the completion
of his researches in other directions. His lively intercourse with friends
and disciples, of whom many belonged to various Orders, proved beneficial
to him. In the year 1638 he published his “Dialogue on the New Sciences,”
which he rightly pronounced to be his best effort, and by which he became
the founder of dynamics. His productiveness continued until he became
blind.

We may say without fear of contradiction that, apart from their
theoretical error, the Roman Congregations had shown the greatest
indulgence towards one guilty of having broken his pledge, and doubtless
they would have been still more lenient had _Galileo_, confirmed by
flattering friends in his anger at the supposed intrigues of his enemies,
not himself made this impossible; if he had not continued to propagate
secretly his views, verbally and in writing, which was bound to be
discovered. Considering all this, Rome’s proceeding in the case appears to
be quite indulgent. Here the position was taken that the spread of the
doctrine would mean an imminent danger to the purity of the faith. The
unfortunate scientist died on January 8, 1642, at the age of seventy-eight
years, fortified by the holy Sacraments. _Urban VIII._ sent him his
blessing. Undoubtedly _Galileo_ had nothing in common with the champions
of that unbelieving freedom of science, which now tries to lift him upon
its shield; notwithstanding his later bitterness he remained to his death
steadfast in his Catholic faith.



Comments on the Galileo Case.


The above is a brief history of _Galileo’s_ conviction, and of the
occurrences leading to it. An event regrettable to all, a stumbling-block
for not a few; for others a welcome event to make the Church appear in the
light of an enemy of science. Let us now give more particulars of the
merits of the case.

We have before us two decisions of Roman Tribunals: the Index decree of
1616, announcing the rejection of the Copernican doctrine and prohibiting
books maintaining it, and the conviction of _Galileo_ in 1633 by the
Congregation of the Inquisition. It is freely admitted that these Roman
Tribunals committed an _error_ in advocating an interpretation of the
Bible which was false in itself, and is to-day recognized as false.

Well, _does this confute the infallibility of the Church?_ It does not.
The matter in point is merely an error of the Congregations, of bodies of
Cardinals, who were responsible for the transactions and decisions. The
Congregations, however, are not infallible organs. There is no Bull or
Papal decree designating the Copernican doctrine as false, much less is
there extant a decision ex cathedra. Neither in 1616 nor in 1633, nor at
any other time, has the Holy See ever manifested its intention of
declaring, by a peremptory, dogmatic decision, the new system to be
against Scripture.


    It was thus the general understanding of that age that in the
    present case there was no irrevocable dogmatic decision given. For
    instance, the Jesuit _Riccioli_, wrote not long after the
    decision: “Inasmuch as no dogmatic decision was rendered in this
    case, neither on the part of the Pope nor on the part of a Council
    ruled by the Pope and acknowledged by him, it is not made, by
    virtue of that decree of the Congregation, a doctrine of faith
    that the sun is moving and the earth standing still, but at most
    it is a doctrine for those who by reason of Holy Writ seem to be
    morally certain that God has so revealed it. Yet every Catholic is
    bound by virtue of obedience to conform to the decree of the
    Congregation, or at least not to teach what is directly opposed to
    it” (Almagestum novum, 1651, 162). _Descartes_, _Gassendi_, and
    others of that time expressed themselves similarly (_Grisar_, 165,
    _seq._). There is an interesting letter of the Protestant
    philosopher _Leibnitz_, written to the Landgrave _Ernest of
    Hessia_, 1688, begging him to work for the repeal of the
    condemnation of the Copernican theory, because of the growing
    verification of this theory: “If the Congregation would change its
    censure, or mitigate it, as one issued hastily at a time when the
    proofs for the correctness of the Copernican theory were not yet
    clear enough, this step could not detract from the authority of
    the Congregation, much less of the Church, because the Pope had no
    part in it. There is no judicial authority which has not at times
    reformed its own decisions.”


But have we here not at least a _wilful attack on science_? or a
manifestation of the Congregation’s narrow-mindedness and ignorance, which
are bound to deprive it of all respect and confidence of sober-minded
people?

This harsh judgment overlooks two points. In the first place, the error of
the judges was quite _pardonable_. Could the liberal critics of to-day,
who so harshly denounce the Cardinals of the Congregation, be suddenly
changed into ecclesiastical prelates, and transferred back to the years of
1616-1633, and placed in the chairs of the tribunal which had to decide
those delicate questions, it may be feared that, did they carry into the
decision but a part of the animosity they now show, they would disgrace
themselves and compromise the Church even more than the judges of
_Galileo_ did. It is true that were we to judge the handling of the
question by the knowledge of to-day, we might be astonished at the
narrow-mindedness of the judges, trying to uphold their untenable views
against the established results of scientific research. But it would be
altogether unhistorical to look at the matter in that way. When the
Copernican theory entered upon the battlefield, it was _by no means
certain and demonstrated_.


    The real arguments for the rotation of the earth were not then
    known. There were no direct proofs for the progressive revolution
    of the earth around the sun. _Galileo_ advanced three main
    arguments for his theory. First, he advanced the argument from the
    phenomenon of the tides, which, he said, could not be accounted
    for but by the rotation of the earth: an argument rejected as
    futile even at that time. Next he argued from certain observations
    of the spots on the sun: another worthless argument, which others,
    like _Scheiner_, looked upon as proof of the older theory. The
    third argument was that the new theory simplified the explanation
    of certain celestial phenomena; but the scope of this argument,
    valid though it was in the abstract, could not be expressed or
    grasped at the time, especially since the corrections of _Tycho de
    Brahe_ had removed the greatest objections to the Ptolemaic
    system. The Copernican theory could not be considered certain till
    the end of the seventeenth century, after _Newton’s_ work on
    gravitation.

    Then there were difficulties, the greatest of which was probably
    the old idea of inertia, which at that time meant only that all
    bodies tend to a state of rest; hence it seemed impossible that
    the earth could ceaselessly execute two movements at the same
    time, around the sun and around its own axis. This notion of
    inertia had not been doubted in 1616; even _Kepler_ adhered to it.
    Later on _Galileo_ came very near to the new idea of inertia: that
    bodies tended to retain their state of repose or motion. But this
    new notion, like everything else new, gained ground but slowly.
    Then it was only with great difficulty that he could dispose of
    the objection that were the earth to speed through space, as the
    new theory claimed, the atmosphere would take a stormlike motion.
    Lastly, the philosophical objection had to be met: the sun and
    other celestial bodies, as far as we can know by observation, are
    moving; if they do not move, then we must admit that we can know
    nothing by observation.

    Thus the new doctrine was not at all proven at that time, as could
    be easily shown by its opponents; although it cannot be denied
    that they did not always enter into the discussion with
    impartiality. The astronomer, _Secchi_, testifies that “none of
    the real arguments for the rotary motion of the earth was known at
    _Galileo’s_ time, also direct proofs for the progressive movement
    of the earth around the sun were lacking at that time” (_Grisar_,
    30). Another famous astronomer, _Schiaparelli_, writes: “In the
    sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the Ptolemaic as well as the
    Copernican system could serve for the description of phenomena;
    geometrically they were equivalent to each other and to _Tycho’s_
    eclectic system” (_Schiaparelli_, Die Vorläufer des Copernicus im
    Altertum (German, 1876), 86).

    Hence no direct evidence could be pleaded against the decision of
    the Congregation, not even _Galileo_ had that evidence. At any
    rate no judge who observed his demeanour at the trial could have
    suspected _Galileo_ of coming in conflict with his conscience by
    swearing off the theory.


For this reason it would be wrong to call _Galileo_ a martyr for science,
because he did not suffer any martyrdom. He has seen neither rack nor
prison. But he was not a martyr chiefly for the reason that he could not
have had any scientific conviction, apart from the fact that he did not
claim any such conviction, even denied it expressly.

No wonder, then, that the heliocentric system had considerable opponents
at that time; no wonder the opposite view was even the prevalent one. _A.
Tanner_ wrote in 1626: “_Ita habet communis ac certa omnium theologorum ac
philosophorum naturalium sentia_” (Theol. Schol. I, disp. 6, q. 4., dub.
3). Had valid argument been brought forth there never would have been a
_Galileo_ case. In this respect a passage from a letter of _Bellarmin_
deserves attention: “If it could be really demonstrated that the sun be in
the centre of the world ... then we would have to proceed quite cautiously
in explaining the apparently opposite passages in the Scriptures, we would
rather have to say that we do not understand them, than to say of things
demonstrated that they are false” (to _Foscarini_, April 12, 1615). The
Cardinals of that time could not be expected to anticipate the knowledge
of a later period. They had to consult the judgment of their
contemporaneous savants. When seeing the majority of them sharply
rejecting the new theory and refuting the arguments of their opponents, it
is little wonder that the Cardinals could not overcome their theological
scruples.

The scruples arose from the opinion, then prevalent, that the Holy
Scripture taught that the earth stood still and the sun moved; that the
words of the Scripture must be taken literally till the contrary is
demonstrated. The unanimous explanation of the Christian centuries was
also cited. As a matter of fact, however, the Christian past had not
taught this to be the only true sense of the words, but at that time the
words were understood that way, because no one could arrive at any other
sense in those days.

Under these circumstances, an error was hardly avoidable, if a decision
was required. And a decision seemed to be urgent, and this is the second
point we must not overlook, if we wish to judge fairly. It was a time
eager for innovations, full of anti-religious ideas. A renaissance,
sidling off into false humanism, was combating religious convictions,
false notions were invading philosophy; in addition, Protestantism was
trying to invade Italy. All this caused suspicion of any innovation apt to
endanger the faith; interpretations of the Scriptures deviating from the
accustomed sense were particularly distrusted. The _Galileo_ quarrel
happened at an inopportune time. Indeed a sudden spread of the Copernican
theory might have been accompanied by great religious dangers. Even now,
after nearly three hundred years, the leaders of the anti-Christian
propaganda are still pointing out that the progress of natural science has
proved Holy Scripture to be erroneous, and many are impressed by the
argument; many thousands would have been confused in those days by the
sudden collapse of old astronomical views that were connected with
unclarified religious ideas—dreading that victorious science might shatter
all religious traditions. Now, if one is convinced that the damage to
religion is to be estimated greater than any other, then one may also have
the conviction that it was better for the nations of the new era to have
their scientific progress a little delayed, than to have their most sacred
possession endangered. Of course considerations of this kind will have no
weight with representatives of the naturalistic view of the world. Then it
can only be emphasized that a science that has no appreciation of the
supernatural character of the Catholic Church cannot be in a position to
render a fair judgment on many facts in the history of that Church.

What we have said shows sufficiently that the condemnation of _Galileo_
was not due to any hostility to science.


    The idea that the Church’s attitude towards _Galileo_ and the
    Copernican theory was a result of her antipathy to science is
    entirely in contradiction with the character of that strenuous
    period. In Catholic countries, especially in Italy, intellectual
    life was zealously promoted by the Popes and their influence. It
    was developing and flourishing even in the natural sciences. When
    reading the correspondence of _Galileo_ one must be surprised to
    see how popular astronomical, physical, and mathematical studies
    were in the educated circles of the period. These studies belonged
    to the curriculum of a general philosophical education, and it was
    a matter of honour for many ecclesiastical dignitaries to remain
    philosophers in that sense, notwithstanding their official duties.
    We recall to mind the scientific discussion carried on with
    _Galileo_ in Rome in 1611 and 1616, by Cardinals _Del Monte_,
    _Farnese_, _Bonzi_, _Bemerio_, _Orsini_, and _Maffeo Baberini_,
    and by clergymen like _Agucchi_, _Dini_, and _Campioli_. Similarly
    in France we meet with names like _Mersenne_, _Gassendi_, and
    _Descartes_. And in Italy, after _Galileo_ and at his time, we
    meet with a long list of eminent naturalists like _Toricelli_,
    _Cassini_, _Riccioli_, and others. In 1667 _Gemiani Montanari_
    could write that in Italy there were continually forming new
    societies of scientists. The advance in knowledge of truth was
    made on safe grounds; at Naples, Rome, and elsewhere science was
    enriched by a great variety of new experiences, inasmuch as the
    scientists were making progress in the observation and the
    investigation of nature. _Targioni-Tozzetti_ writes: “Astronomy
    with us, about the middle of the sixteenth century, was a very
    diligently cultivated branch of science” (Galileistudien (1882)
    338 f.). The Church was by no means hostile to this newly awakened
    life, not even holding aloof from it; on the contrary, it
    flourished especially in ecclesiastical circles; a proof that
    narrow-minded disappreciation of natural science did not prevail,
    and that there was a different explanation for the _Galileo_ case.



Copernicus on the Index till 1835.


And what of the fact that _Copernicus_ remained on the Index until the
nineteenth century? Does it not show a rigid adherence to old, traditional
method and opposition to progress? The fact is true: The work of
_Copernicus_, and other Copernican writings, remained on the Index until
1835. But it is also true that a great deal connected with this fact is
not generally known or ignored. Let us mention here some of these facts.


    To begin with, it must not be forgotten that we owe the new world
    system, and with it the turning-point in astronomy, first of all
    to representatives of the Catholic clergy. After the learned
    Bishop _Nicholas Oresme_ had expressed with fullest certainty the
    most important point of the Copernican system as early as 1377 (in
    a manuscript hitherto unknown, discovered a short time ago by
    _Pierre Duhem_ in the National Library at Paris. Cfr. Liter.
    Zentralblatt (1909), page 1618), and after the learned Cardinal
    _Nicholaus von Kues_ (d. 1474) adopted a rotary motion of the
    earth in his cosmic system, it was _Copernicus_, a canon of the
    diocese of Ermland, who became the father of the new theory, in
    his work “De evolutionibus orbium coelestium.” He published it at
    the urgent request of Cardinal _Nikolaus Schoenberg_. But the most
    zealous promoter of his work was Bishop _Tiedemann Giese_ of Kulm.
    Enthusiastic over the novel idea, he incessantly urged his friend
    to publish his work, took care of its publication, and sent a copy
    to Pope _Paul III._, who accepted its dedication. Again, it was a
    prince of the Church, Bishop _Martin Kromer_, who, in 1851,
    dedicated a tablet in the cathedral at Frauenberg to “The Great
    Astronomer and Innovator of Astronomical Science.” All these men
    knew that _Copernicus_ defended his work not as an hypothesis or
    as fiction, but as true. Before _Copernicus_ issued his great
    work, _Clement VIII._ showed a lively interest in his system and
    had it explained to him by the learned _Johann Widmannstadt_ in
    the Vatican Gardens (_Pastor_, Gesch. der Päpste, IV, 2 (1907)
    550).

    The first attack against the new system, as being contrary to Holy
    Writ, came not from Catholic but from Protestant circles. Among
    the latter the opposition against _Copernicus_ was being agitated,
    while peaceful calm reigned among the former. Twelve Popes
    succeeded _Paul III._, and not one interfered with this doctrine.
    _Luther_, even in _Copernicus’_ time, hurled his anathema against
    the “Frauenberg Fool,” and six years after the publication of
    _Copernicus’_ chief work, _Melanchthon_ declared it a sin and a
    scandal to publish such nonsensical opinions, contrary to the
    divine testimony of the Scriptures. In fear of his religious
    community the Protestant publisher _Osiander_ smuggled in the
    spurious preface already mentioned, “On the hypothesis of this
    work.” The Protestant _Rheticus_, a friend and pupil of
    _Copernicus_, got into disfavour with _Melanchthon_ and had to
    discontinue his lectures at Wittenberg. The genial _Kepler_,
    finally, was prosecuted by his own congregation, because of his
    defence of the theory. And when on the Catholic side the Index
    decree of 1616 was already beginning to be regarded as obsolete,
    Protestant theology still held to the old view even up to the
    nineteenth century: a long list of names could be adduced in
    proof.

    Certainly no fair-minded person can see wilful hostility against
    astronomy in this procedure. Likewise there should not be imputed
    dishonourable intentions to Catholics, if in the course of history
    they rendered tribute to human limitation.


But did not the decrees of 1616 and 1633 do _great harm to research_? Not
at all. That this was hardly the case with _Galileo_ himself we have shown
above. Soon after we find in Italy a goodly number of distinguished
scientists; the Church in no way opposed the newly awakened life, nor even
held aloof from it. _Galileo_ himself was honoured in ecclesiastical
circles. Soon after _Galileo’s_ conviction the Jesuit _Grimaldi_ named a
mountain on the moon after him.

Nor was there any considerable harm done to the development of the
Copernican theory. Although after _Galileo_ the occasions were not
lacking, still no further advocate of his theory was ever up for trial.
Nor was any other book on the subject prohibited. Freedom was quietly
granted more and more. In the edition of the Index of 1758, the general
prohibition of 1616 of Copernican writings was withdrawn; it was an
official withdrawal from the old position. But not until 1822 were the
special prohibitions repealed, although they had long since lost their
binding force. The occasion was given by an accidental occurrence. The
Magister S. Palatii of the time intended to deny the Imprimatur to a book
on the Copernican theory, on account of the obsolete prohibition. An
appeal was made, which brought about the formal repeal of the prohibition.
Of course there had been no hurry to revoke a decision once given. But
according to the astronomer _Lalande’s_ report of his interview with the
Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation of the Index, in 1765, the removal
from the Index of _Galileo’s_ Dialogue had been postponed only on account
of extraneous difficulties. _Leibnitz_, while in Rome, worked for a repeal
of the decree. According to Eméry, there are extant statements of
_Leibnitz_ vouching for the fact that he very nearly succeeded (_Eméry_,
Pensées de Leibnitz, 1, 275). The name of _Copernicus_, too, was omitted
in the next edition of the Index, which appeared in 1835.

But even while the prohibition was still in force, the works of _Galileo_
and _Copernicus_ were read everywhere. As early as 1619 _John Remus_ wrote
from Vienna to _Kepler_ that the Copernican writings may be read by
scientific men who had received special permission, and that this was done
in all Italy and in Rome itself. Besides, it was allowed at any time to
make use of the doctrine as an hypothesis. Thus it advanced continually
nearer and nearer to the position of an established truth.

Soon after the publication of the decree, according to the report of
_Kepler_, it was the general conviction in ecclesiastical and civil
circles of Austria “that the censure was no obstacle to the freedom of
science in the investigation of God’s work.” In 1685 we are assured by the
Jesuit _Kochansky_, that any Catholic was free to “look for an
irrefutable, mathematical, and physical demonstration of the movement of
the earth.” It was also known that the condemnation of the theory had been
aided by the supposition that there were no valid arguments in support of
the new theory. Hence the Congregation’s decree had in the eighteenth
century for the most part lost its force. The Jesuit _Boscovich_, a
celebrated physicist and astronomer, wrote in 1755: “In consequence of the
extraordinary arguments offered by the consideration of _Kepler’s_ laws,
astronomers no longer look upon his theory as a mere hypothesis, but as an
established truth” (Grisar, 347, 350).

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Thus in the light of history the condemnation of the Copernican theory
appears quite differently from the picture presented by the superficial
accusation that Rome up to the nineteenth century condemned this theory.
There is no trace of callousness and oppression, but only submission to
legitimate authority, in so far and as long as one deemed himself obliged.
It was a science enlightened by Christianity, which, in questions not yet
clearly decided, laid down upon the altar of the Giver of all wisdom the
tribute of humble submission, for the sake of higher interests.

We shall have to class with _St. Augustine_ the uncertainty of human
judgments and tribunals among the “troubles of human life,” and say with
him: “It is also a misery that the judge is subject to the necessity of
not knowing many things, but to the wise man it is not a fault” (De Civ.
Dei, IX, 6). May we therefore infer that the teaching authority is an
evil? Were that true, we should have to abolish the authority of the state
and of parents, because they also make mistakes. We should have to
conclude that there had better be no authority at all on earth. Where men
live and rule, mistakes will certainly be made. The physician makes
mistakes in his important office, yet patients return to him with
confidence. Every pedagogue, every professor, has made mistakes, yet they
still command respect. The state government is subject to mistakes, yet
none but the anarchist will say that it must therefore be abolished. “That
the judge is subject to the necessity of not knowing many things, is a
misery, but to the wise man not a fault.”




