Chapter V. The Witnesses of the Incompatibility Of Science And Faith.



The Objection.


We shall not go wrong in presuming that the reader, who has patiently
followed our deductions, has had for some time in his mind the question:
How about the representatives of scientific research themselves? Do not a
large majority of them, perhaps virtually all, stand alien and repellant
to Christian faith and its fundamental truths? We do not refer to our
modern philosophers, for of them it might be said that their researches
yield questionable speculations of individualistic stamp, rather than
exact results. But there are the representatives of the more exact
sciences, especially of the most exact of all, natural science. They may
be considered the legitimate representatives of modern science, since
their results are the most accurate, their methods the most strictly
scientific; and are they not, every one of them, opposed to Christian
faith, especially to its fundamental dogma? Is not _Haeckel_ right when he
states in the final summary of his “Welträtsel,” in which he so strongly
insists on the incompatibility of religion and natural science: “I am
supported by the accord of nearly all modern naturalists who have the
courage to express their convictions”? Is it not true that _A. von
Humboldt_ is considered the prince of German naturalists? and yet in his
voluminous “_Kosmos_” he not once mentions the name of God? Have not, with
few exceptions, German naturalists, under _Humboldt’s_ influence, turned
against Christianity? (_W. Menzel_, Die letzten hundertzwanzig Jahre der
Weltgeschichte, VI, 1860, p. 70; cfr. _Pohle_, P. Angelo Secchi, 1904, p.
6). Here indeed the antagonism between true scientific spirit and the
faith seems to take shape in tangible reality, and to invalidate every
argument to the contrary.

Thus runs the speech that is ever recurring in the literature of the day,
in newspapers and magazines no less than in books. And this speech makes
an impression on its hearers. Indeed, why should it not? After describing
how these heroes of science in recent times marched on triumphantly from
victory to victory, how they renewed the face of the earth, and became the
pioneers of human progress, how can they fail to make a deep impression if
in the same breath they state that these discoverers of truth have, almost
to a man, broken with the ancient teachings of the Christian religion?

Without doubt the suggestive effect of such speculation must be very
considerable with those who lack sufficient historical knowledge. The case
is different with those better acquainted with the history of the natural
sciences. They know that it is not true to state that the leading natural
scientists, for the most part, or even unanimously, have rejected and
denied Christian religion, that it is a _lie_ and a falsification of
history.

Let us illustrate it briefly. We do not, of course, mean to say, that _if_
it were true that all the leading naturalists were infidels, the inference
would necessarily follow that Christianity is untenable, and incompatible
with science. Not at all. First of all, natural scientists who oppose
Christianity could hardly ever come forward in the capacity of experts in
this matter. For by venturing the assertion that world-matter and
world-force are eternal and uncreated, that they develop by force of
natural causality, by unending evolution, and not by the power and
direction of an intelligent cause, they leave their own province and
trespass on the domain of philosophy. These and similar questions are not
solved by natural science research, by experiment, observation, or
calculation, but are the subjects of philosophical speculation. Atheism,
materialism, the denial of the soul’s immortality or of eternal
destination, all these are philosophical matters, and a natural science
theory of the world is a misconception about as absurd as a Swiss England
or a Bavarian Spain.

As it is impossible to review here all scientists of the past centuries,
to probe their bent of mind, we shall restrict ourselves in the following
to scientists of the first rank, for to them the assertion above mentioned
must chiefly refer. First of all, they were possessed of that spirit of
scientific research claimed to be incompatible with the faith; and they,
more than others, should have been conscious of this contradiction. It is
plain that if they did not know anything of the claimed antagonism between
the theories of evolution and of creation, between physical facts and
spirituality of soul, between natural law and miracles; if it be shown
that many of them were actually orthodox Christians, believing in the
supernatural and yet enthusiastic friends of science, fathoming the laws
of nature and yet unshaken in their faith, then the fact that inferior
minds talk of a contradiction unknown to these great ones can no longer
make much of an impression.

Therefore let us look over the long list of great scholars of the last
centuries, those great men to whom we owe knowledge and discoveries that
are our joy to this very day. Among them we shall find many who, in their
life and thought, have plainly confessed themselves faithful Christians;
we shall find that others were at least the opponents of atheism and
materialism, that they clung to the fundamental truths of the Christian
faith, and that is a matter of moment when the antagonism between natural
science and faith is under discussion.

We shall not go back to the ancient representatives of natural science,
men like _Pythagoras_, _Aristotle_, _Archimedes_, _Albert the Great_,
_Roger Bacon_, and others of past ages, partly because there is no doubt
about the religious views of those men, partly because research at their
time was imperfect. We begin at the rise of modern natural science.



The Old Masters.


At the threshold of modern natural science there stands the man who solved
the riddle that had puzzled centuries before him, the father of modern
astronomy, _Nikolaus Copernicus_. He had studied at the universities of
Cracow, Bologna, Ferrara, and Padua, and while he was one of the foremost
historians of his time, it was astronomy that had engaged his enthusiastic
devotion from his youth. He was a Catholic priest, a Canon of Frauenberg.
“If recent representatives of the Roman Church,” so writes the Protestant
theologian, _O. Zoeckler_, “praise this Frauenberg Canon as a faithful son
of their Church, this fact must be granted by Protestants, despite the
frankness with which he opposed the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic theories
taught by the scholastics, and despite his friendship with the Protestant
_Rheticus_” (Gottes Zeugen im Reiche der Natur, 1906, p. 82). _George
Joachim_, a native of Feldkirch, surnamed _Rheticus_, and a Protestant
professor at Wittenberg, came to _Copernicus_ at Frauenberg, and was
cordially received. His praise for “his teacher” is unreserved. He speaks
in the same admiring terms of _Tiedemann Giese_, in those days Bishop of
Kulm.

For nearly forty years _Copernicus_ sat in the modest observatory which he
had erected at Frauenberg, studying and collecting the material for his
book. Even after all this time this deliberate scholar, despite the urging
of his friends, especially Bishop _Tiedemann Giese_ and Cardinal
_Schoenberg_, Archbishop of Capua, hesitated for ten years longer before
publishing his discoveries. The work was entitled _De revolutionibus
orbium caelestium, libri VI_, and was dedicated to Pope _Paul III._ The
author himself could enjoy his achievement but very little. The first copy
sent by the printer reached _Copernicus_ on his deathbed, and a few hours
later he breathed his last, on May 24, 1543.

In the introduction to his work this devout Christian scientist wrote:
“Who would not be urged by the intimate intercourse with the work of His
hands to the contemplation of the Most High, and to the admiration for the
Omnipotent Architect of the universe, in whom is the highest happiness,
and in whom is the perfection of all that is good?”

Without _Copernicus_ there could have been no _Kepler_, without _Kepler_
no _Newton_. These three men, in the words of a recent astronomer, belong
inseparably together, they support and supplement one another. It might be
fittingly asked, after which of these three the celestial system should be
named; and were it possible to ask these three men for their opinion in
this matter, they would probably all give the answer that has been
ascribed to one or the other of them: Not my system, but God’s Order. Like
_Copernicus_, so _Kepler_ and _Newton_ were profoundly religious men.

_Johann Kepler_, born of Protestant parents in Württemberg in 1571, was
raised a Lutheran. In 1594 he was appointed professor of mathematics at a
school in Graz, and after that he dwelt for the most time in Austria,
which country became his second home. From Graz he was called to Prague to
be mathematician at the imperial court, and from there to Linz to be
professor at the college there. His last years were passed at Sagan and
Ratisbon, where he died in 1630. Even after having left Austria he
gratefully remembered the _clementia austriaca_ and the _favor
archiducalis_. _Kepler’s_ astronomical achievements are known to
everybody, especially his laws of the planets. With an untiring spirit of
research he combined beautiful traits of character, cheerfulness,
kindness, and modesty, but chiefly a profoundly religious mind. However,
he was in difficult circumstances as far as his religious life was
concerned. Quite early he came in conflict with the religious authorities
of his confession, particularly for the reason that they considered
_Kepler’s_ Copernican views as against the Bible, a fact which the learned
astronomer could not see. There were also other differences. The conflict
became more and more aggravated. It cannot be denied that the Lutheran
Church-authorities proceeded against _Kepler_ with a lack of consideration
never shown by Rome against men like _Galileo_. _Kepler_ was expelled from
the Lutheran Church, and despite his efforts to be reinstated the ban was
never lifted.


    Like _Kepler_, so was his predecessor at the Catholic court of
    Prague, the Danish astronomer _Tycho Brahe_ (died 1601), a devout
    Protestant, but the trials of _Kepler_ were spared him. His
    erroneous idea that the Copernican system conflicted with Holy
    Writ kept him from subscribing to it: it led him to devise a
    system midway between _Copernicus_ and _Ptolemy_. His religious
    sentiment is evidenced by a passage from a letter of his, written
    at his father’s death, “Although there are many consolations for
    me, of a religious nature based on Holy Writ, and of a
    philosophical kind drawn from the contemplation of the fate of all
    men and of the inconstancy of everything under the moon, it is a
    special comfort for me that my father departed so sweetly and
    piously from this valley of misery to the heavenly eternal home,
    where, according to _St. Paul_, we shall find a lasting abode.”


But let us return to _Kepler_. There is evidence that at various times in
his life he wavered between his Lutheran confession and the Catholic
faith, but that is as far as he went. He was of the opinion that the
fundamental truths of both were in accord, and he would not presume to
judge of the differences; he had taken a view-point of his own, from which
he could not be made to recede. On the other hand, he was shocked when his
fellow-Lutherans in Styria were on two occasions severely dealt with,
although he personally had been treated with especial consideration.
Otherwise his opinions on Catholic matters and the “wisdom” of the
Catholic Church were eminently fair; he censured his co-religionists for
their invidious attacks on Rome, and for their hesitancy in adopting the
Gregorian reform of the calendar. He had friendly relation with many a
Catholic scientist, was in correspondence with many Jesuits, was even
frequently their guest, receiving stimulus, commendation, and scientific
communications from them.

To _Kepler_ the study of astronomy became largely a prayer; the finest of
his scientific works he was wont to conclude with the doxology of the
Psalmist, “Great is our Lord, and great is His power, and of His wisdom
there is no number: praise Him ye Heavens; praise ye Him, O Sun, and Moon,
ye Stars and light, and praise Him in your language. Thou, too, praise
Him, O soul of mine, thy Lord, thy Creator, as long as it is granted to
thee” (_Harmonices Mundi_, v. 9). His name and work is commemorated in the
Keplerbund in Germany, which aims at the promotion of scientific knowledge
in the sense of _Kepler_, in opposition to the misuse of natural science
for purposes of materialism and atheism.

The work, begun so happily by _Copernicus_ and _Kepler_, was completed by
the great Englishman, _Newton_ (died 1727). It was he who in his immortal
work, _Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica_, laid bare the law of
the universe, which compels the heavenly bodies to revolve about one
another. Therewith the laws of _Kepler_, and consequently the Copernican
hypothesis, became established. When, in 1727, this scientist, at the age
of eighty-five, died, his mortal remains were entombed in Westminster
Abbey, the Pantheon of the British nation. Lofty science and the reverent
worship of his Creator were combined in the noble mind of this great
Briton. In an appendix to his master-work, referred to above, he cited his
proofs for the existence of God, and stated that “the entire order, as to
space and time of all things existing, must have necessarily proceeded
from the conception and will of an existing Being,” that “the admirable
arrangement of sun, planets, and comets could only emanate from the decree
and the design of an All-wise and Omnipotent Being,” that “we admire Him
for His perfections, we adore and worship Him as the ruler of the world,
we, the servants of the great Sovereign of the Universe.” According to
_Voltaire_, it was stated by _Newton’s_ disciple, _Clarke_, that his
master invariably pronounced the name of God with reverent attitude and
expression.


    Inseparably connected with the history of the Copernican system
    there is the name, which recalls harsh accusations and painful
    memories, the name of _Galileo_. That he had nothing in common
    with the aims of those who have broken with faith and
    Christianity, nor with that hostility against his Church for which
    his name is so often misused, has been made evident by what we
    have said on another page (see page 189). Not only during his
    early life was his religious turn of mind evidenced, but also
    later on and up to the end of his life he continued to observe
    faithfully the duties of his religion.


One of the greatest physicists of recent times was _Christian Huygens_,
who died in 1695 at his native city, The Hague. To him we owe the
epoch-making discovery of the undulation of light, while _Newton_ had held
light to be a matter of emission. But while _Huygens_ advanced over
_Newton_ in this respect, he paid tribute to human limitation by remaining
prejudiced against _Newton’s_ theory of gravitation, which he rejected.
_Huygens_ was a believing Christian.


    In his philosophic dissertation “Kosmotheoros,” a posthumous work,
    he says in regard to the possibility of the celestial bodies being
    inhabited: “How could the investigator look up to God, the Creator
    of all these great worlds, otherwise but in the spirit of deepest
    reverence? Here it will be possible for us to find manifold proofs
    to demonstrate His providence and wonderful wisdom; likewise will
    our contemplation contend against those who are spreading false
    opinions, such as attributing the origin of the earth to the
    accidental union of atoms, or of the earth being without a
    beginning and without a creator.”


Religious fervour is still more pronounced in _Huygens’_ contemporary,
_Robert Boyle_ (died 1692), a son of Ireland. While he had made
considerable achievements in physics, his chief fame lies in chemistry: he
inaugurated the period in which chemistry became gradually an independent
science. Although working in a different field of research, he is similar
to _Newton_ in many respects: like _Newton_ and _Huygens_, his love of
scientific studies induced him to remain unmarried, like _Newton_ he found
his last resting place in Westminster Abbey, but chiefly he is like
_Newton_ because of his pious, religious mind. He was much occupied with
theological studies, and in them the demonstration from nature of the
existence of God, and the author’s reverence for the Scriptures are most
conspicuous: “In relation to the Bible,” he writes, “all the books of men,
even the most learned, are like the planets that receive their light and
brightness from the sun.” On his deathbed he made a foundation for
apologetic lectures: the Boyle-lectures are held to this very day.


    We shall have to pass by others. We might point to the English
    philosopher and statesman, _Francis Bacon_ of Verulam (died 1626),
    who won his place in the history of natural science by his urging
    of the empiric method; we might point to _W. Harvey_ (died 1658),
    the discoverer of the blood-circulation, a man of earnest and
    simple piety; we might mention the pious _Albrecht von Haller_
    (died 1777), _J. Bernouilli_ (died 1728) the co-inventor of
    integral calculus, the man of whom his great disciple _Euler_
    relates that this _Bernouilli_, co-inventor of the most difficult
    of all calculations, this great mathematician, expressed regret in
    his old age that he had devoted so many years to science, and only
    few hours to religion, and that on his deathbed he admonished
    those around him to adhere to the Word of God because that alone
    is the word of life.


We shall name but one more, a son of northern Sweden, the famous botanist,
_Karl Linné_ (died 1778). He, too, found God in the living nature which he
studied so diligently.


    In commenting on his _Systema naturae_ he writes: “Man, know
    thyself; in theological aspect, that thou art created with an
    immortal soul, after the image of God; in moral aspect, that thou
    alone art blessed with a rational soul for the praise of thy
    sublime Creator. I ask, why did God put man equipped thus in sense
    and spirit on this earth, where he perceives this wonderfully
    ordered nature? For what, but to praise and admire the invisible
    Master-builder for His magnificent work.”


These are the great masters and reformers of recent natural science, the
men who opened up the paths which natural science of the present day is
still pursuing; most of these savants were of a Christian mind, many of
them even pious. There were but few indifferent or irreligious, such as
_E. Halley_ (died 1742), who computed the cycle of the comet since named
after him, and _G. de Buffon_ (died 1788): but they are a small minority.
The period of highest achievement in modern natural science bears the
stamp of religion; indeed, to a great extent it bears the halo of devotion
and fervour. An incompatibility of research and faith, a solidarity of
science and anti-Christian tendency, was never known to the mind of these
great masters.

“Any one who has grasped even the elements of natural science, the unity
of natural forces and their rigid conformity to laws, becomes a monist if
he has the faculty for clear reasoning, and as to the others, there is no
help for them anyway” (_L. Plate_, Ultramontane Weltanschauung und moderne
Lebenskunde, 1907, 11). This sort of argument is shouted at us in manifold
variations. How does that statement look in the light of history? Men like
_Copernicus_, _Kepler_, _Newton_, _Linné_, _Boyle_, thus knew nothing of
the elements of natural science, nothing of the conformity to laws of
natural forces: because they were neither monists nor atheists, but
worshippers of the Creator of heaven and earth! A more painful contrast
cannot be imagined than to see these great masters and pioneers rated as
lesser minds, ignorant of real natural science, by those who trail far
behind them and who are seeking their footsteps. The religious conviction
of the natural scientists of a past age is sufficient proof that, not the
research in natural science, but other causes lead minds to infidelity.



Modern Times.


We turn to the nineteenth century. Does the picture perhaps change
essentially in the century that has shown its children so much progress,
that has disclosed so many secrets of nature, but has also taught
irreligion to thousands of men? Does it become true now that natural
science and Christian fundamental truths are opposed to each other in
hostile attitude? Claims to this effect are not lacking. In fact, the
number of those who refuse assent to the Christian religion is increasing.
But even at this time we do not find such to be the majority of eminent
scientists, and our inquiry is about eminent scientists, those who make
the science of a period, not those who can hardly expect to have their
names known by posterity. A considerable number, indeed the majority, of
the master minds of natural science, even in the nineteenth century,
reject materialism and atheism, and not infrequently they are pious
Christians; another proof that just upon the deeper and more serious minds
religion exercises a stronger power of attraction.

Let us commence with the astronomers.

“The sciences and their true representatives,” so states the renowned
_Mädler_ of Dorpat, “do not deserve the reproaches and imputations heaped
upon them from a certain side, that they would estrange man from God, even
turn him into an atheist ... we hope to show of astronomy especially that
just the contrary is taking place” (Reden und Abhandlungen über
Gegenstände der Himmelskunde, 1870, 326).

The greatest astronomer of the nineteenth century, and one of the greatest
discoverers of all ages, was undoubtedly _William Herschel_ (died 1822).
His son _John Herschel_ (died 1871) became his “worthy successor, almost
his peer, who won a fame nearly equal to that of the inherited name” (_R.
Wolf_, Geschichte der Astronomie, 1877, 505). While not hostile to
religion, the father had been so engrossed in his restless research, that
religion received little attention, but religious thought and sentiment
played a prominent part in the son. Time and again he opposed with zeal
the materialistic-atheistic explanation of the universe. “Nothing is more
unfounded than the objection made by some well-meaning but undiscerning
persons, that the study of natural science induces a doubt of religion and
of the immortality of the soul. Be assured that its logical effect upon
any well-ordered mind must be just the opposite” (Preliminary Discourse on
the Study of Natural Philosophy, 1830, 7).

It was _Leverrier_ (died 1877), Director of the Paris Observatory, who by
calculations ascertained the existence and exact position of the remotest
planet Neptune even before it was discovered. When eventually _Galle_ of
Berlin really found the planet in the position indicated, _Leverrier’s_
name became famous. But greater still were the achievements of this
indefatigable investigator in respect to the known planets. When he
presented to the French Academy the final part of his great work, the
calculations of Jupiter and Saturnus, he said: “During our long labours,
which it took us thirty-five years to complete, we needed the support
obtained by the contemplation of one of the grandest works of creation,
and by the thought that it strengthened in us the imperishable truths of a
spiritualistic (_i.e._, non-materialistic) philosophy.” He was an orthodox
Catholic, known as a Clerical. A newspaper complained of him that “Under
the empire he was a clerical Senator, concerned with the interests of the
altar no less than with those of the throne” (_Kneller_, Das Christenthum
und die Vertreter der neueren Naturwissenschaft, 1904, 96. In the
following pages we have made frequent use of the material gathered in this
sterling work. See also _James J. Walsh_, Makers of Modern Medicine
(1907); and the same author’s Catholic Churchmen in Science, I (1909), II
(1910)).

One year after the death of _Leverrier_ another scientist of the first
rank died. It was _A. Secchi_ (died 1878). Member of nearly all the
scientific academies of the world, he was not only a faithful Christian,
but also a priest: for forty-five years, and until his death, he wore the
garb of the Society of Jesus. As an astronomer he has been named, not
without good cause, the father of astrophysics: he ascertained the
chemical composition of about 4,000 stars and classified them into what is
known as _Secchi’s_ four types of stars. As a physicist he wrote an
important work on The Unity of Natural Forces. He was also an eminent
meteorologist.


    At the second International Exposition at Paris his meteorograph
    was quite a feature. The _Kölnische Zeitung_ wrote, on March 2,
    1878: “Visitors of the Italian Exhibition, at the second World’s
    Fair in Paris, could see the marvellous instrument which does the
    work of ten observers and surpasses them in accuracy. At the same
    time they could obtain all needed information about details and
    scope of the meteorograph from the exhibitor himself; for _Secchi_
    was there daily, devoting several hours to answering questions in
    any of the civilized languages of Europe. It is peculiarly
    interesting to observe the silent movement of the hands working
    day and night like registrars of the natural forces, and recording
    for every quarter of an hour with the utmost accuracy all changes
    in temperature, in humidity, every variance of the wind, any
    movement of the mercury in the barometer. Even the force of the
    wind and the time of rain is registered by this wonderful
    instrument.” The inventor, out of 40,000 art exhibitors, was
    awarded the great golden medal. He also received the insignia of
    an officer of the French Legion of Honor, while the Emperor of
    Brazil appointed him an officer of the “Golden Rose.”

    The French scientist _Moigno_ writes of _Secchi_: “_Secchi_ was
    very pious, and as a worker he knew no limits. He was ever ready
    to evolve new scientific plans, to enter into new and long
    campaigns of observation. The mere list of his 800 works reveals
    him as one of the most intrepid workers of our century. And let
    this be considered: every one of these writings, no matter how
    brief, was the result of subtle and difficult researches and
    observations. And after devoting the day to arduous writing, he
    passed the night searching the skies” (_Pohle_, P. Angelo Secchi,
    1904, 191).

    In the nineteenth century, too, astronomy has not failed in its
    mission of leading to God. A long list could be named of believing
    astronomers of great achievements. For instance, the Roman
    astronomer _Respighi_ (died 1889), a resolute Catholic. And
    _Lamont_, Director of the Observatory of Munich, whose Catholic
    orthodoxy was generally known. _Heis_ (died 1877) likewise was a
    zealous Catholic: when he had finished his map of the sky, after
    27 years of hard work, he sent one of the first copies to _Pius
    IX._ The astronomers _Bessel_ and _Olbers_ speak in their letters
    of God, of the hereafter and Providence, in a way that has nothing
    in common with materialism.

    _Secchi_ was not the only priest and monk among the astronomers of
    the nineteenth century. The very first day of the century was made
    notable by the astronomical achievement of a monk. _Joseph
    Piazzi_, a member of the Theatine order (died 1826), discovered on
    that day the first asteroid, Ceres. The great mathematician
    _Gauss_ named his first born son Joseph, in _Piazzi’s_ honor.

    It is, indeed, a remarkable fact, testifying strongly against the
    incompatibility of natural science and faith, that just the
    Catholic clergy, the prominent representatives of religion and
    faith, have contributed a large contingent to the number of
    natural scientists. _Poggendorf’s_ Biographical Dictionary of the
    Exact Sciences contains, down to 1863, according to preface and
    recapitulation, the names and biographical sketches of 8,847
    natural scientists. Of these, 862 are Catholic priests, amounting
    to 9.8 per cent. To appreciate these 10 per cent it must be taken
    into account that most of them were not connected with natural
    science by their position, but only through their personal
    interest, and most of them were engaged in other duties.


Mathematics, although not natural science proper, is inseparably connected
with it. For this reason we may extend our consideration to
mathematicians. We only point to the three greatest, _Euler_, _Gauss_, and
_Cauchy_, and all three were religious men. _Euler_ (died 1783 at
Petersburg) has no peer in the recent history of science in prolific
activity: ten times he was awarded the prize by the Paris Academy of
Sciences. _Cantor_ says of him: “Like most great mathematicians, _Euler_
was profoundly religious, though without bigotry. He personally conducted
every evening the private devotions at his home, and one of the few
polemical books he wrote was a defence of revelation against the
objections of free-thinkers.” Its publication at Berlin in 1747, in close
proximity of the court of _Frederick the Great_, presupposed a certain
moral courage. In this book he refers to the difficulties found in all
sciences, even in geometry, adding: “By what right then can the
free-thinkers demand of us to reject at once Holy Writ in its entirety,
because of some difficulties which frequently are not even so important as
those complained of in geometry?” _Gauss_ (died 1855) is perhaps the
greatest mathematician of all times. It sounds incredible, yet it is well
attested, that as a child of three years, when in the workshop of his
father, a plain mechanic, he was able to correct the father if he made a
mistake in figuring out the wages paid to his journeymen. His biographer,
_Waltershausen_, says of him: “The conviction of a personal existence
after death, the firm belief in an ultimate Ruler of things, in an
eternal, just, all-wise and all-powerful God, formed the foundation of his
religious life, which, with his unsurpassed scientific researches,
resolved itself into a perfect harmony.” _Cauchy_ (died 1857) was a man of
most extraordinary genius, whose creative genius knew how to discover new
paths everywhere, and almost at every weekly meeting of the Paris Academy
_Cauchy_ had something new to offer. In addition he was a dutiful
Catholic, and a member of St. Vincent’s Society. When, shortly before the
February revolution, an onslaught upon the Jesuit schools was made, he
defended them in two pamphlets.


    One of them contains the following confession of faith: “I am a
    Christian, that is, I believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ,
    with _Tycho __ Brahe_, _Copernicus_, _Descartes_, _Newton_,
    _Fermat_, _Leibnitz_, _Pascal_, _Grimaldi_, _Euler_, _Guldin_,
    _Boscovich_, _Gerdil_; with all great astronomers, all great
    physicists, all great mathematicians of past centuries. I am also
    a Catholic, with the majority of them, and if asked for my
    reasons, I would enumerate them readily. By them it would be made
    clear that my conviction is not the result of inherited
    prejudices, but of profound inquiry. I am a sincere Catholic, as
    _Corneille_, _Racine_, _La Bruyère_, _Bossuet_, _Bourdaloue_,
    _Fénelon_ were, and such as were and still are a large portion of
    the most eminent men of our times, among them those who have
    achieved most in the exact sciences, in philosophy and literature,
    and who have most prominently adorned our Academy” (_Valson_, Vie
    de Cauchy, I, 173). When near death, and told that the priest
    would bring the Holy Sacrament, he ordered the finest flowers of
    his garden used in the reception of the Lord.


We now come to the physicists. To begin with the most prominent
representatives of the science of optics, which was developed especially
during the first half of the century, there are to be named chiefly
_Fresnel_, _Frauenhofer_, _Fizeau_, _Foucault_. _A. Fresnel_ (died 1827),
the originator of the modern theory of light, clung to his conviction of
the spirituality and immortality of the soul. _Frauenhofer_ (died 1826)
showed himself to be a man of refinement and of kindness, which only
occasionally was disturbed by natural irritability: he was much devoted to
his religion, so that even his guests while at his house had to observe
the abstinence prescribed by the Church; this was quite significant,
considering the indifference of his times in this respect. _Fizeau_ (died
1896), too, was a staunch Catholic, who fearlessly testified to his
belief, even before the Paris Academy. Though his work was of the first
rank, France’s chief marks of honour passed him by, and little notice was
even given to his death. A significant fact. “These circumstances,” so
writes _Kneller_, “induced us to inquire for particulars; and through the
services of friends we obtained information in Paris from most reliable
source that _Fizeau_ was a faithful Christian, who fulfilled his religious
duties. For this very reason his name had been stricken, at the Centenary
of the Academy, from the list of candidates for the cross of the legion of
honor, notwithstanding the fact that, on the strength of his scientific
achievement, he should long have been Commander and even Grand Officer of
this order.” _Cornu_ was the only one to protest against this slight.
_Foucault_ (died 1868) had, in the time of his restless scientific work,
taken an unsympathetic attitude towards the Catholic religion. In his last
illness he returned, step by step, to his Creator and Redeemer, in whom he
found his comfort, and he breathed his last in peace with God and the
Church.

_Foucault’s_ great countryman, _Ampère_ (died 1836), the celebrated
investigator in the fields of electricity, was also estranged from the
Christian religion, but, after passing through torturing doubts, he
regained undisturbed possession of his Catholic faith, and was a pious
Christian at the time of his brilliant discoveries. He had frequent
intercourse with _A. F. Ozanam_, and the discussion almost without
exception turned to God. Then _Ampère_ would cover his forehead with his
hands, exclaiming: “How great God is! Ozanam! how great God is, and our
knowledge is as nothing.” “This venerable head,” _Ozanam_ relates of his
friend, “covered with honours and full of knowledge, bowed down before the
mysteries of the faith; he knelt at the same altars where before him
_Descartes_ and _Pascal_ worshipped humbly, beside the poor widow and the
small child, who perhaps were less humble than he” (_A. F. Ozanam_,
Oeuvres Complètes, X, 37, and VIII, 89). As he was dying, and _M.
Deschamps_, director of the college of Marseille, began to read aloud some
passages from the “Imitation of Christ,” the dying man remarked that he
knew the book by heart.

Another great discoverer in the domain of electricity, who had preceded
_Ampère_, was _Volta_ (died 1827). Like his great fellow countryman,
_Galvani_ (died 1798), who did not disdain to be a member of the third
order of St. Francis, _Volta_ was a staunch Catholic; every day he recited
the rosary.

At Como, his home, he was daily seen to go to holy Mass and, on holidays,
to the Sacraments. Those who passed his house on Saturdays saw a small
lamp burning before the picture of the Blessed Virgin Mary over his door.
If the servant forgot to light the lamp, _Volta_ did it himself. On Feast
days, when visiting the parish church, the great electrician could be seen
among the children, explaining the catechism to them.


    A friend of _Volta_, the Canon _Giacomo Ciceri_, once was
    endeavoring to convert a dying man, who, however, refused to hear
    him, on the ground that whereas religion might be good for the
    common people, scientists did not need it, and he reckoned himself
    among them. _Ciceri_ thereupon reminded him of _Volta_. This made
    an impression upon the dying man, who declared that if _Volta_ be
    seriously religious, and not only as a matter of convention, he
    would consent to receive the Sacraments. The Canon then requested
    _Volta_ to write a few lines. _Volta_ replied as follows: “I do
    not understand how anybody can doubt my sincerity and constancy in
    the religion which I profess, and which is that of Catholic,
    Apostolic, Roman Church, wherein I was born and raised, and which
    I have professed all my life, inwardly and outwardly.... Should
    any misdemeanor on my part have prompted any one to suspect me of
    unbelief, then I will declare, for the purpose of making
    reparation ... that I always have believed this Holy Catholic
    religion to be the only true and infallible one, and that I still
    think so, and I thank our dear Lord incessantly for having given
    me this belief, in which to live and to die is my resolution, in
    the firm hope of gaining the eternal life. It is true, I
    acknowledge this belief to be a gift of God, a supernatural
    belief; yet, I have not neglected human means to fortify myself in
    this belief, and to drive away all doubts that may arise to tempt
    me. For this reason, I have studied the faith diligently in its
    foundations, by reading apologetic and controversial writings,
    weighing the reasons for and against; a way, which supplies the
    strongest proof, and makes it most credible for the human reason
    to such a degree, that any noble mind, not perverted by sins and
    passions, cannot help embracing and loving it. I wish this
    profession, for which I was asked and which I willingly make,
    written and signed by my own hand, to be shown at will to any one,
    because I am not ashamed of the Gospel. May my writing bear good
    fruit.

    _Alexander Volta._

    MILAN, January 6th, 1815.
    (_C. Grandi_, Alessandro Volta, 1899, 575.)”


He who, for the first time, is made aware of the religious confession of
the greatest natural scientists may perhaps be astonished. Hitherto, he
had heard little of the Christian mind of these men, but a great deal
about their alleged indifference for religion, and about their materialism
and atheism. Now, suddenly, he sees a large number of them to be the
enemies of atheism, many, indeed, to be zealous Christians.

This is due to the biographers: they dwell largely on the scientific
achievement of a man, likewise on his human qualities, but his religion is
often not mentioned at all. When, in 1888, a monument was erected to
_Ampère_ in his native city, Lyons, not a word in the speeches referred to
the fact that he was a faithful Catholic. Nay, more; on one of the books
seen on his monument is chiselled in bold letters the word “Encyclopédie.”
Those unaware of the facts would infer that _Ampère_ had been one of the
Encyclopædists. His actual relation to this infamous work was that he had
read it in his youth, but abhorred it in his later age.

The English physicist, _Faraday_ (died 1867), according to _Tyndall_ and
_Du Bois-Reymond_ the greatest experimentist of all times, was, like
_Volta_ and _Ampère_, of religious mind.


    In a letter to a lady he wrote: “I belong to a small and despised
    Christian sect, known by the name of Sandemanians. Our hope is
    based upon the belief which is in Christ.” In 1847, he concluded
    his lectures at the Royal Institution with the following words:
    “In teaching us those things, our science should prompt us to
    think of Him whose works they are.” At a later lecture, he
    declared: “I have never encountered anything to cause a
    contradiction between things within the scope of man, and the
    higher things, relating to his future and unconceivable to
    (unaided) human mind” (_Jones_, The Life and Letters of Faraday).


Of the same bent of mind was _Faraday’s_ fellow countryman, _Maxwell_
(died 1879), known to every one who has studied the development of the
theories of electricity. This ingenious theoretician of electrics,
professor of experimental physics at Cambridge, was deeply religious.
Every evening he led in the family prayer; he regularly attended divine
service, and partook of the monthly communion of his denomination. Those
more intimately acquainted with _Maxwell_ agree, that he was one of the
worthiest men they ever met.


    Nothing could better illustrate his religious sentiment than the
    splendid prayer found among his posthumous papers: “Almighty God,
    Thou who hast created man after Thy image and hast given him a
    living soul, that he should search Thee and rule over Thy
    creatures, teach us to study the works by Thy hands that we may
    subject the earth for our use, and strengthen our reason for Thy
    service, and let us receive Thy holy word thus, that we may
    believe in Him whom Thou hast sent us to give us the knowledge of
    salvation and the forgiving of our sins, all of which we pray for
    in the name of the same Jesus Christ, our Lord”
    (_Campbell-Garnett_, The Life of J. C. Maxwell).


_Maxwell’s_ devout mind is especially significant here, because, like
_Ampère_ and _Volta_, he occupied himself much with philosophical and
theological questions. Every Sunday upon return from church he is said to
have buried himself in his theological books.

Many others might be mentioned of English physicists of the past century,
who combined religious belief with great knowledge. The peculiar trait of
the English character to respect and preserve with piety the inherited
institutions of the past, as against radicalism and the craze for
innovation, manifests itself also in the absence of the immature and
frivolous juggling with the great truths of the Christian past, not
infrequently met with elsewhere. Let us mention but one more of England’s
great men who have died in recent years. In December, 1907, the papers
reported the death of _William Thomson_, latterly better known as _Lord
Kelvin_. He lived to the age of 83 years, up to his death incessantly busy
with scientific work. As early as 1855, _Helmholtz_ described him as “one
of the foremost mathematical physicists of Europe.(7)” The Berlin Academy
of Science expressed high praise and admiration in its address
felicitating _Thomson_ on his Golden Jubilee. Undoubtedly, he merited this
admiration also by stoutly defending from the viewpoint of science the
necessity of a Divine Creator.


    “We do not know,” he wrote, “at what moment a creation of matter
    or of energy fixed a beginning beyond which no speculation based
    on mechanical laws is able to lead us. In exact mechanics, if we
    were ever inclined to forget this barrier, we necessarily would be
    reminded of it by the consideration that reasoning, resting
    exclusively upon the law of mechanics, points to a time when the
    earth must have been uninhabited, and it also teaches us that our
    own bodies, like those of all living plants and animals, and
    fossils, are organized forms of matter for which science can give
    no other explanation than the will of a Creator, a truth, in
    support of which geological history offers rich evidence” (On
    Mechanical Antecedent of Motion, Heat and Light, 1884). “The only
    contribution of dynamics to theoretical biology consists in the
    absolute negation of an automatic beginning and automatic
    continuance of life” (Addresses and Speeches).

    On May 1, 1902, the Rev. Prof. _G. Henslow_, according to the
    _London Times_, spoke at University College, before a big audience
    with the President of the University as chairman, on the subject
    “The Rationalism of To-day, an Examination of Darwinism.” On
    conclusion of the speech the venerable octogenarian, _Lord
    Kelvin_, arose and proposed a resolution of thanks to the speaker.
    While fully subscribing to the fundamental ideas of Prof.
    _Henslow’s_ lecture, _Lord Kelvin_ said, he could not assent to
    the proposition that natural science neither affirms nor denies
    the origin of life by a creative force. He stated that natural
    science _does_, positively, assert a creative force. Science
    forces every one to recognize a miracle within himself. That we
    are living, and moving, and existing, is not due to dead matter,
    but to a creating and directing force, and science forces us to
    accept this assumption as a tenet of faith. _Lord Kelvin_
    subsequently amplified these remarks in an article that appeared
    in the _Nineteenth Century_, of June, 1903. It concludes with the
    admonition, not to be afraid to think independently. “If you
    reason sharply, you will be forced by science to believe in God,
    who is the basis of all religion. You will find science to be, not
    an opponent of religion, but a support” (_Times_, May 8 and 15,
    1903).


Such were the views of those to whom, in the first place, the
establishment of natural science and its progress are due. It is not
science and strong reasoning that lead away from God, but the lack of true
science. _Bacon_ said: _Leviores gustus in philosophia movere fortasse
animum ad atheismum, sed pleniores haustus ad Deum reducere_. Another
thing must be observed. Among those earnest men, earnest in the
investigation of nature, and earnest in the consideration of questions of
a supernatural life, there are many who made the religious question the
subject of mature study, and who were well acquainted with the objections
against religion and Christianity. But they cling to their religious
persuasion only the more firmly. We may be reminded of men like _Volta_,
_Cauchy_, _Ampère_, and _Maxwell_.

To speak of authorities, what comparison is there between these great
scientists and discoverers, and those who are satisfied with the general
assurance that “any one who has grasped the elements of natural sciences
must become a monist,” and “that the supernatural exists only in the brain
of the visionary and ignorant,” that, “in the same measure in which the
victorious progress of modern knowledge of nature surpasses the scientific
achievements of former centuries, the untenableness of all mystical views
of life that tend to harness the reason in the yoke of so-called
revelation has been made clear” (_Haeckel_), and who in such assurance
find perfect intellectual gratification. They recall an incident at the
Congress of English natural scientists, held at Belfast in 1874, when
_Tyndall_ delivered from the platform a materialistic lecture, and among
the audience sat _Maxwell_, his superior in scientific research, who put
down the lecture in doggerel rhyme, in a humorous vein, of course, but not
without deserved sarcasm.

We proceed on our way, trying to make haste, and omitting many names that
might be mentioned, limiting ourselves to the most prominent ones.

Among the chemists we name _Lavoisier_. A martyr to his science, he died
under the guillotine of the Revolution in 1794; he had remained true to
his Christian faith. The Swede, _J. Berzelius_ (died 1848), openly
professed his belief in God. _Thénard_ (died 1859), the discoverer of
boron, of a blue dye named after him, and of many other chemicals, was a
staunch Catholic. The pastor of St. Sulpice could testify at his funeral
as follows: “He attended church every Sunday, eyes and heart fixed on his
prayer-book, and on solemn Feast days he received Holy Communion.... With
_Baron Thénard_ one of the greatest benefactors of my poor people is gone”
(_Kneller_).

_Dumas_ (died 1884), who is esteemed by his pupil _Pasteur_ as the peer of
_Lavoisier_, was also a practical Catholic, as was his compatriot
_Chevreul_ (died 1889). This great man had the rare good fortune to be
present at his own centenary in 1886. At this great celebration he
received an address by the Berlin Academy, stating that his name had a
prominent place on the list of the great scientists who had carried the
scientific repute of France to all quarters of the globe. When, in view of
the mundane character of the celebration, the liberal press endeavoured to
rank him among the representatives of unbelieving science, and this
question being discussed in public, _Chevreul_ felt himself constrained to
proclaim his religious persuasion openly in a letter to _Count de
Montravel_, in which he said: “I am simply a scientist, but those who know
me, know also that I was born a Catholic, that I lead a Catholic life, and
that I want to die a Catholic” (Civilta Cattolica, 1891, 292).

Two Germans may conclude the list of chemists, _Schoenbein_ (died 1868)
and _J. Liebig_ (died 1873).


    In his diary, “Menschen und Dinge,” 1885 (page 29), _Schoenbein_
    writes: “There are still people who fancy in their limited mind
    that, the deeper the human intellect penetrates the secrets of
    nature, the more extensive its knowledge, the wider its conception
    of the exterior world, the more it must forget the cause of all
    things. Many have gone even so far as to assert that natural
    science must lead to the denial of God. This view is without all
    foundation. He, who contemplates with open eyes, daily and hourly,
    the doings and workings of nature, will not only believe, but will
    actually perceive, and be firmly convinced, that there is not the
    smallest place in space where the divine does not reveal itself in
    the most magnificent and admirable way.” And in a similar strain
    _Liebig_ writes: “Indeed, the greatness and infinite wisdom of the
    Creator of the world can be realized only by him who endeavours to
    understand His ideas as laid down in that immense book,—nature, in
    comparison to which everything that men otherwise know and tell of
    Him, appears like empty talk” (Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung).


Now let us turn to the geographers. We merely mention _Ritter_ (died
1859), the man who raised geography to the dignity of a science; he was a
faithful Protestant, while biassed against the Catholic Church. In spite
of this, a Catholic historian, _J. Janssen_, has sketched his life, in
which we read: “Firm in his belief in the living God, and in the Incarnate
Son of God, His Redeemer, he furnishes a clear and convincing proof that
this faith, far from being a contradiction to natural science ... alone
enables man to acquire an extensive and deep knowledge of nature.” We give
only passing notice to the founder of scientific crystallography, _R.
Hauy_ (died 1822), who was a dutiful Catholic priest. The geologists now
will get a hearing.


    Among them we meet, in the first place, the noted geologist and
    zoölogist, _Cuvier_ (died 1832), a faithful Protestant: also the
    foremost French geologist of his time, _L. De Beaumont_ (died
    1874), “a Christian in all things and a steadfast Christian ...
    which he remained through his whole life;” so _Dumas_ testifies of
    him in his obituary (Comptes Rendus, 1874). Then there is _J.
    Barrande_, the untiring explorer of the antediluvian strata of
    Bohemia. He came in 1830 to Bohemia with the banished royal
    family, as _Chambord’s_ teacher, and died 1883 at Frohsdorf near
    Vienna. He was a pious Catholic. The volumes of his works are
    nearly all dated on Catholic feasts. The recently deceased French
    geologist, _A. De Lapparent_, was a practical Catholic, and such
    were the two Belgian geologists, _J. d’Omalius_ (died 1875), and
    _A. Dumont_ (died 1857), to both of whom Belgium owes its
    geological exploration. The English geologists, _Buckland_ (died
    1856), _Hitchcock_ (died 1864), and _A. Sedgwick_ (died 1872),
    were ministers of the English Church. _J. Dwight Dana_ (died
    1895), the foremost geologist of North America, begins his
    celebrated text-book of geology with a homage to his Creator, and
    concludes it by paying tribute to Holy Writ. _W. Dawson_ (died
    1899) the worthy geological explorer of his native land, Canada,
    published several apologetic dissertations on the Bible and
    Nature. A kindred sentiment animated the German scientists,
    _Bischof_ (died 1870), _Quenstedt_ (died 1898), the geologist of
    Suabia _Pfaff_ (died 1886), _Schafhæutl_ (died 1890), and the
    equally pious as learned Swiss geologist _O. Heer_ (died 1883).
    They all have much to say about the greatness of their Creator,
    but not a word of any insolvable contradictions between the Bible
    and geologic research.


As a last division of an imposing phalanx, there are now the biologists
and physiologists. Modern biology, as the science of life, has in the eyes
of many accomplished the bold deed of demonstrating the superfluity of a
soul distinct from matter. Claim is made that it has sufficiently
explained the sensitive and mental life by the sole agency of physical and
chemical forces, and thus to have removed the boundary between live and
dead matter. It is said, further, that biology in conjunction with zoölogy
and botany has furnished proof that the wonderful organic forms of life
may be explained by purely natural causes, without having to assume as an
ultimate cause the act of a higher intelligence; that a never ceasing
evolution is the sole ultimate cause,—creation is made superfluous by
evolution. Biology is thus claimed to have refuted the old dualism of soul
and matter, of world and God, and to have awarded the palm to monism.

Are the eminent representatives of this science really the materialists
and monists they would have to be, if all this were true? The foremost
physiologist of the nineteenth century was _J. Müller_ (died 1858), buried
in the Catholic cemetery at Berlin. He was a decided opponent of
materialism; he not only contended for the existence of a spiritual soul,
but also for an immaterial vital force in plants. _Th. Schwann_ (died
1882) is the founder of the cellular theory. In the year 1839 he accepted
a call to take the chair of anatomy at the Catholic University of Louvain.
One of the most prominent physiologists of the nineteenth century was _A.
Volkmann_ (died 1877). He was a stout champion of the spirituality and
immortality of the soul, of purposive cause in animated beings, and an
opponent of _Darwin’s_ theory. _G. J. Mendel_ (died 1884) became by his
work on _Experimenting with Hybrid Plants_ the pioneer of the modern
theory of hereditary transmission, adopted by modern biology; and
scientists like _H. de Vries_, _Correns_, _Tschermak_, and _Bateson_
followed his lead. “His important laws of hereditary transmission are the
best so far offered by the research in this field” (_Muckermann_,
Grundriss der Biologie). He was a Catholic priest, and the abbot of the
Augustinian Monastery at Old-Brünn. _Karl von Vierordt_ (died 1884) is
well known by his “Manual of Physiology,” still in demand as a reference
book in the libraries of universities. In 1865 he delivered a speech at
the Tübingen University on the unity of science, concluding with this
appeal to the students: “Until your religious notions become clear by a
mature insight, trust in the well-meant assurance that the belief in the
divinity of the religion of Jesus has not been put falsely into your
heart. True piety is equally remote from narrow pietism as from
freethinking indifference; it leaves to reason its full rights, but it
also assures to us the faculty to be aware, in joyful confidence in
Almighty Providence, of an immaterial and for us eternal destiny.” _Ch.
Ehrenberg_ (died 1876) is the explorer of the world of little things: of
infusoria and protozoa. He did not countenance _Haeckel’s_ materialism nor
_Darwin’s_ denial of teleology: to him they were fantastic theories and
romances. A friend of his, and of the same mind, was _K. von Martius_, who
admired God’s wisdom in the wonders of the world of vegetation. Long
before his death he ordered his burial dress to be made of white cloth
embroidered with a green cross,—“a cross because I am a Christian, and
green in honour of botany.” Another renowned name may be mentioned, that
of the Austrian anatomist _J. Hyrtl_ (died 1894).


    In the years when materialism was flourishing, _Hyrtl_ was
    painfully grieved to see science fall into disrepute through the
    fault of individuals. He gave vent to his indignation on the
    occasion of the fifth centenary of the Vienna University (1864),
    when, having been elected Rector, and being considered the
    greatest celebrity at that college, he delivered his inaugural
    speech on the materialistic tendency of our times. Summing up he
    said: “I am at a loss how to explain what scientific grounds there
    are to defend and fortify a revival of the old materialistic views
    of an _Epicurus_ and a _Lucretius_, and to endeavour to insure to
    it a permanent rule.... Its success is due to the boldness of its
    assertion and to the prevailing spirit of the time, which
    popularizes teachings of this sort the more willingly, the more
    danger they seem to entail for the existing order of things.” It
    was the same protest made some years later by another famous
    scientist against “the dangerous opinion that there were dogmas of
    natural science in inimical opposition to the highest ideals of
    the human mind.” He stated that “it would be a desirable reward
    for the efforts of our foremost naturalists to erect with the aid
    of anthropology a barrier to this error which is so demoralizing
    for the people” (_J. Ranke_, Der Mensch, 1894).

    _Hyrtl’s_ speech at once aroused a storm of indignation in the
    liberal press of Vienna, and the great scientist, until then
    honoured and extolled, became the object of denunciation and
    sneer. Thus was the freedom of science understood in those
    circles.

    _Haeckel_ was much vexed by two fellow scientists, _M. von Baer_
    (died 1876) and _G. J. Romanes_ (died 1894). _Baer_ was prominent
    in the science of evolution. He was led to theism by his studies.
    _Romanes_, a friend of _Darwin_, had been an adherent of
    materialism, but through serious study he returned to the belief
    in God and Christianity. His posthumous work, “Thoughts on
    Religion, a scientist’s religious evolution from Atheism to
    Christianity,” furnishes a brilliant voucher thereof. _Romanes’s_
    conversion was a sad blow for _Haeckel_. However, he constructed
    an explanation to give himself comfort. “When the news of this
    conversion,” he wrote, “was first circulated by a friend of
    _Romanes_, a zealous English Churchman, the assumption suggested
    itself to me that it was all a mystification and invention, for it
    is known that the fanatical champions of ecclesiastical
    superstition have never hesitated to pervert the truth to save
    their dogma. Later on, however, it was found that it was really an
    instance (analogous to the case of old _Baer_) of one of those
    interesting psychological metamorphoses with which I have dealt in
    Chapter 6 of my book. _Romanes_ was in his last years a sick man.
    It was pathological debility. The first condition, however, of an
    unbiassed, pure conception of reason is the normal condition of
    its organ. His phronema was not in a normal condition.” _Haeckel_
    will have to rank among those whose phronema is not in a normal
    condition a good many other natural scientists; indeed, most of
    those of higher standing.


Every one knows the celebrated name of _Louis Pasteur_ (died 1895), the
discoverer of various bacteria, of whom _Huxley_ says that his manifold
inventions have repaid to French industry the five billion francs
indemnity which France had to pay to Germany after the war. It is equally
well known that _Pasteur_ was to his death a staunch Catholic. “As his
soul departed, he held in his hands a small cross of brass, and his last
words were the confession of faith and hope” (La Science Catholique, X,
1896, 182). The story is told that one of his pupils asked him how he
could be so religious after all his thinking and studying. _Pasteur_
replied: “Just because I have thought and studied, I remained religious
like a man of Brittany, and had I thought and studied still more, I would
be as religious as a woman of Brittany” (Revue des Questions
Scientifiques, 1896, 385).


    In the year 1859 great commotion was caused in the world of
    thought by the appearance of _Darwin’s_ book on the “Origin of
    Species.” It stated that the various species had gradually evolved
    from most simple, primordial forms, and this by natural selection;
    not, therefore, in the sense that the Creator had put the laws of
    evolution into nature, but that in the struggle for existence the
    survival of the fittest was the result of natural selection. Soon
    it was claimed that man, too, in his rational life, was the result
    of an evolution from animal stages; indeed, the whole universe had
    arisen by the survival of the accidentally fittest. Evolution was
    to be substituted for creation. In Germany, _E. Haeckel_ was the
    man who considered it the task of his life to spread those ideas
    as the established result of science. In our own time a belated
    high tide is sweeping over the intellectual lowlands.

    _Darwin_ himself was an agnostic; to begin with, he lacked all
    religious training; his mother had died early, his father was a
    free-thinker, and his education at school was rationalistic. The
    doubt of all higher truths, and finally, according to his own
    confession, the doubt respecting the power of reason, were his
    companions through life. Yet he confesses: “... I never was an
    atheist in the sense that I would deny the existence of God. I
    think, in general (and more so the older I grow), but not at all
    times, agnostic would be a more accurate description of my state
    of mind” (_F. Darwin_, The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, I,
    304). Remarkable, however, is the following passage at the end of
    _Darwin’s_ chief work: “It is a great belief, indeed, of the
    Creator having breathed the embryo of all life surrounding us into
    a few forms, or in but one single form, and an endless row of most
    beautiful, most wonderful forms having evolved and are still
    evolving from such a simple beginning, while our planet, following
    the laws of gravitation, has steadily revolved in its circle.”
    What _Darwin_ was lacking in a high degree was a philosophical
    training of the mind.

    In itself the _theory of evolution_, which asserts the variability
    of species of animals and plants, is by no means opposed to
    religious truths. It neither includes a necessity of assuming the
    origin of the human soul from the essentially lower animal soul,
    nor is it an atheistic theory. On the contrary, such an evolution
    would most clearly certify to God’s wisdom in laying such a
    wonderful basis for the progress of nature, provided this theory
    could be proved by scientific facts; indeed, for an evolution
    within narrow limits, circumstantial evidence is not lacking. That
    there is no contradiction between the theory of evolution and the
    fundamental tenets of Christian Creed is sufficiently shown by the
    representatives of the theory. _Lamarck_ (died 1829) and
    _Saint-Hilaire_ (died 1844), both of them representatives of the
    theory of evolution long before _Darwin_, believed in God. There
    were, prior to _Darwin_, two celebrated Catholic scientists, to
    wit, _Ampère_ and _d’Omalius_, who had decidedly taken the part of
    _Saint-Hilaire_ in his controversy with _Cuvier_. And also after
    _Darwin_, a number of Christian and Catholic scientists have
    contended for the idea of evolution, as, for instance, the pious
    Swiss geologist, _Heer_; also _Quenstedt_, _Volkmann_, and the
    American geologist, _Ch. Lyell_. More recently Catholic scientists
    have expressed themselves in favour of the theory of evolution;
    for instance, the noted zoölogist, _E. Wasmann_, and the
    geologists _Lossen_ and _W. Waagen_, both of whom had to bring
    bitter sacrifices in their career on account of their Catholic
    faith.



Mature Science Respects Faith.


There have now passed in review the great natural scientists of the past,
those living at the present time we shall leave to the judgment of the
future. Is it true, then, that the foremost representatives of natural
science had the conviction that science and faith are incompatible? No! On
the contrary, most of them, and the greatest of them, have professed the
fundamental truths of religion, or have even been devout Christians
themselves.


    “Theism in natural science, or, if you prefer, in natural
    philosophy,” so says a modern scientist, “rests upon the basis of
    a fundamental view which an old formula has clothed in words as
    simple as they are sublime: ‘I believe in God, the Almighty
    Creator of Heaven and of Earth.’ This confession does not cling to
    theistic scientists like an egg-shell from the time of
    unsophisticated childhood faith; it is the result of their entire
    scientific thought and judgment. This conviction has been
    professed by the most discerning natural scientists of all ages”
    (_J. Reinke_, Naturwissenschaft und Religion).


Still it cannot be denied that some of the great scientists were of
different mind, men like _R. von Virchow_, _Tyndall_, _A. von Humboldt_,
_Du Bois-Reymond_. Nor shall it be disputed that, at the present time, a
large number of men of average learning are on the side of unbelief.
However, it must not be forgotten that unbelief is more frequently
pretended to the outside world for appearance’s sake than it really dwells
in the heart. This is, to a great extent, due to human respect, to public
opinion, and the prevailing tendency of science. Then again, it must be
remembered, that religiously minded scientists are often crowded out from
the schools of science, with the natural result that the others
predominate. Another point to be borne in mind is that the atheistic
representatives of science are doing more to get themselves talked about;
they are seeking more diligently the attention of public opinion. Men like
_Tyndall_, _Vogt_, _Moleschott_, _Haeckel_, are known in larger circles
than men like _Faraday_, _Maxwell_, _Ampère_, _Volta_, _Pasteur_, who,
engaged in serious work, gave no time to making propaganda, as the others
did by lecturing and popular writing for materialistic and monistic views
in the name of science; they had no desire for the limelight of attention,
and for posing as personified science.

All this does not change the fact that a very large number, indeed the
largest number, of natural scientists of first rank were believers in God,
or of pious, Christian mind. And that is of the greater importance. To do
pioneer work in the field of science, to give impetus, to make progress,
requires a penetrating and, at the same time, an independent mind, one
that can rise above conventional commonplace. The fact that such men have
largely been very religious, that they never belittled religion, weighs
much more in the balance than the disparagement of inferior minds.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

These, then, are the often-cited witnesses for the incompatibility of
science and faith. While only taken from the province of natural science,
they may in our case be deemed representative of science in general. For
natural science is generally regarded the most exact of all, and as the
one which, more than any other, has the scientific spirit said to be
incompatible with faith, and which, by many, is believed to have brought
about in the modern world of thought the irreconcilable conflict between
faith and science. This is not so! Such antagonism does _not_ exist. It
cannot exist, because it is certain from the outset that both faith and
science unfold the truth. Truth, however, can never be in conflict with
truth. Nor has that antagonism ever existed historically in any of the
great representatives of science. This antagonism is fictitious, it is
false in its very essence. It is fabricated, either by distorting faith
into a blind belief of absurd things, or else by distorting the human
faculty of conception into infallible omniscience, or, the other extreme,
by denying its faculty for a higher perception.

Faith has nothing to fear from a mature science that has arrived at the
conviction of its cognitions, nor has it anything to fear from the great
intellects who reason profoundly and seriously. But it has to fear
mock-science and ignorance, and those small and superficial minds that aim
at stretching their pseudo-knowledge to a gigantic infallibility.





THIRD SECTION. THE LIBERAL FREEDOM OF RESEARCH.




The Yoke of the Sun.


The gifted Danish writer and convert, _J. Jörgensen_, tells a parable
which is pregnant with thought. “In the midst of a large rye-field,” he
relates, “there stood a tall poplar, with other trees standing nearby. One
day the poplar turned to the other trees and plants, and thus began to
speak: ‘Sisters and brothers! To us, the glorious tribe of plants, belongs
the earth, and everything upon it is dependent on us. We fertilize and
feed ourselves, while beasts and men are fed and clothed by us. Indeed,
the earth itself feeds upon our decaying leaves, upon our boughs and
branches. There is only one power in the world our existence and growth is
said to depend on; I refer to the Sun. I purposely used the words, “is
said,” because I am sure that we do not depend on the Sun. This doctrine
of sunlight being a necessity and a benefit to our plant life is nothing
but a superstition, which at last ought to give way to enlightenment.’
Here the poplar paused. From some old oaks and elms in the neighbouring
grove there came signs of disapproval, but the inconstant rye-field
muttered assent. Thus encouraged and raising its voice the poplar
continued: ‘I know well that there is a musty faction amongst us which
clings obstinately to obsolete views. However, I have confidence in the
independence of the younger generation of plants. They will realize the
baseness of continuing to do homage to an absurd superstition. Our
freeborn heads shall never bow to a yoke, not even to the yoke of the Sun.
Down, therefore, with that yoke! And free from restraint there will arise
a free and beautiful generation that will astonish the world.’ The poplar
paused for the second time, and now the applause was long and loud, the
fields cheered and the groves gave boisterous applause, so that the
disapproval of a few old trees could not be heard. The following days
looked upon an odd spectacle. At daybreak, when the Sun ascended and cast
its first rays over the landscape, the flowers closed their cups and
denied admission, as if asleep; the leaves no longer turned toward the
Sun. But when the dispenser of warmth and light had gone down behind the
hills, the gayly coloured flowers opened in the dim starlight, as if now
the time had come for them to grow and blossom.

“Alas, how sad was the fate of these poor rebels! The rye soon began to
languish till it lay prone on the ground; green leaves turned yellow, the
flowers drooped, faded and withered. Then the plants began to grumble at
the poplar. There it stood, its leaves a seared yellow. ‘What simpletons
you are, brothers and sisters!’ it said. ‘Can’t you see that now you are
much more like yourselves than under the rule of the Sun? Now you are
refined, independent beings, well rid of the sluggish health of yore.’
There were some who still believed what the poplar said. ‘We are
independent, we are unfettered,’ they clamoured, till the last spark of
life was gone. Not long after the poplar, too, stood there with its
branches bared,—it had died. The farmers, however, complained about the
failing of the crop, and consoled themselves by hoping for better success
the next year.”

A parable of deep meaning! It may serve as an illustration for the facts
stated, and for those yet to be dealt with.

According to the Christian view, man is dependent on his Creator, from
whom he receives life and light, and, in the same way, his mind depends on
truth, by which it lives as the plants live, by the light and the warmth
of the sun. To many generations this was self-evident, and withal they
felt themselves free, because they looked for the freedom only of the
dependent creature. And, keeping within these bounds, they had a cheerful
existence in the happy possession of their faith, contented and serene in
the possession of truth; their higher spiritual life throve and
flourished, promoted by the Eternal Giver of light and warmth, who held
out to them the prospect of completing their mental life in the
contemplation of His eternal truth.

What the fathers deemed self-evident has now become a problem to their
sons. What to their fathers was lofty and revered, the things to which
they ascribed their ennoblement, have become to the sons an obstacle to
free development. They have forgotten what they are. They demand
independence and freest realization of their own individuality, in which
they see the sole source of greatness and progress. In every dependence
they perceive a hampering of their natural development.

We have in previous chapters become acquainted with this _liberal
freedom_, particularly in reasoning and in scientific research, the child
of the philosophy of humanitarianism and subjectivism, the philosophy that
emancipates man from God’s rule, from the immutable religious truths, and
which sees in this emancipation perfect freedom. We have listened to the
arguments in behalf of this position, especially arguments against the
duty to believe. All that we have set forth hitherto was to prove that
such a freedom is not required. In the faithful adherence to God’s
revelation and to His Church there is no degradation of reason, an
exaltation rather; because to join in the eternal reason of its Creator is
not bondage but a privilege.

We proceed. We shall demonstrate that this freedom is not only not
required, but that it is entirely untenable and ruinous; that it is
especially so because it is urged and demanded in the name of truth and
proper order, in the name of uplift of human intellectual life, and of
progress towards real enlightenment. We shall see that this freedom is not
a liberation from mean fetters, but simply a revolt against the natural
order, an apostasy from God and the supernatural which one shuns. Hence,
not the natural and orderly development of the human individual, but a
principle of negation under the garb of freedom, the severance of man from
the sources of his greatness and strength, the perversion of true science;
not the only admissible scientific method, but an altogether unscientific
method. We shall show that it becomes thereby the principle of mental
pauperization and decay, a principle of mental decadence, which in the
sphere of idealism will reduce mankind to beggary. Thereby public
testimony is given that in the midst of mankind there is needed an
intelligent force that preserves, with conscientious earnestness and
unyielding firmness, the intellectual inheritance of mankind, the ideal
treasures of truth and of morality.




