Chapter I. Theology And Science.


Now one other, the concluding point. So far our discussion has dealt
almost exclusively with the profane sciences, and while there were often
under discussion general principles, applying also to theology, we did not
refer to the latter expressly for the reason that it occupies a special
position in regard to our question. Theology is the science of the faith,
its subjects are truths established by divine or inspired authority;
hence, in teaching, authority plays a larger part in this than in any
other science. For this reason much fault is found with theology, and many
consider that it forfeits thereby its claim to rank as a science. They say
it lacks all liberty, the results are prescribed; it lacks possibility of
progress; nothing but rigid dogmas, rejecting all development and
improvement; its vocation is exhausted by the incessant transmitting of
the immutable; hence it lacks all the essential conditions of a true
science, it has no claim to a place at the university; if it nevertheless
has established itself at the university, as is the case in some
countries, it must be considered as an alien body, a remnant of an
obsolete time.

A keen eye cannot fail to detect in these words the prompting voice of
that view of the world which rejects everything supernatural, and declares
that Christian dogmatics and morals, and ideas of sin, redemption,
humility of faith, cross, and self-denial, do no longer correspond to
modern man. At bottom is the struggle between the two views of the
world—one the philosophy of modern, sovereign man, the other the
contemplation of the world in the light of Christianity: a process of
repulsion, psychologically easily understood, by which the one seeks to
expel the other from the position which it desires to occupy. A closer
examination of the matter will show this.



Theology as a Science.


Is theology a science in the proper sense? May it rightly claim a place
among the branches of human science? This shall be the first question to
be answered. Theology, meaning the doctrine of God, is the science of the
Revelation, or of the faith; of the Revelation which began in the Old
Testament and reached its perfection in Christ, the Son of God, in whom
appeared the fulness of God, the image of the glory of God, the perfection
of all religion; the Revelation intrusted to the Church to be preserved
infallibly, so that by these truths, and means of salvation, the Church
might guide and enrich the life of believing mankind. Hence, in the broad
sense in which it is understood now, theology is the science that gathers
the revealed truths from their sources, endeavours to grasp and to defend
them, and to deduce new truths from them; which also studies these truths
and the means given for salvation, in their development and effect in the
Christian life.

Thus it includes a wide range of subordinate branches, connected by a
common object. The biblical sciences have for their subject Holy Writ; the
sciences of introduction to the Bible deal with its external history, with
historical criticism playing an important part; exegesis is occupied with
the scientific interpretation of the text and uncovers the treasures of
truth in Holy Writ, assisted in this task by hermeneutics and a number of
philosophical-historical auxiliary sciences. Ecclesiastical history and
its branches of patrology, history of dogma, ecclesiastical archæology,
and art, and other auxiliary sciences, describe the doctrine of Revelation
in its historical course through the centuries, and its development in the
bosom of the Church. Dogmatics (with apologetics) and morals have the task
to explain and defend the doctrine of faith and morals, as drawn from the
Scriptures and from tradition, to deduce new truths from them and to unite
them all in a system. Finally, Canon law, and even to a greater degree the
departments of pastoral theology, homiletics, liturgy, show how the
treasures of Revelation and Redemption find their realization in the
practical life of the Church and of the Christian people.

Hence there cannot be any doubt but that theology is a science in the
proper sense, unless a wrong definition of science is presumed. Of course,
if we should identify science in general with empirical science, and
scientific methods with the methods of natural sciences and mathematics,
and refuse to recognize any results as scientific except those gained by
observation and mathematical calculation, then, of course, theology would
not be a science, nor would many other branches of knowledge come under
this head; the fault, however, would lie with a narrow conception, that
limits itself to the portion of human knowledge within its vision,
ignoring everything that exists beyond its horizon.

What are we to understand by science? It is the systematic concentration
of the knowledge and the research of things according to their causes;
hence of our cognition of a subject that can be proved by careful
demonstration to be certain or at least probable. This we find to be the
case in theology. It is the sum total, systematically arranged, of
knowledge and researches concerning the tenets of faith, considered in the
abstract, in their history, and in their effects on the life of the
Church. Applying the method of natural thought, theology first studies the
presumptions and foundations of faith, examines the sources of revelation
by the philosophical and historical-critical method, proves the doctrines
of faith by these sources, endeavours to grasp these truths
intellectually, by the methods of analytical and synthetical thinking, and
to make clear their connection. We have here the same methods as applied
in other sciences: ascertaining the facts, definition of terms, deduction,
induction. In respect to the history of the Church and to Canon law their
similarity with analogous profane sciences is at once obvious.

There is one _difference_: in the theological sciences there is active,
not only rational research, but also the _belief_ in revealed truths. In
some departments, like that of ecclesiastical history, this difference is
less pronounced, they proceed by the method of critically establishing and
connecting the facts; but they, too, are guided by the conviction that
there is in the life of the Church not only natural causation, but also
supernatural principle. Dogmatics takes faith to a greater degree as its
point of support, in order to connect natural reason with the convictions
of faith, and how richly natural reason may unfold itself is shown in the
works of _St. Augustine_ and _St. Thomas_, on the great mysteries of the
faith. As regards faith itself, we must keep in mind that it has a
scientific foundation: the credibility of revelation is proven, it is a
reasoning faith. It may be likened to history. The historian, on the
testimony of his sources, believes in the actuality of human events,
having convinced himself of the credibility of his sources; this belief
becomes then his starting point for further researches of a pragmatical
nature: he penetrates more deeply into the facts, and connects them
according to their causal relations. The difference is this: the historian
rests upon human authority, the theologian upon divine.

Yet the objection is raised: theology is faith, or at least rests on
faith. Faith, however, has nothing to do with science; faith is sentiment,
whereas science is knowledge. That this view of faith is wrong, and the
result of subjective agnosticism that denies to man any positive
understanding of supernatural truths, we have shown repeatedly. Certainly,
if faith were nothing but sentiment, no science could be built upon it;
you cannot build stone houses upon water. But the Catholic faith is not
simply sentiment, it is a conviction of reason, based upon God’s testimony
that the revealed doctrines are true. In the same way that the
historian—to use the comparison once more—believes positively in his
historical facts, on the strength of the authority of a _Livy_ or
_Tacitus_, or accepts as proved some events of ancient times, relying upon
the testimony of Babylonian tablets of clay or upon the pyramids, and
makes these events his starting point for further researches, without
having to fear objections to his work on the ground that knowledge and
belief are incompatible; just so the theologian believes in his religious
truths because they are vouched for by God’s testimony. This proves that
the foundation for his further thought is not formed by uncontrollable,
irrational sentiment, but by a conviction of reason.

Hence, if by knowledge is meant nothing but a conviction of reason—and in
this sense faith and knowledge are usually contrasted by modern
philosophical writers—then faith is knowledge in the proper sense and a
contradiction does not exist. If, however, knowledge is taken to be the
understanding gained by personal insight without reliance on external
testimony, then, of course, there is a distinction, and theology would not
be a science, in so far as it _believes_; just as little as history would
be a science, in so far as it believes its sources. But theology is a
science, in so far as it makes use of experience and reason, examines its
sources, draws from them the facts of faith, and makes them the starting
point for its investigations.


    Theology also has mysteries among its subjects, namely, truths
    whose actuality is cognizable, but whose contents, while not
    indeed inconsistent, yet remain obscure and incomprehensible to
    us. But even this does not impair its scientific character. Other
    sciences share with it this lot of human limitation. Instances are
    plentiful in natural science where the existence of natural forces
    of one kind or another is proven; of which it is able to form some
    idea, but cannot fathom; they remain a puzzle to science,
    sometimes presenting the greatest difficulties. For instance,
    ether, gravitation, electricity, the nature of motion, and so on.
    The noted physicist _J. J. Thomson_ says: “Gravitation is the
    secret of secrets. But the very same holds good of all molecular
    forces, of magnetism, electricity, etc. There are in animated
    nature even more things we cannot understand. We could say that of
    the processes of living organisms we understand practically
    nothing. Our knowledge of indigestion, of propagation, of
    instinct, is so small that we can almost say it is limited to the
    enumeration of them. What we do know and understand is not one
    thousandth part of what would be necessary for a knowledge in any
    degree complete. ‘If we raise an arm,’ says _Pasteur_, ‘or put our
    teeth in action, we do something that no one can explain.’ ”



Theology and Progress.


With a very superficial conception of theology we might easily arrive at
the opinion that it lacks a characteristic of science, which, in our time
especially, is insisted upon, namely, progress. For it must adhere to
dogmas and not go beyond them. Hence, seemingly, there is nothing to do
for theology but to transmit unchangeable truths, perhaps in different
aspects, but nevertheless the same truths.

It must be admitted that one kind of progress is barred in theology, as
also in other sciences; to wit, the progress of incessant remodelling and
reshaping, the continuous tearing down of the old facts, the eternal
search after truth without ever gaining its possession.


    This is often the progress demanded. “The new tuition,” it is
    said, “starts from the premise that the truth is to be searched
    for” (_Paulsen_). “Science is not a perfected doctrine, but a
    research, ever to be revised” (_Harnack_). It is particularly
    demanded of theology that it procure a FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF
    CHRISTIANITY, and substitute for it thoughts which modern age has
    adopted and which it calls scientific thinking. “There remains the
    task,” they say, “of expressing faith and its objects so as to
    coincide with the conception formed by scientific thinking of the
    natural and historical reality” (_Paulsen_). Hence miracles, the
    divinity of Christ, and mysteries of any kind, must be eliminated;
    even the notion of a personal God will have to be changed to a
    pantheistic notion: “After the great revolution in our cosmic
    theories we can no longer think of God, the eternal holy Will that
    we revere as First Cause of all things, as the ‘first mover’
    throning outside and above the universe, as _Aristotle_ and
    _Thomas_ did” (_Paulsen_).


Such a progress is impossible in theology, at least in Catholic theology,
and in any other that still aims to be the theology of the Christian,
revealed religion. It cannot be expected from theology, nor from any other
science, that it will degrade itself to a fashionable science, that takes
for its level not truth but the variable imperatives and moods of the
times, and, destitute of character, changes with each varying fashion. The
science of faith cannot assume this position, so much the less as it must
be aware that its truths often clash with the inclinations of the human
heart, and that its vocation is to lift up mankind, not to let itself be
dragged down. This kind of progress therefore is barred. This, indeed, is
not progress, but a hopeless wavering from pillar to post, a building and
tearing down, acquiring without permanent possession, searching without
finding.

_True progress_ can be shown in theology as in any other science.

The _possibility_ of progress is manifest, particularly, in
Church-history, in the biblical and pastoral sciences: they are closely
related to the profane-historical, philological, social, and juridical
branches of science, hence theology shares in their progress. It would
seem that dogmatics would have to forego progress. Its progress certainly
cannot consist in changing the revealed doctrines, nor in interpreting
differently in the course of times the formulas of creed; here the rule
is, _veritas Domini manet in aeternum_. The development of dogmatic
knowledge consists rather in the following: the revealed truths are in the
course of the centuries more and more clearly perceived and more sharply
circumscribed, more surely demonstrated, more and more extensively
appreciated in their connections, relations, and deductions. The sources
of Divine Revelation flow the richer the more they are drawn from; their
truths are so substantial, so abundant in relation to knowledge and life,
that, the more research advances, the less it reaches its limit. “No one
gets nearer to the realization of truth than he who perceives that in
divine things, no matter how far he progresses, there remains always
something more to be examined” (_Leo the Great_).

Consider the progress in mathematics. No one will say the mathematician is
doomed to stagnation because he cannot change the multiplication table or
the geometrical propositions. The increasing mathematical literature, with
its big volumes, contradicts this notion: but its growth of knowledge is
not the zigzag progress of restless to and fro, it is the solid progress
from the seed to the plant.


    As early as the fifth century _St. Vincent_ of Lerin described the
    progress in dogmatical knowledge: “Sed forsitan dicet aliquis:
    Nullusne ergo in Ecclesia Christi profectus habebitur religionis?
    Habeatur plane et maximus. Nam quis ille est tam invidus
    hominibus, tam exosus Deo, qui istud prohibere conetur? Sed ita
    tamen, ut vere profectus sit ille fidei, non permutatio. Siquidem
    ad profectum pertinet, ut in semetipsum quaeque res amplificetur;
    ad permutationem vero, ut aliquid ex alio in aliud transvertatur.
    Crescat igitur oportet et multum vehementerque proficiat tam
    singulorum quam omnium, tam unius hominis, quam totius Ecclesiae,
    aetatum ac saeculorum gradibus, intelligentia, scientia,
    sapientia, sed in suo duntaxat genere, in eodem scilicet dogmate,
    eodem sensu eademque sententia.... Quodeunque igitur in hac
    Ecclesiae Dei agricultura fide Patrum satum est, hoc idem filiorem
    industria decet excolatur et observetur, hoc idem floreat et
    maturescat, hoc idem proficiat et perficiatur. Fas est etenim, ut
    prisca illa coelestis philosophiae dogmata processu temporis
    excurentur, limentur, poliantur, sed nefas est, ut commutentur,
    nefas, ut detruncentur, ut mutilentur.”


The _proof for the actual progress_ of theology is furnished by its
history. It shows how theology has gradually grown from the first seed of
the divine Word, placed by the hand of God’s Son into the soil of
humanity, until it became a great tree, rich in branches and leaves. The
holiest men of the Christian centuries, equipped with the choicest mental
forces, enlightened by the light of grace, have worked on its growth;
toiling and praying, they filled libraries with their books.


    It is not our intention to outline here a sketch of this
    development. A few hints may suffice. Hardly had the faith taken
    root in the civilized nations of the old times when researches
    were begun. A long list of Holy Fathers and ecclesiastical authors
    were the bearers of the first development. Drawing upon Greek
    philosophy in aid and to deepen their thought in the mental battle
    against the ancient pagan view of the world, against Judaism and
    heresy, they elucidated more and more the tenets of faith and
    morals, and endeavoured to draw ever more fully from their
    spiritual contents. We encounter among the shining host men like
    _Tertullian_, _Cyprian_, _Clement of Alexandria_, _Origines_,
    _Cyril of Jerusalem_, _Basil_, _Gregory of Nyssa_, and many
    others, up to the powerful dogmatist of the old time, _Augustine_,
    who treated scientifically and often extensively the great dogmas
    of faith. Truly a voluminous theological literature with a
    plethora of genius and truth. The great edition of the Greek and
    Latin Fathers by _Migne_ numbers 382 volumes in quarto, each of
    1,500 pages or more in close print. Comparing with these 382
    volumes the modest book of the Bible, which had been their
    foremost source, the progress of these centuries becomes manifest.

    Soon the way was broken for systematizing the tenets of the faith,
    especially by _St. John Damascene_ (eighth century). Scholasticism
    completed the work: it created a systematical whole and connected
    theology and philosophy, especially the Aristotelian, into a
    harmonious union. Its pioneers were _St. Anselm_ and still more
    _Petrus Lombard_ (died 1160). Then, in the Middle Ages, when
    universities began to flourish, there followed the great
    theologians _Alexander of Hales_, _Bonaventure_, _Albert the
    Great_, _Scotus_, and chief of all _Thomas of Aquin_ (died 1274),
    in whom scholasticism reached its perfection, and undeniably one
    of the greatest minds known in the history of science;
    distinguished by an astonishing prolificness, still more by a
    wealth and depth of thought combined with the greatest simplicity
    and lucidity in presenting truths, he will for ever remain
    unapproachable. The decline of scholasticism during the fourteenth
    and fifteenth centuries was followed by a new bloom, when the life
    of the Church, rejuvenated by the Council of Trent, gave birth to
    new forces in theology. The mighty tomes of men like _Suarez_,
    _Lugo_, _Gregory of Valencia_, _Ruiz_, _Bañez_, _Billuart_, and
    others joined the volumes of their predecessors and continued
    their work. At the same time the various departments of the
    science were branching off more and more, and became independent.

    _M. Canus_ created the theory of theological cognition as an
    introduction to dogmatics, _Bellarmin_ and _Th. Stapleton_ founded
    the newer controversial theology. Moral Theology became in the
    sixteenth century a separate science and was developed by men like
    _Lugo_, _Laymann_, _Busembaum_, _Alphons of Liguori_. Similarly a
    new period of research began in the biblical sciences. Not that
    the first foundations were laid at that time; there had been
    _Origines_, who had become the founder of biblical text criticism
    by his “Hexapla”; the Antioch school of exegetes, _Chrysostomus_,
    _Hilarius_, and especially _Jerome_. But it was fostered with
    renewed zeal. The great Antwerp and Paris polyglots furnished
    aids, men like _Maldonatus_, _Salmeron_, _Toletus_, _Cornelius_,
    _á Lapide_, wrote their exegetic works. To the seventeenth century
    belongs the creation of the propædeutics, by _Richard Simon_ and
    _Bernard Lami_. The monumental work, “Cursus sacrae scripturae”
    (since 1885), containing so far thirty-six volumes, demonstrates,
    among other things, that there has been in recent years no
    standstill in the research in Holy Writ. In the province of
    ecclesiastical history, too, with its branches and auxiliary
    sciences, new life was awakened at that time. In the sixteenth
    century, when the defence of the creed by the witnesses of a
    former age became urgent, patristics and history of dogma enjoyed
    their first rise. _Petavius_ was prominently connected with them.
    How these sciences have been fostered in the nineteenth century is
    indicated by the names of _Mai_, _De Rossi_, _Hergenroether_,
    _Hefele_, _Pastor_. There remains to be mentioned the gradual
    establishment of the science of Canon law, of the
    pastoral-theological departments which have attained an
    independent position since the close of the eighteenth century,
    and since then produced a voluminous literature. The fear of a
    standstill in theological research seems unwarranted in the light
    of its history. The errors of the present time will prevent a
    standstill. The more vehement the attacks by natural science and
    philosophy, by philology and archæology, the more they seek to
    shake the foundations of the Christian religion, the stronger
    theology must grow by the combat. The solid progress of our times
    in knowledge and methodics will not remain without influence; nor
    can the empirical, the historical-critical method, the theory of
    evolution, and so on, fail to exert their stimulating influence
    upon theology.

    The progress that Catholic theology has made since the days of the
    Fathers, the vast amount of mental work it has performed, is
    perhaps made most clear by a glance at the “Nomenclator literarius
    theologiae catholicae,” by _H. Hurter_ (2d ed., 3 vols.; the 3d
    ed. is in 6 vols., 5 being ready). It gives in concise briefness
    the biographical data and the more important works of Catholic
    theologians of greater repute. Counting the names there presented,
    we find not less than 3,900 from 1109 to 1563; about 2,900 from
    1564 to 1663; about 3,900 between 1664 and 1763; finally, from
    1764 to 1894 about 4,000 theological authors; hence in the period
    from 1109 to 1894 nearly 14,700 theologians. That these 14,700
    scientists—and their number is not exhausted by this figure—should
    have written their works without offering in them any new
    knowledge, would surely be a bold assertion! In addition consider
    the long rows of tomes which some of them wrote. Perhaps it would
    not be wholly amiss to refer to the restless zeal of many of them,
    as recorded by their biographers. _Baronius_ (died 1607) could
    truthfully assert before his death, that for thirty years he had
    never had sufficient sleep; he usually slept only four or five
    hours. _Pierre Halloix_ (died 1656) likewise was content with four
    or five hours of rest. _Dionysius Sanmarthanus_ (died 1725) gave
    only four hours to sleep and devoted less than half an hour daily
    to recreation; likewise _Fr. Combéfis_ (died 1679), during the
    last forty years of his life. _A. Fr. Orsi_ (died 1761) contented
    himself with three or four hours of sleep; _Fr. Clement_ (died
    1793) and _H. Oberrauch_ (died 1808) are said to have slept but
    two hours daily. _J. Caramuel de Lobkowicz_ (died 1682) persevered
    for fourteen hours every day at his books; _Chr. Lupus_ (died
    1681) even for fifteen hours daily. The theologian _Lessius_ is
    characterized by “_Parcissimus erat temporis, laboris pertinax_”;
    the same holds good of hundreds of others of these men.

    A science, enumerating its disciples by so many thousands, with
    the greatest intellects among its workers, which has commanded so
    much zeal and work for centuries, should be safe from the reproach
    of having back of it a history of stagnation.



Theology and Freedom of Science.


To many it seems obvious that theology lacks at least the other predicate
of science, freedom; because it is bound to dogmas and ecclesiastical
authorities, at least Catholic theology is.

Although this claim is pressed persistently and with confidence, we may
dispose of it very briefly. The freedom missed in theology, and demanded
in its behalf, is none other than the liberal freedom of science, the
nature of which we have had sufficiently long under the searchlight, so
that there remains nothing to be added. We have proved sufficiently that
this freedom is not a freedom from unnatural fetters, but a dissolute
subjectivism, that claims the right not to be bound to any unchangeable,
religious truths. We admit that the Catholic theology does not possess
_THIS_ freedom. Convinced of the truth of the doctrines established by
divine testimony, and by the infallible voice of the Church, theology sees
not freedom but a sin against truth in the license to assert the contrary
of what it has recognized as the truth.

There is but one freedom which science may claim: it is freedom from
hindrance in reaching the truth in its legitimate domain. If this truth is
transmitted to science infallibly, by the highest instance of wisdom—and
of this every theologian is convinced—how can science be said to be
hindered thereby in attaining the truth? Restrained it is, but only by
truth: truth, however, can only be a barrier to license, but not to
precious freedom. This restraint theology shares with the rest of the
sciences. The physicist is tied to the facts brought forth by the
experiments of his laboratory; the astronomer is tied to the results
reported to him by the instruments of his observatory, the historian is
tied to the events disclosed by his sources. Moreover, all sciences are
tied to their methods. In this way, and in no other way, the theologian,
too, is tied to the facts given him by Revelation, and to his method.
Every science has its own method. The astronomer gains his facts by
observation and calculation, the mathematician arrives at his facts by
calculation and study; the historian, by human testimony; the theologian,
however, by divine testimony, at least as to fundamental truths. That they
are transmitted to him not by his personal study, but by external
testimony, does not matter; the historian too draws from such sources. Nor
can theological knowledge be less certain because vouched for by divine
authority: it makes it the more certain. Or is there no divine authority,
and can there be none? This is exactly the silent presumption, which is
the basis of the charge against theology. But where is the proof for it?
It can only be demonstrated by denying the existence of a supermundane
God; for, if there is an Almighty God, there can be no doubt that He can
give a Revelation and demand belief.

Perhaps it may be said further, the theologian is not permitted to doubt
his doctrines, hence he is prohibited from examining them; he surely
cannot be _unprepossessed_.

We can refer to what we have previously said. Unprepossession demands but
one thing, namely, not to assume something as true and certain that is
false or unproved; it demands strong proofs for anything that needs proof.
We may safely assert that there is no other science more exacting in this
respect than Catholic theology, both of the present and of the past. It
has not a single position that is not incessantly tested by attacks as to
its tenability. Any one not unacquainted with theology, who knows the
works of _St. Thomas_ and of the later theologians, with their exact
methods of thinking, who observes the conscientious work in Catholic
biblical-exegetic, historical-critical field, must be convinced of the
serious atmosphere of truth prevailing here. Unprepossession does not
demand to doubt, time and again, that which has been positively proved, to
rediscover it by new research. Positive facts are no longer a subject for
research; in their case research has fully achieved its end. Methodical
doubt, proper in scientific examination, is proper also in regard to
religious truths.

Furthermore, the latitude of the theologian is much larger than presumed
by those who derive their information solely from modern assertions about
dogmatic bondage. One may safely assert that the freedom of movement of
the mathematician is more limited by his principles, his train of thought
more sharply prescribed, than is the case with the theologian. Of course
the theologian is bound by everything he finds infallibly established
directly by revelation and by the authority of the Church; or indirectly
by the concurring teaching of the Fathers or the theologians; he is bound
also by non-infallible decisions, especially those of congregations,
though not absolutely and not irrevocably.

But this is only the smaller part of his province. In many departments,
like the one of ecclesiastical history, there are almost no restrictions
to his research, except those imposed by historical facts. Canon law and
similar departments dealing with the laws of the Church, coincide in
method and liberty of research with the profane science of law. Of all
departments of theology, the dogmatical is the one most affected by the
authority of faith. Yet even here a great deal is left to unhampered work.
Many a void has to be filled, many a question solved, which the theology
of the past has never taken up; even the defined truths still offer a
large scope for personal work, in regard to demonstration, or to the
philosophic-speculative penetration of the dogmas and their
interpretation.

As a fact, the reader of theological literature, both old and new, will,
in a multitude of cases, meet with unrestrained individuality.



Ecclesiastical Supervision of Teaching.


The _Encyclica_ against Modernism (September 8, 1907) gave rise to fears
that any free movement would henceforth be impossible for Catholic
theology. These fears referred chiefly to the disciplinary measures,
prescribed by the Encyclical for the purpose of supervising theological
teaching in each diocese. Then came the papal Motu Proprio, of September
1, 1910, which, among other things, required the teacher of theology to
confirm by oath his confession of the Creed and his intention to repudiate
modernistic errors. Since then many a complaint has been heard about
espionage and coercion. Similar complaint, about an imminent debasement of
the Church, has been raised whenever important measures in the discipline
of the Catholic Church were published, and they emanated primarily from
the camp of the enemy.

It is not to be denied, however, that such an energetic call for
watchfulness and action, issued from the highest ecclesiastical
watchtower, like the one referred to, may lead in some cases to anxiety
and false suspicions. This is no doubt regrettable; but it is an incident
common to human legislation and will surprise no one who has any
experience of life. A glance at these decrees will show that they are
nothing more than an urgent injunction, and the exercise of that
supervision of religious life and teaching which pertains to the authority
of the Catholic Church, and which has been practised by her at all times.
The language is urgent, it has a severity which is softened in the
execution. Its explanation lies in the eminent danger of the modernistic
movement to the continuance of Catholic life. Modernism, as described and
condemned by the Encyclica, is nothing less than the absolute destruction
of the Catholic faith, and of Christianity.

The Protestant theologian, Prof. _Tröltsch_, wrote after the publication
of the Encyclica: “As viewed from the position of curialism and of the
strict Catholic dogma, there existed a real danger. Catholicism had gotten
into a state of inner fermentation, corresponding to the same condition
caused by modern theology within the Protestant churches.”

The danger of Modernism is often enhanced by a deceptive semblance of the
right faith, and by the pretence to urge only the righteous interests of
modern progress against obsolete forms of thought and life, now and then
also by its secret propaganda. Hence this intervention by a firm hand, and
this only after having waited a long time. They were measures of
prevention, like those taken to stave off a serious danger; the tidal wave
receding, their urgency disappears automatically.


    The German bishops stated in their pastoral letter of December 10,
    1907, that in some Catholic lay-circles there was uneasiness about
    the Encyclical, fearing that it might endanger scientific
    endeavour and independence in thought and research, and that the
    Church intended to prohibit or render impossible co-operation in
    solving the problems of civilization. “May they all recognize,”
    they said, “how groundless such fears are! The Church desires to
    set bars only to one kind of freedom—the freedom to err.” If the
    rules and precepts of the Church do sound harsh sometimes, it is
    because the Church adheres unconditionally to the principle: The
    truth above all. “The Church has at no time opposed the true
    progress of civilization, but only that which hinders its
    progress: heedlessness, haste, the mania for innovation, the
    morbid aversion against the truth that comes from God. But we
    Catholic Christians can join free and unhampered, with all our
    strength and talent, in the peaceful strife of noble, intellectual
    work and genuine mental education.”

    The fears of too great a pressure by the ecclesiastical
    authorities have been given trenchant expression in most recent
    times by a man who, while standing outside of the Catholic Church,
    has always shown himself well disposed towards it, namely, the
    noted pedagogue, _Fr. W. Förster_ of Zurich. _Förster_ has won
    merit and distinction by his manly and spirited defence of the
    Christian view in pedagogical science and mental culture. In the
    book referred to he again describes urgently the worthlessness and
    fatality of modern individualism, that knows a good deal about
    freedom but nothing of self-discipline, nor of authority or
    tradition, and which represents most superficial amateurism in the
    domain of religion and morals. Then he turns to criticize Church
    practice; and his criticism becomes a sharp accusation. His main
    charge is “fatal restraint of the spirit of universality.” “Some
    groups in the Church,” he asserts, “of mediocre learning, have
    established a clique rule, under which the others, the more
    creative and intensive souls, become the victims of intolerance,
    espionage, and false suspicion”; “universality, which unites the
    different mental tendencies, has given way to separation”;
    “everywhere a one-sided denunciatory information of the leading
    circles by accidentally ruling groups and factions; anxious
    intolerance for everything unusual, disciplinary austerity and
    unintelligent pedantry, individualistic and unchristian spirit of
    distrust and mutual espionage”; “levelling of the mental life”;
    “one is tired,” we are told, “of the spirit of incessant
    disciplining”; “of the invariable cold and disdainful forbidding
    and repression.” In the Middle Ages and earlier times it was
    different; then “universality was the ruling spirit, the working
    of the many into a unit full of life; this policy was changed for
    no other reason than because of the struggle of the Church against
    Protestantism.” “The greatest harm that Catholicism suffered by
    the great rupture of the sixteenth century is most likely seen in
    the tendency of the Church to view thenceforth religious freedom
    within Catholic Christianity with an anxious, even hostile eye.”

    Readers of the literature of the day will recognize here views
    often met with during the last years, and the same excited note,
    which is quite in contrast to the even temper that ordinarily
    characterizes _Förster’s_ books. But what the reader will not find
    stated are the proofs for these enormous accusations.

    Undeniably, things have happened in the wide range of
    ecclesiastical authority that cannot be approved. But where are
    the facts that would justify charges of such sweeping nature? A
    Protestant author can hardly be presumed to possess such a direct
    and positive insight into the ecclesiastical practice of the
    higher and the highest order, to give convincing strength to his
    bare assertion. Or is the number of dissatisfied voices that make
    these charges sufficient proof in itself? If the ecclesiastical
    authority be allowed, now and then, to emerge from its passiveness
    to take measures against dangerous doctrinal tendencies, is it not
    to be expected, as a matter of course, that some minds become
    disgruntled and complain about oppression and clique rule? Or must
    that right be denied the Church altogether? _Förster_ says
    himself: “The spirit of dignity and responsibility has never ruled
    all parts of the hierarchy in the same measure as now, and rarely
    if ever were there found in its leading circles so many men
    leading an almost holy life as at present.” And yet we are asked
    to believe that it was reserved exactly for this worthy hierarchy,
    and for these saintly men, to forget the traditions of the Church
    in the most irresponsible manner. One will have to say: “If
    _Förster_ would examine without bias the situation and apply
    consistently in respect to authority the principles that he
    himself defends, he would be convinced that the Church could not
    have acted any differently than it did in regard to the
    regrettable events of the last years, and that it has ever been
    the aim of the Church, before the sixteenth century as after, to
    guard carefully the purity of traditions of faith against any
    attack” (Prof. _G. Reinhold_ in a review of _Förster’s_ book).

    The Church has never known a universality that did not oppose
    doctrinal errors. The Middle Ages did not know it; one need only
    read the many condemnations from Nicholas I. to Innocent VIII.;
    nor was such a universality known to the great Councils of ancient
    Christianity up to the Nicæan, which hurled its anathema against
    numerous teachings that opposed no dogmas defined at that time;
    nor did the Holy Fathers know such a universality, nor the
    Apostles, with their strict admonitions of unity of faith. The
    reply is made, the “Church must not yield the least of its
    fundamental truths,” that “its centralizing power ought to remain
    within the region of the most essential”; whereas she actually
    exercises it in the domain of the incidental. The ecclesiastical
    supervision of teaching has never limited itself to the most
    essential, nor would this practice ever accomplish the object to
    preserve pure the doctrine of faith. Furthermore, what is the
    “most essential” what is the “incidental”? _Förster’s_ book does
    not inform us about this most important question. The views
    against which the Church has made front in the last years, do they
    relate only to the incidental? Does this apply to the doctrines of
    a _Rosmini_ and _Lamennais_, who are referred to in passing? No
    well-informed theologian will assert this.

    We shall hardly be wrong in assuming that the charge of
    overstraining the ecclesiastical authority is based upon a
    presumption of a philosophical nature, which is in evidence in
    several other passages of the book—on the view, namely, that in
    religion the intellectual moment should recede before the
    mystical, before anticipation and inner experience. Hence the
    severe censure of “the narrow autocracy of the intellectual
    interpretation” against the “preponderance of the intellectual
    contemplation” in the Church, which is said to have become so
    prevalent as to exert unavoidably a paralyzing effect upon the
    entire religious life. Here we have the result of the notion that
    theory of life, religion, and faith, depend but little on rational
    knowledge. This notion is also in accord with the argument about
    the impossibility of an independent scientific ethics. We have
    discussed this elsewhere. We demonstrated that religion and faith
    relate to positive truths that can be realized, and that can
    therefore be accurately defined; they must be so defined. Of
    course this realization need not be a scientific one, it can be of
    the natural kind that is not clearly conscious of its reasons.
    _Förster_, too, touches upon this important distinction when
    quoting _Saitschick_: “The inner perception overtowers feeling and
    logical reason—here, too, lies the source of a light shining
    brighter, stronger, and incomparably more true than any light of
    reason”; and again, when his advice is, to foster to a greater
    extent the “inner perception.” What is felt here vaguely has long
    since been expressed much more lucidly in Christian philosophy.

    Certainly a view that fails to lay, first of all, absolute stress
    on the protection of the _doctrine_ of faith cannot understand the
    Catholic point of view; it will assume only too easily that the
    supervision relates to incidentals. It will also engender a
    criticism against which the Church may rightly protest, because it
    starts from presumptions that do not apply to the Church.

    No one will be astonished to find a Protestant author lacking the
    clarified conception of the supernatural character of the Church
    that is possessed by the Catholic; to see him view the Church
    almost invariably in the light of a human organization, similar to
    the Protestant denominations which he may cite before the court of
    his individual reason and force to bow under the yoke of his
    criticism. The Catholic has a better understanding of the words:
    “I am with you all days, even unto the consummation of the world.”
    There will be foreign to his mind the idea that the Church has
    since the days of Reformation, for now nearly four centuries,
    deviated from the right way, and degenerated more and more to a
    separatistic and insignificant community; a church able to forget
    its traditions to the extent of grossly misconceiving its proper
    sphere of authority, and fettering itself in a narrow spirit to
    incidentals, could not keep his confidence any longer.



The Oath Against Modernism.


The _Motu Proprio_ of September 1, 1910, decreed that teachers of
theology, and also Catholic priests generally, had to bind themselves by
oath to reject modernistic heresies, and to accept obediently the
ecclesiastical precepts. Dispensed from this pledge were only the
professors of theology at state institutions, to spare them difficulties
with state authorities.

This anti-modernist oath at once became the signal for a storm of
indignation, than which there has been hardly a greater one since the days
of the Vatican Council. A cry was raised for freedom of science, for the
exclusion of theological faculties, even for another “Kulturkampf.” The
General Convention of German college professors, held at Leipzig January
7, 1911, issued a declaration to the effect that “All those who have taken
the anti-modernist oath have thereby expressed their renunciation of an
independent recognition of truth and of the exercise of their scientific
conviction, hence they have forfeited all claim to be considered
independent scientists.” Interpellations were made in legislative bodies,
it was demanded that the option of taking the oath should be taken away
from university professors, because “the dignity of the universities would
be lowered if their members had the opportunity to bind themselves by such
an oath.”

Even threats were made by statesmen, hinting at reprisals by the state,
because its interests were being jeopardized, while, on the other hand,
there were those who declared: “If the Catholic Church thinks it necessary
for her ecclesiastical and religious interests to put her servants under
oath, it is her own business; neither the state nor the Evangelical Church
have a right to interfere” (Prime Minister _Bethmann-Hollweg_, in the
Prussian Diet, on March 7, 1911).

The agitation of the minds will soon subside, as on former occasions of
this kind; and, with calm restored, people will find, as _J. G. Fichte_
told the impulsive _F. Nicolai_, one hundred and thirty years ago, that
the fact has only just been discovered that the Catholics are Catholic.

Yes, indeed, the Catholics are Catholic, and desire to remain
Catholic—this and nothing else is the gist of the anti-modernist oath. It
does not oblige to anything else but what was believed and adhered to
before. It obliges to accept the doctrines of faith; but they are the old
truths of the Catholic Church, propounded and believed at all times, and
the necessary inferences from them. Even the proposition that truths of
faith can never be contradicted by the results of historical research, or
by human science in general, is as old as faith itself. In addition, the
oath avows obedient submission to Church precepts; but this has been
demanded for centuries by the _professio fidei Tridentina_, a pledge by
oath to which every professor of theology has been before obliged:
_Apostolicas et ecclesiasticas traditiones reliquasque eiusdem Ecclesiae
observationes et constitutiones firmissime admitto et amplector_. This was
the opinion of all competent judges on this theological question. “We are
convinced,” declared correctly a prominent theological institution, “that
there is not assumed by this oath any obligation new in subject, and no
obligation not already existing. The oath is but the affirmation of a duty
already imposed by conscience” (the professors of Theology of Paderborn,
December 12, 1910). The Breslau faculty said, in the same sense: “The
faculty does not see in the so-called anti-modernist oath any new
obligation, nor one exceeding the rule of faith ever adhered to by the
faculty.” And this declaration was fully approved of by Rome.


    Cardinal _Kopp_, at the session of the German Upper House on April
    7, 1911, commented on these statements as follows: “Against the
    opinions of these circles (having a different opinion of the oath)
    I set the testimony and the statement of the most competent
    people, to wit, the professors of university faculties and also
    those at episcopal seminaries. Those who have taken the oath, as
    well as those who have refrained from it by the privilege granted
    them by the Holy See, they both declare positively that the oath
    does not contain any new obligations, nor does it impose new
    duties on them; hence that, on the contrary, they are not impeded
    in the pursuit of their tasks as teachers and of their scientific
    work of research. Now, gentlemen, I do not think it would be
    proper to insinuate that these earnest men, appointed by the
    Government, or at least in office by its consent, would make this
    declaration against their conviction and not in full sincerity.”


No wonder, therefore, that of the hundreds of thousands of Catholic
priests hardly a handful have refused the oath.


    Nor is there anything new in the obligation to swear and subscribe
    in writing to a confession of creed. Very often in the course of
    the centuries decrees of creed and symbols had to be subscribed to
    in writing. In the days of Jansenism, when priests were required
    to swear to and sign a statement, many Jansenists tried to dodge
    this oath, and the Jansenist _Racine_ complained that this demand
    was unheard-of in the Church. Thereupon the learned theologian
    _Tournely_ and others cited a number of examples of this kind from
    the history of the Church.


Therefore the anti-modernist oath has not created anything new.
Consequently it has not changed anything in regard to the freedom of
theological research. It is the same as before; nor has the oath changed
anything in the quality of theological professors, they merely promise to
be what they must be anyway; nor can, for instance, the oath induce the
Catholic priest, in teaching profane history, to present the history of
the Reformation in a different light than before, and thus render him
unfit to teach history; the oath has created no new, confessional
differences, hence has given no justified cause for excitement—provided
one has the needed theological comprehension of the oath. If one has not
this insight, and will not trust to information from a competent source,
then it will be the act of prudence to leave the test to the future; and
we can await this test serenely.


    We referred above to the declaration of German college teachers,
    to the effect that all who have taken the oath have thereby
    expressed their renunciation of independent cognition of truth.
    These stereotyped ideas we have so often heard, with the same
    haziness and inconsistency. “Because they have thereby expressed
    the renunciation of independent cognition of the truth,” namely,
    by the acceptance of certain doctrines. But is not every one who
    clings to his Christian belief bound by this very fact to certain
    doctrines? Does every one who still prays his Credo express the
    renunciation of his independence? If the argument quoted is to
    mean anything at all, it means the full rejection of all Christian
    duty to believe; indeed, this is the real sense of this
    “independent recognition of truth,” as we have already seen. But
    cannot some one, because of his conviction, renounce this
    independence and believe, and in this conviction accept the
    doctrines of the Church? If this conviction is his, and he affirms
    it by oath, how can any one see in this oath a want of freedom,
    nay, a renunciation of truth? If an atheist solemnly declared his
    intention to be and to remain an atheist, he would hardly be
    accused of lack of character by the advocates of modern freedom of
    thought. The judge, the military officer, the member of a
    legislature, the professor, who must all take the oath of
    allegiance,—all of these will have to be protected against the
    insinuation of disloyalty to truth. If a man affirms by oath his
    unalterable Catholic faith, he is without any hesitation accused
    of untruthfulness. The government has been urged to forbid this
    spontaneous exercise of Catholic sentiment. The inconsistency of
    modern catch-phrases can hardly be given more drastic expression.
    In order to guard the freedom of thought the government is to
    forbid one from pledging himself to his own principles; in order
    to remain an independent thinker a man must be forced by penal
    statute to confess unconditionally the brand of free science
    prescribed by a certain school and by no means have an opinion of
    his own; in order to be free in his research the teacher in
    theology must be tied to the catch-phrases of liberal philosophy.
    This is modern freedom, a hybrid of freedom and bondage, of
    sophistry and contradiction, of arrogance and barrenness of
    thought, which will exert its rule over the minds as long as they
    are guided by half-thinking.



Bonds of Love, not of Servitude.


People to whose mind Catholic thinking is foreign will never be able to
appreciate the energetic activity of the Church authority.

On close examination, however, they will not deny that, _if_ the Christian
treasure of faith is to be preserved undiminished, _if_ in the hopeless
confusion and the unsteady vacillation of opinions in our days there is to
be left anywhere a safe place for truth and unity of faith, this cannot be
accomplished otherwise than in the shape of a strong authority that has
the assurance of the aid of God.


    The Catholic theologian may be permitted to point in exemplifying
    this fact to the recent history of Protestantism and of its
    theology. Protestantism does not acknowledge a teaching authority:
    its theology demands complete freedom of research and teaching,
    making the most extensive use of both. The result is the
    demoralization of the Christian faith, which is speeding with
    frightfully accelerated steps to total annihilation. The very
    danger which Modernism threatened to carry into the Catholic
    Church has overwhelmed Protestant theology: the metaphysical ideas
    of a modern philosophy penetrated it without check, and killed its
    Christian substance. The measures against Modernism were sharply
    criticized by many Protestants who, at the same time, laid stress
    upon the fact that nothing of the sort could happen among
    themselves. Indeed it could not, at least not consistently with
    Protestant principle. But there is not a single fact in all
    history which demonstrates more clearly the necessity of the
    Catholic authority of faith, than just the condition of
    Protestantism at the present time. On the part of believing
    Protestants this is admitted, if not expressly, then at least in
    practice. To stem the destructive work of liberal theology they
    resort to authority; invoke Evangelical formulas of confession,
    the traditional doctrine, sometimes even the aid of the state;
    neological preachers are disciplined by censures, even by
    dismissal, against the loud protest of the liberals. Such action
    is easily understandable; one cannot hear without sadness the cry
    for help of pious Protestantism, a cry that grows more desperate
    every day; one cannot help regretting its forlorn situation in
    view of the millions of souls whose salvation is jeopardized, who
    are in danger of being despoiled of the last remains of their
    Christian faith. Yet it must be admitted that this cry for
    authority and obedience signifies the abandoning of the Protestant
    principle, and the involuntary imitation and therefore
    acknowledgment of the Catholic principle—for the Catholic an
    incentive to cleave the more closely to his Church.


Many to whom the Catholic way of thinking is foreign, look upon the duty
of obedience which ties the Catholic to his Church as a sort of servitude;
to the Catholic it is the tie of love, uniting free people to a sacred
authority. Many look upon the Church of Rome as a tyrannical curia, where
Umbrian prelates are cracking their whips over millions of servile and
ignorant souls; to the Catholic the Church is the divinely appointed
institution of truth, that possesses his fullest confidence. He knows that
history has given the most magnificent justification to the Catholic
principle of authority. Opinions have come and gone, systems were born and
have died, thrones of learning rose and fell; only one towering mental
structure remained standing upon the rock of God-founded authority in the
vast field of ruins with its wrecks of human wisdom. And its ancient
Credo, prayed by all nations, is the same Credo once prayed by the
martyrs.




