Chapter I. Free From The Yoke Of The Supernatural.



Ignoramus, We Ignore.


The liberal principle of research rests on the basis of the humanitarian
view of the world, which makes man autonomous, and causes him to turn his
eyes from above and downward, and to fix them upon his earthly existence.
To remain true to its own idea, this liberal science will feel the
necessity to sever itself gradually from the restraining powers of the
world beyond, and to shun the thought of God and of His divine influence
and supremacy over the world and human life. It must resent such truths as
a burdensome yoke that oppresses human freedom.

And to this thought it remains faithful, if not in all its
representatives, then at any rate in a good many of them. With unremitting
persistency it enforces in all its domains the demand: _Science must not
reckon with supernatural factors_. Ignoramus is its watchword, “we do not
know it” in the sense of its usual agnosticism, but “we ignore it” in the
spirit of the impulse which dreads the loss of its freedom through higher
powers. Creation and miracles, divine revelation and the God-imposed duty
of belief, it does not know. A moral law, as given by God, does not exist
for this science. It wants nothing to do with a religion that worships a
personal God, much less with a supernatural religion, with mysteries,
miracles, and grace. It praises all the higher that modern religion of
sentiment, without dogmas and religious duties, which sovereign man
creates for himself, a poetical adornment of his individuality, a religion
he need not ask what he owes it, but rather what it offers him. All
connection with the world beyond is cut off. Man is now free in his own
house. We shall show this in detail, by the testimony chiefly of men
generally accepted as foremost representatives of modern science. We do
not assert, however, that all representatives of modern science belong
here. Far be it from us to sit in judgment as to the good intentions of
the champions of liberal science. We know very well that an education
indifferent to religion, early habitual association with the ideas of a
sceptical, naturalistic philosophy, the acquisition of prejudices and
unsolved difficulties, a continuous stay in an intellectual atmosphere
foreign and inimical to religious belief—all this, we well understand,
will gradually rob the mind of all inclination and unbiassed judgment for
religious truth, and thus make for apostasy from religion. Nor do we
assert that the idea of God and Christianity are extinct in the hearts of
the representatives of liberal science, but we do assert that their
_science_ no longer wants to know God and His true religion, that only too
often it is in the grip of a Theophobia, which slinks past God and His
works, with its eyes designedly averted.

At the same time the _unprepossession of this science_ will be made clear.
“A feeling of degradation pervades the German university circles,” so the
learned _Mommsen_ expressed himself some years ago when Strassburg was to
get a Catholic chair of history; therefore a Catholic who takes his
Catholic view of the world as his guide cannot be unprepossessed, hence
cannot be a true scientist. We have become used to this reproach;
nevertheless it is very painful to a Catholic, especially when he devotes
his life to scientific work. The other side claims very emphatically to
have a monopoly on unprepossession and truthfulness; it gives most solemn
assurances of not desiring anything but the truth, of serving the truth
alone, with persevering unselfishness, unaffected by disposition and party
interest, and that it has its unbiassed spiritual eye turned only to the
chaste sunlight of truth. Hence, we may be permitted to inquire whether
these assurances square with the facts. As they demand belief, we may also
demand proofs; and if those assurances are accompanied by sharp
accusations, the accused will have even a greater right to examine the
deeds and records of this assertive science.

What about the unprepossession of liberal science, especially in the
province of philosophy and religion? It cannot be our intention to explore
the whole territory in every direction. We shall keep to the central and
main road, the road to which chiefly lead all other roads of life, we mean
the attitude of this school of research towards the world beyond. We find
this attitude to be one of persistent ignoring! Science cannot acknowledge
the supernatural; this presumption, unproved and impossible of proof, it
never loses sight of, it is even made a scientific principle, which is
called:



The Principle of Exclusive Natural Causation.


This principle demands that everything belonging to nature in its widest
sense, consequently all objects and events of irrational nature and of
human life, must be explained by natural causes only; supernatural factors
must not be brought in. To assume an interposition by God, in the form of
creation, miracle, or revelation, is unscientific; he who does so is not a
true scientist. A presumption, a mandate of truly stupendous enormity! How
can it be proved that there is no God, that creation, miracles, the
supernatural origin of religion, are impossible things? And if they are
possible, why should it be forbidden to make use of them in explaining
facts which cannot otherwise be explained?

However, it is readily admitted that the principle is merely a postulate,
an _unproved_ presumption.


    “The postulate of exclusive natural causation tells us that
    natural events can have their causes only in other natural events,
    and not in conditions lying outside of the continuity of natural
    causality”; so _W. Wundt_. This is a “postulate, accepted by
    modern natural science partly tacitly, partly by open profession.”
    “Even where an exact deduction is not possible, natural science
    nevertheless acts under this supposition. It never will consider a
    natural event to be causally explained, if it is attempted to
    derive that event from other conditions than preceding natural
    events.”

    Professor _Jodl_ protests against alliance with the Catholic
    Church, for the reason that the latter does not acknowledge the
    fundamental presumption of all scientific research, namely, the
    uninterrupted natural causation, and because the Church is
    essentially founded on supernatural presumptions. Prof. _A.
    Messer_ thinks he has proved sufficiently the untenableness of the
    Catholic faith by the simple appeal to this presumption: “Natural
    sciences rest upon the presumption that everything is causally
    determined. This means, that the same causes must be followed by
    the same effects, and all natural events take their course
    according to invariable laws. It is against this presumption that
    the Church exacts a belief in miracles, in immediate divine
    manifestations, not explainable by natural causes. _God_ is not a
    causal factor in the eyes of natural science, because everything,
    and for that very reason, nothing, could be explained through
    Him.” We see that the principle is expressly admitted to be a mere
    presumption. “I concede readily,” says _Paulsen_, “that the law of
    natural causation is not a proven fact, but a demand or
    presumption with which reason approaches the task of explaining
    natural phenomena. But this postulate ... is the hard-fought
    victory of long scientific effort.... Gradually there were
    eliminated from the course of nature demoniacal influence and the
    miraculous intervention of God, and in their stead the idea of
    natural causation was installed.”


It is merely another expression for the same thing if one calls, with
_Paulsen_, the unbroken causal connection “the fundamental presumption of
all our natural research”; or concludes, with _A. Drews_, that the
assumption of a transcendental God, beyond the visible, and in causal
relation to the world, destroys the universal conformity to laws in the
world, the self-evident presumption of all scientific knowledge; or one
may say, with _F. Steudel_, “The theory of unbroken causal connection has
become the fundamental presupposition of all philosophical explanation of
world happenings. This finally disposes of a transcendental God, together
with his empiric correlative, the miracle, as a philosophical explanation
of the world.” The same result is achieved by declaring evolution from
natural factors as the universal world-law.

“_I Know not God the Father, Almighty Creator of Heaven and of Earth_”

With inexorable persistency this principle is now applied wherever science
meets with God and the world beyond. Hence, let us proceed on our way and
halt at some points to watch this science at work.

The unbiassed reasoning of the mind shows that this world, limited and
finite, in all its phenomena accidental and perishable, cannot have in
itself the cause of its existence, hence, that it demands a supernatural
creative cause. This solution of the question is by no means demonstrated
by liberal science as untenable, it is simply declined.


    “Natural science, once for all, has not the least occasion to
    assume a supernatural act of creation”; this we are told by the
    famous historian of materialism, _F. A. Lange_. “To fall back upon
    explanations of this sort amounts always to straying from
    scientific grounds, which not only is not permissible in a
    scientific investigation, but should never enter into
    consideration.” And _L. Plate_ states: “A creation of matter we
    cannot assume, nor would such an assumption be any explanation at
    all; at most, it would be tantamount to exchanging one question
    mark for another. We natural scientists are modest enough, as
    matters now stand, to forego a further solution of the question.”
    They will subscribe to _Du Bois-Reymond’s_ “ignoramus” rather than
    assume the only solution of the question, an act of creation. This
    scientist, asking himself the question, from where the
    world-matter received its first impulse, argues: “Let us try to
    imagine a primordial condition, where matter had not yet been
    influenced by any cause, and we arrive at the conclusion that
    matter an infinite time ago was inactive, and equally distributed
    in infinite space. Since a supernatural impulse does not fit into
    our theory of the universe, an adequate cause for the first action
    is lacking.”


Thus they frankly violate the scientific method that demands acceptance of
the explanation demonstrated as necessary, and violate it only for the
reason to dodge the acknowledgment of a Creator. This is not science, but
politics.

But let us ask, Why should it be against science to reckon with
supernatural factors? Is it because we cannot disclose with certainty the
other world? Are they not aware that such a principle is opposed by the
conviction of all mankind, that always held these conceptions to be the
highest, and therefore not to be considered illusions? Do they not see,
moreover, how they involve themselves in flagrant contradictions? Does not
science by means of its laws of reasoning, especially on the principle of
causality, constantly infer invisible causes from visible facts? From
physical-chemical facts ether and physical atoms, which no man has ever
seen, are deduced: from falling stones and the movement of astral bodies
is inferred a universal gravitation, undemonstrable by experience; from an
anonymous letter is deduced an author. The astronomer deduces from certain
facts that fixed stars must have dark companions, visible to no one; from
disturbances in the movements of Uranus _Leverrier_ found by calculation
the existence and location of Neptune, then not as yet discovered. Hence,
what does it mean: “to fall back upon explanations of this sort always
amounts to straying away from scientific ground”? Let us imagine a noble
vessel on the high seas to have become the victim of a catastrophe. It
lies now at the bottom of the sea. Fishes come from all sides and stop
musingly before the strange visitor. Whence did this come? Was it made out
of water? Impossible! Did it creep up from the bottom of the sea? No! At
last a fish reasons: “What we see here has undoubtedly come down to us
from a higher world, far above us, and invisible to us.” The speech meets
with approval. But another fish objects: “Nonsense! To fall back upon
explanations of this sort always amounts to straying away from the
scientific grounds on which we fish must stand. We cannot assume such a
world to exist, because this would offend against the first principle of
our science, the principle of the exclusive natural causation of sea and
water.” With these words the speaker departs, wagging his tail, his speech
having been received with stupefaction rather than with understanding.

To this philosophy may be applied the word of the Apostle: “Beware lest
any man cheat you by philosophy and vain deceit” (Col. ii. 8). No, it is
not the spirit of true science that opposes the belief in supernatural
factors, but it is the desertion of the traditions and the spirit of a
better science. To the representatives of paganism, to _Plato_ and others,
the highest goal of human quest of truth was to find God and to worship
Him. For the great leaders in recent natural science, _Copernicus_,
_Kepler_, _Newton_, _Linné_, _Boyle_,_ Volta_, _Faraday_, and _Maxwell_,
the highest achievement was to point to God’s wisdom in the wonderful
works of nature; their science ended in prayer. A principle of unbroken
natural causation, as a boycott of the Deity, was to them not a postulate
of science but an abomination. They were carried by a conviction expressed
by a later scientist, _W. Thomson_, in the following words: “Fear not to
be independent thinkers! If you think vigorously enough, you will be
forced by science to believe in a God, Who is the basis of all religion”;
and expressed by _R. Mayer_ in the following words: “True philosophy must
not and cannot be anything else but the propædeutics of the Christian
religion.”

But let us proceed. We have before us an astonishing _order_, we behold
uncounted wonders of well-designed purpose in the world. The question
suggests itself: Whence this Order? The watch originates from the
intelligence of a maker, an accident could not have produced it; hence
also the great world-machine must have had an intelligent maker. This is
the logic of unbiassed reason. But the principles of liberal research
object to the acceptance of this explanation. What is theirs?


    There have been some scientists endeavouring to discover the
    purposeless in nature, and they have gleaned various things.
    _Haeckel_ invented for them the name Dysteleologists; and this is
    now the name they go by. Why the destruction of so many living
    embryos? What is the purpose of pain, of the vermiform appendix?
    “To what purpose is the immense belt of desert extending through
    both large continents of the Old World? Could the Sahara not have
    been avoided?... Indeed, numerous forms of life we cannot look at
    but with repugnance and horror; for instance, the parasitical
    beings.” ... (_F. Paulsen_). Hence the order claimed for the world
    does not exist, on the contrary, “it is beyond doubt that the most
    essential means of nature is of a kind which can only be put on a
    level with the blindest accident” (_F. A. Lange_). But they do not
    feel satisfied with this. They feel that even if all these things
    were actually purposeless, they would amount only to a few drops
    in the immense ocean of order which still has to be explained. At
    most, they would form but a few typographical errors in an
    otherwise ingenious book,—errors that evidently are no proof that
    the whole book is a mass of nonsense and not dictated by reason.


There appears to them, like a rescuing plank in a shipwreck, _Darwin’s_
Natural Selection. The artistic forms in the kingdom of plants and animals
arose, says _Darwin_, by the fact that, among numerous seemingly tentative
formations, there were some useful organs or their rudiments which
survived in the struggle for existence and became hereditary in the
offspring, while others disappeared. It was seen very soon, and it is even
better understood to-day, that this enormous feat of “natural selection”
is contrary to the facts, and would be, above all, an incredible accident.
Nevertheless _Darwin_ has become the rescuing knight for many who became
alarmed about the threatening Supernaturalism.


    _Du Bois-Reymond_ speaks very frankly: “Albeit, in holding to this
    theory we may feel like a man kept from drowning only by holding
    firmly to a plank just strong enough to keep him afloat. But when
    we have to choose between a plank and death, the preference will
    decidedly be with the plank.” The same idea is expressed somewhat
    more gracefully by _W. Ostwald_: “That the quite complicated
    problem concerning the purposiveness of organism loses its
    character of a riddle, at least in principle, and assumes the
    aspect of a scientific task, all by virtue of this simple thought
    ... is a gain that cannot be sufficiently appreciated.” With
    vehement plainness _H. Spitzer_ maintains: “Purposiveness in
    nature, which was feared by positive research like a ghost,
    because it really seemed only to be due to the intervention of
    ghosts in the course of the world, has now been traced by _Darwin_
    to its origin from natural causes, and he thereby made it a fit
    object for the science that is at home only in the sphere of
    natural causes.” “To the height of this point of view,” _D. F.
    Strauss_ boasts, “we have been led by modern natural research in
    _Darwin_.”(8)

    At any rate one thing is settled: “The theological explanation
    must be rejected,” as _Plate_ puts it. “It sees in adaptation the
    proof for the love and kindness of a Creator, who has ordered all
    organisms most conformable to their purpose. Natural Science
    cannot accept such an explanation.”


Is this the boasted spirit of truthfulness, which desires only the
truth,—but is evading it persistently? Is this that unbiassed eye that
seeks only the truth? Truly, it seems to be unsound, since it cannot bear
the rays of truth. Let us go to another workshop of liberal science. It is
known now that our earth has once been a ball of glowing fluid, with a
temperature in which no living being could exist. Consequently the latter
must have appeared at a later stage of evolution. As a fact, palæontology
does not show any remnants of organisms in the lower strata of the earth.
Now again a question suggests itself to the scientist, _Whence did the
first life come from?_ We have the choice of only two explanations: either
it has risen by itself, out of unorganic, dead matter, or it was produced
by the hand of a Creator: either by _generatio aequivoca_ or the act of
creation. Now there has never been observed a _generatio aequivoca_, as is
testified to by natural science itself, and never has it been accomplished
in the laboratory. Therefore, inasmuch as the natural laws of olden times
cannot have been any different from those of the present, there has never
been a primordial genesis. Do they perhaps give the Creator his due here,
where the case is so obvious? Let us see.


    The noted zoölogist, _R. Hertwig_, writes: “Inasmuch as there has
    doubtless been a time when the prevailing temperature of our globe
    made any life impossible, there must have been a time when life on
    it arose either by an act of creation or by primordial genesis.
    If, conformable to the spirit of natural sciences, we are relying
    only on natural forces for an explanation of natural phenomena,
    then we are necessarily led to the hypothesis of primordial
    genesis,” although it contradicts all experience. But the
    deduction is only brought forth as a “logical postulate”: there
    “must” be such genesis after creation is eliminated. “We natural
    scientists say,” states _Plate_, “that all living beings must have
    originated some time in former geological periods ... from dead,
    unorganic matter; to assume a creation would be no explanation at
    all, exactly as it would be no explanation to assume the creation
    of matter.” Which philosophy teaches that it is not an explanation
    of a fact to assume for it the only reasonable cause? But just
    this cause they do not want. _Virchow_ says in this respect: “If I
    do not wish to assume a creative act, if I desire to explain the
    matter in my way, then it is clear that I must resort to
    _generatio aequivoca_. _Tertium non datur._ There is nothing else
    left, if one once has said: ‘I do not accept creation, but I want
    an explanation of it.’ If this is the first thesis, the second
    thesis is, ergo, I accept the _generatio aequivoca_. _But we have
    no actual proof of it._” Hence _Haeckel_ only follows the lead of
    others when he writes: “We admit that this process (_primordial
    genesis_) must remain a pure hypothesis, as long as it is not
    directly observed or duplicated by experiment. But I repeat that
    this hypothesis is indispensable for the entire coherence of the
    history of natural creation. Unless you accept the hypothesis of
    primordial genesis at this one point in the theory of evolution,
    you must take refuge in the miracle of a supernatural creation.”


Is this science, or is it not rather Theophobia? Does the freedom of
science consist, first of all, in the privilege of emancipating one’s self
from truth, whenever truth is not to one’s taste? True, liberal science
will then be free from distasteful truths, but all the more shackled by
its irreligious prejudices.

In modern times, the _theory of evolution_ is in high favour. On earth we
do not only see life, but life in a great variety of forms, from plant to
man. The question, whence this variety, admits in its turn only of the
alternative: either it was immediately created by God’s hand, or it is the
result of a slow evolution from common original forms. Whether there has
been an evolution within the vegetable and animal kingdom is a problem for
natural science. But it is a philosophical question, whether the
essentially superior human soul, endowed with spirituality and reason,
could have evolved from the inferior animal soul. Philosophy must answer:
No, just as impossible as to evolve ten from two, or a whole book from a
single proofsheet. Faith says the human soul is created by God. We do not
intend to discuss the problem here any further, but shall only point out
how science here, too, expressly or tacitly, is determined very
energetically by the presumption of the exclusive natural causation; this
is applied to the entire theory of evolution, but especially in regard to
man.


    “The notion of the evolution of the living world on earth,” thus
    states _Weismann_ quite significantly, “extends far beyond the
    provinces of individual sciences, and it influences our entire
    range of thoughts. This notion means nothing less than the
    elimination of miracle from our knowledge of nature, and the
    classification of the phenomena of life on an equal footing with
    the rest of natural events.” The guiding motive is plainly in
    evidence.


The aim to eliminate the “miracle of creation” is manifested even more
conspicuously in the question about the origin of man: man with his entire
equipment, intellectual as well as cultural, must have evolved upward from
the most imperfect rudiments; this is regarded as a self-evident
proposition.


    _M. Hoernes_, for instance, writes: “The Cosmogonies, _i.e._, the
    theories of creation, of all nations ascribe the origin of man to
    a supernatural act of creation, whereby the Creator is imagined as
    a human being, because at the intellectual stage corresponding to
    these notions something created could only be conceived as
    something formed, something constructed.” Thus the theory of
    creation, and the Christian doctrine of the genesis of man, is
    disposed of as a notion of the lower intellect. “On the contrary,
    we are taught by science to look upon the highest mammals as our
    nearest blood-relatives.” This “we are taught by science,”
    although it is confessed: “We know the fact of the existence of
    the man of the fourth, or glacial, period, but we have not a
    solitary fact that would throw light upon his origin and his
    previous existence.”

    “The theory of miracles can be given up only when we shall cease
    to contemplate man as a creature apart from the rest of creation,
    and look upon him as a being developed within creation to what he
    is now. Then, however, reason and language, as well as man
    himself, are the products of a continuous evolution,” says _Wundt_
    in his “Psychology of Nations.” _Fr. Müller_, in a text-book on
    the science of language, argues: “According to _Darwin_ and to
    modern natural science, man was not created but has evolved from a
    lower organism during a process of thousands and thousands of
    years.... For this reason, we must (?) assume that the first
    language of primitive man could not have ranked above the speech
    by which animals living in families communicate with each other.”

    On the basis of this truly dogmatical presumption, that the
    “miracle theory” of creation must not be accepted, they proceed
    then to construe one hypothesis upon another, of the origin of
    language, of thought, of conscience, of religion, according to the
    method of _Darwin_ and _Spencer_, hypotheses of utmost
    arbitrariness, and frequently most fantastic. “Ethnographical
    researches,” so we are told by _E. Lehmann_, “made by travellers,
    representatives of science and of practical life, in all parts of
    the globe, ... are starting to-day, almost without exception, from
    the tacit presumption that the civilization of peoples living in
    the primitive state represent an early and low stage in a
    historical chain of evolution.”


All these are suitable commentaries upon the trite proposition that
natural science, or more generally science, is incompatible with religious
belief. Of course research, like that described above, does not agree with
Faith. But the fault lies in its unscientific method, rather than in its
scientific character, in its latent atheistic presumption which prevents
an unbiassed conception of truth.


    In February, 1907, the well-known biologist and priest of the
    Jesuit order, _E. Wasmann_, gave three lectures in Berlin on the
    theory of evolution, before a large audience; they were followed
    on the fourth evening by a discussion, in the course of which
    eleven opponents voiced for nearly three hours their objections
    and attacks, to which _Wasmann_ replied briefly at midnight, but
    little time having been allotted to him for this purpose.
    _Wasmann_, as well as his chief opponent, Prof. _Plate_ of Berlin,
    have published the arguments on both sides with notes, comments,
    and supplements. The report of Prof. _Plate_ lays stress upon the
    assertion, which had also formed the refrain of all opposing
    speeches, viz., “the discussion has shown, in the first place,
    that true research in natural science is impossible for those
    taking the position of the Roman Catholic Church; secondly, the
    glaring and irreconcilable opposition of the scientific theory of
    the world to the Orthodox-Christian view was sharply manifested.”
    In examining how this was demonstrated by this particular natural
    science, one meets with a painful surprise.

    Even the facts concerning the arrangements for the discussion make
    an unpleasant impression. It is true, _Plate_ accused _Wasmann_ of
    calumny on account of the latter’s complaint. However, upon
    comparing closely the statements of both, the following facts
    remain undisputed. _Wasmann_ notified _Plate_ that he desired to
    speak twice during the discussion, and that the entire discussion
    should not last much over two hours. _Plate_ promised to arrange
    matters accordingly. But on the forenoon of February 18th, the
    opponents held a meeting, _Plate_ presiding, and they resolved,
    without the least notification to _Wasmann_, that there should be
    eleven speakers against _Wasmann_, and that the latter should
    reply but once, at the end. Only just before the beginning of the
    discussion, the same evening, _Plate_ informed _Wasmann_ of the
    arrangement, making it practically impossible for the latter to
    change the situation. Furthermore, upon _Plate’s_ proposal, an
    intermission of five minutes before the appearance of the tenth
    speaker was decided upon, “in order to give those in the audience,
    who might find the session too exhausting, a chance to leave.”
    Thus the audience was to be subjected for three long hours to the
    influence of heated attacks on Theism, Christianity, and the
    Church, and without hearing the reply unless they held out from
    half-past eight in the evening to half-past twelve in the morning.

    _Plate’s_ Monism rejects principally everything metaphysical:
    “Monism is the short term for the natural science view of the
    world, that rejects all preternatural and supernatural ideas.”
    Solutions, not given by the natural sciences, simply do not exist
    for him; for him the sun sets on the horizon of his natural
    science. “Natural laws comprise all that we are able to fathom:
    what is behind them, or what is living in them and operates in
    them, is the ultimate question for philosophy, and there one
    thinks this way, another that way” (_Plate_). Nevertheless, he
    knows that “Out of nothing can come nothing: hence matter is
    eternal,” and he is certain that there is no personal God, no
    angel nor devil, no beyond nor immortality. Whoever fails to think
    the same way is no scientist, he is not even a man of sound
    reason: because “he who has grasped even the elements of natural
    science, the unity and strict conformity to law of the natural
    forces, and has a head for sound reasoning, will become a monist
    all by himself, while the rest are past help, anyhow.”

    “The Polytheism of the orthodox Church,” he says further,
    referring to the mystery of the Trinity, “is irrational”; for
    “Common Sense says that 3 is not equal to 1, nor 1 to 3,” and this
    is sufficient for _Plate_. “Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of
    God, Christ’s Ascension and His descent into hell, Original Sin,
    Redemption from sin by Christ’s sacrifice, Angels and Devils, the
    Immaculate Conception, the Infallibility of the Pope, all these
    and many other doctrines of the orthodox Church are thrown to the
    winds by anybody convinced of the permanence and imperviousness of
    the natural laws.” This again is sufficient for him. “The question
    whether God is personal or impersonal,” says he, in another place,
    “should never be raised: it is just as preposterous as the
    question whether God has eyes or not.” Another of his arguments
    reads: “If the body after death can become dust by natural means,
    then there must have been conditions under which the dust became
    by natural means a body.” An analogous argument would be: “If a
    book can of itself finally wear away into withered and loosened
    leaves, then there must be conditions under which the perfect book
    could originate all by itself, and without Prof. _Plate_, out of
    withered, loose leaves.”

    _Plate_ assures us: “I do not know anything about metaphysics.” We
    do not want to dispute that. It is regrettable that so many
    scientists of our times are betraying a pitiable lack of
    philosophical training, a lack which becomes a social danger if
    they, nevertheless, yield to the temptation to invade the domain
    of Philosophy. Even the Protestant scientist _G. Wobbermin_ in
    referring to the above-mentioned discussion remarked: “_Wasmann’s_
    opponents on that evening have betrayed without exception a really
    amazing lack of philosophical training.” In glaring contrast with
    this ignorance stands their intolerance for any different theory
    of the world. Because he thinks as a Christian, _Wasmann_ is
    peremptorily expelled from the ranks of natural scientists.
    “_Father Wasmann_ is not a true natural scientist, he is not a
    true scholar.” With this crushing verdict Prof. _Plate_ concluded
    his speech. He repeats this finding on the last page of his book
    in conspicuous type: “_Father Wasmann_, S. J., no true natural
    scientist, no true scholar.” That his opponent, in answer to
    questions that go beyond mere natural science, is giving
    philosophical replies, in accord with the doctrine of
    Christianity, is explained by “his voluntary or involuntary
    submission to the Church,” “natural science bows to Theology.” He
    therefore lacks “the freedom of thought and of deduction.”
    Sophistical stunts in the service of intolerance! But let us
    proceed on our way.


The compulsory dogma of the inadmissibility of a supernatural order of the
world, and of its operation in the visible world, becomes most manifest
when liberal science comes in contact with the miracle. Forsooth, it
shirks this contact. But time and again, now and in the past, it is
confronted by clearly attested facts and it cannot avoid noticing them.
However, it is determined from the outset that miracles are impossible. Of
course, this cannot be proved except by the presumption that there is no
supermundane God. Even the agnostic _Stuart Mill_ admits that if the
existence of God is conceded, an effect produced by His will, which in
every instance owes its origin to its creator, appears no longer as a
purely arbitrary hypothesis, but must be considered a serious possibility
(Essays, 1874). Generally, however, liberal science does not try hard to
demonstrate in a scientific way the impossibility.


    “It is my unyielding conviction,” so speaks _A. Harnack_, and his
    is perhaps the most telling expression of this dogmatic mood,
    “that anything that happens within time and space is subject to
    the laws of motion. Hence, that in this sense, _i.e._, of
    interrupting the natural connection, there cannot be any
    miracles.” One simply does not believe such things. “That a
    tempest at sea,” thus _Harnack_ again, “could have been stilled by
    a word we do not believe, nor shall we ever again believe it.”
    Similarly reads _Baumgarten’s_ declaration regarding the
    resurrection of Christ: “Even if all the reports had been written
    on the third day, and had been transmitted to us as a certainty
    ... nevertheless modern consciousness could not accept the story.”
    And _W. Foerster_ writes: “The supposition that such interferences
    do not occur, and that everything in the world is advancing
    steadily and in accordance with fixed laws, forms the
    indispensable presumption of scientific research.” And _H. von
    Sybel_ holds “An absolute concord with the laws of evolution, a
    common level in the existence of things terrestrial, forms the
    presumption of all knowledge: it stands and falls with it.”


This is the presumption, from which is drawn the most extravagant
conclusion, which, though so manifestly improper, is made the basis for
rejecting the entire supernatural religion of Christianity. Because God’s
Incarnate Son, in a small town of Palestine, once turned water into wine,
will the Christian housewife lose her confidence in the stability of
water? When it was suddenly discovered that the orbit of the planet Uranus
was not a perfect ellipsis, as required by the law of _Kepler_, was it
thought that these deviations are impossible because there must not be any
exception to the law of perfect elliptical movements? Happily, this law
continued to be accepted without deeming an irregularity impossible, and
shortly afterwards Neptune was discovered and found to be the cause of the
disturbance. But anything miraculous, no matter how well proven, must be
considered unacceptable by reason of such unsound presumption.
Philosophical a-priorism is superior to facts.


    Thus _St. Augustine_ tells in his work “De civitate Dei” (1. xxii.
    c. 8) of a number of miracles happening in his time, of which he
    had knowledge either as eye-witness or by authentical reports from
    eye-witnesses. _E. Zeller_ renders judgment on the historical
    value of the statement as follows: “The narrator is a
    contemporary, and partly even an eye-witness, of the events
    reported: by virtue of his episcopal office he is particularly
    commissioned to closely investigate them; we know him as a man
    overtowering his contemporaries in intellect and knowledge, second
    to none in religious zeal, strong faith, and moral earnestness.
    The wonderful events happened to well-known persons, sometimes in
    the presence of big crowds of people; they were attested and
    recorded by official order.” Hence the statement must be accepted
    without objection. But must it not also be believed? is the query
    of an unbiassed listener. Not in the judgment of one who is in the
    tyrannical yoke of his presumptions. “What are we to say about
    it?” continues _Zeller_, and finds that “in this unparalleled
    aggregation of miracles we can after all see nothing else but a
    proof of the credulity of that age.” The report is incontestable,
    but it must not be believed!

    In our times _Lourdes_ has become the scene of events which are
    founded on facts, and the miraculous character has been proven at
    least of some of them. _Bertrin_, in his “Histoire critique des
    evénéments de Lourdes,” deals with the attitude of the physicians
    toward the miracles. The believing physician can enter upon his
    investigation without prejudice: not so the unbelieving physician
    and scientist, who is shackled by his prejudice against the
    possibility of miracles. Of this a few examples:

    “How did you get cured?” was the question put by a physician to a
    young woman who, after having suffered for four years from a
    suppurating inflammation of the hip joints, complicated by caries,
    had a few days previously suddenly regained her full health. Pains
    and sores had disappeared. “By whom was I cured? By the Blessed
    Virgin!” “Never mind the Blessed Virgin,” replied the physician.
    “Young woman, why don’t you admit that you had been assured in
    advance that you would get well. You were told that, once in
    Lourdes, you would suddenly rise from the box wherein you were
    lying. That sort of thing happens—we call it suggestion.” The girl
    replied, unhesitatingly, that it did not happen this way at all.
    Finally the physician offered her money if she would admit having
    really been cured by suggestion. The girl declined the
    offer.—Another girl arrived in Lourdes, with a physician’s
    attestation that she was a consumptive. She is cured after the
    first bath. At the bureau of verification her lungs were found to
    be no longer diseased. Her physician’s statement having been very
    brief, a telegram was sent to him as a matter of precaution,
    asking him for another statement without, however, informing him
    of the cure. The physician immediately wired back: “She is a
    consumptive.” This was also the opinion of other physicians who
    had treated the girl. The girl joyfully returns home, and hurries
    to her physician, requesting him to certify to her cure. He does
    so quite reluctantly. Upon reading his certificate, she discovers
    that it said she had been cured, but only of a _cough_. The case
    of consumption of his original testimonial had changed into a
    cough. His dread of a miracle had induced this physician to commit
    a falsehood.

    _A. Rambacher_, as he relates in a pamphlet, sent the scientific
    treatise on Lourdes by Dr. _Boissarie_ to Prof. _Haeckel_, with
    the request to read it, in order to gain a better notion of the
    existence of a supernatural world. After some urging he finally
    received the following reply, which speaks volumes for the
    attitude of the natural scientist towards facts: “With many thanks
    I hereby return the book by Dr. _Boissarie_ on the Great Cures of
    Lourdes which you sent me. The perusal of the same has convinced
    me anew of the tremendous power of superstition (glorified as
    ‘pious belief’) of naïve credulity (without critical examination),
    and of contagious collective suggestion, as well as of the cunning
    of the clergy, exploiting them for their gain.... The physicians,
    said to testify in behalf of the ‘miracles’ and the supernatural
    phenomena, are either ignorant and undiscerning quacks, or
    positive frauds in collusion with the priests. The most accurate
    description of the gigantic swindle of Lourdes I know of, is that
    of _Zola_ in his well-known novel.... With repeated thanks for
    your kindness ... _Ernst Haeckel_.” Against all the facts in
    evidence this dogmatic scientist was safely intrenched behind the
    stone wall of his presumptions. He knew in advance that everything
    was superstition or the fraud of cunning priests, that all
    physicians who certified to cures were quacks and cheats. _Zola’s_
    tendentious romance considered the best historical source! Mention
    should be made here how this celebrated novelist dealt with facts
    at Lourdes. In the year 1892, the time of the great pilgrimage,
    _Zola_ went to Lourdes. He wanted to observe and then tell what he
    had seen. An historical novel it was to be; time and again he had
    proclaimed in the newspapers that he would tell the whole truth.
    At Lourdes all doors were opened to him; he had admittance
    anywhere; he could interview and obtain explanations at will. How
    he kept his promise to report the truth may be shown by a single
    instance: _Marie Lebranchu_ came to Lourdes on August 20, 1892,
    suffering from incurable consumption. She was suddenly cured, and
    never had a relapse. One year after her cure she returned to the
    miraculous Grotto. The excellent condition of her lungs was again
    verified. Now, what does _Zola_ make of this event? In his novel
    the cured girl suffers a terrible relapse upon her first return
    home, “a brutal return of the disease which remained victorious,”
    we read in _Zola’s_ book. One day, the president of the Lourdes
    Bureau of Investigation introduced himself to _Zola_ in Paris, and
    asked him “How dare you let _Marie Lebranchu_ die in your novel;
    you know very well that she is alive and just as well as you and
    I.” “What do I care,” was _Zola’s_ reply, “I think I have the
    right to do as I please with the characters I create.” If a
    romancer desires to avail himself of this privilege he certainly
    has not the right to proclaim his novels as truthful historical
    writings, much less may others see in such a novel the “most
    accurate description of the events at Lourdes.”

    _Renan_ at one time said: “Oh, if we just once might have a
    miracle brought before professional scientists! But, alas! this
    will never happen!” He borrowed this saying from _Voltaire_, with
    the difference that the latter demanded God to perform a miracle
    before the Academy of Sciences, as if there were need for miracles
    in a physical or chemical laboratory. Those who desire in earnest
    to investigate miracles ought to go where they are performed. And
    even there, where the eyes can see them, it also takes good will
    to acknowledge them. In this respect an interview is instructive
    which _Zola_ once had with an editor. The latter asked: “If you
    were witness to a miracle, that would occur under strictest
    conditions suggested by yourself, would you acknowledge the
    miracle? Would you then accept the teachings of the faith?” After
    a few moments of serious thought, _Zola_ replied: “I do not know,
    but I do not believe I would” (_Bertrin_). On April 7, 1875, there
    came to the Belgian sanctuary, Oostacker, a Flemish labourer, by
    name _Peter de Rudder_, whose leg had eight years before been
    broken below the knee, and who was then suffering from two
    suppurating cancerous sores, that had formed at the place of the
    fracture and on the foot. He suddenly was entirely cured. The case
    was investigated in a most exact way. In 1900 a treatise
    concerning the case was published by three physicians. _E.
    Wasmann_ had as early as 1900 published a short extract of it in
    the “Stimmen aus Maria Laach.” In February, 1907, when, at Berlin,
    he delivered his lectures which were followed by a discussion, his
    opponents, headed by Prof. _Plate_, did not know of this article.
    When they learned of it, some time afterwards, he was put under
    the ban because he “had degraded himself to the position of a
    charlatan by vouching with his scientific repute for the happening
    of a miraculous cure”; and they said “they would fight him in the
    same way as they would fight every quack, but as a scientist he
    was discarded.” _Plate_ had on the evening of the discussion asked
    of the assembled scientists the question: “Have we ever observed
    anything like a suspension of the natural laws? The reply to it is
    an unconditional ‘we have not’; consequently Theism becomes
    inadmissible to the natural scientist.” Here, in the _de Rudder_
    case, is found the required instance. But _Plate_ knows, in
    advance of any investigation, that it is a fairy tale, believed
    without critical examination. And Prof. _Hansemann_, another
    opposing speaker of that evening, subsequently sent word to
    _Wasmann_ that: “One can pretty well judge what to think of a
    natural scientist who publishes such stuff. For this reason I now
    declare that I shall never in future, no matter how or where,
    enter into discussion of matters of natural science with Mr.
    _Wasmann_.” When on a certain occasion _Hegel_ was advised that
    some facts did not agree with his philosophical notions, he
    replied: “The more pity for the facts.”


The English natural scientist, _W. Thomson_, once said before the British
Society at Edinburgh: “Science is bound by eternal honour to face
fearlessly every problem that can be clearly laid before it.” The equally
famous _Faraday_, in the name of empirical research, demands of its
adherents the determination to stand or to fall with the results of a
direct appeal to the facts in the first place, and with the strict logical
deductions therefrom in the second. In general these principles are
adhered to so long as religious notions are not encountered. But as soon
as these are sighted, the engine is reversed, and all scientific
principles are forgotten.

A science led by this spirit will set out to emancipate man’s moral
conduct of life from God and religion. Indeed, the first postulate of
modern ethics directs that _morality_ must be _independent of religion_.
That God and eternal salvation is the end of man, the ultimate norm of his
moral life, that God’s Command is the ultimate reason of the moral
obligation, and divine sanction its strongest support, it does not want to
acknowledge. Here, too, we find the principle of natural causality in
operation. “As in physics God’s will must not be made to serve as an
explanation, so likewise in the theory of moral phenomena. Both the
natural and the moral world, as they exist, may point beyond themselves to
something transcendental. But we cannot admit the transcendental ... a
scientific explanation will have to be wholly immanent, and
anthropological” (_Paulsen_). According to this approved principle of
ignoration, the supreme aim and law of a morality without religion is
_man_, his earthly happiness, and his culture.


    Its aims, according to Prof. _Jodl_, one of its noted champions,
    are: “Promotion of moral life, fostering of a refined humanity,
    development of a true fellow-feeling, without the religious and
    metaphysical notions upon which mankind hitherto has mostly built
    its ethical ideals.” _Kant_ was the pioneer here: “In so far as
    morality is based on the conception of man as a free, being, it
    requires neither the idea of a superior being to make him
    cognizant of his duties, nor any motive but the law itself in
    order to observe it ... hence morality for its own sake does not
    by any means need religion.” This is the viewpoint of the
    autonomous man, who is his own law. “From the viewpoint of
    authority,” so tells us _E. von Hartmann_, “autonomy does not mean
    anything else but that in ethical matters I am for myself the
    highest court without appeal.... The God, Who in the beginning
    spoke to His children from a fiery cloud ... has descended into
    our bosom, and, transformed into our own being, speaks out of us
    as a moral autonomy.” _Diis extinctis successit humanitas._


“Although an individual representative of science may be a believer in God
in his private life,” so argues the English philosopher, _W. James_, “at
any rate the times have passed when it could be said that the heavens
announce to science the glory of God, and that the heaven shows the works
of His hands.” The flight from divinity, atheism open or disguised, is the
psychological effect of the liberal principle. Free thought aims to free
man of all authority, it aims at severing from religion his entire
existence, marriage, state, schools, and likewise science. “It is
undeniable,” we hear from the lips of champions of modern man, standing on
the pinnacle of religious liberalism, “that there is a certain
forsakenness in this existence of man, as compared to a life brightened by
the idea of a God,” but that forsakenness is not purchased too dearly, for
“it is the solitude of autonomy, a possession so precious that no price
for it could be too high” (_Carneri_).

Indeed, these modern men use even plainer language: science is applauded
for having at last freed man from God. With _Kant’s_ principle that we
cannot know anything of the supernatural, we are told, there “were thrown
overboard the cosmogonic notions of the Semitic races, notions that have
so severely oppressed our science and religion, and are still oppressing
them.... By this insight an idol is smashed. In a previous chapter I
called the Israelites the worshippers of abstract idols; now, I believe, I
shall be fully understood.” Indeed, we understand. It means: Away with
God. “This German metaphysics frees us from idolatry and reveals to us the
living divinity in our own bosom” (_Chamberlain_).

This is the manner in which this free thought, within science and without,
is fulfilling the earnest admonition of the Psalmist: “Seek ye the Lord
and be strengthened: seek His face evermore” (Ps. civ. 4), and it turns
into irony the words: “This is the generation of them that seek Him, of
them that seek the face of the God of Jacob” (Ps. xxiii. 6).



“I Know not Jesus Christ, His Only Begotten Son, Our Lord.”


Where the thought of independence and of this world enslaves the minds,
and holds them captive in harsh aversion to the supernatural, an objective
judgment on the nature and history of the Christian religion, to say
nothing of the Catholic Church, can hardly be hoped for. What may be
expected is that we will also meet here with a science which, with its
hands held before the eye that fears the light, wards off and combats
everything that is specifically Christian. It is to be feared only that it
will turn light into darkness regarding the view of life, as also the
doctrine and history, of the Christian religion.

Regarding the Christian view of life we need only read the superficial and
yet so arrogant discussions of Christian philosophy, as found in
_Paulsen_, _Wundt_, or _E. von Hartmann_. From this judicial bench the
wisdom of Him, of Whom it is said “And we saw His glory, full of grace and
truth,” we see condemned, if not even treated with subtle ridicule.

Let us for instance take _Paulsen’s_ presentment of the “View of Life
under Christianity.” Whoever reads it, and believes it, to him the
teaching of Jesus Christ can only be, what the Apostle said it was to the
heathens, foolishness. No longer can he have adoration for its Founder,
but rather the pity that one has for an enthusiastic visionary devoid of
any knowledge of the world and men. The wisdom taught by Christ is
distorted into a sombre grimace, while side by side with it the conception
of life of Hellenic paganism is transfigured into a beautiful ideal.


    We are told there: “While classical antiquity saw as the task of
    life the perfect development of the natural powers and talents of
    man, ... Christianity with clear consciousness makes the contrary
    the goal of life.” “The cultivation and exercise of intellectual
    faculties was of great importance to the Greeks.... Primitive
    Christianity looks upon reason and natural cognition with
    indifference, even with suspicion and contempt ... indeed, natural
    reason and knowledge are an obstacle for the kingdom of God.
    Christianity at first was indifferent, even inimical, not only to
    philosophy and science, but also to art and poetry. It cuts off
    not only sensual but also æsthetical gratification,” because _St.
    John_ condemned the gratification of the eyes (which means
    something quite different from æsthetical gratification)
    Christianity is said to reject “the arts of the Muses and
    athletics: they belong to that sowing of the flesh of which the
    harvest is perdition.” “What the Christians valued highly was not
    erudition and eloquence, but silence. Silence is the first thing
    recommended by _Ambrose_” (and he the great and renowned
    representative of early Christian eloquence!). There is more: “In
    the primitive view the first virtue was valour, especially valour
    in war; indeed, in Greek and Latin speech the word ’virtue’ meant
    valour; the Christian’s virtue, however, is patience and
    endurance. He does not draw the sword; to him are expressly
    forbidden not only anger, hatred, and private revenge, but even
    litigation.”

    In this tendentious strain _Paulsen_ continues, with exaggerations
    and misrepresentations that have nothing in common with science.
    According to the Greek view, he says, high-mindedness was a great
    virtue, but, naturally, the Christian is not allowed to have it;
    “the virtue of the Christian is humility,” _i.e._, in _Paulsen’s_
    sense low-mindedness; this is “the starting point of
    Christianity.” True, the author assures us that Christianity of
    to-day is no longer the one he is describing; it has adapted
    itself more to the world. But it is sad to have this gloomy,
    visionary fanaticism described to us as the one which was taught
    by the words of Jesus Himself.

    The adherent of this Christianity looks upon governments and their
    aims as something essentially foreign to it, even to be an
    official “would doubtless have been felt as a contradiction”; but
    a sudden change is said to have taken place under _Constantine_.
    Earthly joys and benefits, the holy ties of the family, those that
    Jesus in person blessed at Cana, they were, according to _St.
    Paul_, so we are told, in the spirit of Christ things to avoid and
    condemn.

    And how are these theological discoveries proven, what sources are
    quoted in substantiation? By some arbitrarily selected passages of
    the Scriptures, that one must hate father and mother, wife and
    child, brother and sister; that the poor in spirit are blessed,
    that the lust of the eye is sinful, that evil should not be
    resisted; and in quoting these passages all scientific
    interpretation is carefully avoided, all the writers who have
    amply explained them are ignored. And what the scriptural passages
    fail to prove must be demonstrated by some extreme statement
    borrowed from _Tertullian_, who is generally prone to
    exaggeration. As a matter of course, gloomy Christianity then
    seems inferior to the brilliancy of Greek paganism; Christianity
    is directly a danger to civilization; it may be good enough for
    those tired of life. “The objection has been made that the
    fulfilment of this command would destroy our entire civilization.
    Most probably this would be the case. But where is it written (in
    Holy Writ) that our civilization must be preserved?” We have here
    the picture formed of the doctrine of Christ by the world, whereof
    the Lord has predicted: the world will hate you. _Paulsen_ admits
    frankly: “Whence this hatred? Because the Christian despises that
    which to the world is the highest good. There can be no better
    reason for hating any one....”

    It is easy to understand that one who has for a long time mentally
    abandoned his Christian faith, cannot carry in mind its picture as
    undistorted as he did in his better days, and as would conform to
    reality. But it is reprehensible to exhibit in public this
    picture, without having previously and conscientiously examined
    the main lines, to see whether they are not caricatures. And they
    are caricatures, traced by a hand that is led by the mood of a
    secret anti-Christianity.


A treatment identical with that of its view of life is accorded to the
_doctrine and history of the Christian religion_. Not science and
uncorrupted truthfulness, but antipathy, presumption, harsh denial of
everything divine, only too often point the way. Let us listen again to
the author named above, since he knows to express modern thought with a
clearness and precision almost unequalled by any one else.


    It made a painful impression to find in the Christmas number,
    1908, of the liberal-theological “Christliche Welt” a posthumous
    article by _Fr. Paulsen_: “What think you of Christ: Whose Son is
    He?” The article was without doubt one of the last he had written.
    It contains the program of modern liberal science. “With the
    seventeenth century,” we read there, “begins the reorganization of
    the theory of the universe by science. Its general tendency may be
    described by the formula: Elimination of the supernatural from the
    natural and historical world.” “Consequently, no miracles in
    history, no supernatural birth, no resurrection, no revelation, in
    fact no interference by the Eternal in temporal events.” Hence,
    the man who “thinks scientifically _in this wise_ can have no
    doubt that the old ecclesiastical dogma cannot be reconciled with
    scientific thought.” This, of course, amounts to a complete
    renunciation of positive Christianity.

    This scientific thought, in the words of _Baumgarten_, “rejects
    any projection of the supernatural into tangible reality”;
    especially is “the metaphysical genesis and nature of the Saviour
    highly offensive to our ethical consciousness,” even “absolutely
    unbearable.” The Christian religion can no longer be permitted to
    overtower other religions by its supernaturalness. “The
    distinction between a revealed and a natural religion becomes an
    impossibility,” says _W. Bousset_. And _Wundt_ declares:
    “Christianity, as an ‘absolute’ or a ‘revealed’ religion, would
    stand opposed to all other religious development, as an
    incommensurable magnitude. This point of view, evidently, cannot
    be competent for our speculations.”


Having become the ruling mode of thought, these presumptions determine
from the outset the results to be obtained by “research,” and they force
it to violate its own method, so that it may be dragged along the by-ways
and false ways of a mistaken, philosophical a-priorism, thereby making
freedom of science a mockery. From the abundant material at our disposal
let us take only one example, viz., the _Modern Criticism of the Gospels_.

The Gospels contain many records of facts of a supernatural character, of
miracles and prophecies. That these records are necessarily false is the
first principle of the historical, or critical, method, as it is called.
“As a miracle of itself is unthinkable, so the miracles in the history of
Christianity, and in the Christianity of the New Testament, are likewise
unthinkable. Hence, when miracles are nevertheless narrated, these
narratives must be false, in as far as they report miracles: that is,
either the relation did not happen at all, or, if it did, there was a
sufficient natural explanation”; “the historian must under all
circumstances answer, ‘No,’ to the question whether the report of a
miracle is worthy of belief” (_T. Zeller_). Thus instructed,
“unprejudiced” research proceeds to construct its results of the
investigation of the genuineness, time and date, of the writing of the
Gospels and of the Acts, as well as of their credibility. Let us see how
this is done.

The tradition of the early Church, as well as intrinsic evidence, testify
that the first Gospel was really written by the Apostle _Matthew_, and
this certainly before the destruction of Jerusalem. Liberal-Protestant
criticism, however, assigns its origin to a time after the year 70,
chiefly for two reasons: First, the striking prophecy of the destruction
of Jerusalem, conforming so accurately to the actual event, could have
been written only after the year 70; otherwise it would have amounted to a
real prophecy subsequently fulfilled, a conclusion that cannot be
accepted. The second reason is this: The contents of _St. Matthew’s_
Gospel is already wholly Catholic, hence it must have been written during
a later, Catholic, period. For as there can be no influences from above,
and as everything is evolved in a natural way, the principle must govern:
that the more supernatural and the more dogmas, so much later the period
in question; at first there could have been only a religion of sentiment
without dogma, which gradually developed into Catholic dogmatism. Similar
are the presumptions which direct modern research in respect to the
genuineness of the other Gospels and the Acts. A few proofs:


    Prof. _Jülicher_ thinks that, “While we cannot go prior to the
    beginning of the second century, because of external testimony, we
    cannot on the other hand maintain a later date. The most probable
    time for our Gospel is the one shortly before the year 100....”
    Why? “Because the ill-fitting feature in the parable of the
    wedding feast, that the king in his wrath, because his invitation
    had been made light of, sent forth his armies and destroyed those
    murderers and burned up their city, could hardly have been
    invented before the conflagration of Jerusalem”—a prophecy,
    namely, of the coming destruction of Jerusalem cannot be admitted.
    “But to my mind, the decisive point is found in the religious
    position of _Matthew_. Despite his conservative treatment of
    tradition, he already stands quite removed from its spirit; he has
    written a Catholic Gospel.... To _Matthew_ the congregation, the
    Church, forms the highest court of discipline, being the
    administrator of all heavenly goods of salvation; his Gospel
    determines who is to rule, who to give laws: in its essential
    features the early Catholicism is completed.”

    _Jülicher_ arrives at a similar conclusion in his research on _St.
    Luke’s_ Gospel: “That _Luke’s_ Gospel was written sometime after
    the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 A.D., is proven beyond any
    doubt, by xxi. 22-24, where the terrible events of the Jewish war
    are ‘foretold.’... All arguments in favor of a later date of
    writing concerning _Matthew_ hold good also of _Luke_.” Even more
    unreserved is _O. Pfleiderer_, until recently a prominent
    representative of liberal-Protestant theology at Berlin: “In this
    Gospel we find the elements of dogma, morals, the constitution of
    the developing Catholic Church. Catholic is its trinitarian
    formula of christening, this embryo of the Creed and of the
    apostolic symbol. Catholic is its teaching of Christ ... Catholic,
    the doctrine of Salvation ... Catholic are the morals ...
    Catholic, finally, is the importance attached to _Peter_ as the
    foundation of the Church and as the bearer of the power of the
    key.” In regard to this latter point _Pfleiderer_ remarks
    expressly: “In spite of all attempts of Protestants to mitigate
    this passage (Matt. xvi. 17-20) there is no doubt that it contains
    the solemn proclamation of _Peter’s_ Primacy.” The unsophisticated
    reader thereupon would be likely to deduct: If the oldest Gospel
    is already Catholic, then it must be admitted that earliest
    Christianity was already Catholic. In so reasoning he might have
    rightly concluded, but he would have shown himself little
    acquainted with the method of liberal science. This infers
    contrariwise: early Christianity must not be Catholic, hence the
    Catholic Gospel cannot be so old, it must be the fraudulent
    concoction of a later time; “hence the origin of the Gospel of
    _Matthew_ is to be put down not before the time of _Hadrian_; in
    the fourth century rather than in the third.”

    _A. Harnack_ fixes the date of the Gospel at shortly after 70,
    because “_Matthew_, as well as _Luke_, are presupposing the
    destruction of Jerusalem. This follows with the greatest
    probability from Matt. xxii. 7 (the parable of the marriage
    feast).” This is to be held also of _Luke’s_ Gospel. “This much
    can be concluded without hesitation: that, as now admitted by
    almost all critics, _Luke’s_ Gospel presupposes the destruction of
    Jerusalem.”

    Remarkable is _Harnack’s_ latest attitude towards the Acts; it
    shows again that the results of modern biblical criticism are less
    the results of historical research than of philosophical
    presumptions. In his “Acts of the Apostles” _Harnack_ admits:
    “Very weighty observations indicate that the Acts (hence also the
    Gospels) were already written at the beginning of the sixties.” In
    substantiation he cites not less than six reasons which evidently
    prove it: they are based upon the principles of sound historical
    criticism. “These are opposed solely by the observation that the
    prophecy about the catastrophe of Jerusalem in some striking
    points comes near to the actual event, and that the reports about
    the Apparition and the legend of the Ascension would be hard to
    understand prior to the destruction of Jerusalem. It is hard to
    decide.... But it is not difficult to judge on which side the
    weightier arguments are” (viz., on the part of the contention for
    an earlier date). Yet _Harnack_ is loath to accept the better
    scientific reasons: they must suffer correction by presumptions.
    He formulates his final decision in the following way: “_Luke_
    wrote at the time of _Titus_, or during the earlier time of
    _Domitian_ (?), but perhaps (only _perhaps_, in spite of decisive
    arguments) already at the beginning of the sixties.” (Recently
    _Harnack_ recedes to the time before the destruction of Jerusalem
    without, however, acknowledging a divine prophecy of this
    catastrophe.) Similar is this theologian’s proof that the fourth
    Gospel could not have been written by _John_, the son of
    _Zebedee_; because xxi. 20-23 (I will that he tarry till I come)
    cannot be a prophecy, but must have been written down after the
    death of the favourite disciple. “The section xx. 20-23 obviously
    presupposes the death of the beloved disciple; on the other hand
    he cannot be left out of the 21st Chapter. This 21st Chapter,
    however, shows no other pen than that which had written Chapters
    1-20. This proves that the author of Chapter 21, hence the author
    of Chapters 1-20, could not have been the son of _Zebedee_, whose
    death is there presupposed.” The whole argument again rests upon
    the refusal to hold possible a prophecy from the lips of Jesus.

    The main reason, however, for disputing the genuineness of the
    fourth Gospel, although external tradition and internal criterions
    testify to it as the writing of _St. John_, is, because it teaches
    so clearly the _divinity of Christ_: and this must be denied.
    Significant are, for instance, the words in which _Weizsäcker_
    sums up his objections to this gospel: “That the Apostle, the
    favorite disciple according to the Gospel, who sat at the table
    beside Christ, should have looked upon and represented everything
    that he once experienced, as the living together with the
    incarnate divine Logos, is rather a puzzle. No power of faith and
    no philosophy can be imagined big enough to extinguish the memory
    of real life and to replace it by this miraculous image of a
    divine being ... of one of the original Apostles, it is
    unthinkable. Upon this the decision of this point will always
    hinge. Anything else that may be added from the contents of the
    Gospel is subordinate.” This means, Christ cannot be admitted to
    be a Divine Being—impossible. An eye-witness could not take Him
    for it: therefore, this “miraculous picture of a Divine Being”
    cannot have been the work of an eye-witness.


Like the _genuineness_ of the Gospels, so is also their _credibility_
beyond a doubt. Two of them are written by Apostles, the two others by
Disciples of the Apostles: they also have all the marks peculiar to
writings of eye or ear witnesses, or of persons who have heard the
narratives directly from the lips of eye-witnesses. Nor would any one
doubt their credibility if they did not report supernatural facts. But,
this being the case, infidel research is bound to arrive at the opposite
result.

The writers were frauds—this was long ago the hypothesis of the
superficial Hamburg Professor, _Samuel Reimarus_, whose “Fragments” were
published by _Lessing_. But even to a _D. F. Strauss_ “such a suspicion
was repulsive.” The Heidelberg Professor, _H. E. Paulus_, sought his
salvation in trying to reduce the reports of miracles to a natural sense,
by doing painful violence to the text: for instance, the Lord did not walk
_upon_ the sea, but only _along_ the sea; the miracle of the wine at Cana
was only a wedding joke. Then came _D. F. Strauss_ (died 1874), and he
tried it in a different way. “If the Gospels are really historical
documents, then the miracle cannot be removed from the life of Jesus.”
Hence, it is to remain? Indeed not! The Gospels must not be accepted as
historical sources. They are products of purposeless poetic legends, the
miracles are garlands of religious myths, gradually twined around the
picture of Jesus. Myths, however, need time for their formation, hence
_Strauss_ fixes the date of the Gospels within the second century. He
openly admits that his hypothesis would fall to the ground if but a single
Gospel has been written in the first century. As a fact, more recent
rationalistic criticism has found itself constrained to drop this
hypothesis. _F. Ch. Baur_ (died 1860) fell back upon the fraud-hypothesis
of a _Reimarus_. It, too, has been laid among the dead. Thus they have
exhausted themselves in the attempt to shake off the burdensome yoke of
truth.

Influenced by _Strauss_, _Baur_, and other German critics, _E. Renan_
(died 1892) wrote his “Life of Jesus,” a frivolous romance. Quite frank
are the words he wrote down in the preface to the thirteenth edition of
his “Vie de Jésus” (1883): “If miracle has any reality, then my book is
nothing but a tissue of errors.... If the miracle and the inspiration of
certain books are real things, then our method is abominable.” But he
silences all doubts by the phrase: “To admit the supernatural is alone
sufficient to place one’s self outside of science.”

The newer “historical-critical” school, while having disposed of many
contentions of the old schools, is nevertheless in its research bound just
as energetically by the postulate of conformity to natural laws. The
fourth Gospel is pushed aside: in the others all miraculous occurrences
are expounded away, till the “historically credible core” is reached.

The books of the Old Testament fare even worse, if possible.


    “Does Genesis relate history or a legend?” asks Prof. _Gunkel_,
    and continues: “this is no longer a question to the historian.”
    Well, a legend, then. But how does the historian know this? From
    his own pantheistic philosophy, which recognizes no God differing
    from this world: “The narratives of Genesis being mostly of a
    religious nature, they continuously speak of God. The way,
    however, in which narratives speak of God is one of the most
    reliable standards to judge whether they are meant historically or
    poetically. Here, too, the historian cannot do without a world
    philosophy. We believe that God acts in the world as the latent,
    hidden motive of all things ... but He never appears to us as an
    acting factor _jointly with others_ (the italics are the
    author’s), but always as the ultimate cause of all things. Quite
    different in many narratives of Genesis. We are able to understand
    these narratives of miracles and apparitions as the artlessness of
    primitive people, but we refuse to believe them.”


Analogous to Bible-criticism is the research in other branches of
theology. The _origin of Christianity_, this wonderful power which so
suddenly made its appearance in history and speedily vanquished a whole
world, must of course not be a work of Heaven. Hence its origin must be
explained at any cost in a natural way, or “historically,” as they put it.
The religious notions of Christianity must not be conceded a supernatural
certainty over all other religions; and “to understand an event
historically means: to conceive it by its causal connection with the
conditions of a given place and at a certain time of the human life. Hence
science cannot consider such a thing as the appearance of a supernatural
being upon the earth” (_Pfleiderer_).

And then they proceed to show that Christianity is a natural, evolutionary
product of the Israelite religion, of Greek philosophy, of Oriental myths,
and Roman customs. That it is far superior to all these, and that it is
the opposite to them in various ways, is carefully hushed up. The
inadequacy and impossibility of such an explanation is adroitly concealed.
Nor could the Israelite religion of the Old Covenant, according to the
naturalistic principle of liberal theology, have had its origin in
revelation and the prophets; hence it comes from Babylon, as the product
of natural evolution from Oriental myths and customs. Any old and new
analogies, hypotheses, and fancies are good enough then to demonstrate
this as “historical.”



The Truth is not in Them.


We pause here. We might thus continue for a long time; but it is enough.
The patient reader, who has accompanied us on the tedious way to this
point, may begin to feel tired. May he excuse the detailed recital for the
reason that we had to do some extensive reconnoitring, through the
precincts of modern philosophical-religious research, to avoid the
reproach that we were making accusations without furnishing proofs. Our
contention was, that liberal science is trying to shake off the yoke of
religious truth, and to explain it away by its self-made presumptions. We
believe that we have proved our contention.

We are confronted by a science that boasts of monopolizing the spirit of
truthfulness; as a matter of fact, we see that it uses all scientific
devices to shirk the truth and to disguise its effort. In loquacious
protests it rejects the “rigid dogmatism,” the “fixed views,” of the
Christian faith, and it proclaims experience and reason as the sole
criterions of scientific cognition; yet it always stands upon the platform
of rigid presumptions, that are derived from no experience, and which no
reason can prove. It clamours for research free from presumption, and,
without winking an eye, substitutes its own presumption, secretly or
openly. It is _dishonest_.

It promises to preserve for man the highest ideals and blessings for which
his mind is yearning, yet it has no religion and no God. It recalls to
mind the words spoken by _St. Augustine_ of the philosophers whom he had
followed in the false ways of his youth: “They said: truth, and always
truth, and talked much of truth, but it was not in them.... Oh, truth,
truth, how deeply my inmost spirit sighed after thee, while they filled my
ears incessantly with thy bare name and with the palaver of their bulky
volumes.” Free it wants to be, this science. One of its disciples boasted:
“It has taught its disciples to look down without dizziness from the airy
heights of sovereign scepticism. How easy and free one breathes up there!”
Aye, it has made itself free,—from the yoke of unpalatable truth. So much
more firmly is it fettered, not with the holy bonds of belief in God, but
by the more burdensome mental yoke of a disbelief that weakens and blinds
the eyes against the cognition of the higher truth:—and bound by the
chains of public opinion, which threatens anathema to every one who fails
to stop at the border of the natural. Truly free is only the science that
enjoys a clear and free perception for the truth. Unfree is a science that
restrains the mental eye with the blinkers of theophoby. Our age seeks for
the lost happiness of the soul, it seeks longingly God and the
supernatural that have been removed from its sight. But science, so often
its leader, loathingly dodges God, and refuses to fold the hands and pray.
As long as our age does not break with a science that refuses to know a
God and a Saviour, so long will it hopelessly grope about without result,
and look in vain for an escape from the wretched labyrinth of doubt.




