The Project Gutenberg eBook of Friendship
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Friendship

Author: Hugh Black


        
Release date: March 20, 2007 [eBook #20861]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20861

Credits: Produced by Al Haines






Produced by Al Haines










FRIENDSHIP

_By_ HUGH BLACK



_With an Introductory Note by_

W. ROBERTSON NICOLL, D.D.



Chicago--New York--Toronto

FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY

London--Edinburgh




Copyright, 1898, 1903, by

FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY




To MY FRIEND

HECTOR MUNRO FERGUSON

AND TO MANY OTHER FRIENDS WHO HAVE MADE LIFE RICH







_Equidem, ex omnibus rebus, quas mihi aut Fortuna aut Natura tribuit,
nihil habeo quod cum amicitia Scipionis possum, comparare._

CICERO.




  _Intreat me not to leave thee,
  And to return from following after thee:
  For whither thou guest, I will go;
  And where thou lodgest, I will lodge;
  Thy people shall be my people,
  And thy God my God:
  Where thou diest, will I die,
  And there will I be buried:
  The Lord do so to me, and more also,
  If aught but death part thee and me._

  BOOK OF RUTH.




APPRECIATION

BY SIR WM. ROBERTSON NICOLL, D.D.

Mr. Hugh Black's wise and charming little book on Friendship is full of
good things winningly expressed, and, though very simply written, is
the result of real thought and experience.  Mr. Black's is the art that
conceals art.  For young men, especially, this volume will be a golden
possession, and it can hardly fail to affect their after lives.  Mr.
Black says well that the subject of friendship is less thought of among
us now than it was in the old world.  Marriage has come to mean
infinitely more.  Communion with God in Christ has become to multitudes
the primal fact of life.  Nevertheless the need for friendship
remains.--"British Weekly."




_Friendship is to be valued for what there is in it, not for what can
be gotten out of it.  When two people appreciate each other because
each has found the other convenient to have around, they are not
friends, they are simply acquaintances with a business understanding.
To seek friendship for its utility is as futile as to seek the end of a
rainbow for its bag of gold.  A true friend is always useful in the
highest sense; but we should beware of thinking of our friends as
brother members of a mutual-benefit association, with its periodical
demands and threats of suspension for non-payment of dues._

TRUMBULL.




Contents


I

THE MIRACLE OF FRIENDSHIP


