Chapter XXIII

A Great Blast


Hardly comprehending what the Irish foreman had said, Tom Swift, the
Titus brothers and Mr. Damon followed Tim Sullivan back into the
tunnel. They had not gone far before they heard the murmur of many
voices, and mingled with that were roarings like those of wild beasts.

"That's thim!" cried Tim. "They're chawin' each other up!"

"Koku and that Indian giant fighting!" cried Tom. "What's it all about?"

"Don't ask me!" shouted Tim. "They've been on bad terms iver since they
met." This was true enough, for one giant was jealous of the other's
power, and they were continually trying feats of strength against one
another. Probably this had culminated in a fight, Tom concluded.

"And it will be some fight!" mused the young inventor.

Hurrying on, Tom and his companions came upon a strange and not
altogether pleasant sight. In an open place in the tunnel, where the
lights were brightest, and in front of the rocky wall which offered a
bar to further progress and which was soon to be blasted away,
struggled the two giants.

With their arms locked about one another, they swayed this way and
that--a struggle between two Titans. Of nearly the same height and
bigness, it was a wrestling match such as had never been seen before.
Had it been merely a friendly test of strength it would have been good
to look upon. But it needed only a glance into the faces of either
giant to show that it was a struggle in deadly earnest.

Back and forth they reeled over the rocky floor of the tunnel, bones
and sinews cracking. One sought to throw the other, and first, as Koku
would gain a slight advantage, his friends would call encouragement,
while, when Lamos seemed about to triumph, the Indians favoring him
would let out a yell of triumph.

For a few minutes Tom and his friends watched, fascinated.  Then they
saw Koku slip, while Lamos bent him farther toward the earth. The
Indian giant raised his big fist, and Tom saw in it a rock, which the
big man was about to bring down on Koku's head.

"Look out, Koku!" yelled Tom.

Tom's giant slid to one side only just in time, for the blow descended,
catching him on his muscular shoulder where it only raised a bruise.
And then Koku gathered himself for a mighty effort. His face flamed
with rage at the unfair trick.

"Bless my bath sponge!" cried Mr. Damon. "This is awful!"

"They must stop!" said Job Titus. "We can't have them fighting like
this. It is bad for the others. If it were in fun it would be all
right, but they are in deadly earnest.  They must stop!"

"Koku, stop!" called Tom. "You must not fight any more!"

"No fight more!" gasped the giant, through his clenched teeth. "This
end fight!"

With a mighty effort he broke the hold of Lamos' arms.  Then stooping
suddenly he seized his rival about the middle, and with a tremendous
heave, in which his muscles stood out in great bunches while his very
bones seemed to crack, Koku raised Lamos high in the air. Up over his
head he raised that mass of muscle, bone and flesh, squirming and
wriggling, trying in vain to save itself.

Up and up Koku raised Lamos as the murmur of those watching grew to a
shout of amazement and terror. Never had the like been seen in that
land for generations. Up and up one giant raised the other. Then
calling out something in his native tongue Koku hurled the other from
him, clear across the tunnel and up against the opposite rocky wall.
The murmuring died to frightened whispers as Lamos fell in a shapeless
heap on the floor.

"Ah!" breathed Koku, stretching himself, and extending his brawny arms.
"Fight all over, Master."

"Yes, so it seems, Koku," said Tom, solemnly, "but you have killed him.
Shame on you!" and he spoke bitterly.

Job Titus had hurried over to the fallen giant.

"He isn't dead," he called, "but I guess he won't wrestle or fight any
more. He's badly crippled."

"And him no more try to blow up tunnel, either," said Koku in his
hoarse voice. "Me fix: him! No more him take powder, and make tunnel
all bust."

"What do you mean, Koku?" asked Tom. "Is that why you fought him? Did
he try to wreck the tunnel?"

"So him done, Master. But Koku see--Koku stop. Then um fight."

"Be jabbers an' I wouldn't wonder but what he was right!" cried Tim
Sullivan, excitedly. "I did see that beggar." and he pointed to Lamos,
who was slowly crawling away, "at the chist where I kape th' powder,
but I thought nothin' of it at th' time. What did he try t' do, Koku?"

Then the giant explained in his own language, Tom Swift translating,
for Koku spoke English but indifferently well.

"Koku says," rendered Tom, "that he saw Lamos trying to put a big
charge of powder up in the place where the balanced rock fits in the
secret opening of the tunnel roof.  The charge was all ready to fire,
and if the giant had set it off he might have brought down the roof of
the tunnel and so choked it up that we'd have been months cleaning it
out.  Koku saw him and stopped him, and then the fight began. We only
saw the end."

"Bless my shoe string!" gasped Mr. Damon. "And a terrible end it was.
Will Lamos die?"

"I don't think so," answered Job Titus. "But he will be a cripple for
life. Not only would he have wrecked the tunnel, but he would have
killed many of our men had he set off that blast. Koku saved them,
though it seems too bad he had to fight to do it."

An investigation showed that Koku spoke truly. The charge, all ready to
set off, was found where he had knocked it from the hand of Lamos. And
so Tom's giant saved the day. Lamos was sent back to his own village, a
broken and humbled giant. And to this day, in that part of Peru, the
great struggle between Koku and Lamos is spoken of with awe where
Indians gather about their council fires, and they tell their children
of the Titanic fight.

"It was part of the plot," said Job Titus when the usual blast had been
set off that day, with not very good results.  "This giant was sent to
us by our rivals. They wanted him to hamper our work, for they see we
have a chance to finish on time. I think that foreman, Serato, is in
the plot. He brought Lamos here. We'll fire him!"

This was done, though the Indian protested his innocence.  But he could
not be trusted.

"We can't take any chances," said Job Titus. "Our time is too nearly
up. In fact I'm afraid we won't finish on time as it is. There is too
much of that hard rock to cut through."

"There's only one thing to do," said Tom, after an investigation. "As
you say, there is more of that hard rock than we calculated on. To try
to blast and take it out in the ordinary way will be useless. We must
try desperate means."

"What is that?" asked Walter Titus.

"We must set off the biggest blast we can with safety.  We'll bore a
lot of extra holes, and put in double charges of the explosive. I'll
add some ingredients to it that will make it stronger. It's our last
chance. Either we'll blow the tunnel all to pieces, or we'll loosen
enough rock to make sufficient progress so we can finish on time. What
do you say? Shall we take the chance?"

The Titus brothers looked at one another. Failure stared them in the
face. Unless they completed the tunnel very soon they would lose all
the money they had sunk in it.

"Take the chance!" exclaimed Job. "It's sink or swim anyhow. Set off
the big blast, Tom."

"All right. We'll get ready for it as soon as we can."

That day preparations were made for setting off a great charge of the
powerful explosive. The work was hurried as fast as was consistent with
safety, but even then progress was rather slow. Precautions had to be
taken, and the guards about the tunnel were doubled. For it was feared
that some word of what was about to be done would reach the rival firm,
who might try desperate means to prevent the completion of the work.

There was plenty of the explosive on hand, for Mr. Swift had sent Tom a
large shipment. All this while no word had come from Mr. Nestor, and
Tom was beginning to think that his prospective father-in-law was very
angry with him. Nor had Mary written.

Professor Bumper came and went as he pleased, but his quest was
regarded as hopeless now. Tom and his friends had little time for the
bald-headed scientist, for they were too much interested in the success
of the big blast.

"Well, we'll set her off to-morrow," Tom said one night, after a hard
day's work. "The rocky wall is honeycombed with explosive. If all goes
well we ought to bring down enough rock to keep the gangs busy night
and day."

Everything was in readiness. What would the morrow bring--success or
failure?




