Chapter XXV

Success


Had it not been for Tom Swift, the excited professor would have rushed
pellmell over the jagged pile of rocks into the great cave which had
been opened by the blast, the cave in which the scientist declared was
the lost city for which he had been searching. But the young inventor
grasped Mr. Bumper by the arm.

"Better wait a bit," Tom suggested. "There may be powder gas in there.
Some of it must have blown forward."

"I don't care!" excitedly cried the professor. "That is the hidden
city! I'm sure of it! I have found it at last! I must go in and examine
it!"

"There'll be plenty of time," said Tom. "It isn't going to run away.
Wait until I make a test Tim, hand me one of those torches."

Some torches of a very inflammable wood were used to test for the
presence of the deadly smoke-gas. Lighting one of these, Tom tossed it
into the big excavation.

It fell to the stone floor--to the stone street to be more exact--and,
flaring up brightly, further revealed the rows of houses as they stood,
silent and uninhabited.

"It's all right," Tom announced. "There's no danger so long as the
torch burns. You can go on, Professor."

And Professor Bumper rushed forward, scrambling over the pile of
blasted rock, followed by Tom and the others. Some of the debris from
the explosion had fallen into the cave, and was scattered for some
distance along the main street of what had been Pelone. But beyond that
the way was clear.

"Yes, it is Pelone," cried Professor Bumper. "See!"

He pointed to inscriptions in queer characters over the doorway of some
of the houses, but he alone could read them.

"I have found Pelone!" he kept repeating over and over again.

And that is just what had happened. That last great blast Tom Swift had
set off had broken down the rock wall that hid the lost city from view.
There it was, buried deep down under the mountain, where it had been
covered from sight ages ago by some mighty earthquake or landslide;
perhaps both. And the earth and rocks had fallen over the main portion
of the city of Pelone in such a way--in such an arch formation--that
the greater part of it was preserved from the pressure of the mountain
above it.

The outlying portions were crushed into dust by the awful pressure of
the mountain--millions of tons of stone--but where the natural arch had
formed the weight was kept off the buildings, most of which were as
perfect as they had been before the cataclysm came.

The buildings were of stone block construction, mostly only one story
in height, though some were two. They were simply made, somewhat after
the fashion of the Aztecs. A look into some of them by the light of
portable electric lamps showed that the houses were furnished with some
degree of taste and luxury. There were traces of an ancient
civilization.

But of the inhabitants, there was not a trace: either they had fled
before the earthquake or the volcanic eruption had engulfed the city,
or the countless centuries had turned their very bones to dust.

"Oh, what a find! What a find!" murmured Professor Bumper.  "I shall be
famous! And so will you, Tom Swift. For it was your blast that revealed
the lost city of Pelone. Your name will be honored by every
archeological society in the world, and all will be eager to make you
an honorary member."

"That's all very nice," said Tom, "but what pleases me better is that
this tunnel is a success."

"Success!" cried Mr. Damon. "I should call it a failure, Tom Swift.
Why, you've run smack into an old city, and you'll have either to curve
the tunnel to one side, or start a new one."

"Nothing of the sort!" laughed Tom. "Don't you see? The tunnel comes
right up to the main street of Pelone. And the street is as straight as
a die, and just the width and height of the tunnel. All we will have to
do will be to keep on blasting away, where the main street comes to an
end, and our tunnel will be finished.  The street is over half a mile
long, I should judge, and we'll save all that blasting. The tunnel will
be finished in time!"

"So it will!" cried Job Titus. "We can use the main street of the
hidden city as part of the tunnel."

"Use the street all you like," said Mr. Bumper, "but leave the houses
to me. They are a perfect mine of ancient lore and information. At last
I have found it! The ancient, hidden city of Pelone, spoken of on the
Peruvian tablets, of gold."

The story of the discoveries the scientist made in Pelone is an
enthralling one. But this is a story of Tom Swift and his big tunnel,
and no place for telling of the archeological discoveries.

Suffice it to say that Professor Bumper, though he found no gold, for
which the contractors hoped, made many curious finds in the ancient
houses. He came upon traces of a strange civilization, though he could
find no record of what had caused the burial of Pelone beneath the
mountains. He wrote many books about his discovery, giving Tom Swift
due credit for uncovering the place with the mighty blast. Other
scientists came in flocks, and for a time Pelone was almost as busy a
place as it had been originally.

Even when the tunnel was completed and trains ran through it, the
scientists kept on with their work of classifying what they found. An
underground station was built on the main street of the old city, and
visitors often wandered through the ancient houses, wherein was the
bone-dust of the dead and gone people.

But to go back to the story of Tom Swift. Tom's surmise was right. He
and the contractors were able to use the main street of Pelone as part
of their tunnel, and a good half mile of blasting through solid rock
was saved. The flint came to an end at the extremity of Pelone, and the
last part of the tunnel had only to be dug through sand-stone and soft
dirt, an easy undertaking.

So the big bore was finished on time--ahead of time in fact, and Titus
Brothers received from Senor Belasdo, the Peruvian representative, a
large bonus of money, in which Tom Swift shared.

"So our rivals didn't balk us after all," said Walter Titus, "though
they tried mighty hard."

The big tunnel was finished--at least Tom Swift's work on it. All that
remained to do was to clear away the debris and lay the connecting
rails. Tom and Mr. Damon prepared to go back home. The latter's work
was done. As for Professor Bumper, nothing could take him from Pelone.
He said he was going to live there, and, practically, he did.

Tom, Koku and Mr. Damon returned to Lima, thence to go to Callao to
take the steamer for San Francisco. One day the manager of the hotel
spoke to them.

"You are Americans, are you not?" he asked.

"Yes," answered Tom. "Why?"

"Because there is another American here. He is friendless and alone,
and he is dying. He has no friends, he says.  Perhaps--"

"Of course we'll do what we can for him," said Tom, impulsively. "Where
is he?"

With Mr. Damon he entered the room where the dying man lay. He had
caught a fever, the hotel manager said, and could not recover. Tom,
catching sight of the sufferer, cried:

"The bearded man! Waddington!"

He had recognized the mysterious person who had been on the Bellaconda,
and the man whose face had stared at him through the secret shaft of
the tunnel.

"Yes, the 'bearded man' now," said the sufferer in a hoarse voice, "and
some one else too. You are right. I am Waddington!"

And so it proved. He had grown a beard to disguise himself so he might
better follow Tom Swift and Mr. Titus. And he had followed them,
seeking to prevent the completion of the tunnel. But he had not been
successful.

Waddington it was who had thrown the bomb, though he declared he only
hoped to disable Tom and Mr. Titus, and not to injure them. He was
fighting for delay. And it was Waddington, working in conjunction with
the rascally foreman Serato, who had induced the tunnel workers to
desert so mysteriously, hoping to scare the other Indians away. He
nearly succeeded too, had it not been for the gratitude of the woman
whose baby Tom had saved from the condor.

Waddington had been an actor before he became involved with the rival
contractors. He was smooth shaven when first he went to Shopton, to spy
on Mr. Titus, whose movements he had been commanded to follow by
Blakeson & Grinder. Then he disappeared after Mr. Titus chased him,
only to reappear, in disguise, on board the Bellaconda, as Senor Pinto.

Waddington, meanwhile, had grown a beard and this, with his knowledge
of theatrical makeup, enabled him to deceive even Mr. Titus. Of course
it was comparatively easy to deceive Tom, who had not known him.
Waddington had really been ill when he called for help on the ship, and
he had not noticed that it was Tom and Mr. Titus who came into his
stateroom to his aid. When he did recognize them, he relied on his
disguise to screen him from recognition, and he was successful. He had
only pretended to be ill, though, the time he slipped out and threw the
bomb.

Reaching Peru he at once began his plotting. Serato told him about the
secret shaft leading into the tunnel, and with the knotted rope, and
with the aid of the faithless foreman, the men were got out of the
tunnel and paid to hide away.  Waddington was planning further
disappearances when Tom saw him, but thought it a dream.

Masni, the Indian woman, out herb-hunting one day, had seen Waddington,
'the bearded man' as he then was--working the secret stone. Hidden, she
observed him and told her husband, who was afraid to reveal what he
knew. But when Tom saved the baby the woman rewarded him in the only
way possible. And it was Serato, who, at Waddington's suggestion,
caused the "hit" among the men by working on their superstitious fears.

Waddington, knowing that he was dying, confessed everything, and begged
forgiveness from Tom and his friends, which was granted, in as much as
no real harm had been done.  Waddington was but a tool in the hands of
the rival contractors, who deserted him in his hour of need. His last
hours, however, were made as comfortable as possible by the generosity
of Tom and Mr. Damon.

No effort was made to bring Blakeson & Grinder to justice, as there was
no evidence against them after Waddington died.  And, as the tunnel was
finished, the Titus brothers had no further cause for worry.

"But if it had not been for Tom's big blast, and the discovery of the
hidden city of Pelone just in the right place, we might be digging at
that tunnel yet," said Job Titus.

The day before the steamer was to sail, Tom Swift received a cable
message. Its receipt seemed to fill him with delight, so that Mr. Damon
asked:

"Is it from your father, Tom?"

"No it's from Mary Nestor. She says her father has forgiven me. They
have been away, and Mary has been ill, which accounts for no letters up
to now. But everything is all right now, and they feel that the
dynamite trick wasn't my fault. But, all the same, I'm going to teach
Eradicate to read," concluded Tom.

"I think it would be a good idea," agreed Mr. Damon.

Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku, bidding farewell to the friends they had made
in Peru, went aboard the steamer, Job Titus and his brother coming to
see them off.

"Give us an option on all that explosive you make, Tom Swift!" begged
Walter Titus. "We were so successful with this tunnel, thanks to you,
that the government is going to have us dig another.  Will you come
down and help?"

"Maybe," said Tom, with a smile. "But I'm going home first," and once
more he read the message from Mary Nestor.

And as Tom, on the deck of the steamer, waved his hands to Professor
Bumper and his other friends whom he was leaving in Peru, we also, will
say farewell.








End of Project Gutenberg's Tom Swift and his Big Tunnel, by Victor Appleton



