Chapter XVII

The Condor


Left to himself, with only the rather silent gang of Peruvian Indians
as company, Tom Swift looked about him.  There was not much active work
to be done, only to see that the Indians filled the dump cars evenly
full, so none of the broken rock would spill over the side and litter
the tramway. Then, too, he had to keep the Indians up to the mark
working, for these men were no different from any other, and they were
just as inclined to "loaf on the job" when the eye of the "boss" was
turned away.

They did not talk much, murmuring among themselves now and then, and
little of what they said was intelligible to Tom.  But he knew enough
of the language to give them orders, the main one of which was:

"Hurry up!"

Now, having seen to it that the gang of which he was in temporary
charge was busily engaged, Tom had a chance to look about him. The
tunnel was not new to him. Much of his time in the past month had been
spent in its black depths, illuminated, more or less, by the string of
incandescent lights.

"What I want to find," mused Tom, as he walked to and fro, "is the
place where those Indians disappeared. For I'm positive they got away
through some hole in this tunnel.  They never came out the main
entrance."

Tom held to this view in spite of the fact that nearly every one else
believed the contrary--that the men had left by the tunnel mouth, near
which Tom happened to be alone at the time.

Now, left to himself, with merely nominal duties, and so disguised that
none of the workmen would know him for the trim young inventor who
oversaw the preparing of the blast charges, Tom Swift walked to and
fro, looking for some carefully hidden passage or shaft by means of
which the men had got away.

"For it must be well hidden to have escaped observation so long," Tom
decided.  "And it must be a natural shaft, or hole, for we are boring
into native rock, and it isn't likely that these Indians ever tried to
make a tunnel here.  There must be some natural fissure communicating
with the outside of the mountain, in a place where no one would see the
men coming out."

But though Tom believed this it was another matter to demonstrate his
belief. In the intervals of seeing that the natives properly loaded the
dump cars, and removed as much of the debris as possible, Tom looked
carefully along the walls and roof of the tunnel thus far excavated.

There were cracks and fissures, it is true, but they were all
superficial ones, as Tom ascertained by poking a long pole up into them.

"No getting out that way," he said, as he met with failure after
failure.

Once, while thus engaged, he saw Serato, the Indian foreman looking
narrowly at him, and Serato said something in his own language which
Tom could not understand. But just then along came Tim Sullivan, who,
grasping the situation, exclaimed:

"Thot's all roight, now, Serri, me lad!" for thus he contracted the
Indian's name. "Thot's a new helper I have, a broth of a bye, an' yez
kin kape yer hands off him. He's takin' orders from me!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian. "Wha for he fish in tunnel roof?" for Tom's
pole was one like those the Indians used when, on off days, they
emulated Izaak Walton.

"Fishin' is it!" exclaimed Tim. "Begorra 'tis flyin' fish he's after
I'm thinkin'. Lave him alone though, Serri! I'm his boss!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian again, as he moved off into the farther
darkness.

"Be careful, Tom," whispered the Irishman, when the native had gone.
"These black imps is mighty suspicious. Maybe thot fellah had a hand in
th' disappearances hisself."

"Maybe," admitted Tom. "He may get a percentage on all new hands that
are hired."

Tom kept on with his search, always hoping he might find some hidden
means of getting out of the tunnel. But as the days went by, and he
discovered nothing, he began to despair.

"The queer thing about it," mused Tom, "is what has become of the ten
men. Even if they did find some secret means of leaving, what has
become of them? They couldn't completely disappear, and they have
families and relatives that would make some sort of fuss if they were
out of sight completely this long. I wonder if any inquiries have been
made about them?"

When Tom came off duty he asked the Titus brothers whether or not any
of the relatives of the missing men had come to seek news about them.
None had.

"Then," said Tom, "you can depend on it the men are all right, and
their relatives know it. I wonder how it would do to make inquiries at
that end? Question some of the relatives."

"Bless my hat band!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who was at the conference. "I
never thought of that. I'll do it for you."

The odd man had gotten his quinine gathering business well under way
now, and he had some spare time. So, with an interpreter who could be
trusted, he went to the native village whence had come nearly all of
the ten missing men.  But though Mr. Damon found some of their
relatives, the latter, with shrugs of their shoulders, declared they
had seen nothing of the ones sought.

"And they didn't seem to worry much, either," reported Mr. Damon.

"Then we can depend on it," remarked Tom, "that the men are all right
and their relatives know it. There's some conspiracy here."

So it seemed. But who was at the bottom of it?

"I can't figure out where Blakeson & Grinder come in," said Job Titus.
"They would have an object in crippling us, but they seem to be working
from the financial end, trying to make us fail there. I haven't seen
any of their sneaking agents around here lately, and as for Waddington
he seems to have stayed up North."

Tom resumed his vigil in the tunnel, poking here and there, but with
little success. His week was about up, and he would soon have to resume
his character as powder expert, for the debris was nearly all cleaned
up, and another blast would have to be fired shortly.

"Well, I'm stumped!" Tom admitted, the day when he was to come on duty
for the last time as a pretended foreman. "I've hunted all over, and I
can't find any secret passage."

It was warm in the tunnel, and Tom, having seen one train of the dump
cars loaded, sat down to rest on an elevated ledge of rock, where he
had made a sort of easy chair for himself, with empty cement bags for
cushions.

The heat, his weariness and the monotonous clank-clank of a water pump
near by, and the equally monotonous thump of the lumps of rocks in the
cars made Tom drowsy. Almost before he knew it he was asleep.

What suddenly awakened him he could not tell. Perhaps it was some
influence on the brain cells, as when a vivid dream causes us to start
up from slumber, or it may have been a voice. For certainly Tom heard a
voice, he declared afterward.

As he roused up he found himself staring at the rocky wall of the
tunnel. And yet the wall seemed to have an opening in it and in the
opening, as if it were in the frame of a picture, appeared the face Tom
had seen at his library the day Job Titus called on him--the face of
Waddington!

Tom sat up so quickly that he hit his head sharply on a projecting rock
spur, and, for the moment he "saw stars." And with the appearance of
these twinkling points of light the face of Waddington seemed to fade
away, as might a vision in a dream.

"Bless my salt mackerel, as Mr. Damon would say!" cried Tom. "What have
I discovered?"

He rubbed his head where he had struck it, and then passed his hand
before his eyes, to make sure he was awake. But the vision, if vision
it was, had vanished, and he saw only the bare rock wall. However, the
echo of the voice remained in his ears, and, looking down toward the
tunnel floor Tom saw Serato, the Indian foreman.

"Were you speaking to me?" asked Tom, for the man understood and spoke
English fairly well.

"No, sar. I not know you there!" and the foreman seemed startled at
seeing Tom. Clearly he was in a fright.

"You were speaking!" insisted Tom.

"No, sar!" The man shook his head.

"To some one up there!" went on the young inventor, waving his hand
toward the spot where he had seen the face in the rock.

"Me speak to roof? No, sar!" Serato laughed.

Tom did not know what to believe.

"You hear me tell um lazy man to much hurry," the Indian went on. "Me
not know you sleep there, sar!"

"Oh, all right," Tom said, recollecting that he must keep up his
disguise. "Maybe I was dreaming."

"Yes, sar," and the foreman hurried on, with a backward glance over his
shoulder.

"Now was I dreaming or not?" thought Tom. "I'm going to have a look at
that place though, where I saw Waddington's face. Or did I imagine it?"

He got a long pole and a powerful flash lamp, and when he had a chance,
unobserved, he poked around in the vicinity where he had seen the face.

But there was only solid rock.

"It must have been a dream," Tom concluded. "I've been thinking too
much about this business. I'll have to give up.  I can't solve the
mystery of the missing men."

The next day, much disappointed, he resumed his own character as
explosive expert, and prepared for another blast. The net result of his
watch was that he became suspicious of Serato, and so informed the
Titus Brothers.

"Oh, but you're mistaken," said Job.  "We have had him for years, on
other contracts in Peru, and we trust him."

"Well, I don't," Tom said, but he had to let it go at that.

Another blast was set off, but it was not very successful.

"The rock seems to be getting harder the farther in we go," commented
Walter Titus. "We're not up to where we ought to be."

"I'll have to look into it," answered Tom. "I may have to change the
powder mixture. Guess I'll go up the mountain a way, and see if there
are any outcroppings of rock there that would give me an idea of what
lies underneath."

Accordingly, while the men in the tunnel were clearing away the rock
loosened by the blast, Tom, one day, taking his electric rifle with
him, went up the mountain under which the big bore ran.

He located, by computation, the spot beneath which the end of the
tunnel then was, and began collecting samples of the outcropping ledge.
He wanted to analyze these pieces of stone later. Koku was with him,
and, giving the giant a bag of stones to carry, Tom walked on rather
idly.

It was a wild and desolate region in which he found himself on the side
of the mountain. Beyond him stretched towering and snow-clad peaks, and
high in the air were small specks, which he knew to be condors,
watching with their eager eyes for their offal food.

As Tom and Koku made their way along the mountain trail they came
unexpectedly upon an Indian workman who was gathering herbs and bark,
an industry by which many of the natives added to their scanty
livelihood. The woman was familiar with the appearance of the white
men, and nodded in friendly fashion.

Tom passed on, thinking of many things, when he was suddenly startled
by a scream from the woman. It was a scream of such terror and agony
that, for the moment, Tom was stunned into inactivity. Then, as he
turned, he saw a great condor sweeping down out of the air, the wind
fairly whistling through the big, outstretched wings.

"Jove!" ejaculated Tom. "Can the bird be going to attack the woman?"

But this was not the object of the condor. It was aiming to strike,
with its fierce talons, at a point some paces distant from where the
woman stood, and in the intervals between her screams Tom heard her
cry, in her native tongue:

"My baby! My baby! The beast-bird will carry off my baby!"

Then Tom understood. The woman herb-gatherer had brought her infant
with her on her quest, and had laid it down on a bed of soft grass
while she worked. And it was this infant, wrapped as Tom afterward saw
in a piece of deer-skin, at which the condor was aiming.

"Master shoot!" cried Koku, pointing to the down-sweeping bird.

"You bet I'll shoot!" cried Tom.

Throwing his electric rifle to his shoulder, Tom pressed the switch
trigger. The unseen but powerful force shot straight at the condor.

The outstretched wings fell limp, the great body seemed to shrivel up,
and, with a crash, the bird fell into the underbrush, breaking the
twigs and branches with its weight.  The electric rifle, a full account
of which was given in the volume entitled "Tom Swift and His Electric
Rifle," had done its work well.

With a scream, in which was mingled a cry of thanks, the woman threw
herself on the sleeping child. The condor had fallen dead not three
paces from it.

Tom Swift had shot just in time.




