The Project Gutenberg EBook of An Essay on the Development of Christian
Doctrine, by John Henry Cardinal Newman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine

Author: John Henry Cardinal Newman

Release Date: January 29, 2011 [EBook #35110]
Last Updated: July 4, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY ON THE DEVELOPMENT ***




Produced by Curtis Weyant, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Transcriber's Notes: Greek words may not display properly--in that case,
try another version of the text. Transliterations of Greek words can be
found in the ascii and html files.

Words in italics in the original are surrounded by _underscores_. A row
of asterisks represents a thought break. Variations in spelling and
hyphenation have been left as in the original. Words with and without
accents appear as in the original. In this text, semi-colons and colons
are used indiscriminately. They appear as in the original. Ellipses
match the original.

A few typographical errors have been corrected. A complete list follows
the text.




                               AN ESSAY

                                ON THE

                       DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN
                              DOCTRINE.


                                  BY

                     JOHN HENRY CARDINAL NEWMAN.


                           _SIXTH EDITION_


                    UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME PRESS
                         NOTRE DAME, INDIANA




TO THE

REV. SAMUEL WILLIAM WAYTE, B.D.

PRESIDENT OF TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD.


MY DEAR PRESIDENT,

Not from any special interest which I anticipate you will take in this
Volume, or any sympathy you will feel in its argument, or intrinsic
fitness of any kind in my associating you and your Fellows with it,--

But, because I have nothing besides it to offer you, in token of my
sense of the gracious compliment which you and they have paid me in
making me once more a Member of a College dear to me from Undergraduate
memories;--

Also, because of the happy coincidence, that whereas its first
publication was contemporaneous with my leaving Oxford, its second
becomes, by virtue of your act, contemporaneous with a recovery of my
position there:--

Therefore it is that, without your leave or your responsibility, I take
the bold step of placing your name in the first pages of what, at my
age, I must consider the last print or reprint on which I shall ever be
engaged.

                            I am, my dear President,
                                   Most sincerely yours,
                                             JOHN H. NEWMAN.

_February 23, 1878._




PREFACE TO THE EDITION OF 1878.


The following pages were not in the first instance written to prove the
divinity of the Catholic Religion, though ultimately they furnish a
positive argument in its behalf, but to explain certain difficulties in
its history, felt before now by the author himself, and commonly
insisted on by Protestants in controversy, as serving to blunt the force
of its _primâ facie_ and general claims on our recognition.

However beautiful and promising that Religion is in theory, its history,
we are told, is its best refutation; the inconsistencies, found age
after age in its teaching, being as patent as the simultaneous
contrarieties of religious opinion manifest in the High, Low, and Broad
branches of the Church of England.

In reply to this specious objection, it is maintained in this Essay
that, granting that some large variations of teaching in its long course
of 1800 years exist, nevertheless, these, on examination, will be found
to arise from the nature of the case, and to proceed on a law, and with
a harmony and a definite drift, and with an analogy to Scripture
revelations, which, instead of telling to their disadvantage, actually
constitute an argument in their favour, as witnessing to a
superintending Providence and a great Design in the mode and in the
circumstances of their occurrence.

Perhaps his confidence in the truth and availableness of this view has
sometimes led the author to be careless and over-liberal in his
concessions to Protestants of historical fact.

If this be so anywhere, he begs the reader in such cases to understand
him as speaking hypothetically, and in the sense of an _argumentum ad
hominem_ and _à fortiori_. Nor is such hypothetical reasoning out of
place in a publication which is addressed, not to theologians, but to
those who as yet are not even Catholics, and who, as they read history,
would scoff at any defence of Catholic doctrine which did not go the
length of covering admissions in matters of fact as broad as those which
are here ventured on.

In this new Edition of the Essay various important alterations have been
made in the arrangement of its separate parts, and some, not indeed in
its matter, but in its text.

_February 2, 1878._




ADVERTISEMENT TO THE FIRST EDITION.

OCULI MEI DEFECERUNT IN SALUTARE TUUM.


It is now above eleven years since the writer of the following pages, in
one of the early Numbers of the Tracts for the Times, expressed himself
thus:--

     "Considering the high gifts, and the strong claims of the
     Church of Rome and her dependencies on our admiration,
     reverence, love, and gratitude, how could we withstand her, as
     we do; how could we refrain from being melted into tenderness,
     and rushing into communion with her, but for the words of
     Truth, which bid us prefer Itself to the whole world? 'He that
     loveth father or mother more than Me, is not worthy of Me.'
     How could we learn to be severe, and execute judgment, but for
     the warning of Moses against even a divinely-gifted teacher
     who should preach new gods, and the anathema of St. Paul even
     against Angels and Apostles who should bring in a new
     doctrine?"[ix-1]

He little thought, when he so wrote, that the time would ever come when
he should feel the obstacle, which he spoke of as lying in the way of
communion with the Church of Rome, to be destitute of solid foundation.

The following work is directed towards its removal.

Having, in former publications, called attention to the supposed
difficulty, he considers himself bound to avow his present belief that
it is imaginary.

He has neither the ability to put out of hand a finished composition,
nor the wish to make a powerful and moving representation, on the great
subject of which he treats. His aim will be answered, if he succeeds in
suggesting thoughts, which in God's good time may quietly bear fruit, in
the minds of those to whom that subject is new; and which may carry
forward inquirers, who have already put themselves on the course.

If at times his tone appears positive or peremptory, he hopes this will
be imputed to the scientific character of the Work, which requires a
distinct statement of principles, and of the arguments which recommend
them.

He hopes too he shall be excused for his frequent quotations from
himself; which are necessary in order to show how he stands at present
in relation to various of his former Publications. * * *

  LITTLEMORE,
      _October 6, 1845_.


POSTSCRIPT.

Since the above was written, the Author has joined the Catholic Church.
It was his intention and wish to have carried his Volume through the
Press before deciding finally on this step. But when he had got some
way in the printing, he recognized in himself a conviction of the truth
of the conclusion to which the discussion leads, so clear as to
supersede further deliberation. Shortly afterwards circumstances gave
him the opportunity of acting upon it, and he felt that he had no
warrant for refusing to do so.

His first act on his conversion was to offer his Work for revision to
the proper authorities; but the offer was declined on the ground that it
was written and partly printed before he was a Catholic, and that it
would come before the reader in a more persuasive form, if he read it as
the author wrote it.

It is scarcely necessary to add that he now submits every part of the
book to the judgment of the Church, with whose doctrine, on the subjects
of which he treats, he wishes all his thoughts to be coincident.


FOOTNOTES:

[ix-1] Records of the Church, xxiv. p. 7.




CONTENTS.


  PART I.

  DOCTRINAL DEVELOPMENTS VIEWED IN THEMSELVES.
                                                                    PAGE
  INTRODUCTION                                                         3

  CHAPTER I.

  The Development of Ideas                                            33
      Section 1. The Process of Development in Ideas                  33
      Section 2. The Kinds of Development in Ideas                    41

  CHAPTER II.

  The Antecedent Argument in behalf of Developments in Christian
        Doctrine                                                      55
      Section 1. Developments to be expected                          55
      Section 2. An infallible Developing Authority to be expected    75
      Section 3. The existing Developments of Doctrine the probable
        Fulfilment of that Expectation                                92

  CHAPTER III.

  The Historical Argument in behalf of the existing Developments      99
      Section 1. Method of Proof                                      99
      Section 2. State of the Evidence                               110

  CHAPTER IV.

  Instances in Illustration                                          122
      Section 1. Instances cursorily noticed                         123
            § 1. Canon of the New Testament                          123
            § 2. Original Sin                                        126
            § 3. Infant Baptism                                      127
            § 4. Communion in one kind                               129
            § 5. The Homoüsion                                       133
      Section 2. Our Lord's Incarnation, and the dignity of His
        Mother and of all Saints                                     135
      Section 3. Papal Supremacy                                     148


  PART II.

  DOCTRINAL DEVELOPMENTS VIEWED RELATIVELY TO DOCTRINAL CORRUPTIONS.

  CHAPTER V.

  Genuine Developments contrasted with Corruptions                   169
      Section 1. First Note of a genuine Development of an Idea:
        Preservation of its Type                                     171
      Section 2. Second Note: Continuity of its Principles           178
      Section 3. Third Note: Its Power of Assimilation               185
      Section 4. Fourth Note: Its Logical Sequence                   189
      Section 5. Fifth Note: Anticipation of its Future              195
      Section 6. Sixth Note: Conservative Action upon its Past       199
      Section 7. Seventh Note: Its Chronic Vigour                    203

  CHAPTER VI.

  Application of the First Note of a true Development to the
        Existing Developments of Christian Doctrine: Preservation
        of its Type                                                  207
      Section 1. The Church of the First Centuries                   208
      Section 2. The Church of the Fourth Century                    248
      Section 3. The Church of the Fifth and Sixth Centuries         273

  CHAPTER VII.

  Application of the Second: Continuity of its Principles            323
            § 1. Principles of Christianity                          323
            § 2. Supremacy of Faith                                  326
            § 3. Theology                                            336
            § 4. Scripture and its Mystical Interpretation           338
            § 5. Dogma                                               346
            § 6. Additional Remarks                                  353

  CHAPTER VIII.

  Application of the Third: its Assimilative Power                   355
            § 1. The Assimilating Power of Dogmatic Truth            357
            § 2. The Assimilating Power of Sacramental Grace         368

  CHAPTER IX.

  Application of the Fourth: its Logical Sequence                    383
            § 1. Pardons                                             384
            § 2. Penances                                            385
            § 3. Satisfactions                                       386
            § 4. Purgatory                                           388
            § 5. Meritorious Works                                   393
            § 6. The Monastic Rule                                   395

  CHAPTER X.

  Application of the Fifth: Anticipation of its Future               400
            § 1. Resurrection and Relics                             401
            § 2. The Virgin Life                                     407
            § 3. Cultus of Saints and Angels                         410
            § 4. Office of the Blessed Virgin                        415

  CHAPTER XI.

  Application of the Sixth: Conservative Action on its Past          419
      Section 1. Instances cursorily noticed                         420
      Section 2. Devotion to the Blessed Virgin                      425

  CHAPTER XII.

  Application of the Seventh: its Chronic Vigour                     437

  CONCLUSION                                                         445




PART I.

DOCTRINAL DEVELOPMENTS VIEWED IN THEMSELVES.




INTRODUCTION.


Christianity has been long enough in the world to justify us in dealing
with it as a fact in the world's history. Its genius and character, its
doctrines, precepts, and objects cannot be treated as matters of private
opinion or deduction, unless we may reasonably so regard the Spartan
institutions or the religion of Mahomet. It may indeed legitimately be
made the subject-matter of theories; what is its moral and political
excellence, what its due location in the range of ideas or of facts
which we possess, whether it be divine or human, whether original or
eclectic, or both at once, how far favourable to civilization or to
literature, whether a religion for all ages or for a particular state of
society, these are questions upon the fact, or professed solutions of
the fact, and belong to the province of opinion; but to a fact do they
relate, on an admitted fact do they turn, which must be ascertained as
other facts, and surely has on the whole been so ascertained, unless the
testimony of so many centuries is to go for nothing. Christianity is no
theory of the study or the cloister. It has long since passed beyond the
letter of documents and the reasonings of individual minds, and has
become public property. Its "sound has gone out into all lands," and its
"words unto the ends of the world." It has from the first had an
objective existence, and has thrown itself upon the great concourse of
men. Its home is in the world; and to know what it is, we must seek it
in the world, and hear the world's witness of it.


2.

The hypothesis, indeed, has met with wide reception in these latter
times, that Christianity does not fall within the province of
history,--that it is to each man what each man thinks it to be, and
nothing else; and thus in fact is a mere name for a cluster or family of
rival religions all together, religions at variance one with another,
and claiming the same appellation, not because there can be assigned any
one and the same doctrine as the common foundation of all, but because
certain points of agreement may be found here and there of some sort or
other, by which each in its turn is connected with one or other of the
rest. Or again, it has been maintained, or implied, that all existing
denominations of Christianity are wrong, none representing it as taught
by Christ and His Apostles; that the original religion has gradually
decayed or become hopelessly corrupt; nay that it died out of the world
at its birth, and was forthwith succeeded by a counterfeit or
counterfeits which assumed its name, though they inherited at best but
some fragments of its teaching; or rather that it cannot even be said
either to have decayed or to have died, because historically it has no
substance of its own, but from the first and onwards it has, on the
stage of the world, been nothing more than a mere assemblage of
doctrines and practices derived from without, from Oriental, Platonic,
Polytheistic sources, from Buddhism, Essenism, Manicheeism; or that,
allowing true Christianity still to exist, it has but a hidden and
isolated life, in the hearts of the elect, or again as a literature or
philosophy, not certified in any way, much less guaranteed, to come from
above, but one out of the various separate informations about the
Supreme Being and human duty, with which an unknown Providence had
furnished us, whether in nature or in the world.


3.

All such views of Christianity imply that there is no sufficient body of
historical proof to interfere with, or at least to prevail against, any
number whatever of free and independent hypotheses concerning it. But
this surely is not self-evident, and has itself to be proved. Till
positive reasons grounded on facts are adduced to the contrary, the most
natural hypotheses, the most agreeable to our mode of proceeding in
parallel cases, and that which takes precedence of all others, is to
consider that the society of Christians, which the Apostles left on
earth, were of that religion to which the Apostles had converted them;
that the external continuity of name, profession, and communion, argues
a real continuity of doctrine; that, as Christianity began by
manifesting itself as of a certain shape and bearing to all mankind,
therefore it went on so to manifest itself; and that the more,
considering that prophecy had already determined that it was to be a
power visible in the world and sovereign over it, characters which are
accurately fulfilled in that historical Christianity to which we
commonly give the name. It is not a violent assumption, then, but rather
mere abstinence from the wanton admission of a principle which would
necessarily lead to the most vexatious and preposterous scepticism, to
take it for granted, before proof to the contrary, that the Christianity
of the second, fourth, seventh, twelfth, sixteenth, and intermediate
centuries is in its substance the very religion which Christ and His
Apostles taught in the first, whatever may be the modifications for good
or for evil which lapse of years, or the vicissitudes of human affairs,
have impressed upon it.

Of course I do not deny the abstract possibility of extreme changes.
The substitution is certainly, in idea, supposable of a counterfeit
Christianity,--superseding the original, by means of the adroit
innovations of seasons, places, and persons, till, according to the
familiar illustration, the "blade" and the "handle" are alternately
renewed, and identity is lost without the loss of continuity. It is
possible; but it must not be assumed. The _onus probandi_ is with those
who assert what it is unnatural to expect; to be just able to doubt is
no warrant for disbelieving.


4.

Accordingly, some writers have gone on to give reasons from history for
their refusing to appeal to history. They aver that, when they come to
look into the documents and literature of Christianity in times past,
they find its doctrines so variously represented, and so inconsistently
maintained by its professors, that, however natural it be _à priori_, it
is useless, in fact, to seek in history the matter of that Revelation
which has been vouchsafed to mankind; that they cannot be historical
Christians if they would. They say, in the words of Chillingworth,
"There are popes against popes, councils against councils, some fathers
against others, the same fathers against themselves, a consent of
fathers of one age against a consent of fathers of another age, the
Church of one age against the Church of another age:"--Hence they are
forced, whether they will or not, to fall back upon the Bible as the
sole source of Revelation, and upon their own personal private judgment
as the sole expounder of its doctrine. This is a fair argument, if it
can be maintained, and it brings me at once to the subject of this
Essay. Not that it enters into my purpose to convict of misstatement, as
might be done, each separate clause of this sweeping accusation of a
smart but superficial writer; but neither on the other hand do I mean
to deny everything that he says to the disadvantage of historical
Christianity. On the contrary, I shall admit that there are in fact
certain apparent variations in its teaching, which have to be explained;
thus I shall begin, but then I shall attempt to explain them to the
exculpation of that teaching in point of unity, directness, and
consistency.


5.

Meanwhile, before setting about this work, I will address one remark to
Chillingworth and his friends:--Let them consider, that if they can
criticize history, the facts of history certainly can retort upon them.
It might, I grant, be clearer on this great subject than it is. This is
no great concession. History is not a creed or a catechism, it gives
lessons rather than rules; still no one can mistake its general teaching
in this matter, whether he accept it or stumble at it. Bold outlines and
broad masses of colour rise out of the records of the past. They may be
dim, they may be incomplete; but they are definite. And this one thing
at least is certain; whatever history teaches, whatever it omits,
whatever it exaggerates or extenuates, whatever it says and unsays, at
least the Christianity of history is not Protestantism. If ever there
were a safe truth, it is this.

And Protestantism has ever felt it so. I do not mean that every writer
on the Protestant side has felt it; for it was the fashion at first, at
least as a rhetorical argument against Rome, to appeal to past ages, or
to some of them; but Protestantism, as a whole, feels it, and has felt
it. This is shown in the determination already referred to of dispensing
with historical Christianity altogether, and of forming a Christianity
from the Bible alone: men never would have put it aside, unless they had
despaired of it. It is shown by the long neglect of ecclesiastical
history in England, which prevails even in the English Church. Our
popular religion scarcely recognizes the fact of the twelve long ages
which lie between the Councils of Nicæa and Trent, except as affording
one or two passages to illustrate its wild interpretations of certain
prophesies of St. Paul and St. John. It is melancholy to say it, but the
chief, perhaps the only English writer who has any claim to be
considered an ecclesiastical historian, is the unbeliever Gibbon. To be
deep in history is to cease to be a Protestant.


6.

And this utter incongruity between Protestantism and historical
Christianity is a plain fact, whether the latter be regarded in its
earlier or in its later centuries. Protestants can as little bear its
Ante-nicene as its Post-tridentine period. I have elsewhere observed on
this circumstance: "So much must the Protestant grant that, if such a
system of doctrine as he would now introduce ever existed in early
times, it has been clean swept away as if by a deluge, suddenly,
silently, and without memorial; by a deluge coming in a night, and
utterly soaking, rotting, heaving up, and hurrying off every vestige of
what it found in the Church, before cock-crowing: so that 'when they
rose in the morning' her true seed 'were all dead corpses'--Nay dead and
buried--and without gravestone. 'The waters went over them; there was
not one of them left; they sunk like lead in the mighty waters.' Strange
antitype, indeed, to the early fortunes of Israel!--then the enemy was
drowned, and 'Israel saw them dead upon the sea-shore.' But now, it
would seem, water proceeded as a flood 'out of the serpent's mouth,' and
covered all the witnesses, so that not even their dead bodies lay in the
streets of the great city.' Let him take which of his doctrines he will,
his peculiar view of self-righteousness, of formality, of superstition;
his notion of faith, or of spirituality in religious worship; his denial
of the virtue of the sacraments, or of the ministerial commission, or
of the visible Church; or his doctrine of the divine efficacy of the
Scriptures as the one appointed instrument of religious teaching; and
let him consider how far Antiquity, as it has come down to us, will
countenance him in it. No; he must allow that the alleged deluge has
done its work; yes, and has in turn disappeared itself; it has been
swallowed up by the earth, mercilessly as itself was merciless."[9:1]

That Protestantism, then, is not the Christianity of history, it is easy
to determine, but to retort is a poor reply in controversy to a question
of fact, and whatever be the violence or the exaggeration of writers
like Chillingworth, if they have raised a real difficulty, it may claim
a real answer, and we must determine whether on the one hand
Christianity is still to represent to us a definite teaching from above,
or whether on the other its utterances have been from time to time so
strangely at variance, that we are necessarily thrown back on our own
judgment individually to determine, what the revelation of God is, or
rather if in fact there is, or has been, any revelation at all.


7.

Here then I concede to the opponents of historical Christianity, that
there are to be found, during the 1800 years through which it has
lasted, certain apparent inconsistencies and alterations in its doctrine
and its worship, such as irresistibly attract the attention of all who
inquire into it. They are not sufficient to interfere with the general
character and course of the religion, but they raise the question how
they came about, and what they mean, and have in consequence supplied
matter for several hypotheses.

Of these one is to the effect that Christianity has even changed from
the first and ever accommodates itself to the circumstances of times and
seasons; but it is difficult to understand how such a view is compatible
with the special idea of revealed truth, and in fact its advocates more
or less abandon, or tend to abandon the supernatural claims of
Christianity; so it need not detain us here.

A second and more plausible hypothesis is that of the Anglican divines,
who reconcile and bring into shape the exuberant phenomena under
consideration, by cutting off and casting away as corruptions all
usages, ways, opinions, and tenets, which have not the sanction of
primitive times. They maintain that history first presents to us a pure
Christianity in East and West, and then a corrupt; and then of course
their duty is to draw the line between what is corrupt and what is pure,
and to determine the dates at which the various changes from good to bad
were introduced. Such a principle of demarcation, available for the
purpose, they consider they have found in the _dictum_ of Vincent of
Lerins, that revealed and Apostolic doctrine is "quod semper, quod
ubique, quod ab omnibus," a principle infallibly separating, on the
whole field of history, authoritative doctrine from opinion, rejecting
what is faulty, and combining and forming a theology. That "Christianity
is what has been held always, everywhere, and by all," certainly
promises a solution of the perplexities, an interpretation of the
meaning, of history. What can be more natural than that divines and
bodies of men should speak, sometimes from themselves, sometimes from
tradition? what more natural than that individually they should say many
things on impulse, or under excitement, or as conjectures, or in
ignorance? what more certain than that they must all have been
instructed and catechized in the Creed of the Apostles? what more
evident than that what was their own would in its degree be peculiar,
and differ from what was similarly private and personal in their
brethren? what more conclusive than that the doctrine that was common to
all at once was not really their own, but public property in which they
had a joint interest, and was proved by the concurrence of so many
witnesses to have come from an Apostolical source? Here, then, we have a
short and easy method for bringing the various informations of
ecclesiastical history under that antecedent probability in its favour,
which nothing but its actual variations would lead us to neglect. Here
we have a precise and satisfactory reason why we should make much of the
earlier centuries, yet pay no regard to the later, why we should admit
some doctrines and not others, why we refuse the Creed of Pius IV. and
accept the Thirty-nine Articles.


8.

Such is the rule of historical interpretation which has been professed
in the English school of divines; and it contains a majestic truth, and
offers an intelligible principle, and wears a reasonable air. It is
congenial, or, as it may be said, native to the Anglican mind, which
takes up a middle position, neither discarding the Fathers nor
acknowledging the Pope. It lays down a simple rule by which to measure
the value of every historical fact, as it comes, and thereby it provides
a bulwark against Rome, while it opens an assault upon Protestantism.
Such is its promise; but its difficulty lies in applying it in
particular cases. The rule is more serviceable in determining what is
not, than what is Christianity; it is irresistible against
Protestantism, and in one sense indeed it is irresistible against Rome
also, but in the same sense it is irresistible against England. It
strikes at Rome through England. It admits of being interpreted in one
of two ways: if it be narrowed for the purpose of disproving the
catholicity of the Creed of Pope Pius, it becomes also an objection to
the Athanasian; and if it be relaxed to admit the doctrines retained by
the English Church, it no longer excludes certain doctrines of Rome
which that Church denies. It cannot at once condemn St. Thomas and St.
Bernard, and defend St. Athanasius and St. Gregory Nazianzen.

This general defect in its serviceableness has been heretofore felt by
those who appealed to it. It was said by one writer; "The Rule of
Vincent is not of a mathematical or demonstrative character, but moral,
and requires practical judgment and good sense to apply it. For
instance, what is meant by being 'taught _always_'? does it mean in
every century, or every year, or every month? Does '_everywhere_' mean
in every country, or in every diocese? and does 'the _Consent of
Fathers_' require us to produce the direct testimony of every one of
them? How many Fathers, how many places, how many instances, constitute
a fulfilment of the test proposed? It is, then, from the nature of the
case, a condition which never can be satisfied as fully as it might have
been. It admits of various and unequal application in various instances;
and what degree of application is enough, must be decided by the same
principles which guide us in the conduct of life, which determine us in
politics, or trade, or war, which lead us to accept Revelation at all,
(for which we have but probability to show at most,) nay, to believe in
the existence of an intelligent Creator."[12:1]


9.

So much was allowed by this writer; but then he added:--

"This character, indeed, of Vincent's Canon, will but recommend it to
the disciples of the school of Butler, from its agreement with the
analogy of nature; but it affords a ready loophole for such as do not
wish to be persuaded, of which both Protestants and Romanists are not
slow to avail themselves."

This surely is the language of disputants who are more intent on
assailing others than on defending themselves; as if similar loopholes
were not necessary for Anglican theology.

He elsewhere says: "What there is not the shadow of a reason for saying
that the Fathers held, what has not the faintest pretensions of being a
Catholic truth, is this, that St. Peter or his successors were and are
universal Bishops, that they have the whole of Christendom for their one
diocese in a way in which other Apostles and Bishops had and have
not."[13:1] Most true, if, in order that a doctrine be considered
Catholic, it must be formally stated by the Fathers generally from the
very first; but, on the same understanding, the doctrine also of the
apostolical succession in the episcopal order "has not the faintest
pretensions of being a Catholic truth."

Nor was this writer without a feeling of the special difficulty of his
school; and he attempted to meet it by denying it. He wished to maintain
that the sacred doctrines admitted by the Church of England into her
Articles were taught in primitive times with a distinctness which no one
could fancy to attach to the characteristic tenets of Rome.

"We confidently affirm," he said in another publication, "that there is
not an article in the Athanasian Creed concerning the Incarnation which
is not anticipated in the controversy with the Gnostics. There is no
question which the Apollinarian or the Nestorian heresy raised, which
may not be decided in the words of Ignatius, Irenæus and
Tertullian."[13:2]


10.

This may be considered as true. It may be true also, or at least shall
here be granted as true, that there is also a _consensus_ in the
Ante-nicene Church for the doctrines of our Lord's Consubstantiality and
Coeternity with the Almighty Father. Let us allow that the whole circle
of doctrines, of which our Lord is the subject, was consistently and
uniformly confessed by the Primitive Church, though not ratified
formally in Council. But it surely is otherwise with the Catholic
doctrine of the Trinity. I do not see in what sense it can be said that
there is a _consensus_ of primitive divines in its favour, which will
not avail also for certain doctrines of the Roman Church which will
presently come into mention. And this is a point which the writer of the
above passages ought to have more distinctly brought before his mind and
more carefully weighed; but he seems to have fancied that Bishop Bull
proved the primitiveness of the Catholic doctrine concerning the Holy
Trinity as well as that concerning our Lord.

Now it should be clearly understood what it is which must be shown by
those who would prove it. Of course the doctrine of our Lord's divinity
itself partly implies and partly recommends the doctrine of the Trinity;
but implication and suggestion belong to another class of arguments
which has not yet come into consideration. Moreover the statements of a
particular father or doctor may certainly be of a most important
character; but one divine is not equal to a Catena. We must have a whole
doctrine stated by a whole Church. The Catholic Truth in question is
made up of a number of separate propositions, each of which, if
maintained to the exclusion of the rest, is a heresy. In order then to
prove that all the Ante-nicene writers taught the dogma of the Holy
Trinity, it is not enough to prove that each still has gone far enough
to be only a heretic--not enough to prove that one has held that the
Son is God, (for so did the Sabellian, so did the Macedonian), and
another that the Father is not the Son, (for so did the Arian), and
another that the Son is equal to the Father, (for so did the Tritheist),
and another that there is but One God, (for so did the Unitarian),--not
enough that many attached in some sense a Threefold Power to the idea of
the Almighty, (for so did almost all the heresies that ever existed, and
could not but do so, if they accepted the New Testament at all); but we
must show that all these statements at once, and others too, are laid
down by as many separate testimonies as may fairly be taken to
constitute a "_consensus_ of doctors." It is true indeed that the
subsequent profession of the doctrine in the Universal Church creates a
presumption that it was held even before it was professed; and it is
fair to interpret the early Fathers by the later. This is true, and
admits of application to certain other doctrines besides that of the
Blessed Trinity in Unity; but there is as little room for such
antecedent probabilities as for the argument from suggestions and
intimations in the precise and imperative _Quod semper, quod ubique,
quod ab omnibus_, as it is commonly understood by English divines, and
is by them used against the later Church and the see of Rome. What we
have a right to ask, if we are bound to act upon Vincent's rule in
regard to the Trinitarian dogma, is a sufficient number of Ante-nicene
statements, each distinctly anticipating the Athanasian Creed.


11.

Now let us look at the leading facts of the case, in appealing to which
I must not be supposed to be ascribing any heresy to the holy men whose
words have not always been sufficiently full or exact to preclude the
imputation. First, the Creeds of that early day make no mention in
their letter of the Catholic doctrine at all. They make mention indeed
of a Three; but that there is any mystery in the doctrine, that the
Three are One, that They are coequal, coeternal, all increate, all
omnipotent, all incomprehensible, is not stated, and never could be
gathered from them. Of course we believe that they imply it, or rather
intend it. God forbid we should do otherwise! But nothing in the mere
letter of those documents leads to that belief. To give a deeper meaning
to their letter, we must interpret them by the times which came after.

Again, there is one and one only great doctrinal Council in Ante-nicene
times. It was held at Antioch, in the middle of the third century, on
occasion of the incipient innovations of the Syrian heretical school.
Now the Fathers there assembled, for whatever reason, condemned, or at
least withdrew, when it came into the dispute, the word "Homoüsion,"
which was afterwards received at Nicæa as the special symbol of
Catholicism against Arius.[16:1]

Again, the six great Bishops and Saints of the Ante-nicene Church were
St. Irenæus, St. Hippolytus, St. Cyprian, St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, St.
Dionysius of Alexandria, and St. Methodius. Of these, St. Dionysius is
accused by St. Basil of having sown the first seeds of Arianism;[16:2]
and St. Gregory is allowed by the same learned Father to have used
language concerning our Lord, which he only defends on the plea of an
economical object in the writer.[16:3] St. Hippolytus speaks as if he
were ignorant of our Lord's Eternal Sonship;[17:1] St. Methodius speaks
incorrectly at least upon the Incarnation;[17:2] and St. Cyprian does
not treat of theology at all. Such is the incompleteness of the extant
teaching of these true saints, and, in their day, faithful witnesses of
the Eternal Son.

Again, Athenagoras, St. Clement, Tertullian, and the two SS. Dionysii
would appear to be the only writers whose language is at any time exact
and systematic enough to remind us of the Athanasian Creed. If we limit
our view of the teaching of the Fathers by what they expressly state,
St. Ignatius may be considered as a Patripassian, St. Justin arianizes,
and St. Hippolytus is a Photinian.

Again, there are three great theological authors of the Ante-nicene
centuries, Tertullian, Origen, and, we may add, Eusebius, though he
lived some way into the fourth. Tertullian is heterodox on the doctrine
of our Lord's divinity,[17:3] and, indeed, ultimately fell altogether
into heresy or schism; Origen is, at the very least, suspected, and must
be defended and explained rather than cited as a witness of orthodoxy;
and Eusebius was a Semi-Arian.


12.

Moreover, it may be questioned whether any Ante-nicene father
distinctly affirms either the numerical Unity or the Coequality of the
Three Persons; except perhaps the heterodox Tertullian, and that chiefly
in a work written after he had become a Montanist:[18:1] yet to satisfy
the Anti-roman use of _Quod semper, &c._, surely we ought not to be left
for these great articles of doctrine to the testimony of a later age.

Further, Bishop Bull allows that "nearly all the ancient Catholics who
preceded Arius have the appearance of being ignorant of the invisible
and incomprehensible (_immensam_) nature of the Son of God;"[18:2] an
article expressly taught in the Athanasian Creed under the sanction of
its anathema.

It must be asked, moreover, how much direct and literal testimony the
Ante-nicene Fathers give, one by one, to the divinity of the Holy
Spirit? This alone shall be observed, that St. Basil, in the fourth
century, finding that, if he distinctly called the Third Person in the
Blessed Trinity by the Name of God, he should be put out of the Church
by the Arians, pointedly refrained from doing so on an occasion on which
his enemies were on the watch; and that, when some Catholics found fault
with him, St. Athanasius took his part.[18:3] Could this possibly have
been the conduct of any true Christian, not to say Saint, of a later
age? that is, whatever be the true account of it, does it not suggest to
us that the testimony of those early times lies very unfavourably for
the application of the rule of Vincentius?


13.

Let it not be for a moment supposed that I impugn the orthodoxy of the
early divines, or the cogency of their testimony among _fair_ inquirers;
but I am trying them by that _unfair_ interpretation of Vincentius,
which is necessary in order to make him available against the Church of
Rome. And now, as to the positive evidence which those Fathers offer in
behalf of the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity, it has been drawn out by
Dr. Burton and seems to fall under two heads. One is the general
_ascription of glory_ to the Three Persons together, both by fathers and
churches, and that on continuous tradition and from the earliest times.
Under the second fall certain _distinct statements_ of _particular_
fathers; thus we find the word "Trinity" used by St. Theophilus, St.
Clement, St. Hippolytus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Origen, St. Methodius;
and the Divine _Circumincessio_, the most distinctive portion of the
Catholic doctrine, and the unity of power, or again, of substance, are
declared with more or less distinctness by Athenagoras, St. Irenæus, St.
Clement, Tertullian, St. Hippolytus, Origen, and the two SS. Dionysii.
This is pretty much the whole of the evidence.


14.

Perhaps it will be said we ought to take the Ante-nicene Fathers as a
whole, and interpret one of them by another. This is to assume that they
are all of one school, which of course they are, but which in
controversy is a point to be proved; but it is even doubtful whether, on
the whole, such a procedure would strengthen the argument. For instance,
as to the second head of the positive evidence noted by Dr. Burton,
Tertullian is the most formal and elaborate of these Fathers in his
statements of the Catholic doctrine. "It would hardly be possible," says
Dr. Burton, after quoting a passage, "for Athanasius himself, or the
compiler of the Athanasian Creed, to have delivered the doctrine of the
Trinity in stronger terms than these."[19:1] Yet Tertullian must be
considered heterodox on the doctrine of our Lord's eternal
generation.[20:1] If then we are to argue from his instance to that of
the other Fathers, we shall be driven to the conclusion that even the
most exact statements are worth nothing more than their letter, are a
warrant for nothing beyond themselves, and are consistent with
heterodoxy where they do not expressly protest against it.

And again, as to the argument derivable from the Doxologies, it must not
be forgotten that one of the passages in St. Justin Martyr includes the
worship of the Angels. "We worship and adore," he says, "Him, and the
Son who came from Him and taught us these things, and the host of those
other good Angels, who follow and are like Him, and the Prophetic
Spirit."[20:2] A Unitarian might argue from this passage that the glory
and worship which the early Church ascribed to our Lord was not more
definite than that which St. Justin was ready to concede to creatures.


15.

Thus much on the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. Let us proceed to another
example. There are two doctrines which are generally associated with the
name of a Father of the fourth and fifth centuries, and which can show
little definite, or at least but partial, testimony in their behalf
before his time,--Purgatory and Original Sin. The dictum of Vincent
admits both or excludes both, according as it is or is not rigidly
taken; but, if used by Aristotle's "Lesbian Rule," then, as Anglicans
would wish, it can be made to admit Original Sin and exclude Purgatory.

On the one hand, some notion of suffering, or disadvantage, or
punishment after this life, in the case of the faithful departed, or
other vague forms of the doctrine of Purgatory, has in its favour almost
a _consensus_ of the four first ages of the Church, though some Fathers
state it with far greater openness and decision than others. It is, as
far as words go, the confession of St. Clement of Alexandria,
Tertullian, St. Perpetua, St. Cyprian, Origen, Lactantius, St. Hilary,
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Ambrose, St. Basil, St. Gregory of
Nazianzus, and of Nyssa, St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, St. Paulinus, and
St. Augustine. And so, on the other hand, there is a certain agreement
of Fathers from the first that mankind has derived some disadvantage
from the sin of Adam.


16.

Next, when we consider the two doctrines more distinctly,--the doctrine
that between death and judgment there is a time or state of punishment;
and the doctrine that all men, naturally propagated from fallen Adam,
are in consequence born destitute of original righteousness,--we find,
on the one hand, several, such as Tertullian, St. Perpetua, St. Cyril,
St. Hilary, St. Jerome, St. Gregory Nyssen, as far as their words go,
definitely declaring a doctrine of Purgatory: whereas no one will say
that there is a testimony of the Fathers, equally strong, for the
doctrine of Original Sin, though it is difficult here to make any
definite statement about their teaching without going into a discussion
of the subject.

On the subject of Purgatory there were, to speak generally, two schools
of opinion; the Greek, which contemplated a trial of fire at the last
day through which all were to pass; and the African, resembling more
nearly the present doctrine of the Roman Church. And so there were two
principal views of Original Sin, the Greek and the African or Latin. Of
the Greek, the judgment of Hooker is well known, though it must not be
taken in the letter: "The heresy of freewill was a millstone about those
Pelagians' neck; shall we therefore give sentence of death inevitable
against all those Fathers in the Greek Church which, being mispersuaded,
died in the error of freewill?"[22:1] Bishop Taylor, arguing for an
opposite doctrine, bears a like testimony: "Original Sin," he says, "as
it is at this day commonly explicated, was not the doctrine of the
primitive Church; but when Pelagius had puddled the stream, St. Austin
was so angry that he stamped and disturbed it more. And truly . . I do
not think that the gentlemen that urged against me St. Austin's opinion
do well consider that I profess myself to follow those Fathers who were
before him; and whom St. Austin did forsake, as I do him, in the
question."[22:2] The same is asserted or allowed by Jansenius, Petavius,
and Walch,[22:3] men of such different schools that we may surely take
their agreement as a proof of the fact. A late writer, after going
through the testimonies of the Fathers one by one, comes to the
conclusion, first, that "the Greek Church in no point favoured
Augustine, except in teaching that from Adam's sin came death, and,
(after the time of Methodius,) an extraordinary and unnatural sensuality
also;" next, that "the Latin Church affirmed, in addition, that a
corrupt and contaminated soul, and that, by generation, was carried on
to his posterity;"[22:4] and, lastly, that neither Greeks nor Latins
held the doctrine of imputation. It may be observed, in addition, that,
in spite of the forcible teaching of St. Paul on the subject, the
doctrine of Original Sin appears neither in the Apostles' nor the Nicene
Creed.


17.

One additional specimen shall be given as a sample of many others:--I
betake myself to one of our altars to receive the Blessed Eucharist; I
have no doubt whatever on my mind about the Gift which that Sacrament
contains; I confess to myself my belief, and I go through the steps on
which it is assured to me. "The Presence of Christ is here, for It
follows upon Consecration; and Consecration is the prerogative of
Priests; and Priests are made by Ordination; and Ordination comes in
direct line from the Apostles. Whatever be our other misfortunes, every
link in our chain is safe; we have the Apostolic Succession, we have a
right form of consecration: therefore we are blessed with the great
Gift." Here the question rises in me, "Who told you about that Gift?" I
answer, "I have learned it from the Fathers: I believe the Real Presence
because they bear witness to it. St. Ignatius calls it 'the medicine of
immortality:' St. Irenæus says that 'our flesh becomes incorrupt, and
partakes of life, and has the hope of the resurrection,' as 'being
nourished from the Lord's Body and Blood;' that the Eucharist 'is made
up of two things, an earthly and an heavenly:'[23:1] perhaps Origen, and
perhaps Magnes, after him, say that It is not a type of our Lord's Body,
but His Body: and St. Cyprian uses language as fearful as can be spoken,
of those who profane it. I cast my lot with them, I believe as they."
Thus I reply, and then the thought comes upon me a second time, "And do
not the same ancient Fathers bear witness to another doctrine, which
you disown? Are you not as a hypocrite, listening to them when you will,
and deaf when you will not? How are you casting your lot with the
Saints, when you go but half-way with them? For of whether of the two do
they speak the more frequently, of the Real Presence in the Eucharist,
or of the Pope's supremacy? You accept the lesser evidence, you reject
the greater."


18.

In truth, scanty as the Ante-nicene notices may be of the Papal
Supremacy, they are both more numerous and more definite than the
adducible testimonies in favour of the Real Presence. The testimonies to
the latter are confined to a few passages such as those just quoted. On
the other hand, of a passage in St. Justin, Bishop Kaye remarks, "Le
Nourry infers that Justin maintained the doctrine of Transubstantiation;
it might in my opinion be more plausibly urged in favour of
Consubstantiation, since Justin calls the consecrated elements Bread and
Wine, though not common bread and wine.[24:1] . . . We may therefore
conclude that, when he calls them the Body and Blood of Christ, he
speaks figuratively." "Clement," observes the same author, "says that
the Scripture calls wine a mystic _symbol_ of the holy blood. . . .
Clement gives various interpretations of Christ's expressions in John
vi. respecting His flesh and blood; but in no instance does he interpret
them literally. . . . His notion seems to have been that, by partaking
of the bread and wine in the Eucharist, the soul of the believer is
united to the Spirit, and that by this union the principle of
immortality is imparted to the flesh."[24:2] "It has been suggested by
some," says Waterland, "that Tertullian understood John vi. merely of
faith, or doctrine, or spiritual actions; and it is strenuously denied
by others." After quoting the passage, he adds, "All that one can
justly gather from this confused passage is that Tertullian interpreted
the bread of life in John vi. of the Word, which he sometimes makes to
be vocal, and sometimes substantial, blending the ideas in a very
perplexed manner; so that he is no clear authority for construing John
vi. of doctrines, &c. All that is certain is that he supposes the Word
made flesh, the Word incarnate to be the heavenly bread spoken of
in that chapter."[25:1] "Origen's general observation relating to
that chapter is, that it must not be literally, but figuratively
understood."[25:2] Again, "It is plain enough that Eusebius followed
Origen in this matter, and that both of them favoured the same mystical
or allegorical construction; whether constantly and uniformly I need not
say."[25:3] I will but add the incidental testimony afforded on a late
occasion:--how far the Anglican doctrine of the Eucharist depends on the
times before the Nicene Council, how far on the times after it, may be
gathered from the circumstance that, when a memorable Sermon[25:4] was
published on the subject, out of about one hundred and forty passages
from the Fathers appended in the notes, not in formal proof, but in
general illustration, only fifteen were taken from Ante-nicene writers.

With such evidence, the Ante-nicene testimonies which may be cited in
behalf of the authority of the Holy See, need not fear a comparison.
Faint they may be one by one, but at least we may count seventeen of
them, and they are various, and are drawn from many times and countries,
and thereby serve to illustrate each other, and form a body of proof.
Whatever objections may be made to this or that particular fact, and I
do not think any valid ones can be raised, still, on the whole, I
consider that a cumulative argument rises from them in favour of the
ecumenical and the doctrinal authority of Rome, stronger than any
argument which can be drawn from the same period for the doctrine of the
Real Presence. I shall have occasion to enumerate them in the fourth
chapter of this Essay.


19.

If it be said that the Real Presence appears, by the Liturgies of the
fourth or fifth century, to have been the doctrine of the earlier, since
those very forms probably existed from the first in Divine worship, this
is doubtless an important truth; but then it is true also that the
writers of the fourth and fifth centuries fearlessly assert, or frankly
allow that the prerogatives of Rome were derived from apostolic times,
and that because it was the See of St. Peter.

Moreover, if the resistance of St. Cyprian and Firmilian to the Church
of Rome, in the question of baptism by heretics, be urged as an argument
against her primitive authority, or the earlier resistance of Polycrates
of Ephesus, let it be considered, first, whether all authority does not
necessarily lead to resistance; next, whether St. Cyprian's own
doctrine, which is in favour of Rome, is not more weighty than his act,
which is against her; thirdly, whether he was not already in error in
the main question under discussion, and Firmilian also; and lastly,
which is the chief point here, whether, in like manner, we may
not object on the other hand against the Real Presence the words
of Tertullian, who explains, "This is my Body," by "a figure of
my Body," and of Origen, who speaks of "our drinking Christ's
Blood not only in the rite of the Sacraments, but also when we
receive His discourses,"[26:1] and says that "that Bread which
God the Word acknowledges as His Body is the Word which nourishes
souls,"[26:2]--passages which admit of a Catholic interpretation when
the Catholic doctrine is once proved, but which _primâ facie_ run
counter to that doctrine.

It does not seem possible, then, to avoid the conclusion that, whatever
be the proper key for harmonizing the records and documents of the early
and later Church, and true as the dictum of Vincentius must be
considered in the abstract, and possible as its application might be in
his own age, when he might almost ask the primitive centuries for their
testimony, it is hardly available now, or effective of any satisfactory
result. The solution it offers is as difficult as the original problem.


20.

Another hypothesis for accounting for a want of accord between the early
and the late aspects of Christianity is that of the _Disciplina Arcani_,
put forward on the assumption that there has been no variation in the
teaching of the Church from first to last. It is maintained that
doctrines which are associated with the later ages of the Church were
really in the Church from the first, but not publicly taught, and that
for various reasons: as, for the sake of reverence, that sacred subjects
might not be profaned by the heathen; and for the sake of catechumens,
that they might not be oppressed or carried away by a sudden
communication of the whole circle of revealed truth. And indeed the fact
of this concealment can hardly be denied, in whatever degree it took the
shape of a definite rule, which might vary with persons and places. That
it existed even as a rule, as regards the Sacraments, seems to be
confessed on all hands. That it existed in other respects, as a
practice, is plain from the nature of the case, and from the writings of
the Apologists. Minucius Felix and Arnobius, in controversy with Pagans,
imply a denial that then the Christians used altars; yet Tertullian
speaks expressly of the _Ara Dei_ in the Church. What can we say, but
that the Apologists deny altars _in the sense_ in which they ridicule
them; or, that they deny that altars _such as_ the Pagan altars were
tolerated by Christians? And, in like manner, Minucius allows that there
were no temples among Christians; yet they are distinctly recognized in
the edicts of the Dioclesian era, and are known to have existed at a
still earlier date. It is the tendency of every dominant system, such as
the Paganism of the Ante-nicene centuries, to force its opponents into
the most hostile and jealous attitude, from the apprehension which they
naturally feel, lest if they acted otherwise, in those points in which
they approximate towards it, they should be misinterpreted and overborne
by its authority. The very fault now found with clergymen of the
Anglican Church, who wish to conform their practices to her rubrics, and
their doctrines to her divines of the seventeenth century, is, that,
whether they mean it or no, whether legitimately or no, still, in matter
of fact, they will be sanctioning and encouraging the religion of Rome,
in which there are similar doctrines and practices, more definite and
more influential; so that, at any rate, it is inexpedient at the moment
to attempt what is sure to be mistaken. That is, they are required to
exercise a _disciplina arcani_; and a similar reserve was inevitable on
the part of the Catholic Church, at a time when priests and altars
and rites all around it were devoted to malignant and incurable
superstitions. It would be wrong indeed to deny, but it was a duty to
withhold, the ceremonial of Christianity; and Apologists might be
sometimes tempted to deny absolutely what at furthest could only be
denied under conditions. An idolatrous Paganism tended to repress
the externals of Christianity, as, at this day, the presence of
Protestantism is said to repress, though for another reason, the
exhibition of the Roman Catholic religion.

On various grounds, then, it is certain that portions of the Church
system were held back in primitive times, and of course this fact goes
some way to account for that apparent variation and growth of doctrine,
which embarrasses us when we would consult history for the true idea of
Christianity; yet it is no key to the whole difficulty, as we find it,
for obvious reasons:--because the variations continue beyond the time
when it is conceivable that the discipline was in force, and because
they manifest themselves on a law, not abruptly, but by a visible growth
which has persevered up to this time without any sign of its coming to
an end.[29:1]


21.

The following Essay is directed towards a solution of the difficulty
which has been stated,--the difficulty, as far as it exists, which lies
in the way of our using in controversy the testimony of our most natural
informant concerning the doctrine and worship of Christianity, viz. the
history of eighteen hundred years. The view on which it is written has
at all times, perhaps, been implicitly adopted by theologians, and, I
believe, has recently been illustrated by several distinguished writers
of the continent, such as De Maistre and Möhler: viz. that the increase
and expansion of the Christian Creed and Ritual, and the variations
which have attended the process in the case of individual writers and
Churches, are the necessary attendants on any philosophy or polity which
takes possession of the intellect and heart, and has had any wide or
extended dominion; that, from the nature of the human mind, time is
necessary for the full comprehension and perfection of great ideas; and
that the highest and most wonderful truths, though communicated to the
world once for all by inspired teachers, could not be comprehended all
at once by the recipients, but, as being received and transmitted by
minds not inspired and through media which were human, have required
only the longer time and deeper thought for their full elucidation. This
may be called the _Theory of Development of Doctrine_; and, before
proceeding to treat of it, one remark may be in place.

It is undoubtedly an hypothesis to account for a difficulty; but such
too are the various explanations given by astronomers from Ptolemy to
Newton of the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies, and it is as
unphilosophical on that account to object to the one as to object to the
other. Nor is it more reasonable to express surprise, that at this time
of day a theory is necessary, granting for argument's sake that the
theory is novel, than to have directed a similar wonder in disparagement
of the theory of gravitation, or the Plutonian theory in geology.
Doubtless, the theory of the Secret and the theory of doctrinal
Developments are expedients, and so is the dictum of Vincentius; so is
the art of grammar or the use of the quadrant; it is an expedient to
enable us to solve what has now become a necessary and an anxious
problem. For three hundred years the documents and the facts of
Christianity have been exposed to a jealous scrutiny; works have been
judged spurious which once were received without a question; facts have
been discarded or modified which were once first principles in argument;
new facts and new principles have been brought to light; philosophical
views and polemical discussions of various tendencies have been
maintained with more or less success. Not only has the relative
situation of controversies and theologies altered, but infidelity itself
is in a different,--I am obliged to say in a more hopeful position,--as
regards Christianity. The facts of Revealed Religion, though in their
substance unaltered, present a less compact and orderly front to the
attacks of its enemies now than formerly, and allow of the introduction
of new inquiries and theories concerning its sources and its rise. The
state of things is not as it was, when an appeal lay to the supposed
works of the Areopagite, or to the primitive Decretals, or to St.
Dionysius's answers to Paul, or to the Cœna Domini of St. Cyprian.
The assailants of dogmatic truth have got the start of its adherents of
whatever Creed; philosophy is completing what criticism has begun; and
apprehensions are not unreasonably excited lest we should have a new
world to conquer before we have weapons for the warfare. Already
infidelity has its views and conjectures, on which it arranges the facts
of ecclesiastical history; and it is sure to consider the absence of any
antagonist theory as an evidence of the reality of its own. That the
hypothesis, here to be adopted, accounts not only for the Athanasian
Creed, but for the Creed of Pope Pius, is no fault of those who adopt
it. No one has power over the issues of his principles; we cannot manage
our argument, and have as much of it as we please and no more. An
argument is needed, unless Christianity is to abandon the province of
argument; and those who find fault with the explanation here offered of
its historical phenomena will find it their duty to provide one for
themselves.

And as no special aim at Roman Catholic doctrine need be supposed to
have given a direction to the inquiry, so neither can a reception of
that doctrine be immediately based on its results. It would be the work
of a life to apply the Theory of Developments so carefully to the
writings of the Fathers, and to the history of controversies and
councils, as thereby to vindicate the reasonableness of every decision
of Rome; much less can such an undertaking be imagined by one who, in
the middle of his days, is beginning life again. Thus much, however,
might be gained even from an Essay like the present, an explanation of
so many of the reputed corruptions, doctrinal and practical, of Rome, as
might serve as a fair ground for trusting her in parallel cases where
the investigation had not been pursued.


FOOTNOTES:

[9:1] Church of the Fathers [Hist. Sketches, vol. i. p. 418].

[12:1] Proph. Office [Via Media, vol. i. pp. 55, 56].

[13:1] [Ibid. p. 181.]

[13:2] [British Critic, July, 1836, p. 193. Vid. supr. vol. i. p. 130.]

[16:1] This of course has been disputed, as is the case with almost all
facts which bear upon the decision of controversies. I shall not think
it necessary to notice the possibility or the fact of objections on
questions upon which the world may now be said to be agreed; _e. g._ the
arianizing tone of Eusebius.

[16:2] σχεδὸν ταυτησὶ τῆς νῦν περιθυλλουμένης ἀσεβείας, τῆς κατὰ τὸ Ἀνόμοιον λέγω, οὗτος ἐστὶν,
ὅσα γε ἡμεῖς ἴσμεν, ὁ πρῶτος ἀνθρώποις τὰ σπέρματα παρασχών. Ep. ix. 2.

[16:3] Bull, Defens. F. N. ii. 12, § 6.

[17:1] "The authors who make the generation temporary, and speak not
expressly of any other, are these following: Justin, Athenagoras,
Theophilus, Tatian, Tertullian, and Hippolytus."--_Waterland_, vol. i.
part 2, p. 104.

[17:2] "Levia sunt," says Maran in his defence, "quæ in Sanctissimam
Trinitatem hic liber peccare dicitur, paulo graviora quæ in mysterium
Incarnationis."--_Div. Jes. Christ._ p. 527. Shortly after, p. 530, "In
tertiâ oratione nonnulla legimus Incarnationem Domini spectantia, quæ
subabsurdè dicta fateor, nego impiè cogitata."

[17:3] Bishop Bull, who is tender towards him, allows, "Ut quod res est
dicam, cum Valentinianis hic et reliquo gnosticorum grege aliquatenus
locutus est Tertullianus; in re ipsâ tamen cum Catholicis omninò
sensit."--_Defens. F. N._ iii. 10, § 15.

[18:1] Adv. Praxeam.

[18:2] Defens. F. N. iv. 3, § 1.

[18:3] Basil, ed. Ben. vol. 3, p. xcvi.

[19:1] Ante-nicene Test, to the Trinity, p. 69.

[20:1] "Quia et Pater Deus est, et judex Deus est, non tamen ideo Pater
et judex semper, quia Deus semper. Nam nec Pater potuit esse ante
Filium, nec judex ante delictum. Fuit autem tempus, cum et delictum et
Filius non fuit, quod judicem, et qui Patrem Dominum faceret."--_Contr.
Herm._ 3.

[20:2] Vid. infra, towards the end of the Essay, ch. x., where more will
be said on the passage.

[22:1] Of Justification, 26.

[22:2] Works, vol. ix. p. 396.

[22:3] "Quamvis igitur quam maximè fallantur Pelagiani, quum asserant,
peccatum originale ex Augustini profluxisse ingenio, antiquam vero
ecclesiam illud plane nescivisse; diffiteri tamen nemo potest, apud
Græcos patres imprimis inveniri loca, quæ Pelagianismo favere videntur.
Hinc et C. Jansenius, 'Græci,' inquit, 'nisi caute legantur et
intelligantur, præbere possunt occasionem errori Pelagiano;' et D.
Petavius dicit, 'Græci originalis fere criminis raram, nec disertam,
mentionem scriptis suis attigerunt.'"--_Walch_, _Miscell. Sacr._ p. 607.

[22:4] Horn, Comment. de Pecc. Orig. 1801, p. 98.

[23:1] Hær. iv. 18, § 5.

[24:1] Justin Martyr, ch. 4.

[24:2] Clem. Alex. ch. 11.

[25:1] Works, vol. vii. p. 118-120.

[25:2] Ibid. p. 121.

[25:3] Ibid. p. 127.

[25:4] [Dr. Pusey's University Sermon of 1843.]

[26:1] Numer. Hom. xvi. 9.

[26:2] Interp. Com. in Matt. 85.

[29:1] [_Vid._ Apolog., p. 198, and Difficulties of Angl. vol. i. xii.
7.]




CHAPTER I.

ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF IDEAS.


SECTION I.

ON THE PROCESS OF DEVELOPMENT IN IDEAS.

It is the characteristic of our minds to be ever engaged in passing
judgment on the things which come before us. No sooner do we apprehend
than we judge: we allow nothing to stand by itself: we compare,
contrast, abstract, generalize, connect, adjust, classify: and we view
all our knowledge in the associations with which these processes have
invested it.

Of the judgments thus made, which become aspects in our minds of the
things which meet us, some are mere opinions which come and go, or which
remain with us only till an accident displaces them, whatever be the
influence which they exercise meanwhile. Others are firmly fixed in our
minds, with or without good reason, and have a hold upon us, whether
they relate to matters of fact, or to principles of conduct, or are
views of life and the world, or are prejudices, imaginations, or
convictions. Many of them attach to one and the same object, which is
thus variously viewed, not only by various minds, but by the same. They
sometimes lie in such near relation, that each implies the others; some
are only not inconsistent with each other, in that they have a common
origin: some, as being actually incompatible with each other, are, one
or other, falsely associated in our minds with their object, and in any
case they may be nothing more than ideas, which we mistake for things.

Thus Judaism is an idea which once was objective, and Gnosticism is an
idea which was never so. Both of them have various aspects: those of
Judaism were such as monotheism, a certain ethical discipline, a
ministration of divine vengeance, a preparation for Christianity: those
of the Gnostic idea are such as the doctrine of two principles, that of
emanation, the intrinsic malignity of matter, the inculpability of
sensual indulgence, or the guilt of every pleasure of sense, of which
last two one or other must be in the Gnostic a false aspect and
subjective only.


2.

The idea which represents an object or supposed object is commensurate
with the sum total of its possible aspects, however they may vary in the
separate consciousness of individuals; and in proportion to the variety
of aspects under which it presents itself to various minds is its force
and depth, and the argument for its reality. Ordinarily an idea is not
brought home to the intellect as objective except through this variety;
like bodily substances, which are not apprehended except under the
clothing of their properties and results, and which admit of being
walked round, and surveyed on opposite sides, and in different
perspectives, and in contrary lights, in evidence of their reality. And,
as views of a material object may be taken from points so remote or so
opposed, that they seem at first sight incompatible, and especially as
their shadows will be disproportionate, or even monstrous, and yet all
these anomalies will disappear and all these contrarieties be adjusted,
on ascertaining the point of vision or the surface of projection in each
case; so also all the aspects of an idea are capable of coalition, and
of a resolution into the object to which it belongs; and the _primâ
facie_ dissimilitude of its aspects becomes, when explained, an argument
for its substantiveness and integrity, and their multiplicity for its
originality and power.


3.

There is no one aspect deep enough to exhaust the contents of a real
idea, no one term or proposition which will serve to define it; though
of course one representation of it is more just and exact than another,
and though when an idea is very complex, it is allowable, for the sake
of convenience, to consider its distinct aspects as if separate ideas.
Thus, with all our intimate knowledge of animal life and of the
structure of particular animals, we have not arrived at a true
definition of any one of them, but are forced to enumerate properties
and accidents by way of description. Nor can we inclose in a formula
that intellectual fact, or system of thought, which we call the Platonic
philosophy, or that historical phenomenon of doctrine and conduct, which
we call the heresy of Montanus or of Manes. Again, if Protestantism were
said to lie in its theory of private judgment, and Lutheranism in its
doctrine of justification, this indeed would be an approximation to the
truth; but it is plain that to argue or to act as if the one or the
other aspect were a sufficient account of those forms of religion
severally, would be a serious mistake. Sometimes an attempt is made to
determine the "leading idea," as it has been called, of Christianity, an
ambitious essay as employed on a supernatural work, when, even as
regards the visible creation and the inventions of man, such a task is
beyond us. Thus its one idea has been said by some to be the restoration
of our fallen race, by others philanthropy, by others the tidings of
immortality, or the spirituality of true religious service, or the
salvation of the elect, or mental liberty, or the union of the soul with
God. If, indeed, it is only thereby meant to use one or other of these
as a central idea for convenience, in order to group others around it,
no fault can be found with such a proceeding: and in this sense I should
myself call the Incarnation the central aspect of Christianity, out of
which the three main aspects of its teaching take their rise, the
sacramental, the hierarchical, and the ascetic. But one aspect of
Revelation must not be allowed to exclude or to obscure another; and
Christianity is dogmatical, devotional, practical all at once; it is
esoteric and exoteric; it is indulgent and strict; it is light and dark;
it is love, and it is fear.


4.

When an idea, whether real or not, is of a nature to arrest and possess
the mind, it may be said to have life, that is, to live in the mind
which is its recipient. Thus mathematical ideas, real as they are, can
hardly properly be called living, at least ordinarily. But, when some
great enunciation, whether true or false, about human nature, or present
good, or government, or duty, or religion, is carried forward into the
public throng of men and draws attention, then it is not merely received
passively in this or that form into many minds, but it becomes an active
principle within them, leading them to an ever-new contemplation of
itself, to an application of it in various directions, and a propagation
of it on every side. Such is the doctrine of the divine right of kings,
or of the rights of man, or of the anti-social bearings of a priesthood,
or utilitarianism, or free trade, or the duty of benevolent enterprises,
or the philosophy of Zeno or Epicurus, doctrines which are of a nature
to attract and influence, and have so far a _primâ facie_ reality, that
they may be looked at on many sides and strike various minds very
variously. Let one such idea get possession of the popular mind, or the
mind of any portion of the community, and it is not difficult to
understand what will be the result. At first men will not fully realize
what it is that moves them, and will express and explain themselves
inadequately. There will be a general agitation of thought, and an
action of mind upon mind. There will be a time of confusion, when
conceptions and misconceptions are in conflict, and it is uncertain
whether anything is to come of the idea at all, or which view of it is
to get the start of the others. New lights will be brought to bear upon
the original statements of the doctrine put forward; judgments and
aspects will accumulate. After a while some definite teaching emerges;
and, as time proceeds, one view will be modified or expanded by another,
and then combined with a third; till the idea to which these various
aspects belong, will be to each mind separately what at first it was
only to all together. It will be surveyed too in its relation to other
doctrines or facts, to other natural laws or established customs, to the
varying circumstances of times and places, to other religions, polities,
philosophies, as the case may be. How it stands affected towards other
systems, how it affects them, how far it may be made to combine with
them, how far it tolerates them, when it interferes with them, will be
gradually wrought out. It will be interrogated and criticized by
enemies, and defended by well-wishers. The multitude of opinions formed
concerning it in these respects and many others will be collected,
compared, sorted, sifted, selected, rejected, gradually attached to it,
separated from it, in the minds of individuals and of the community. It
will, in proportion to its native vigour and subtlety, introduce itself
into the framework and details of social life, changing public opinion,
and strengthening or undermining the foundations of established order.
Thus in time it will have grown into an ethical code, or into a system
of government, or into a theology, or into a ritual, according to its
capabilities: and this body of thought, thus laboriously gained, will
after all be little more than the proper representative of one idea,
being in substance what that idea meant from the first, its complete
image as seen in a combination of diversified aspects, with the
suggestions and corrections of many minds, and the illustration of many
experiences.


5.

This process, whether it be longer or shorter in point of time, by which
the aspects of an idea are brought into consistency and form, I call its
development, being the germination and maturation of some truth or
apparent truth on a large mental field. On the other hand this process
will not be a development, unless the assemblage of aspects, which
constitute its ultimate shape, really belongs to the idea from which
they start. A republic, for instance, is not a development from a pure
monarchy, though it may follow upon it; whereas the Greek "tyrant" may
be considered as included in the idea of a democracy. Moreover a
development will have this characteristic, that, its action being in the
busy scene of human life, it cannot progress at all without cutting
across, and thereby destroying or modifying and incorporating with
itself existing modes of thinking and operating. The development then of
an idea is not like an investigation worked out on paper, in which each
successive advance is a pure evolution from a foregoing, but it is
carried on through and by means of communities of men and their leaders
and guides; and it employs their minds as its instruments, and depends
upon them, while it uses them. And so, as regards existing opinions,
principles, measures, and institutions of the community which it has
invaded; it developes by establishing relations between itself and
them; it employs itself, in giving them a new meaning and direction, in
creating what may be called a jurisdiction over them, in throwing off
whatever in them it cannot assimilate. It grows when it incorporates,
and its identity is found, not in isolation, but in continuity and
sovereignty. This it is that imparts to the history both of states and
of religions, its specially turbulent and polemical character. Such is
the explanation of the wranglings, whether of schools or of parliaments.
It is the warfare of ideas under their various aspects striving for the
mastery, each of them enterprising, engrossing, imperious, more or less
incompatible with the rest, and rallying followers or rousing foes,
according as it acts upon the faith, the prejudices, or the interest of
parties or classes.


6.

Moreover, an idea not only modifies, but is modified, or at least
influenced, by the state of things in which it is carried out, and is
dependent in various ways on the circumstances which surround it. Its
development proceeds quickly or slowly, as it may be; the order of
succession in its separate stages is variable; it shows differently in a
small sphere of action and in an extended; it may be interrupted,
retarded, mutilated, distorted, by external violence; it may be
enfeebled by the effort of ridding itself of domestic foes; it may be
impeded and swayed or even absorbed by counter energetic ideas; it may
be coloured by the received tone of thought into which it comes, or
depraved by the intrusion of foreign principles, or at length shattered
by the development of some original fault within it.


7.

But whatever be the risk of corruption from intercourse with the world
around, such a risk must be encountered if a great idea is duly to be
understood, and much more if it is to be fully exhibited. It is elicited
and expanded by trial, and battles into perfection and supremacy. Nor
does it escape the collision of opinion even in its earlier years, nor
does it remain truer to itself, and with a better claim to be considered
one and the same, though externally protected from vicissitude and
change. It is indeed sometimes said that the stream is clearest near the
spring. Whatever use may fairly be made of this image, it does not apply
to the history of a philosophy or belief, which on the contrary is more
equable, and purer, and stronger, when its bed has become deep, and
broad, and full. It necessarily rises out of an existing state of
things, and for a time savours of the soil. Its vital element needs
disengaging from what is foreign and temporary, and is employed in
efforts after freedom which become more vigorous and hopeful as its
years increase. Its beginnings are no measure of its capabilities, nor
of its scope. At first no one knows what it is, or what it is worth. It
remains perhaps for a time quiescent; it tries, as it were, its limbs,
and proves the ground under it, and feels its way. From time to time it
makes essays which fail, and are in consequence abandoned. It seems in
suspense which way to go; it wavers, and at length strikes out in one
definite direction. In time it enters upon strange territory; points of
controversy alter their bearing; parties rise and fall around it;
dangers and hopes appear in new relations; and old principles reappear
under new forms. It changes with them in order to remain the same. In a
higher world it is otherwise, but here below to live is to change, and
to be perfect is to have changed often.


SECTION II.

ON THE KINDS OF DEVELOPMENT IN IDEAS.

To attempt an accurate analysis or complete enumeration of the processes
of thought, whether speculative or practical, which come under the
notion of development, exceeds the pretensions of an Essay like the
present; but, without some general view of the various mental exercises
which go by the name we shall have no security against confusion in our
reasoning and necessary exposure to criticism.

1. First, then, it must be borne in mind that the word is commonly used,
and is used here, in three senses indiscriminately, from defect of our
language; on the one hand for the process of development, on the other
for the result; and again either generally for a development, true or
not true, (that is, faithful or unfaithful to the idea from which it
started,) or exclusively for a development deserving the name. A false
or unfaithful development is more properly to be called a corruption.

2. Next, it is plain that _mathematical_ developments, that is, the
system of truths drawn out from mathematical definitions or equations,
do not fall under our present subject, though altogether analogous to
it. There can be no corruption in such developments, because they are
conducted on strict demonstration; and the conclusions in which they
terminate, being necessary, cannot be declensions from the original
idea.

3. Nor, of course, do _physical_ developments, as the growth of animal
or vegetable nature, come into consideration here; excepting that,
together with mathematical, they may be taken as illustrations of the
general subject to which we have to direct our attention.

4. Nor have we to consider _material_ developments, which, though
effected by human contrivance, are still physical; as the development,
as it is called, of the national resources. We speak, for instance, of
Ireland, the United States, or the valley of the Indus, as admitting of
a great development; by which we mean, that those countries have fertile
tracts, or abundant products, or broad and deep rivers, or central
positions for commerce, or capacious and commodious harbours, the
materials and instruments of wealth, and these at present turned to
insufficient account. Development in this case will proceed by
establishing marts, cutting canals, laying down railroads, erecting
factories, forming docks, and similar works, by which the natural riches
of the country may be made to yield the largest return and to exert the
greatest influence. In this sense, art is the development of nature,
that is, its adaptation to the purposes of utility and beauty, the human
intellect being the developing power.


2.

5. When society and its various classes and interests are the
subject-matter of the ideas which are in operation, the development may
be called _political_; as we see it in the growth of States or the
changes of a Constitution. Barbarians descend into southern regions from
cupidity, and their warrant is the sword: this is no intellectual
process, nor is it the mode of development exhibited in civilized
communities. Where civilization exists, reason, in some shape or other,
is the incentive or the pretence of development. When an empire
enlarges, it is on the call of its allies, or for the balance of power,
or from the necessity of a demonstration of strength, or from a fear for
its frontiers. It lies uneasily in its territory, it is ill-shaped, it
has unreal boundary-lines, deficient communication between its principal
points, or defenceless or turbulent neighbours. Thus, of old time,
Eubœa was necessary for Athens, and Cythera for Sparta; and Augustus
left his advice, as a legacy, to confine the Empire between the
Atlantic, the Rhine and Danube, the Euphrates, and the Arabian and
African deserts. In this day, we hear of the Rhine being the natural
boundary of France, and the Indus of our Eastern empire; and we predict
that, in the event of a war, Prussia will change her outlines in the map
of Europe. The development is material; but an idea gives unity and
force to its movement.

And so to take a case of national politics, a late writer remarks of the
Parliament of 1628-29, in its contest with Charles, that, so far from
encroaching on the just powers of a limited monarch, it never hinted at
the securities which were necessary for its measures. However, "twelve
years more of repeated aggressions," he adds, "taught the Long
Parliament what a few sagacious men might perhaps have already
suspected; that they must recover more of their ancient constitution,
from oblivion; that they must sustain its partial weakness by new
securities; that, in order to render the existence of monarchy
compatible with that of freedom, they must not only strip it of all it
had usurped, but of something that was its own."[43:1] Whatever be the
worth of this author's theory, his facts or representations are an
illustration of a political development.

Again, at the present day, that Ireland should have a population of one
creed, and a Church of another, is felt to be a political arrangement so
unsatisfactory, that all parties seem to agree that either the
population will develope in power or the Establishment in influence.

Political developments, though really the growth of ideas, are often
capricious and irregular from the nature of their subject-matter. They
are influenced by the character of sovereigns, the rise and fall of
statesmen, the fate of battles, and the numberless vicissitudes of the
world. "Perhaps the Greeks would be still involved in the heresy of the
Monophysites," says Gibbon, "if the Emperor's horse had not fortunately
stumbled. Theodosius expired, his orthodox sister succeeded to the
throne."[44:1]


3.

Again, it often happens, or generally, that various distinct and
incompatible elements are found in the origin or infancy of politics, or
indeed of philosophies, some of which must be ejected before any
satisfactory developments, if any, can take place. And they are commonly
ejected by the gradual growth of the stronger. The reign of Charles the
First, just referred to, supplies an instance in point.

Sometimes discordant ideas are for a time connected and concealed by a
common profession or name. Such is the case of coalitions in politics
and comprehensions in religion, of which commonly no good is to be
expected. Such is an ordinary function of committees and boards, and the
sole aim of conciliations and concessions, to make contraries look the
same, and to secure an outward agreement where there is no other unity.

Again, developments, reactions, reforms, revolutions, and changes of
various kinds are mixed together in the actual history of states, as of
philosophical sects, so as to make it very difficult to exhibit them in
any scientific analysis.

Often the intellectual process is detached from the practical, and
posterior to it. Thus it was after Elizabeth had established the
Reformation that Hooker laid down his theory of Church and State as one
and the same, differing only in idea; and, after the Revolution and its
political consequences, that Warburton wrote his "Alliance." And now
again a new theory is needed for the constitutional lawyer, in order to
reconcile the existing political state of things with the just claims
of religion. And so, again, in Parliamentary conflicts, men first come
to their conclusions by the external pressure of events or the force of
principles, they do not know how; then they have to speak, and they look
about for arguments: and a pamphlet is published on the subject in
debate, or an article appears in a Review, to furnish common-places for
the many.

Other developments, though political, are strictly subjected and
consequent to the ideas of which they are the exhibitions. Thus Locke's
philosophy was a real guide, not a mere defence of the Revolution era,
operating forcibly upon Church and Government in and after his day. Such
too were the theories which preceded the overthrow of the old regime in
France and other countries at the end of the last century.

Again, perhaps there are polities founded on no ideas at all, but on
mere custom, as among the Asiatics.


4.

6. In other developments the intellectual character is so prominent that
they may even be called _logical_, as in the Anglican doctrine of the
Royal Supremacy, which has been created in the courts of law, not in the
cabinet or on the field. Hence it is carried out with a consistency and
minute application which the history of constitutions cannot exhibit. It
does not only exist in statutes, or in articles, or in oaths, it is
realized in details: as in the _congé d'élire_ and letter-missive on
appointment of a Bishop;--in the forms observed in Privy Council on the
issuing of State Prayers;--in certain arrangements observed in the
Prayer-book, where the universal or abstract Church precedes the King,
but the national or really existing body follows him; in printing his
name in large capitals, while the Holiest Names are in ordinary type,
and in fixing his arms in churches instead of the Crucifix; moreover,
perhaps, in placing "sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebellion," before
"false doctrine, heresy, and schism" in the Litany.

Again, when some new philosophy or its instalments are introduced into
the measures of the Legislature, or into the concessions made to a
political party, or into commercial or agricultural policy, it is often
said, "We have not seen the end of this;" "It is an earnest of future
concessions;" "Our children will see." We feel that it has unknown
bearings and issues.

The admission of Jews to municipal offices has lately been
defended[46:1] on the ground that it is the introduction of no new
principle, but a development of one already received; that its great
premisses have been decided long since; and that the present age has but
to draw the conclusion; that it is not open to us to inquire what ought
to be done in the abstract, since there is no ideal model for the
infallible guidance of nations; that change is only a question of time,
and that there is a time for all things; that the application of
principles ought not to go beyond the actual case, neither preceding nor
coming after an imperative demand; that in point of fact Jews have
lately been chosen for offices, and that in point of principle the law
cannot refuse to legitimate such elections.


5.

7. Another class of developments may be called _historical_; being the
gradual formation of opinion concerning persons, facts, and events.
Judgments, which were at one time confined to a few, at length spread
through a community, and attain general reception by the accumulation
and concurrence of testimony. Thus some authoritative accounts die away;
others gain a footing, and are ultimately received as truths. Courts of
law, Parliamentary proceedings, newspapers, letters and other
posthumous documents, the industry of historians and biographers, and
the lapse of years which dissipates parties and prejudices, are in this
day the instruments of such development. Accordingly the Poet makes
Truth the daughter of Time.[47:1] Thus at length approximations are made
to a right appreciation of transactions and characters. History cannot
be written except in an after-age. Thus by development the Canon of the
New Testament has been formed. Thus public men are content to leave
their reputation to posterity; great reactions take place in opinion;
nay, sometimes men outlive opposition and obloquy. Thus Saints are
canonized in the Church, long after they have entered into their rest.


6.

8. _Ethical_ developments are not properly matter for argument and
controversy, but are natural and personal, substituting what is
congruous, desirable, pious, appropriate, generous, for strictly logical
inference. Bishop Butler supplies us with a remarkable instance in the
beginning of the Second Part of his "Analogy." As principles imply
applications, and general propositions include particulars, so, he tells
us, do certain relations imply correlative duties, and certain objects
demand certain acts and feelings. He observes that, even though we were
not enjoined to pay divine honours to the Second and Third Persons of
the Holy Trinity, what is predicated of Them in Scripture would be an
abundant warrant, an indirect command, nay, a ground in reason, for
doing so. "Does not," he asks, "the duty of religious regards to both
these Divine Persons as immediately arise, to the view of reason, out of
the very nature of these offices and relations, as the inward good-will
and kind intention which we owe to our fellow-creatures arises out of
the common relations between us and them?" He proceeds to say that he is
speaking of the inward religious regards of reverence, honour, love,
trust, gratitude, fear, hope. "In what external manner this inward
worship is to be expressed, is a matter of pure revealed command; . .
but the worship, the internal worship itself, to the Son and Holy Ghost,
is no further matter of pure revealed command than as the relations they
stand in to us are matter of pure revelation; for, the relations being
known, the obligations to such internal worship are obligations of
reason, arising out of those relations themselves." Here is a
development of doctrine into worship, of which parallel instances are
obviously to be found in the Church of Rome.


7.

A development, converse to that which Butler speaks of, must next be
mentioned. As certain objects excite certain emotions and sentiments, so
do sentiments imply objects and duties. Thus conscience, the existence
of which we cannot deny, is a proof of the doctrine of a Moral Governor,
which alone gives it a meaning and a scope; that is, the doctrine of a
Judge and Judgment to come is a development of the phenomenon of
conscience. Again, it is plain that passions and affections are in
action in our minds before the presence of their proper objects; and
their activity would of course be an antecedent argument of extreme
cogency in behalf of the real existence of those legitimate objects,
supposing them unknown. And so again, the social principle, which is
innate in us, gives a divine sanction to society and to civil
government. And the usage of prayers for the dead implies certain
circumstances of their state upon which such devotions bear. And rites
and ceremonies are natural means through which the mind relieves itself
of devotional and penitential emotions. And sometimes the cultivation
of awe and love towards what is great, high, and unseen, has led a man
to the abandonment of his sect for some more Catholic form of doctrine.

Aristotle furnishes us with an instance of this kind of development in
his account of the happy man. After showing that his definition of
happiness includes in itself the pleasurable, which is the most obvious
and popular idea of happiness, he goes on to say that still external
goods are necessary to it, about which, however, the definition said
nothing; that is, a certain prosperity is by moral fitness, not by
logical necessity, attached to the happy man. "For it is impossible," he
observes, "or not easy, to practise high virtue without abundant means.
Many deeds are done by the instrumentality of friends, wealth and
political power; and of some things the absence is a cloud upon
happiness, as of noble birth, of hopeful children, and of personal
appearance: for a person utterly deformed, or low-born, or bereaved and
childless, cannot quite be happy: and still less if he have very
worthless children or friends, or they were good and died."[49:1]


8.

This process of development has been well delineated by a living French
writer, in his Lectures on European civilization, who shall be quoted at
some length. "If we reduce religion," he says, "to a purely religious
sentiment . . . it appears evident that it must and ought to remain a
purely personal concern. But I am either strangely mistaken, or this
religious sentiment is not the complete expression of the religious
nature of man. Religion is, I believe, very different from this,
and much more extended. There are problems in human nature, in human
destinies, which cannot be solved in this life, which depend on
an order of things unconnected with the visible world, but which
unceasingly agitate the human mind with a desire to comprehend them. The
solution of these problems is the origin of all religion; her primary
object is to discover the creeds and doctrines which contain, or are
supposed to contain it.

"Another cause also impels mankind to embrace religion . . . From whence
do morals originate? whither do they lead? is this self-existing
obligation to do good, an isolated fact, without an author, without an
end? does it not conceal, or rather does it not reveal to man, an
origin, a destiny, beyond this world? The science of morals, by these
spontaneous and inevitable questions, conducts man to the threshold of
religion, and displays to him a sphere from whence he has not derived
it. Thus the certain and never-failing sources of religion are, on the
one hand, the problems of our nature; on the other, the necessity of
seeking for morals a sanction, an origin, and an aim. It therefore
assumes many other forms beside that of a pure sentiment; it appears a
union of doctrines, of precepts, of promises. This is what truly
constitutes religion; this is its fundamental character; it is not
merely a form of sensibility, an impulse of the imagination, a variety
of poetry.

"When thus brought back to its true elements, to its essential nature,
religion appears no longer a purely personal concern, but a powerful and
fruitful principle of association. Is it considered in the light of a
system of belief, a system of dogmas? Truth is not the heritage of any
individual, it is absolute and universal; mankind ought to seek and
profess it in common. Is it considered with reference to the precepts
that are associated with its doctrines? A law which is obligatory on a
single individual, is so on all; it ought to be promulgated, and it is
our duty to endeavour to bring all mankind under its dominion. It is
the same with respect to the promises that religion makes, in the name
of its creeds and precepts; they ought to be diffused; all men should be
incited to partake of their benefits. A religious society, therefore,
naturally results from the essential elements of religion, and is such a
necessary consequence of it that the term which expresses the most
energetic social sentiment, the most intense desire to propagate ideas
and extend society, is the word _proselytism_, a term which is
especially applied to religious belief, and in fact consecrated to it.

"When a religious society has ever been formed, when a certain number of
men are united by a common religious creed, are governed by the same
religious precepts, and enjoy the same religious hopes, some form of
government is necessary. No society can endure a week, nay more, no
society can endure a single hour, without a government. The moment,
indeed, a society is formed, by the very fact of its formation, it calls
forth a government,--a government which shall proclaim the common truth
which is the bond of the society, and promulgate and maintain the
precepts that this truth ought to produce. The necessity of a superior
power, of a form of government, is involved in the fact of the existence
of a religious, as it is in that of any other society.

"And not only is a government necessary, but it naturally forms
itself. . . . When events are suffered to follow their natural laws,
when force does not interfere, power falls into the hands of the most
able, the most worthy, those who are most capable of carrying out the
principles on which the society was founded. Is a warlike expedition
in agitation? The bravest take the command. Is the object of the
association learned research, or a scientific undertaking? The best
informed will be the leader. . . . The inequality of faculties and
influence, which is the foundation of power in civil life, has the same
effect in a religious society. . . Religion has no sooner arisen in the
human mind than a religious society appears; and immediately a religious
society is formed, it produces its government."[52:1]


9.

9. It remains to allude to what, unless the word were often so vaguely
and variously used, I should be led to call _metaphysical_ developments;
I mean such as are a mere analysis of the idea contemplated, and
terminate in its exact and complete delineation. Thus Aristotle draws
the character of a magnanimous or of a munificent man; thus Shakspeare
might conceive and bring out his Hamlet or Ariel; thus Walter Scott
gradually enucleates his James, or Dalgetty, as the action of his story
proceeds; and thus, in the sacred province of theology, the mind may be
employed in developing the solemn ideas, which it has hitherto held
implicitly and without subjecting them to its reflecting and reasoning
powers.

I have already treated of this subject at length, with a reference to
the highest theological subject, in a former work, from which it will be
sufficient here to quote some sentences in explanation:--

"The mind which is habituated to the thought of God, of Christ, of
the Holy Spirit, naturally turns with a devout curiosity to the
contemplation of the object of its adoration, and begins to form
statements concerning it, before it knows whither, or how far, it will
be carried. One proposition necessarily leads to another, and a second
to a third; then some limitation is required; and the combination of
these opposites occasions some fresh evolutions from the original idea,
which indeed can never be said to be entirely exhausted. This process is
its development, and results in a series, or rather body, of dogmatic
statements, till what was an impression on the Imagination has become a
system or creed in the Reason.

"Now such impressions are obviously individual and complete above other
theological ideas, because they are the impressions of Objects. Ideas
and their developments are commonly not identical, the development being
but the carrying out of the idea into its consequences. Thus the
doctrine of Penance may be called a development of the doctrine of
Baptism, yet still is a distinct doctrine; whereas the developments in
the doctrines of the Holy Trinity and the Incarnation are mere portions
of the original impression, and modes of representing it. As God is one,
so the impression which He gives us of Himself is one; it is not a thing
of parts; it is not a system; nor is it anything imperfect and needing a
counterpart. It is the vision of an object. When we pray, we pray, not
to an assemblage of notions or to a creed, but to One Individual Being;
and when we speak of Him, we speak of a Person, not of a Law or
Manifestation . . . Religious men, according to their measure, have an
idea or vision of the Blessed Trinity in Unity, of the Son Incarnate,
and of His Presence, not as a number of qualities, attributes, and
actions, not as the subject of a number of propositions, but as one and
individual, and independent of words, like an impression conveyed
through the senses. . . . Creeds and dogmas live in the one idea which
they are designed to express, and which alone is substantive; and are
necessary, because the human mind cannot reflect upon that idea except
piecemeal, cannot use it in its oneness and entireness, or without
resolving it into a series of aspects and relations."[53:1]


10.

So much on the development of ideas in various subject matters: it may
be necessary to add that, in many cases, _development_ simply stands
for _exhibition_, as in some of the instances adduced above. Thus both
Calvinism and Unitarianism may be called developments, that is,
exhibitions, of the principle of Private Judgment, though they have
nothing in common, viewed as doctrines.

As to Christianity, supposing the truths of which it consists to admit
of development, that development will be one or other of the last five
kinds. Taking the Incarnation as its central doctrine, the Episcopate,
as taught by St. Ignatius, will be an instance of political development,
the _Theotokos_ of logical, the determination of the date of our Lord's
birth of historical, the Holy Eucharist of moral, and the Athanasian
Creed of metaphysical.


FOOTNOTES:

[43:1] Hallam's Constit. Hist. ch. vii. p. 572.

[44:1] ch. xlvii.

[46:1] _Times_ newspaper of March, 1845.

[47:1] Crabbe's Tales.

[49:1] Eth. Nic. i. 8.

[52:1] Guizot, Europ. Civil., Lect. v., Beckwith's Translation.

[53:1] [Univ. Serm. xv. 20-23, pp. 329-332, ed. 3.]




