CHAPTER XI.

APPLICATION OF THE SIXTH NOTE OF A TRUE DEVELOPMENT.


CONSERVATIVE ACTION ON ITS PAST.

It is the general pretext of heretics that they are but serving and
protecting Christianity by their innovations; and it is their charge
against what by this time we may surely call the Catholic Church, that
her successive definitions of doctrine have but overlaid and obscured
it. That is, they assume, what we have no wish to deny, that a true
development is that which is conservative of its original, and a
corruption is that which tends to its destruction. This has already been
set down as a Sixth Test, discriminative of a development from a
corruption, and must now be applied to the Catholic doctrines; though
this Essay has so far exceeded its proposed limits, that both reader and
writer may well be weary, and may content themselves with a brief
consideration of the portions of the subject which remain.

It has been observed already that a strict correspondence between the
various members of a development, and those of the doctrine from which
it is derived, is more than we have any right to expect. The bodily
structure of a grown man is not merely that of a magnified boy; he
differs from what he was in his make and proportions; still manhood is
the perfection of boyhood, adding something of its own, yet keeping
what it finds. "Ut nihil novum," says Vincentius, "proferatur in
senibus, quod non in pueris jam antea latitaverit." This character of
addition,--that is, of a change which is in one sense real and
perceptible, yet without loss or reversal of what was before, but, on
the contrary, protective and confirmative of it,--in many respects and
in a special way belongs to Christianity.


SECTION I.

VARIOUS INSTANCES.

If we take the simplest and most general view of its history, as
existing in an individual mind, or in the Church at large, we shall see
in it an instance of this peculiarity. It is the birth of something
virtually new, because latent in what was before. Thus we know that no
temper of mind is acceptable in the Divine Presence without love; it is
love which makes Christian fear differ from servile dread, and true
faith differ from the faith of devils; yet in the beginning of the
religious life, fear is the prominent evangelical grace, and love is but
latent in fear, and has in course of time to be developed out of what
seems its contradictory. Then, when it is developed, it takes that
prominent place which fear held before, yet protecting not superseding
it. Love is added, not fear removed, and the mind is but perfected in
grace by what seems a revolution. "They that sow in tears, reap in joy;"
yet afterwards still they are "sorrowful," though "alway rejoicing."

And so was it with the Church at large. She started with suffering,
which turned to victory; but when she was set free from the house of her
prison, she did not quit it so much as turn it into a cell. Meekness
inherited the earth; strength came forth from weakness; the poor made
many rich; yet meekness and poverty remained. The rulers of the world
were Monks, when they could not be Martyrs.


2.

Immediately on the overthrow of the heathen power, two movements
simultaneously ran through the world from East to West, as quickly as
the lightning in the prophecy, a development of worship and of
asceticism. Hence, while the world's first reproach in heathen times had
been that Christianity was a dark malevolent magic, its second has been
that it is a joyous carnal paganism;--according to that saying, "We have
piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye
have not lamented. For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they
say, He hath a devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they
say, Behold a man gluttonous and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners." Yet our Lord too was "a man of sorrows" all the while, but
softened His austerity by His gracious gentleness.


3.

The like characteristic attends also on the mystery of His Incarnation.
He was first God and He became man; but Eutyches and heretics of his
school refused to admit that He was man, lest they should deny that He
was God. In consequence the Catholic Fathers are frequent and unanimous
in their asseverations, that "the Word" had become flesh, not to His
loss, but by an addition. Each Nature is distinct, but the created
Nature lives in and by the Eternal. "Non amittendo quod erat, sed
sumendo quod non erat," is the Church's principle. And hence, though the
course of development, as was observed in a former Chapter, has been to
bring into prominence the divine aspect of our Lord's mediation, this
has been attended by even a more open manifestation of the doctrine of
His atoning sufferings. The passion of our Lord is one of the most
imperative and engrossing subjects of Catholic teaching. It is the great
topic of meditations and prayers; it is brought into continual
remembrance by the sign of the Cross; it is preached to the world in the
Crucifix; it is variously honoured by the many houses of prayer, and
associations of religious men, and pious institutions and undertakings,
which in some way or other are placed under the name and the shadow of
Jesus, or the Saviour, or the Redeemer, or His Cross, or His Passion, or
His sacred Heart.


4.

Here a singular development may be mentioned of the doctrine of the
Cross, which some have thought so contrary to its original
meaning,[422:1] as to be a manifest corruption; I mean the introduction
of the Sign of the meek Jesus into the armies of men, and the use of an
emblem of peace as a protection in battle. If light has no communion
with darkness, or Christ with Belial, what has He to do with Moloch, who
would not call down fire on His enemies, and came not to destroy but to
save? Yet this seeming anomaly is but one instance of a great law which
is seen in developments generally, that changes which appear at first
sight to contradict that out of which they grew, are really its
protection or illustration. Our Lord Himself is represented in the
Prophets as a combatant inflicting wounds while He received them, as
coming from Bozrah with dyed garments, sprinkled and red in His apparel
with the blood of His enemies; and, whereas no war is lawful but what is
just, it surely beseems that they who are engaged in so dreadful a
commission as that of taking away life at the price of their own,
should at least have the support of His Presence, and fight under the
mystical influence of His Name, who redeemed His elect as a combatant by
the Blood of Atonement, with the slaughter of His foes, the sudden
overthrow of the Jews, and the slow and awful fall of the Pagan Empire.
And if the wars of Christian nations have often been unjust, this is a
reason against much more than the use of religious symbols by the
parties who engage in them, though the pretence of religion may increase
the sin.


5.

The same rule of development has been observed in respect of the
doctrine of the Blessed Trinity. It is the objection of the School of
Socinus, that belief in the Trinity is destructive of any true
maintenance of the Divine Unity, however strongly the latter may be
professed; but Petavius, as we have seen,[423:1] sets it down as one
especial recommendation of the Catholic doctrine, that it subserves that
original truth which at first sight it does but obscure and compromise.


6.

This representation of the consistency of the Catholic system will be
found to be true, even in respect of those peculiarities of it, which
have been considered by Protestants most open to the charge of
corruption and innovation. It is maintained, for instance, that the
veneration paid to Images in the Catholic Church directly contradicts
the command of Scripture, and the usage of the primitive ages. As to
primitive usage, that part of the subject has been incidentally observed
upon already; here I will make one remark on the argument from
Scripture.

It may be reasonably questioned, then, whether the Commandment which
stands second in the Protestant Decalogue, on which the prohibition of
Images is grounded, was intended in its letter for more than temporary
observance. So far is certain, that, though none could surpass the later
Jews in its literal observance, nevertheless this did not save them from
the punishments attached to the violation of it. If this be so, the
literal observance is not its true and evangelical import.


7.

"When the generation to come of your children shall rise up after you,"
says their inspired lawgiver, "and the stranger that shall come from a
far land shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and its
sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon it; and that the whole land
thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown, nor
beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, . . . even all nations shall
say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this land? What meaneth the
heat of this great anger? Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken
the covenants of the Lord God of their fathers, which He made with them
when He brought them forth out of the land of Egypt; for they went and
served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and
whom He had not given them." Now the Jews of our Lord's day did not keep
this covenant, for they incurred the penalty; yet they kept the letter
of the Commandment rigidly, and were known among the heathen far and
wide for their devotion to the "Lord God of their fathers who brought
them out of the land of Egypt," and for their abhorrence of the "gods
whom He had not given them." If then adherence to the letter was no
protection to the Jews, departure from the letter may be no guilt in
Christians.

It should be observed, moreover, that there certainly is a difference
between the two covenants in their respective view of symbols of the
Almighty. In the Old, it was blasphemy to represent Him under "the
similitude of a calf that eateth hay;" in the New, the Third Person of
the Holy Trinity has signified His Presence by the appearance of a Dove,
and the Second Person has presented His sacred Humanity for worship
under the name of the Lamb.


8.

It follows that, if the letter of the Decalogue is but partially binding
on Christians, it is as justifiable, in setting it before persons under
instruction, to omit such parts as do not apply to them, as, when we
quote passages from the Pentateuch in Sermons or Lectures generally, to
pass over verses which refer simply to the temporal promises or the
ceremonial law, a practice which we allow without any intention or
appearance of dealing irreverently with the sacred text.


SECTION II.

DEVOTION TO THE BLESSED VIRGIN.

It has been anxiously asked, whether the honours paid to St. Mary, which
have grown out of devotion to her Almighty Lord and Son, do not, in
fact, tend to weaken that devotion; and whether, from the nature of the
case, it is possible so to exalt a creature without withdrawing the
heart from the Creator.

In addition to what has been said on this subject in foregoing Chapters,
I would here observe that the question is one of fact, not of
presumption or conjecture. The abstract lawfulness of the honours paid
to St. Mary, and their distinction in theory from the incommunicable
worship paid to God, are points which have already been dwelt upon; but
here the question turns upon their practicability or expedience, which
must be determined by the fact whether they are practicable, and whether
they have been found to be expedient.


1.

Here I observe, first, that, to those who admit the authority of the
Fathers of Ephesus, the question is in no slight degree answered by
their sanction of the θεοτόκος, or "Mother of God," as a title of St.
Mary, and as given in order to protect the doctrine of the Incarnation,
and to preserve the faith of Catholics from a specious Humanitarianism.
And if we take a survey at least of Europe, we shall find that it is not
those religious communions which are characterized by devotion towards
the Blessed Virgin that have ceased to adore her Eternal Son, but those
very bodies, (when allowed by the law,) which have renounced devotion to
her. The regard for His glory, which was professed in that keen jealousy
of her exaltation, has not been supported by the event. They who were
accused of worshipping a creature in His stead, still worship Him; their
accusers, who hoped to worship Him so purely, they, wherever obstacles
to the development of their principles have been removed, have ceased to
worship Him altogether.


2.

Next, it must be observed, that the tone of the devotion paid to the
Blessed Mary is altogether distinct from that which is paid to her
Eternal Son, and to the Holy Trinity, as we must certainly allow on
inspection of the Catholic services. The supreme and true worship paid
to the Almighty is severe, profound, awful, as well as tender,
confiding, and dutiful. Christ is addressed as true God, while He is
true Man; as our Creator and Judge, while He is most loving, gentle, and
gracious. On the other hand, towards St. Mary the language employed is
affectionate and ardent, as towards a mere child of Adam; though
subdued, as coming from her sinful kindred. How different, for instance,
is the tone of the _Dies Iræ_ from that of the _Stabat Mater_. In the
"Tristis et afflicta Mater Unigeniti," in the "Virgo virginum præclara
Mihi jam non sis amara, Pœnas mecum divide," in the "Fac me vere
tecum flere," we have an expression of the feelings with which we regard
one who is a creature and a mere human being; but in the "Rex tremendæ
majestatis qui salvandos salvas gratis, salva me Fons pietatis," the "Ne
me perdas illâ die," the "Juste judex ultionis, donum fac remissionis,"
the "Oro supplex et acclinis, cor contritum quasi cinis," the "Pie Jesu
Domine, dona eis requiem," we hear the voice of the creature raised in
hope and love, yet in deep awe to his Creator, Infinite Benefactor, and
Judge.

Or again, how distinct is the language of the Breviary Services on the
Festival of Pentecost, or of the Holy Trinity, from the language of the
Services for the Assumption! How indescribably majestic, solemn, and
soothing is the "Veni Creator Spiritus," the "Altissimi donum Dei, Fons
vivus, ignis, charitas," or the "Vera et una Trinitas, una et summa
Deitas, sancta et una Unitas," the "Spes nostra, salus nostra, honor
noster, O beata Trinitas," the "Charitas Pater, gratia Filius,
communicatio Spiritus Sanctus, O beata Trinitas;" "Libera nos, salva
nos, vivifica nos, O beata Trinitas!" How fond, on the contrary, how
full of sympathy and affection, how stirring and animating, in the
Office for the Assumption, is the "Virgo prudentissima, quo progrederis,
quasi aurora valde rutilans? filia Sion, tota formosa et suavis es,
pulcra ut luna, electa ut sol;" the "Sicut dies verni circumdabant eam
flores rosarum, et lilia convallium;" the "Maria Virgo assumpta est ad
æthereum thalamum in quo Rex regum stellato sedet solio;" and the
"Gaudent Angeli, laudantes benedicunt Dominum." And so again, the
Antiphon, the "Ad te clamamus exules filii Hevæ, ad te suspiramus
gementes et flentes in hac lacrymarum valle," and "Eia ergo, advocata
nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos ad nos converte," and "O clemens,
O pia, O dulcis Virgo Maria." Or the Hymn, "Ave Maris stella, Dei Mater
alma," and "Virgo singularis, inter omnes mitis, nos culpis solutos,
mites fac et castos."


3.

Nor does it avail to object that, in this contrast of devotional
exercises, the human will supplant the Divine, from the infirmity of our
nature; for, I repeat, the question is one of fact, whether it has done
so. And next it must be asked, whether the character of much of the
Protestant devotion towards our Lord has been that of adoration at all;
and not rather such as we pay to an excellent human being, that is, no
higher devotion than that which Catholics pay to St. Mary, differing
from it, however, in often being familiar, rude, and earthly. Carnal
minds will ever create a carnal worship for themselves; and to forbid
them the service of the Saints will have no tendency to teach them the
worship of God.

Moreover, it must be observed, what is very important, that great and
constant as is the devotion which the Catholic pays to the Blessed Mary,
it has a special province, and has far more connexion with the public
services and the festive aspect of Christianity, and with certain
extraordinary offices which she holds, than with what is strictly
personal and primary in religion.

Two instances will serve in illustration of this, and they are but
samples of many others.[428:1]


4.

(1.) For example, St. Ignatius' Spiritual Exercises are among the most
approved methods of devotion in the modern Catholic Church; they proceed
from one of the most celebrated of her Saints, and have the praise of
Popes, and of the most eminent masters of the spiritual life. A Bull of
Paul the Third's "approves, praises, and sanctions all and everything
contained in them;" indulgences are granted to the performance of them
by the same Pope, by Alexander the Seventh, and by Benedict the
Fourteenth. St. Carlo Borromeo declared that he learned more from them
than from all other books together; St. Francis de Sales calls them "a
holy method of reformation," and they are the model on which all the
extraordinary devotions of religious men or bodies, and the course of
missions, are conducted. If there is a document which is the
authoritative exponent of the inward communion of the members of the
modern Catholic Church with their God and Saviour, it is this work.

The Exercises are directed to the removal of obstacles in the way of the
soul's receiving and profiting by the gifts of God. They undertake to
effect this in three ways; by removing all objects of this world, and,
as it were, bringing the soul "into the solitude where God may speak to
its heart;" next, by setting before it the ultimate end of man, and its
own deviations from it, the beauty of holiness, and the pattern of
Christ; and, lastly, by giving rules for its correction. They consist of
a course of prayers, meditations, self-examinations, and the like, which
in its complete extent lasts thirty days; and these are divided into
three stages,--the _Via Purgativa_, in which sin is the main subject of
consideration; the _Via Illuminativa_, which is devoted to the
contemplation of our Lord's passion, involving the process of the
determination of our calling; and the _Via Unitiva_, in which we proceed
to the contemplation of our Lord's resurrection and ascension.


5.

No more need be added in order to introduce the remark for which I have
referred to these Exercises; viz. that in a work so highly sanctioned,
so widely received, so intimately bearing upon the most sacred points of
personal religion, very slight mention occurs of devotion to the Blessed
Virgin, Mother of God. There is one mention of her in the rule given for
the first Prelude or preparation, in which the person meditating is
directed to consider as before him a church, or other place with Christ
in it, St. Mary, and whatever else is suitable to the subject of
meditation. Another is in the third Exercise, in which one of the three
addresses is made to our Lady, Christ's Mother, requesting earnestly
"her intercession with her Son;" to which is to be added the Ave Mary.
In the beginning of the Second Week there is a form of offering
ourselves to God in the presence of "His infinite goodness," and with
the witness of His "glorious Virgin Mother Mary, and the whole host of
heaven." At the end of the Meditation upon the Angel Gabriel's mission
to St. Mary, there is an address to each Divine Person, to "the Word
Incarnate and to His Mother." In the Meditation upon the Two Standards,
there is an address prescribed to St. Mary to implore grace from her Son
through her, with an Ave Mary after it.

In the beginning of the Third Week one address is prescribed to Christ;
or three, if devotion incites, to Mother, Son, and Father. In the
description given of three different modes of prayer we are told, if we
would imitate the Blessed Mary, we must recommend ourselves to her, as
having power with her Son, and presently the Ave Mary, _Salve Regina_,
and other forms are prescribed, as is usual after all prayers. And this
is pretty much the whole of the devotion, if it may so be called, which
is recommended towards St. Mary in the course of so many apparently as a
hundred and fifty Meditations, and those chiefly on the events in our
Lord's earthly history as recorded in Scripture. It would seem then that
whatever be the influence of the doctrines connected with the Blessed
Virgin and the Saints in the Catholic Church, at least they do not
impede or obscure the freest exercise and the fullest manifestation of
the devotional feelings towards God and Christ.


6.

(2.) The other instance which I give in illustration is of a different
kind, but is suitable to mention. About forty little books have come
into my possession which are in circulation among the laity at Rome, and
answer to the smaller publications of the Christian Knowledge Society
among ourselves. They have been taken almost at hazard from a number of
such works, and are of various lengths; some running to as many as two
or three hundred pages, others consisting of scarce a dozen. They may be
divided into three classes:--a third part consists of books on practical
subjects; another third is upon the Incarnation and Passion; and of the
rest, a portion is upon the Sacraments, especially the Holy Eucharist,
with two or three for the use of Missions, but the greater part is about
the Blessed Virgin.

As to the class on practical subjects, they are on such as the
following: "La Consolazione degl' Infermi;" "Pensieri di una donna sul
vestire moderno;" "L'Inferno Aperto;" "Il Purgatorio Aperto;" St.
Alphonso Liguori's "Massime eterne;" other Maxims by St. Francis de
Sales for every day in the year; "Pratica per ben confessarsi e
communicarsi;" and the like.

The titles of the second class on the Incarnation and Passion are such
as "Gesu dalla Croce al cuore del peccatore;" "Novena del Ss. Natale di
G. C.;" "Associazione pel culto perpetuo del divin cuore;" "Compendio
della Passione."

In the third are "Il Mese Eucaristico," "Il divoto di Maria," Feasts of
the Blessed Virgin, &c.


7.

These books in all three divisions are, as even the titles of some of
them show, in great measure made up of Meditations; such are the "Breve
e pie Meditazioni" of P. Crasset; the "Meditazioni per ciascun giorno
del mese sulla Passione;" the "Meditazioni per l'ora Eucaristica." Now
of these it may be said generally, that in the body of the Meditation
St. Mary is hardly mentioned at all. For instance, in the Meditations on
the Passion, a book used for distribution, through two hundred and
seventy-seven pages St. Mary is not once named. In the Prayers for Mass
which are added, she is introduced, at the Confiteor, thus, "I pray the
Virgin, the Angels, the Apostles, and all the Saints of heaven to
intercede," &c.; and in the Preparation for Penance, she is once
addressed, after our Lord, as the Refuge of sinners, with the Saints and
Guardian Angel; and at the end of the Exercise there is a similar prayer
of four lines for the intercession of St. Mary, Angels and Saints of
heaven. In the Exercise for Communion, in a prayer to our Lord, "my only
and infinite good, my treasure, my life, my paradise, my all," the
merits of the Saints are mentioned, "especially of St. Mary." She is
also mentioned with Angels and Saints at the termination.

In a collection of "Spiritual Lauds" for Missions, of thirty-six Hymns,
we find as many as eleven addressed to St. Mary, or relating to her,
among which are translations of the _Ave Maris Stella_, and the _Stabat
Mater_, and the _Salve Regina_; and one is on "the sinner's reliance on
Mary." Five, however, which are upon Repentance, are entirely engaged
upon the subjects of our Lord and sin, with the exception of an address
to St. Mary at the end of two of them. Seven others, upon sin, the
Crucifixion, and the Four Last Things, do not mention the Blessed
Virgin's name.

To the Manual for the Perpetual Adoration of the Divine Heart of Jesus
there is appended one chapter on the Immaculate Conception.


8.

One of the most important of these books is the French _Pensez-y bien_,
which seems a favourite, since there are two translations of it, one of
them being the fifteenth edition; and it is used for distribution in
Missions. In these reflections there is scarcely a word said of St.
Mary. At the end there is a Method of reciting the Crown of the Seven
Dolours of the Virgin Mary, which contains seven prayers to her, and the
_Stabat Mater_.

One of the longest in the whole collection is a tract consisting
principally of Meditations on the Holy Communion; under the title of the
"Eucharistic Month," as already mentioned. In these "Preparations,"
"Aspirations," &c., St. Mary is but once mentioned, and that in a prayer
addressed to our Lord. "O my sweetest Brother," it says with an allusion
to the Canticles, "who, being made Man for my salvation, hast sucked the
milk from the virginal breast of her, who is my Mother by grace," &c. In
a small "Instruction" given to children on their first Communion, there
are the following questions and answers: "Is our Lady in the Host? No.
Are the Angels and the Saints? No. Why not? Because they have no place
there."


9.

Now coming to those in the third class, which directly relate to the
Blessed Mary, such as "Esercizio ad Onore dell' addolorato cuore di
Maria," "Novena di Preparazione alla festa dell' Assunzione," "Li
Quindici Misteri del Santo Rosario," the principal is Father Segneri's
"Il divoto di Maria," which requires a distinct notice. It is far from
the intention of these remarks to deny the high place which the Holy
Virgin holds in the devotion of Catholics; I am but bringing evidence of
its not interfering with that incommunicable and awful relation which
exists between the creature and the Creator; and, if the foregoing
instances show, as far as they go, that that relation is preserved
inviolate in such honours as are paid to St. Mary, so will this treatise
throw light upon the _rationale_ by which the distinction is preserved
between the worship of God and the honour of an exalted creature, and
that in singular accordance with the remarks made in the foregoing
Section.


10.

This work of Segneri is written against persons who continue in sins
under pretence of their devotion to St. Mary, and in consequence he is
led to draw out the idea which good Catholics have of her. The idea is
this, that she is absolutely the first of created beings. Thus the
treatise says, that "God might have easily made a more beautiful
firmament, and a greener earth, but it was not possible to make a higher
Mother than the Virgin Mary; and in her formation there has been
conferred on mere creatures all the glory of which they are capable,
remaining mere creatures," p. 34. And as containing all created
perfection, she has all those attributes, which, as was noticed above,
the Arians and other heretics applied to our Lord, and which the Church
denied of Him as infinitely below His Supreme Majesty. Thus she is "the
created Idea in the making of the world," p. 20; "which, as being a more
exact copy of the Incarnate Idea than was elsewhere to be found, was
used as the original of the rest of the creation," p. 21. To her are
applied the words, "Ego primogenita prodivi ex ore Altissimi," because
she was predestinated in the Eternal Mind coevally with the Incarnation
of her Divine Son. But to Him alone the title of Wisdom Incarnate is
reserved, p. 25. Again, Christ is the First-born by nature; the Virgin
in a less sublime order, viz. that of adoption. Again, if omnipotence is
ascribed to her, it is a participated omnipotence (as she and all Saints
have a participated sonship, divinity, glory, holiness, and worship),
and is explained by the words, "Quod Deus imperio, tu prece, Virgo,
potes."


11.

Again, a special office is assigned to the Blessed Virgin, that is,
special as compared with all other Saints; but it is marked off with the
utmost precision from that assigned to our Lord. Thus she is said to
have been made "the arbitress of every _effect_ coming from God's
mercy." Because she is the Mother of God, the salvation of mankind is
said to be given to her prayers "_de congruo_, but _de condigno_ it is
due only to the blood of the Redeemer," p. 113. Merit is ascribed to
Christ, and prayer to St. Mary, p. 162. The whole may be expressed in
the words, "_Unica_ spes mea Jesus, et post Jesum Virgo Maria. Amen."

Again, a distinct _cultus_ is assigned to Mary, but the reason of it is
said to be the transcendent dignity of her Son. "A particular _cultus_
is due to the Virgin beyond comparison greater than that given to any
other Saint, because her dignity belongs to another order, namely to one
which in some sense belongs to the order of the Hypostatic Union itself,
and is necessarily connected with it," p. 41. And "Her being the Mother
of God is the source of all the extraordinary honours due to Mary," p.
35.

It is remarkable that the "Monstra te esse Matrem" is explained, p. 158,
as "Show thyself to be _our_ Mother;" an interpretation which I think I
have found elsewhere in these Tracts, and also in a book commonly used
in religious houses, called the "Journal of Meditations," and
elsewhere.[436:1]

It must be kept in mind that my object here is not to prove the dogmatic
accuracy of what these popular publications teach concerning the
prerogatives of the Blessed Virgin, but to show that that teaching is
not such as to obscure the divine glory of her Son. We must ask for
clearer evidence before we are able to admit so grave a charge; and so
much may suffice on the Sixth Test of fidelity in the development of an
idea, as applied to the Catholic system.


FOOTNOTES:

[422:1] Supr. p. 173.

[423:1] Supr. p. 174.

[428:1] _E. g._ the "De Imitatione," the "Introduction à la Vie Dévote,"
the "Spiritual Combat," the "Anima Divota," the "Paradisus Animæ," the
"Regula Cleri," the "Garden of the Soul," &c. &c. [Also, the Roman
Catechism, drawn up expressly for Parish instruction, a book in which,
out of nearly 600 pages, scarcely half-a-dozen make mention of the
Blessed Virgin, though without any disparagement thereby, or thought of
disparagement, of her special prerogatives.]

[436:1] [Vid. Via Media, vol. ii. pp. 121-2.]




