CHAPTER VI.

APPLICATION OF THE SEVEN NOTES TO THE EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS OF CHRISTIAN
DOCTRINE.


APPLICATION OF THE FIRST NOTE OF A TRUE DEVELOPMENT. PRESERVATION OF
TYPE.

Now let me attempt to apply the foregoing seven Notes of fidelity in
intellectual developments to the instance of Christian Doctrine. And
first as to the Note of _identity of type_.

I have said above, that, whereas all great ideas are found, as time goes
on, to involve much which was not seen at first to belong to them, and
have developments, that is enlargements, applications, uses and
fortunes, very various, one security against error and perversion in the
process is the maintenance of the original type, which the idea
presented to the world at its origin, amid and through all its apparent
changes and vicissitudes from first to last.

How does this apply to Christianity? What is its original type? and has
that type been preserved in the developments commonly called Catholic,
which have followed, and in the Church which embodies and teaches them?
Let us take it as the world now views it in its age; and let us take it
as the world once viewed it in its youth, and let us see whether there
be any great difference between the early and the later description of
it. The following statement will show my meaning:--

There is a religious communion claiming a divine commission, and
holding all other religious bodies around it heretical or infidel; it is
a well-organized, well-disciplined body; it is a sort of secret society,
binding together its members by influences and by engagements which it
is difficult for strangers to ascertain. It is spread over the known
world; it may be weak or insignificant locally, but it is strong on the
whole from its continuity; it may be smaller than all other religious
bodies together, but is larger than each separately. It is a natural
enemy to governments external to itself; it is intolerant and
engrossing, and tends to a new modelling of society; it breaks laws, it
divides families. It is a gross superstition; it is charged with the
foulest crimes; it is despised by the intellect of the day; it is
frightful to the imagination of the many. And there is but one communion
such.

Place this description before Pliny or Julian; place it before Frederick
the Second or Guizot.[208:1] "Apparent diræ facies." Each knows at once,
without asking a question, who is meant by it. One object, and only one,
absorbs each item of the detail of the delineation.


SECTION I.

THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST CENTURIES.

The _primâ facie_ view of early Christianity, in the eyes of witnesses
external to it, is presented to us in the brief but vivid descriptions
given by Tacitus, Suetonius, and Pliny, the only heathen writers who
distinctly mention it for the first hundred and fifty years.

Tacitus is led to speak of the Religion, on occasion of the
conflagration of Rome, which was popularly imputed to Nero. "To put an
end to the report," he says, "he laid the guilt on others, and visited
them with the most exquisite punishment, those, namely, who, held in
abhorrence for their crimes (_per flagitia invisos_), were popularly
called Christians. The author of that profession (_nominis_) was Christ,
who, in the reign of Tiberius, was capitally punished by the Procurator,
Pontius Pilate. The deadly superstition (_exitiabilis superstitio_),
though checked for a while, broke out afresh; and that, not only
throughout Judæa, the original seat of the evil, but through the City
also, whither all things atrocious or shocking (_atrocia aut pudenda_)
flow together from every quarter and thrive. At first, certain were
seized who avowed it; then, on their report, a vast multitude were
convicted, not so much of firing the City, as of hatred of mankind
(_odio humani generis_)." After describing their tortures, he continues
"In consequence, though they were guilty, and deserved most signal
punishment, they began to be pitied, as if destroyed not for any public
object, but from the barbarity of one man."

Suetonius relates the same transactions thus: "Capital punishments were
inflicted on the Christians, a class of men of a new and magical
superstition (_superstitionis novæ et maleficæ_)." What gives additional
character to this statement is its context; for it occurs as one out of
various police or sumptuary or domestic regulations, which Nero made;
such as "controlling private expenses, forbidding taverns to serve meat,
repressing the contests of theatrical parties, and securing the
integrity of wills." When Pliny was Governor of Pontus, he wrote his
celebrated letter to the Emperor Trajan, to ask advice how he was to
deal with the Christians, whom he found there in great numbers. One of
his points of hesitation was, whether the very profession of
Christianity was not by itself sufficient to justify punishment;
"whether the name itself should be visited, though clear of flagitious
acts (_flagitia_), or only when connected with them." He says, he had
ordered for execution such as persevered in their profession, after
repeated warnings, "as not doubting, whatever it was they professed,
that at any rate contumacy and inflexible obstinacy ought to be
punished." He required them to invoke the gods, to sacrifice wine and
frankincense to the images of the Emperor, and to blaspheme Christ; "to
which," he adds, "it is said no real Christian can be compelled."
Renegades informed him that "the sum total of their offence or fault was
meeting before light on an appointed day, and saying with one another a
form of words (_carmen_) to Christ, as if to a god, and binding
themselves by oath, (not to the commission of any wickedness, but)
against the commission of theft, robbery, adultery, breach of trust,
denial of deposits; that, after this they were accustomed to separate,
and then to meet again for a meal, but eaten all together and harmless;
however, that they had even left this off after his edicts enforcing the
Imperial prohibition of _Hetæriæ_ or Associations." He proceeded to put
two women to the torture, but "discovered nothing beyond a bad and
excessive superstition" (_superstitionem pravam et immodicam_), "the
contagion" of which, he continues, "had spread through villages and
country, till the temples were emptied of worshippers."


2.

In these testimonies, which will form a natural and convenient text for
what is to follow, we have various characteristics brought before us of
the religion to which they relate. It was a superstition, as all three
writers agree; a bad and excessive superstition, according to Pliny; a
magical superstition, according to Suetonius; a deadly superstition,
according to Tacitus. Next, it was embodied in a society, and moreover a
secret and unlawful society or _hetæria_; and it was a proselytizing
society; and its very name was connected with "flagitious," "atrocious,"
and "shocking" acts.


3.

Now these few points, which are not all which might be set down, contain
in themselves a distinct and significant description of Christianity;
but they have far greater meaning when illustrated by the history of the
times, the testimony of later writers, and the acts of the Roman
government towards its professors. It is impossible to mistake the
judgment passed on the religion by these three writers, and still more
clearly by other writers and Imperial functionaries. They evidently
associated Christianity with the oriental superstitions, whether
propagated by individuals or embodied in a rite, which were in that day
traversing the Empire, and which in the event acted so remarkable a part
in breaking up the national forms of worship, and so in preparing the
way for Christianity. This, then, is the broad view which the educated
heathen took of Christianity; and, if it had been very unlike those
rites and curious arts in external appearance, they would not have
confused it with them.

Changes in society are, by a providential appointment, commonly preceded
and facilitated by the setting in of a certain current in men's thoughts
and feelings in that direction towards which a change is to be made.
And, as lighter substances whirl about before the tempest and presage
it, so words and deeds, ominous but not effective of the coming
revolution, are circulated beforehand through the multitude, or pass
across the field of events. This was specially the case with
Christianity, as became its high dignity; it came heralded and attended
by a crowd of shadows, shadows of itself, impotent and monstrous as
shadows are, but not at first sight distinguishable from it by common
spectators. Before the mission of the Apostles, a movement, of which
there had been earlier parallels, had begun in Egypt, Syria, and the
neighbouring countries, tending to the propagation of new and peculiar
forms of worship throughout the Empire. Prophecies were afloat that some
new order of things was coming in from the East, which increased the
existing unsettlement of the popular mind; pretenders made attempts to
satisfy its wants, and old Traditions of the Truth, embodied for ages in
local or in national religions, gave to these attempts a doctrinal and
ritual shape, which became an additional point of resemblance to that
Truth which was soon visibly to appear.


4.

The distinctive character of the rites in question lay in their
appealing to the gloomy rather than to the cheerful and hopeful
feelings, and in their influencing the mind through fear. The notions of
guilt and expiation, of evil and good to come, and of dealings with the
invisible world, were in some shape or other pre-eminent in them, and
formed a striking contrast to the classical polytheism, which was gay
and graceful, as was natural in a civilized age. The new rites, on the
other hand, were secret; their doctrine was mysterious; their profession
was a discipline, beginning in a formal initiation, manifested in an
association, and exercised in privation and pain. They were from the
nature of the case proselytizing societies, for they were rising into
power; nor were they local, but vagrant, restless, intrusive, and
encroaching. Their pretensions to supernatural knowledge brought them
into easy connexion with magic and astrology, which are as attractive to
the wealthy and luxurious as the more vulgar superstitions to the
populace.


5.

Such were the rites of Cybele, Isis, and Mithras; such the Chaldeans, as
they were commonly called, and the Magi; they came from one part of the
world, and during the first and second century spread with busy
perseverance to the northern and western extremities of the
empire.[213:1] Traces of the mysteries of Cybele, a Syrian deity, if the
famous temple at Hierapolis was hers, have been found in Spain, in Gaul,
and in Britain, as high up as the wall of Severus. The worship of Isis
was the most widely spread of all the pagan deities; it was received in
Ethiopia and in Germany, and even the name of Paris has been fancifully
traced to it. Both worships, as well as the Science of Magic, had their
colleges of priests and devotees, which were governed by a president,
and in some places were supported by farms. Their processions passed
from town to town, begging as they went and attracting proselytes.
Apuleius describes one of them as seizing a whip, accusing himself of
some offence, and scourging himself in public. These strollers,
_circulatores_ or _agyrtæ_ in classical language, told fortunes, and
distributed prophetical tickets to the ignorant people who consulted
them. Also, they were learned in the doctrine of omens, of lucky and
unlucky days, of the rites of expiation and of sacrifices. Such an
_agyrtes_ or itinerant was the notorious Alexander of Abonotichus, till
he managed to establish himself in Pontus, where he carried on so
successful an imposition that his fame reached Rome, and men in office
and station entrusted him with their dearest political secrets. Such a
wanderer, with a far more religious bearing and a high reputation for
virtue, was Apollonius of Tyana, who professed the Pythagorean
philosophy, claimed the gift of miracles, and roamed about preaching,
teaching, healing, and prophesying from India and Alexandria to Athens
and Rome. Another solitary proselytizer, though of an earlier time and
of an avowed profligacy, had been the Sacrificulus, viewed with such
horror by the Roman Senate, as introducing the infamous Bacchic rites
into Rome. Such, again, were those degenerate children of a divine
religion, who, in the words of their Creator and Judge, "compassed sea
and land to make one proselyte," and made him "twofold more the child of
hell than themselves."


6.

These vagrant religionists for the most part professed a severe rule of
life, and sometimes one of fanatical mortification. In the mysteries of
Mithras, the initiation[214:1] was preceded by fasting and abstinence,
and a variety of painful trials; it was made by means of a baptism as a
spiritual washing; and it included an offering of bread, and some emblem
of a resurrection. In the Samothracian rites it had been a custom to
initiate children; confession too of greater crimes seems to have been
required, and would naturally be involved in others in the inquisition
prosecuted into the past lives of the candidates for initiation. The
garments of the converts were white; their calling was considered as a
warfare (_militia_), and was undertaken with a _sacramentum_, or
military oath. The priests shaved their heads and wore linen, and when
they were dead were buried in a sacerdotal garment. It is scarcely
necessary to refer to the mutilation inflicted on the priests of Cybele;
one instance of their scourgings has been already mentioned; and
Tertullian speaks of their high priest cutting his arms for the life of
the Emperor Marcus.[215:1] The priests of Isis, in lamentation for
Osiris, tore their breasts with pine cones. This lamentation was a
ritual observance, founded on some religious mystery: Isis lost Osiris,
and the initiated wept in memory of her sorrow; the Syrian goddess had
wept over dead Thammuz, and her mystics commemorated it by a ceremonial
woe; in the rites of Bacchus, an image was laid on a bier at
midnight,[215:2] which was bewailed in metrical hymns; the god was
supposed to die, and then to revive. Nor was this the only worship which
was continued through the night; while some of the rites were performed
in caves.


7.

Only a heavenly light can give purity to nocturnal and subterraneous
worship. Caves were at that time appropriated to the worship of the
infernal gods. It was but natural that these wild religions should be
connected with magic and its kindred arts; magic has at all times led to
cruelty, and licentiousness would be the inevitable reaction from a
temporary strictness. An extraordinary profession, when men are in a
state of mere nature, makes hypocrites or madmen, and will in no long
time be discarded except by the few. The world of that day associated
together in one company, Isiac, Phrygian, Mithriac, Chaldean, wizard,
astrologer, fortune-teller, itinerant, and, as was not unnatural, Jew.
Magic was professed by the profligate Alexander, and was imputed to the
grave Apollonius. The rites of Mithras came from the Magi of Persia; and
it is obviously difficult to distinguish in principle the ceremonies of
the Syrian Taurobolium from those of the Necyomantia in the Odyssey, or
of Canidia in Horace.

The Theodosian Code calls magic generally a "superstition;" and magic,
orgies, mysteries, and "sabbathizings," were referred to the same
"barbarous" origin. "Magical superstitions," the "rites of the Magi,"
the "promises of the Chaldeans," and the "Mathematici," are familiar to
the readers of Tacitus. The Emperor Otho, an avowed patron of oriental
fashions, took part in the rites of Isis, and consulted the Mathematici.
Vespasian, who also consulted them, is heard of in Egypt as performing
miracles at the suggestion of Serapis. Tiberius, in an edict, classes
together "Egyptian and Jewish rites;" and Tacitus and Suetonius, in
recording it, speak of the two religions together as "_ea
superstitio_."[216:1] Augustus had already associated them together as
superstitions, and as unlawful, and that in contrast to others of a like
foreign origin. "As to foreign rites (_peregrinæ ceremoniæ_)," says
Suetonius, "as he paid more reverence to those which were old and
enjoined, so did he hold the rest in contempt."[216:2] He goes on to say
that, even on the judgment-seat, he had recognized the Eleusinian
priests, into whose mysteries he had been initiated at Athens; "whereas,
when travelling in Egypt, he had refused to see Apis, and had approved
of his grandson Caligula's passing by Judæa without sacrificing at
Jerusalem." Plutarch speaks of magic as connected with the mournful
mysteries of Orpheus and Zoroaster, with the Egyptian and the Phrygian;
and, in his Treatise on Superstition, he puts together in one clause, as
specimens of that disease of mind, "covering oneself with mud, wallowing
in the mire, sabbathizings, fallings on the face, unseemly postures,
foreign adorations."[216:3] Ovid mentions in consecutive verses the
rites of "Adonis lamented by Venus," "The Sabbath of the Syrian Jew,"
and the "Memphitic Temple of Io in her linen dress."[216:4] Juvenal
speaks of the rites, as well as the language and the music, of the
Syrian Orontes having flooded Rome; and, in his description of the
superstition of the Roman women, he places the low Jewish fortune-teller
between the pompous priests of Cybele and Isis, and the bloody
witchcraft of the Armenian haruspex and the astrology of the
Chaldeans.[217:1]


8.

The Christian, being at first accounted a kind of Jew, was even on that
score included in whatever odium, and whatever bad associations,
attended on the Jewish name. But in a little time his independence of
the rejected people was clearly understood, as even the persecutions
show; and he stood upon his own ground. Still his character did not
change in the eyes of the world; for favour or for reproach, he was
still associated with the votaries of secret and magical rites. The
Emperor Hadrian, noted as he is for his inquisitive temper, and a
partaker in so many mysteries,[217:2] still believed that the Christians
of Egypt allowed themselves in the worship of Serapis. They are brought
into connexion with the magic of Egypt in the history of what is
commonly called the Thundering Legion, so far as this, that the rain
which relieved the Emperor's army in the field, and which the Church
ascribed to the prayers of the Christian soldiers, is by Dio Cassius
attributed to an Egyptian magician, who obtained it by invoking Mercury
and other spirits. This war had been the occasion of one of the first
recognitions which the state had conceded to the Oriental rites, though
statesmen and emperors, as private men, had long taken part in them. The
Emperor Marcus had been urged by his fears of the Marcomanni to resort
to these foreign introductions, and is said to have employed Magi and
Chaldeans in averting an unsuccessful issue of the war. It is
observable that, in the growing countenance which was extended to these
rites in the third century, Christianity came in for a share. The chapel
of Alexander Severus contained statues of Abraham, Orpheus, Apollonius,
Pythagoras, and our Lord. Here indeed, as in the case of Zenobia's
Judaism, an eclectic philosophy aided the comprehension of religions.
But, immediately before Alexander, Heliogabalus, who was no philosopher,
while he formally seated his Syrian idol in the Palatine, while he
observed the mysteries of Cybele and Adonis, and celebrated his magic
rites with human victims, intended also, according to Lampridius, to
unite with his horrible superstition "the Jewish and Samaritan religions
and the Christian rite, that so the priesthood of Heliogabalus might
comprise the mystery of every worship."[218:1] Hence, more or less, the
stories which occur in ecclesiastical history of the conversion or
good-will of the emperors to the Christian faith, of Hadrian, Mammæa,
and others, besides Heliogabalus and Alexander. Such stories might often
mean little more than that they favoured it among other forms of
Oriental superstition.


9.

What has been said is sufficient to bring before the mind an historical
fact, which indeed does not need evidence. Upon the established
religions of Europe the East had renewed her encroachments, and was
pouring forth a family of rites which in various ways attracted the
attention of the luxurious, the political, the ignorant, the restless,
and the remorseful. Armenian, Chaldee, Egyptian, Jew, Syrian, Phrygian,
as the case might be, was the designation of the new hierophant; and
magic, superstition, barbarism, jugglery, were the names given to his
rite by the world. In this company appeared Christianity. When then
three well-informed writers call Christianity a superstition and a
magical superstition, they were not using words at random, or the
language of abuse, but they were describing it in distinct and
recognized terms as cognate to those gloomy, secret, odious,
disreputable religions which were making so much disturbance up and down
the empire.


10.

The impression made on the world by circumstances immediately before the
rise of Christianity received a sort of confirmation upon its rise, in
the appearance of the Gnostic and kindred heresies, which issued from
the Church during the second and third centuries. Their resemblance in
ritual and constitution to the Oriental religions, sometimes their
historical relationship, is undeniable; and certainly it is a singular
coincidence, that Christianity should be first called a magical
superstition by Suetonius, and then should be found in the intimate
company, and seemingly the parent, of a multitude of magical
superstitions, if there was nothing in the Religion itself to give rise
to such a charge.


11.

The Gnostic family[219:1] suitably traces its origin to a mixed race,
which had commenced its national history by associating Orientalism with
Revelation. After the captivity of the ten tribes, Samaria was colonized
by "men from Babylon and Cushan, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from
Sepharvaim," who were instructed at their own instance in "the manner of
the God of the land," by one of the priests of the Church of Jeroboam.
The consequence was, that "they feared the Lord and served their own
gods." Of this country was Simon, the reputed patriarch of the
Gnostics; and he is introduced in the Acts of the Apostles as professing
those magical powers which were so principal a characteristic of the
Oriental mysteries. His heresy, though broken into a multitude of sects,
was poured over the world with a Catholicity not inferior in its day to
that of Christianity. St. Peter, who fell in with him originally in
Samaria, seems to have encountered him again at Rome. At Rome, St.
Polycarp met Marcion of Pontus, whose followers spread through Italy,
Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and Persia; Valentinus preached his doctrines in
Alexandria, Rome, and Cyprus; and we read of his disciples in Crete,
Cæsarea, Antioch, and other parts of the East. Bardesanes and his
followers were found in Mesopotamia. The Carpocratians are spoken of at
Alexandria, at Rome, and in Cephallenia; the Basilidians spread through
the greater part of Egypt; the Ophites were apparently in Bithynia and
Galatia; the Cainites or Caians in Africa, and the Marcosians in Gaul.
To these must be added several sects, which, though not strictly of the
Gnostic stock, are associated with them in date, character, and
origin;--the Ebionites of Palestine, the Cerinthians, who rose in some
part of Asia Minor, the Encratites and kindred sects, who spread from
Mesopotamia to Syria, to Cilicia and other provinces of Asia Minor, and
thence to Rome, Gaul, Aquitaine, and Spain; and the Montanists, who,
with a town in Phrygia for their metropolis, reached at length from
Constantinople to Carthage.

"When [the reader of Christian history] comes to the second century,"
says Dr. Burton, "he finds that Gnosticism, under some form or other,
was professed in every part of the then civilized world. He finds it
divided into schools, as numerously and as zealously attended as any
which Greece or Asia could boast in their happiest days. He meets with
names totally unknown to him before, which excited as much sensation as
those of Aristotle or Plato. He hears of volumes having been written in
support of this new philosophy, not one of which has survived to our own
day."[221:1] Many of the founders of these sects had been Christians;
others were of Jewish parentage; others were more or less connected in
fact with the Pagan rites to which their own bore so great a
resemblance. Montanus seems even to have been a mutilated priest of
Cybele; the followers of Prodicus professed to possess the secret books
of Zoroaster; and the doctrine of dualism, which so many of the sects
held, is to be traced to the same source. Basilides seems to have
recognized Mithras as the Supreme Being, or the Prince of Angels, or the
Sun, if Mithras is equivalent to Abraxas, which was inscribed upon his
amulets: on the other hand, he is said to have been taught by an
immediate disciple of St. Peter, and Valentinus by an immediate disciple
of St. Paul. Marcion was the son of a Bishop of Pontus; Tatian, a
disciple of St. Justin Martyr.


12.

Whatever might be the history of these sects, and though it may be a
question whether they can be properly called "superstitions," and though
many of them numbered educated men among their teachers and followers,
they closely resembled, at least in ritual and profession, the vagrant
Pagan mysteries which have been above described. Their very name of
"Gnostic" implied the possession of a secret, which was to be
communicated to their disciples. Ceremonial observances were the
preparation, and symbolical rites the instrument, of initiation. Tatian
and Montanus, the representatives of very distinct schools, agreed in
making asceticism a rule of life. The followers of each of these
sectaries abstained from wine; the Tatianites and Marcionites, from
flesh; the Montanists kept three Lents in the year. All the Gnostic
sects seem to have condemned marriage on one or other reason.[222:1] The
Marcionites had three baptisms or more; the Marcosians had two rites of
what they called redemption; the latter of these was celebrated as a
marriage, and the room adorned as a marriage-chamber. A consecration to
a priesthood then followed with anointing. An extreme unction was
another of their rites, and prayers for the dead one of their
observances. Bardesanes and Harmonius were famous for the beauty of
their chants. The prophecies of Montanus were delivered, like the
oracles of the heathen, in a state of enthusiasm or ecstasy. To
Epiphanes, the son of Carpocrates, who died at the age of seventeen, a
temple was erected in the island of Cephallenia, his mother's
birthplace, where he was celebrated with hymns and sacrifices. A similar
honour was paid by the Carpocratians to Homer, Pythagoras, Plato,
Aristotle, as well as to the Apostles; crowns were placed upon their
images, and incense burned before them. In one of the inscriptions found
at Cyrene, about twenty years since, Zoroaster, Pythagoras, Epicurus,
and others, are put together with our Lord, as guides of conduct. These
inscriptions also contain the Carpocratian tenet of a community of
women. I am unwilling to allude to the Agapæ and Communions of certain
of these sects, which were not surpassed in profligacy by the Pagan
rites of which they were an imitation. The very name of Gnostic became
an expression for the worst impurities, and no one dared eat bread with
them, or use their culinary instruments or plates.


13.

These profligate excesses are found in connexion with the exercise of
magic and astrology.[223:1] The amulets of the Basilidians are still
extant in great numbers, inscribed with symbols, some Christian, some
with figures of Isis, Serapis, and Anubis, represented according to the
gross indecencies of the Egyptian mythology.[223:2] St. Irenæus had
already connected together the two crimes in speaking of the Simonians:
"Their mystical priests," he says, "live in lewdness, and practise
magic, according to the ability of each. They use exorcisms and
incantations; love-potions too, and seductive spells; the virtue of
spirits, and dreams, and all other curious arts, they diligently
observe."[223:3] The Marcosians were especially devoted to these
"curious arts," which are also ascribed to Carpocrates and Apelles.
Marcion and others are reported to have used astrology. Tertullian
speaks generally of the sects of his day: "Infamous are the dealings of
the heretics with sorcerers very many, with mountebanks, with
astrologers, with philosophers, to wit, such as are given to curious
questions. They everywhere remember, 'Seek, and ye shall find.'"[223:4]

Such were the Gnostics; and to external and prejudiced spectators,
whether philosophers, as Celsus and Porphyry, or the multitude, they
wore an appearance sufficiently like the Church to be mistaken for her
in the latter part of the Ante-nicene period, as she was confused with
the Pagan mysteries in the earlier.


14.

Of course it may happen that the common estimate concerning a person or
a body is purely accidental and unfounded; but in such cases it is not
lasting. Such were the calumnies of child-eating and impurity in the
Christian meetings, which were almost extinct by the time of Origen, and
which might arise from the world's confusing them with the pagan and
heretical rites. But when it continues from age to age, it is certainly
an index of a fact, and corresponds to definite qualities in the object
to which it relates. In that case, even mistakes carry information; for
they are cognate to the truth, and we can allow for them. Often what
seems like a mistake is merely the mode in which the informant conveys
his testimony, or the impression which a fact makes on him. Censure is
the natural tone of one man in a case where praise is the natural tone
of another; the very same character or action inspires one mind with
enthusiasm, and another with contempt. What to one man is magnanimity,
to another is romance, and pride to a third, and pretence to a fourth,
while to a fifth it is simply unintelligible; and yet there is a certain
analogy in their separate testimonies, which conveys to us what the
thing is like and what it is not like. When a man's acknowledged note is
superstition, we may be pretty sure we shall not find him an Academic or
an Epicurean; and even words which are ambiguous, as "atheist," or
"reformer," admit of a sure interpretation when we are informed of the
speaker. In like manner, there is a certain general correspondence
between magic and miracle, obstinacy and faith, insubordination and zeal
for religion, sophistry and argumentative talent, craft and meekness, as
is obvious. Let us proceed then in our contemplation of this reflection,
as it may be called of primitive Christianity in the mirror of the
world.


15.

All three writers, Tacitus, Suetonius, and Pliny, call it a
"superstition;" this is no accidental imputation, but is repeated by a
variety of subsequent writers and speakers. The charge of Thyestean
banquets scarcely lasts a hundred years; but, while pagan witnesses are
to be found, the Church is accused of superstition. The heathen
disputant in Minucius calls Christianity, "_Vana et demens
superstitio_." The lawyer Modestinus speaks, with an apparent allusion
to Christianity, of "weak minds being terrified _superstitione
numinis_." The heathen magistrate asks St. Marcellus, whether he and
others have put away "vain superstitions," and worship the gods whom the
emperors worship. The Pagans in Arnobius speak of Christianity as "an
execrable and unlucky religion, full of impiety and sacrilege,
contaminating the rites instituted from of old with the superstition of
its novelty." The anonymous opponent of Lactantius calls it, "_Impia et
anilis superstitio_." Diocletian's inscription at Clunia was, as it
declared, on occasion of "the total extinction of the superstition of
the Christians, and the extension of the worship of the gods." Maximin,
in his Letter upon Constantine's Edict, still calls it a
superstition.[225:1]


16.

Now what is meant by the word thus attached by a _consensus_ of heathen
authorities to Christianity? At least, it cannot mean a religion in
which a man might think what he pleased, and was set free from all
yokes, whether of ignorance, fear, authority, or priestcraft. When
heathen writers call the Oriental rites superstitions, they evidently
use the word in its modern sense; it cannot surely be doubted that they
apply it in the same sense to Christianity. But Plutarch explains for us
the word at length, in his Treatise which bears the name: "Of all kinds
of fear," he says, "superstition is the most fatal to action and
resource. He does not fear the sea who does not sail, nor war who does
not serve, nor robbers who keeps at home, nor the sycophant who is poor,
nor the envious if he is a private man, nor an earthquake if he lives in
Gaul, nor thunder if he lives in Ethiopia; but he who fears the gods
fears everything, earth, seas, air, sky, darkness, light, noises,
silence, sleep. Slaves sleep and forget their masters; of the fettered
doth sleep lighten the chain; inflamed wounds, ulcers cruel and
agonizing, are not felt by the sleeping. Superstition alone has come to
no terms with sleep; but in the very sleep of her victims, as though
they were in the realms of the impious, she raises horrible spectres,
and monstrous phantoms, and various pains, and whirls the miserable soul
about, and persecutes it. They rise, and, instead of making light of
what is unreal, they fall into the hands of quacks and conjurers, who
say, 'Call the crone to expiate, bathe in the sea, and sit all day on
the ground.'" He goes on to speak of the introduction of "uncouth names
and barbarous terms" into "the divine and national authority of
religion;" observes that, whereas slaves, when they despair of freedom,
may demand to be sold to another master, superstition admits of no
change of gods, since "the god cannot be found whom he will not fear,
who fears the gods of his family and his birth, who shudders at the
Saving and the Benignant, who has a trembling and dread at those from
whom we ask riches and wealth, concord, peace, success of all good words
and deeds." He says, moreover, that, while death is to all men an end of
life, it is not so to the superstitious; for then "there are deep gates
of hell to yawn, and headlong streams of at once fire and gloom are
opened, and darkness with its many phantoms encompasses, ghosts
presenting horrid visages and wretched voices, and judges and
executioners, and chasms and dens full of innumerable miseries."

Presently, he says, that in misfortune or sickness the superstitious man
refuses to see physician or philosopher, and cries, "Suffer me, O man,
to undergo punishment, the impious, the cursed, the hated of gods and
spirits. The Atheist," with whom all along he is contrasting the
superstitious disadvantageously, "wipes his tears, trims his hair, doffs
his mourning; but how can you address, how help the superstitious? He
sits apart in sackcloth or filthy rags; and often he strips himself and
rolls in the mud, and tells out his sins and offences, as having eaten
and drunken something, or walked some way which the divinity did not
allow. . . . And in his best mood, and under the influence of a
good-humoured superstition, he sits at home, with sacrifice and
slaughter all round him, while the old crones hang on him as on a peg,
as Bion says, any charm they fall in with." He continues, "What men like
best are festivals, banquets at the temples, initiations, orgies, votive
prayers, and adorations. But the superstitious wishes indeed, but is
unable to rejoice. He is crowned and turns pale; he sacrifices and is in
fear; he prays with a quivering voice, and burns incense with trembling
hands, and altogether belies the saying of Pythagoras, that we are then
in best case when we go to the gods; for superstitious men are in most
wretched and evil case, approaching the houses or shrines of the gods as
if they were the dens of bears, or the holes of snakes, or the caves of
whales."


17.

Here we have a vivid picture of Plutarch's idea of the essence of
Superstition; it was the imagination of the existence of an unseen
ever-present Master; the bondage of a rule of life, of a continual
responsibility; obligation to attend to little things, the
impossibility of escaping from duty, the inability to choose or change
one's religion, an interference with the enjoyment of life, a melancholy
view of the world, sense of sin, horror at guilt, apprehension of
punishment, dread, self-abasement, depression, anxiety and endeavour to
be at peace with heaven, and error and absurdity in the methods chosen
for the purpose. Such too had been the idea of the Epicurean Velleius,
when he shrunk with horror from the "_sempiternus dominus_" and
"_curiosus Deus_" of the Stoics.[228:1] Such, surely, was the meaning of
Tacitus, Suetonius, and Pliny. And hence of course the frequent reproach
cast on Christians as credulous, weak-minded, and poor-spirited. The
heathen objectors in Minucius and Lactantius speak of their "old-woman's
tales."[228:2] Celsus accuses them of "assenting at random and without
reason," saying, "Do not inquire, but believe." "They lay it down," he
says elsewhere, "Let no educated man approach, no man of wisdom, no man
of sense; but if a man be unlearned, weak in intellect, an infant, let
him come with confidence. Confessing that these are worthy of their God,
they evidently desire, as they are able, to convert none but fools, and
vulgar, and stupid, and slavish, women and boys." They "take in the
simple, and lead him where they will." They address themselves to
"youths, house-servants, and the weak in intellect." They "hurry away
from the educated, as not fit subjects of their imposition, and inveigle
the rustic."[228:3] "Thou," says the heathen magistrate to the Martyr
Fructuosus, "who as a teacher dost disseminate a new fable, that fickle
girls may desert the groves and abandon Jupiter, condemn, if thou art
wise, the anile creed."[229:1]


18.

Hence the epithets of itinerant, mountebank, conjurer, cheat, sophist,
sorcerer, heaped upon the teachers of Christianity; sometimes to account
for the report or apparent truth of their miracles, sometimes to explain
their success. Our Lord was said to have learned His miraculous power in
Egypt; "wizard, mediciner, cheat, rogue, conjurer," were the epithets
applied to Him by the opponents of Eusebius;[229:2] they "worship that
crucified sophist," says Lucian;[229:3] "Paul, who surpasses all the
conjurers and impostors who ever lived," is Julian's account of the
Apostle. "You have sent through the whole world," says St. Justin to
Trypho, "to preach that a certain atheistic and lawless sect has sprung
from one Jesus, a Galilean cheat."[229:4] "We know," says Lucian,
speaking of Chaldeans and Magicians, "the Syrian from Palestine, who is
the sophist in these matters, how many lunatics, with eyes distorted and
mouth in foam, he raises and sends away restored, ridding them from the
evil at a great price."[229:5] "If any conjurer came to them, a man of
skill and knowing how to manage matters," says the same writer, "he made
money in no time, with a broad grin at the simple fellows."[229:6] The
officer who had custody of St. Perpetua feared her escape from prison
"by magical incantations."[229:7] When St. Tiburtius had walked barefoot
on hot coals, his judge cried out that Christ had taught him magic. St.
Anastasia was thrown into prison as a mediciner; the populace called out
against St. Agnes, "Away with the witch," _Tolle magam, tolle
maleficam_.

When St. Bonosus and St. Maximilian bore the burning pitch without
shrinking, Jews and Gentiles cried out, _Isti magi et malefici_. "What
new delusion," says the heathen magistrate concerning St. Romanus, "has
brought in these sophists to deny the worship of the gods? How doth this
chief sorcerer mock us, skilled by his Thessalian charm (_carmine_) to
laugh at punishment."[230:1]

Hence we gather the meaning of the word "_carmen_" as used by Pliny;
when he speaks of the Christians "saying with one another a _carmen_ to
Christ as to a god," he meant pretty much what Suetonius expresses by
the "_malefica superstitio_."[230:2] And the words of the last-mentioned
writer and Tacitus are still more exactly, and, I may say, singularly
illustrated by clauses which occur in the Theodosian code; which seem to
show that these historians were using formal terms and phrases to
express their notion of Christianity. For instance, Tacitus says, "_Quos
per flagitia invisos, vulgus Christianos appellabat_;" and the Law
against the Malefici and Mathematici in the Code speaks of those, "_Quos
ob facinorum magnitudinem vulgus maleficos appellat_."[230:3] Again,
Tacitus charges Christians with the "_odium humani generis_:" this is
the very characteristic of a practiser in magic; the Laws call the
Malefici, "_humani generis hostes_," "_humani generis inimici_,"
"_naturæ peregrini_," "_communis salutis hostes_."[230:4]


19.

This also explains the phenomenon, which has created so much surprise to
certain moderns;--that a grave, well-informed historian like Tacitus
should apply to Christians what sounds like abuse. Yet what is the
difficulty, supposing that Christians were considered mathematici and
magi, and these were the secret intriguers against established
government, the allies of desperate politicians, the enemies of the
established religion, the disseminators of lying rumours, the
perpetrators of poisonings and other crimes? "Read this," says Paley,
after quoting some of the most beautiful and subduing passages of St.
Paul, "read this, and then think of _exitiabilis superstitio_;" and he
goes on to express a wish "in contending with heathen authorities, to
produce our books against theirs,"[231:1] as if it were a matter of
books. Public men care very little for books; the finest sentiments, the
most luminous philosophy, the deepest theology, inspiration itself,
moves them but little; they look at facts, and care only for facts. The
question was, What was the worth, what the tendency of the Christian
body in the state? what Christians said, what they thought, was little
to the purpose. They might exhort to peaceableness and passive obedience
as strongly as words could speak; but what did they do, what was their
political position? This is what statesmen thought of then, as they do
now. What had men of the world to do with abstract proofs or first
principles? a statesman measures parties, and sects, and writers by
their bearing upon _him_; and he has a practised eye in this sort of
judgment, and is not likely to be mistaken. "'What is Truth?' said
jesting Pilate." Apologies, however eloquent or true, availed nothing
with the Roman magistrate against the sure instinct which taught him to
dread Christianity. It was a dangerous enemy to any power not built
upon itself; he felt it, and the event justified his apprehension.


20.

We must not forget the well-known character of the Roman state in its
dealings with its subjects. It had had from the first an extreme
jealousy of secret societies; it was prepared to grant a large
toleration and a broad comprehension, but, as is the case with modern
governments, it wished to have jurisdiction and the ultimate authority
in every movement of the body politic and social, and its civil
institutions were based, or essentially depended, on its religion.
Accordingly, every innovation upon the established paganism, except it
was allowed by the law, was rigidly repressed. Hence the professors of
low superstitions, of mysteries, of magic, of astrology, were the
outlaws of society, and were in a condition analogous, if the comparison
may be allowed, to smugglers or poachers among ourselves, or perhaps to
burglars and highwaymen. The modern robber is sometimes made to ask in
novels or essays, why the majority of a people should bind the minority,
and why he is amenable to laws which he does not enact; but the
magistrate, relying on the power of the sword, wishes all men to gain a
living indeed, and to prosper, but only in his own legally sanctioned
ways, and he hangs or transports dissenters from his authority. The
Romans applied this rule to religion. Lardner protests against Pliny's
application of the words "contumacy and inflexible obstinacy" to the
Christians of Pontus. "Indeed, these are hard words," he says, "very
improperly applied to men who were open to conviction, and willing to
satisfy others, if they might have leave to speak."[232:1] And he says,
"It seems to me that Pliny acted very arbitrarily and unrighteously, in
his treatment of the Christians in his province. What right had Pliny to
act in this manner? by what law or laws did he punish [them] with
death?"--but the Romans had ever burnt the sorcerer, and banished his
consulters for life.[233:1] It was an ancient custom. And at mysteries
they looked with especial suspicion, because, since the established
religion did not include them in its provisions, they really did supply
what may be called a demand of the age. The Greeks of an earlier day had
naturalized among themselves the Eleusinian and other mysteries, which
had come from Egypt and Syria, and had little to fear from a fresh
invasion from the same quarter; yet even in Greece, as Plutarch tells us,
the "_carmina_" of the itinerants of Cybele and Serapis threw the
Pythian verses out of fashion, and henceforth the responses from the
temple were given in prose. Soon the oracles altogether ceased. What
would cause in the Roman mind still greater jealousy of Christianity was
the general infidelity which prevailed among all classes as regards the
mythological fables of Charon, Cerberus, and the realms of
punishment.[233:2]


21.

We know what opposition had been made in Rome even to the philosophy of
Greece; much greater would be the aversion of constitutional statesmen
and lawyers to the ritual of barbarians. Religion was the Roman point of
honour. "Spaniards might rival them in numbers," says Cicero, "Gauls in
bodily strength, Carthaginians in address, Greeks in the arts, Italians
and Latins in native talent, but the Romans surpassed all nations in
piety and devotion."[234:1] It was one of their laws, "Let no one have
gods by himself, nor worship in private new gods nor adventitious,
unless added on public authority."[234:2] Lutatius,[234:3] at the end of
the first Punic war, was forbidden by the senate to consult the Sortes
Prænestinæ as being "_auspicia alienigena_." Some years afterwards the
Consul took axe in hand, and commenced the destruction of the temples of
Isis and Serapis. In the second Punic war, the senate had commanded the
surrender of the _libri vaticini_ or _precationes_, and any written art
of sacrificing. When a secret confraternity was discovered, at a later
date, the Consul spoke of the rule of their ancestors which forbade the
forum, circus, and city to Sacrificuli and prophets, and burnt their
books. In the next age banishment was inflicted on individuals who were
introducing the worship of the Syrian Sabazius; and in the next the
Iseion and Serapeion were destroyed a second time. Mæcenas in Dio
advises Augustus to honour the gods according to the national custom,
because the contempt of the country's deities leads to civil
insubordination, reception of foreign laws, conspiracies, and secret
meetings.[234:4] "Suffer no one," he adds, "to deny the gods or to
practise sorcery." The civilian Julius Paulus lays it down as one of the
leading principles of Roman Law, that those who introduce new or untried
religions should be degraded, and if in the lower orders put to
death.[234:5] In like manner, it is enacted in one of Constantine's Laws
that the Haruspices should not exercise their art in private; and there
is a law of Valentinian's against nocturnal sacrifices or magic. It is
more immediately to our purpose that Trajan had been so earnest in his
resistance to _Hetæriæ_ or secret societies, that, when a fire had laid
waste Nicomedia, and Pliny proposed to him to incorporate a body of a
hundred and fifty firemen in consequence,[235:1] he was afraid of the
precedent and forbade it.


22.

What has been said will suggest another point of view in which the
Oriental rites were obnoxious to the government, viz., as being vagrant
and proselytizing religions. If it tolerated foreign superstitions, this
would be on the ground that districts or countries within its
jurisdiction held them; to proselytize to a rite hitherto unknown, to
form a new party, and to propagate it through the Empire,--a religion
not local but Catholic,--was an offence against both order and reason.
The state desired peace everywhere, and no change; "considering,"
according to Lactantius, "that they were rightly and deservedly punished
who execrated the public religion handed down to them by their
ancestors."[235:2]

It is impossible surely to deny that, in assembling for religious
purposes, the Christians were breaking a solemn law, a vital principle
of the Roman constitution; and this is the light in which their conduct
was regarded by the historians and philosophers of the Empire. This was
a very strong act on the part of the disciples of the great Apostle, who
had enjoined obedience to the powers that be. Time after time they
resisted the authority of the magistrate; and this is a phenomenon
inexplicable on the theory of Private Judgment or of the Voluntary
Principle. The justification of such disobedience lies simply in the
necessity of obeying the higher authority of some divine law; but if
Christianity were in its essence only private and personal, as so many
now think, there was no necessity of their meeting together at all. If,
on the other hand, in assembling for worship and holy communion, they
were fulfilling an indispensable observance, Christianity has imposed a
social law on the world, and formally enters the field of politics.
Gibbon says that, in consequence of Pliny's edict, "the prudence of the
Christians suspended their Agapæ; but it was _impossible_ for them to
omit the exercise of public worship."[236:1] We can draw no other
conclusion.


23.

At the end of three hundred years, a more remarkable violation of law
seems to have been admitted by the Christian body. It shall be given in
the words of Dr. Burton; he has been speaking of Maximin's edict, which
provided for the restitution of any of their lands or buildings which
had been alienated from them. "It is plain," he says, "from the terms of
this edict, that the Christians had for some time been in possession of
property. It speaks of houses and lands which did not belong to
individuals, but to the whole body. Their possession of such property
could hardly have escaped the notice of the government; but it seems to
have been held in direct violation of a law of Diocletian, which
prohibited corporate bodies, or associations which were not legally
recognized, from acquiring property. The Christians were certainly not a
body recognized by law at the beginning of the reign of Diocletian, and
it might almost be thought that this enactment was specially directed
against them. But, like other laws which are founded upon tyranny, and
are at variance with the first principles of justice, it is probable
that this law about corporate property was evaded. We must suppose that
the Christians had purchased lands and houses before the law was passed;
and their disregard of the prohibition may be taken as another proof
that their religion had now taken so firm a footing that the executors
of the laws were obliged to connive at their being broken by so numerous
a body."[237:1]


24.

No wonder that the magistrate who presided at the martyrdom of St.
Romanus calls them in Prudentius "a rebel people;"[237:2] that Galerius
speaks of them as "a nefarious conspiracy;" the heathen in Minucius, as
"men of a desperate faction;" that others make them guilty of sacrilege
and treason, and call them by those other titles which, more closely
resembling the language of Tacitus, have been noticed above. Hence the
violent accusations against them as the destruction of the Empire, the
authors of physical evils, and the cause of the anger of the gods.

"Men cry out," says Tertullian, "that the state is beset, that the
Christians are in their fields, in their forts, in their islands. They
mourn as for a loss that every sex, condition, and now even rank, is
going over to this sect. And yet they do not by this very means advance
their minds to the idea of some good therein hidden; they allow not
themselves to conjecture more rightly, they choose not to examine more
closely. The generality run upon a hatred of this name, with eyes so
closed that in bearing favourable testimony to any one they mingle with
it the reproach of the name. 'A good man Caius Seius, only he is a
Christian.' So another, 'I marvel that that wise man Lucius Titius hath
suddenly become a Christian.' No one reflecteth whether Caius be not
therefore good and Lucius wise because a Christian, or therefore a
Christian because wise and good. They praise that which they know, they
revile that which they know not. Virtue is not in such account as hatred
of the Christians. Now, then, if the hatred be of the name, what guilt
is there in names? What charge against words? Unless it be that any word
which is a name have either a barbarous or ill-omened, or a scurrilous
or an immodest sound. If the Tiber cometh up to the walls, if the Nile
cometh not up to the fields, if the heaven hath stood still, if the
earth hath been moved, if there be any famine, if any pestilence, 'The
Christians to the lions' is forthwith the word."[238:1]


25.

"Men of a desperate, lawless, reckless faction," says the heathen
Cæcilius, in the passage above referred to, "who collect together out of
the lowest rabble the thoughtless portion, and credulous women seduced
by the weakness of their sex, and form a mob of impure conspirators, of
whom nocturnal assemblies, and solemn fastings, and unnatural food, no
sacred rite but pollution, is the bond. A tribe lurking and
light-hating, dumb for the public, talkative in corners, they despise
our temples as if graves, spit at our gods, deride our religious forms;
pitiable themselves, they pity, forsooth, our priests; half-naked
themselves, they despise our honours and purple; monstrous folly and
incredible impudence! . . . Day after day, their abandoned morals wind
their serpentine course; over the whole world are those most hideous
rites of an impious association growing into shape: . . . they recognize
each other by marks and signs, and love each other almost before they
recognize; promiscuous lust is their religion. Thus does their vain and
mad superstition glory in crimes. . . The writer who tells the story of a
criminal capitally punished, and of the gibbet (_ligna feralia_) of the
cross being their observance (_ceremonias_), assigns to them thereby an
altar in keeping with the abandoned and wicked, that they may worship
(_colant_) what they merit. . . . Why their mighty effort to hide and
shroud whatever it is they worship (_colunt_), since things honest ever
like the open day, and crimes are secret? Why have they no altars, no
temples, no images known to us, never speak abroad, never assemble
freely, were it not that what they worship and suppress is subject
either of punishment or of shame? . . What monstrous, what portentous
notions do they fabricate! that that God of theirs, whom they can
neither show nor see, should be inquiring diligently into the
characters, the acts, nay the words and secret thoughts of all men;
running to and fro, forsooth, and present everywhere, troublesome,
restless, nay impudently curious they would have him; that is, if he is
close at every deed, interferes in all places, while he can neither
attend to each as being distracted through the whole, nor suffice for
the whole as being engaged about each. Think too of their threatening
fire, meditating destruction to the whole earth, nay the world itself
with its stars! . . . Nor content with this mad opinion, they add and
append their old wives' tales about a new birth after death, ashes and
cinders, and by some strange confidence believe each other's lies. Poor
creatures! consider what hangs over you after death, while you are still
alive. Lo, the greater part of you, the better, as you say, are in want,
cold, toil, hunger, and your God suffers it; but I omit common trials.
Lo, threats are offered to you, punishments, torments; crosses to be
undergone now, not worshipped (_adorandæ_); fires too which ye predict
and fear; where is that God who can recover, but cannot preserve your
life? The answer of Socrates, when he was asked about heavenly matters,
is well known, 'What is above us does not concern us.' My opinion also
is, that points which are doubtful, as are the points in question, must
be left; nor, when so many and such great men are in controversy on the
subject, must judgment be rashly and audaciously given on either side,
lest the consequence be either anile superstition or the overthrow of
all religion."


26.

Such was Christianity in the eyes of those who witnessed its rise and
propagation;--one of a number of wild and barbarous rites which were
pouring in upon the Empire from the ancient realms of superstition, and
the mother of a progeny of sects which were faithful to the original
they had derived from Egypt or Syria; a religion unworthy of an educated
person, as appealing, not to the intellect, but to the fears and
weaknesses of human nature, and consisting, not in the rational and
cheerful enjoyment, but in a morose rejection of the gifts of
Providence; a horrible religion, as inflicting or enjoining cruel
sufferings, and monstrous and loathsome in its very indulgence of the
passions; a religion leading by reaction to infidelity; a religion of
magic, and of the vulgar arts, real and pretended, with which magic was
accompanied; a secret religion which dared not face the day; an
itinerant, busy, proselytizing religion, forming an extended confederacy
against the state, resisting its authority and breaking its laws. There
may be some exceptions to this general impression, such as Pliny's
discovery of the innocent and virtuous rule of life adopted by the
Christians of Pontus; but this only proves that Christianity was not in
fact the infamous religion which the heathen thought it; it did not
reverse their general belief to that effect.


27.

Now it must be granted that, in some respects, this view of Christianity
depended on the times, and would alter with their alteration. When there
was no persecution, Martyrs could not be obstinate; and when the Church
was raised aloft in high places, it was no longer in caves. Still, I
believe, it continued substantially the same in the judgment of the
world external to it, while there was an external world to judge of it.
"They thought it enough," says Julian in the fourth century, of our Lord
and His Apostles, "to deceive women, servants, and slaves, and by their
means wives and husbands." "A human fabrication," says he elsewhere,
"put together by wickedness, having nothing divine in it, but making a
perverted use of the fable-loving, childish, irrational part of the
soul, and offering a set of wonders to create belief." "Miserable men,"
he says elsewhere, "you refuse to worship the ancile, yet you worship
the wood of the cross, and sign it on your foreheads, and fix it on your
doors. Shall one for this hate the intelligent among you, or pity the
less understanding, who in following you have gone to such an excess of
perdition as to leave the everlasting gods and go over to a dead Jew?"
He speaks of their adding other dead men to Him who died so long ago.
"You have filled all places with sepulchres and monuments, though it is
nowhere told you in your religion to haunt the tombs and to attend upon
them." Elsewhere he speaks of their "leaving the gods for corpses and
relics." On the other hand, he attributes the growth of Christianity to
its humanity towards strangers, care in burying the dead, and pretended
religiousness of life. In another place he speaks of their care of the
poor.[241:1]

Libanius, Julian's preceptor in rhetoric, delivers the same testimony,
as far as it goes. He addressed his Oration for the Temples to a
Christian Emperor, and would in consequence be guarded in his language;
however it runs in one direction. He speaks of "those black-habited
men," meaning the monks, "who eat more than elephants, and by the
number of their potations trouble those who send them drink in their
chantings, and conceal this by paleness artificially acquired." They
"are in good condition out of the misfortunes of others, while they
pretend to serve God by hunger." Those whom they attack "are like bees,
they like drones." I do not quote this passage to prove that there were
monks in Libanius's days, which no one doubts, but to show his
impression of Christianity, as far as his works betray it.

Numantian, in the same century, describes in verse his voyage from Rome
to Gaul: one book of the poem is extant; he falls in with Christianity
on two of the islands which lie in his course. He thus describes them as
found on one of these: "The island is in a squalid state, being full of
light-haters. They call themselves monks, because they wish to live
alone without witness. They dread the gifts, from fearing the reverses,
of fortune. Thus Homer says that melancholy was the cause of
Bellerophon's anxiety; for it is said that after the wounds of grief
mankind displeased the offended youth." He meets on the other island a
Christian, whom he had known, of good family and fortune, and happy in
his marriage, who "impelled by the Furies had left men and gods, and,
credulous exile, was living in base concealment. Is not this herd," he
continues, "worse than Circean poison? then bodies were changed, now
minds."


28.

In the Philopatris, which is the work of an Author of the fourth
century,[242:1] Critias is introduced pale and wild. His friend asks him
if he has seen Cerberus or Hecate; and he answers that he has heard a
rigmarole from certain "thrice-cursed sophists;" which he thinks would
drive him mad, if he heard it again, and was nearly sending him
headlong over some cliff as it was. He retires for relief with his
inquirer to a pleasant place, shadowed by planes, where swallows and
nightingales are singing, and a quiet brook is purling. Triephon, his
friend, expresses a fear lest he has heard some incantation, and is led
by the course of the dialogue, before his friend tells his tale, to give
some account of Christianity, being himself a Christian. After speaking
of the creation, as described by Moses, he falls at once upon that
doctrine of a particular providence which is so distasteful to Plutarch,
Velleius in Cicero, and Cæcilius, and generally to unbelievers. "He is
in heaven," he says, "looking at just and unjust, and causing actions to
be entered in books; and He will recompense all on a day which He has
appointed." Critias objects that he cannot make this consistent with the
received doctrine about the Fates, "even though he has perhaps been
carried aloft with his master, and initiated in unspeakable mysteries."
He also asks if the deeds of the Scythians are written in heaven; for if
so, there must be many scribes there. After some more words, in course
of which, as in the earlier part of the dialogue, the doctrine of the
Holy Trinity is introduced, Critias gives an account of what befell him.
He says, he fell in with a crowd in the streets; and, while asking a
friend the cause of it, others joined them (Christians or monks), and a
conversation ensues, part of it corrupt or obscure, on the subject, as
Gesner supposes, of Julian's oppression of the Christians, especially of
the clergy. One of these interlocutors is a wretched old man, whose
"phlegm is paler than death;" another has "a rotten cloke on, and no
covering on head or feet," who says he has been told by some ill-clad
person from the mountains, with a shorn crown, that in the theatre was a
name hieroglyphically written of one who would flood the highway with
gold. On his laughing at the story, his friend Crato, whom he had
joined, bids him be silent, using a Pythagorean word; for he has "most
excellent matters to initiate him into, and that the prediction is no
dream but true," and will be fulfilled in August, using the Egyptian
name of the month. He attempts to leave them in disgust, but Crato pulls
him back "at the instigation of that old demon." He is in consequence
persuaded to go "to those conjurers," who, says Crato, would "initiate
in all mysteries." He finds, in a building which is described in the
language used by Homer of the Palace of Menelaus, "not Helen, no, but
men pale and downcast," who ask, whether there was any bad news; "for
they seemed," he says, "wishing the worst; and rejoicing in misfortune,
as the Furies in the theatres." On their asking him how the city and the
world went on, and his answering that things went on smoothly and seemed
likely to do so still, they frown, and say that "the city is in travail
with a bad birth." "You, who dwell aloft," he answers, "and see
everything from on high, doubtless have a keen perception in this
matter; but tell me, how is the sky? will the Sun be eclipsed? will Mars
be in quadrature with Jupiter? &c.;" and he goes on to jest upon their
celibacy. On their persisting in prophesying evil to the state, he says,
"This evil will fall on your own head, since you are so hard upon your
country; for not as high-flyers have ye heard this, nor are ye adepts in
the restless astrological art, but if divinations and conjurings have
seduced you, double is your stupidity; for they are the discoveries of
old women and things to laugh at." The interview then draws to an end;
but more than enough has been quoted already to show the author's notion
of Christianity.


29.

Such was the language of paganism after Christianity had for fifty years
been exposed to the public gaze; after it had been before the world for
fifty more, St. Augustine had still to defend it against the charge of
being the cause of the calamities of the Empire. And for the charge of
magic, when the Arian bishops were in formal disputations with the
Catholic, before Gungebald, Burgundian King of France, at the end of the
fifth century, we find still that they charged the Catholics with being
"_præstigiatores_," and worshipping a number of gods; and when the
Catholics proposed that the king should repair to the shrine of St.
Justus, where both parties might ask him concerning their respective
faiths, the Arians cried out that "they would not seek enchantments like
Saul, for Scripture was enough for them, which was more powerful than
all bewitchments."[245:1] This was said, not against strangers of whom
they knew nothing, as Ethelbert might be suspicious of St. Augustine and
his brother missionaries, but against a body of men who lived among
them.

I do not think it can be doubted then that, had Tacitus, Suetonius, and
Pliny, Celsus, Porphyry, and the other opponents of Christianity, lived
in the fourth century, their evidence concerning Christianity would be
very much the same as it has come down to us from the centuries before
it. In either case, a man of the world and a philosopher would have been
disgusted at the gloom and sadness of its profession, its
mysteriousness, its claim of miracles, the want of good sense imputable
to its rule of life, and the unsettlement and discord it was introducing
into the social and political world.


30.

On the whole then I conclude as follows:--if there is a form of
Christianity now in the world which is accused of gross superstition, of
borrowing its rites and customs from the heathen, and of ascribing to
forms and ceremonies an occult virtue;--a religion which is considered
to burden and enslave the mind by its requisitions, to address itself to
the weak-minded and ignorant, to be supported by sophistry and
imposture, and to contradict reason and exalt mere irrational faith;--a
religion which impresses on the serious mind very distressing views of
the guilt and consequences of sin, sets upon the minute acts of the day,
one by one, their definite value for praise or blame, and thus casts a
grave shadow over the future;--a religion which holds up to admiration
the surrender of wealth, and disables serious persons from enjoying it
if they would;--a religion, the doctrines of which, be they good or bad,
are to the generality of men unknown; which is considered to bear on its
very surface signs of folly and falsehood so distinct that a glance
suffices to judge of it, and that careful examination is preposterous;
which is felt to be so simply bad, that it may be calumniated at hazard
and at pleasure, it being nothing but absurdity to stand upon the
accurate distribution of its guilt among its particular acts, or
painfully to determine how far this or that story concerning it is
literally true, or what has to be allowed in candour, or what is
improbable, or what cuts two ways, or what is not proved, or what may be
plausibly defended;--a religion such, that men look at a convert to it
with a feeling which no other denomination raises except Judaism,
Socialism, or Mormonism, viz. with curiosity, suspicion, fear, disgust,
as the case may be, as if something strange had befallen him, as if he
had had an initiation into a mystery, and had come into communion with
dreadful influences, as if he were now one of a confederacy which
claimed him, absorbed him, stripped him of his personality, reduced him
to a mere organ or instrument of a whole;--a religion which men hate as
proselytizing, anti-social, revolutionary, as dividing families,
separating chief friends, corrupting the maxims of government, making a
mock at law, dissolving the empire, the enemy of human nature, and a
"conspirator against its rights and privileges;"[247:1]--a religion
which they consider the champion and instrument of darkness, and a
pollution calling down upon the land the anger of heaven;--a religion
which they associate with intrigue and conspiracy, which they speak
about in whispers, which they detect by anticipation in whatever goes
wrong, and to which they impute whatever is unaccountable;--a religion,
the very name of which they cast out as evil, and use simply as a bad
epithet, and which from the impulse of self-preservation they would
persecute if they could;--if there be such a religion now in the world,
it is not unlike Christianity as that same world viewed it, when first
it came forth from its Divine Author.[247:2]


SECTION II.

THE CHURCH OF THE FOURTH CENTURY.

Till the Imperial Government had become Christian, and heresies were put
down by the arm of power, the face of Christendom presented much the
same appearance all along as on the first propagation of the religion.
What Gnosticism, Montanism, Judaism and, I may add, the Oriental
mysteries were to the nascent Church, as described in the foregoing
Section, such were the Manichean, Donatist, Apollinarian and
contemporary sects afterwards. The Church in each place looked at first
sight as but one out of a number of religious communions, with little of
a very distinctive character except to the careful inquirer. Still there
were external indications of essential differences within; and, as we
have already compared it in the first centuries, we may now contrast it
in the fourth, with the rival religious bodies with which it was
encompassed.


2.

How was the man to guide his course who wished to join himself to the
doctrine and fellowship of the Apostles in the times of St. Athanasius,
St. Basil, and St. Augustine? Few indeed were the districts in the
_orbis terrarum_, which did not then, as in the Ante-nicene era, present
a number of creeds and communions for his choice. Gaul indeed is said at
that era to have been perfectly free from heresies; at least none are
mentioned as belonging to that country in the Theodosian Code. But in
Egypt, in the early part of the fourth century, the Meletian schism
numbered one-third as many bishops as were contained in the whole
Patriarchate. In Africa, towards the end of it, while the Catholic
Bishops amounted in all to 466, the Donatists rivalled them with as many
as 400. In Spain Priscillianism was spread from the Pyrenees to the
Ocean. It seems to have been the religion of the population in the
province of Gallicia, while its author Priscillian, whose death had been
contrived by the Ithacians, was honoured as a Martyr. The Manichees,
hiding themselves under a variety of names in different localities, were
not in the least flourishing condition at Rome. Rome and Italy were the
seat of the Marcionites. The Origenists, too, are mentioned by St.
Jerome as "bringing a cargo of blasphemies into the port of Rome." And
Rome was the seat of a Novatian, a Donatist, and a Luciferian bishop, in
addition to the legitimate occupant of the See of St. Peter. The
Luciferians, as was natural under the circumstances of their schism,
were sprinkled over Christendom from Spain to Palestine, and from Treves
to Lybia; while in its parent country Sardinia, as a centre of that
extended range, Lucifer seems to have received the honours of a Saint.

When St. Gregory Nazianzen began to preach at Constantinople, the Arians
were in possession of its hundred churches; they had the populace in
their favour, and, after their legal dislodgment, edict after edict was
ineffectually issued against them. The Novatians too abounded there; and
the Sabbatians, who had separated from them, had a church, where they
prayed at the tomb of their founder. Moreover, Apollinarians, Eunomians,
and Semi-arians, mustered in great numbers at Constantinople. The
Semi-arian bishops were as popular in the neighbouring provinces, as the
Arian doctrine in the capital. They had possession of the coast of the
Hellespont and Bithynia; and were found in Phrygia, Isauria, and the
neighbouring parts of Asia Minor. Phrygia was the headquarters of the
Montanists, and was overrun by the Messalians, who had advanced thus far
from Mesopotamia, spreading through Syria, Lycaonia, Pamphylia, and
Cappadocia in their way. In the lesser Armenia, the same heretics had
penetrated into the monasteries. Phrygia, too, and Paphlagonia were the
seat of the Novatians, who besides were in force at Nicæa and Nicomedia,
were found in Alexandria, Africa, and Spain, and had a bishop even in
Scythia. The whole tract of country from the Hellespont to Cilicia had
nearly lapsed into Eunomianism, and the tract from Cilicia as far as
Phœnicia into Apollinarianism. The disorders of the Church of Antioch
are well known: an Arian succession, two orthodox claimants, and a
bishop of the Apollinarians. Palestine abounded in Origenists, if at
that time they may properly be called a sect; Palestine, Egypt, and
Arabia were overrun with Marcionites; Osrhoene was occupied by the
followers of Bardesanes and Harmonius, whose hymns so nearly took the
place of national tunes that St. Ephrem found no better way of resisting
the heresy than setting them to fresh words. Theodoret in Comagene
speaks in the next century of reclaiming eight villages of Marcionites,
one of Eunomians, and one of Arians.


3.

These sects were of very various character. Learning, eloquence, and
talent were the characteristics of the Apollinarians, Manichees, and
Pelagians; Tichonius the Donatist was distinguished in Biblical
interpretation; the Semi-arian and Apollinarian leaders were men of
grave and correct behaviour; the Novatians had sided with the Orthodox
during the Arian persecution; the Montanists and Messalians addressed
themselves to an almost heathen population; the atrocious fanaticism of
the Priscillianists, the fury of the Arian women of Alexandria and
Constantinople, and the savage cruelty of the Circumcellions can hardly
be exaggerated. These various sectaries had their orders of clergy,
bishops, priests and deacons; their readers and ministers; their
celebrants and altars; their hymns and litanies. They preached to the
crowds in public, and their meeting-houses bore the semblance of
churches. They had their sacristies and cemeteries; their farms; their
professors and doctors; their schools. Miracles were ascribed to the
Arian Theophilus, to the Luciferian Gregory of Elvira, to a Macedonian
in Cyzicus, and to the Donatists in Africa.


4.

How was an individual inquirer to find, or a private Christian to keep
the Truth, amid so many rival teachers? The misfortunes or perils of
holy men and saints show us the difficulty; St. Augustine was nine years
a Manichee; St. Basil for a time was in admiration of the Semi-arians;
St. Sulpicius gave a momentary countenance to the Pelagians; St. Paula
listened, and Melania assented, to the Origenists. Yet the rule was
simple, which would direct every one right; and in that age, at least,
no one could be wrong for any long time without his own fault. The
Church is everywhere, but it is one; sects are everywhere, but they are
many, independent and discordant. Catholicity is the attribute of the
Church, independency of sectaries. It is true that some sects might seem
almost Catholic in their diffusion; Novatians or Marcionites were in all
quarters of the empire; yet it is hardly more than the name, or the
general doctrine or philosophy, that was universal: the different
portions which professed it seem to have been bound together by no
strict or definite tie. The Church might be evanescent or lost for a
while in particular countries, or it might be levelled and buried among
sects, when the eye was confined to one spot, or it might be confronted
by the one and same heresy in various places; but, on looking round the
_orbis terrarum_, there was no mistaking that body which, and which
alone, had possession of it. The Church is a kingdom; a heresy is a
family rather than a kingdom; and as a family continually divides and
sends out branches, founding new houses, and propagating itself in
colonies, each of them as independent as its original head, so was it
with heresy. Simon Magus, the first heretic, had been Patriarch of
Menandrians, Basilidians, Valentinians, and the whole family of
Gnostics; Tatian of Encratites, Severians, Aquarians, Apotactites, and
Saccophori. The Montanists had been propagated into Tascodrugites,
Pepuzians, Artotyrites, and Quartodecimans. Eutyches, in a later time,
gave birth to the Dioscorians, Gaianites, Theodosians, Agnoetæ,
Theopaschites, Acephali, Semidalitæ, Nagranitæ, Jacobites, and others.
This is the uniform history of heresy. The patronage of the civil power
might for a time counteract the law of its nature, but it showed it as
soon as that obstacle was removed. Scarcely was Arianism deprived of the
churches of Constantinople, and left to itself, than it split in that
very city into the Dorotheans, the Psathyrians, and the Curtians; and
the Eunomians into the Theophronians and Eutychians. One fourth part of
the Donatists speedily became Maximinianists; and besides these were the
Rogatians, the Primianists, the Urbanists, and the Claudianists. If such
was the fecundity of the heretical principle in one place, it is not to
be supposed that Novatians or Marcionites in Africa or the East would
feel themselves bound to think or to act with their fellow-sectaries of
Rome or Constantinople; and the great varieties or inconsistencies of
statement, which have come down to us concerning the tenets of heresies,
may thus be explained. This had been the case with the pagan rites,
whether indigenous or itinerant, to which heresy succeeded. The
established priesthoods were local properties, as independent
theologically as they were geographically of each other; the fanatical
companies which spread over the Empire dissolved and formed again as the
circumstances of the moment occasioned. So was it with heresy: it was,
by its very nature, its own master, free to change, self-sufficient;
and, having thrown off the yoke of the Church, it was little likely to
submit to any usurped and spurious authority. Montanism and Manicheeism
might perhaps in some sort furnish an exception to this remark.


5.

In one point alone the heresies seem universally to have agreed,--in
hatred to the Church. This might at that time be considered one of her
surest and most obvious Notes. She was that body of which all sects,
however divided among themselves, spoke ill; according to the prophecy,
"If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
them of His household." They disliked and they feared her; they did
their utmost to overcome their mutual differences, in order to unite
against her. Their utmost indeed was little, for independency was the
law of their being; they could not exert themselves without fresh
quarrels, both in the bosom of each, and one with another. "_Bellum
hæreticorum pax est ecclesiæ_" had become a proverb; but they felt the
great desirableness of union against the only body which was the natural
antagonist of all, and various are the instances which occur in
ecclesiastical history of attempted coalitions. The Meletians of Africa
united with the Arians against St. Athanasius; the Semi-Arians of the
Council of Sardica corresponded with the Donatists of Africa; Nestorius
received and protected the Pelagians; Aspar, the Arian minister of Leo
the Emperor, favoured the Monophysites of Egypt; the Jacobites of Egypt
sided with the Moslem, who are charged with holding a Nestorian
doctrine. It had been so from the beginning: "They huddle up a peace
with all everywhere," says Tertullian, "for it maketh no matter to them,
although they hold different doctrines, so long as they conspire
together in their siege against the one thing, Truth."[254:1] And even
though active co-operation was impracticable, at least hard words cost
nothing, and could express that common hatred at all seasons.
Accordingly, by Montanists, Catholics were called "the carnal;" by
Novatians, "the apostates;" by Valentinians, "the worldly;" by
Manichees, "the simple;" by Aërians, "the ancient;"[254:2] by
Apollinarians, "the man-worshippers;" by Origenists, "the flesh-lovers,"
and "the slimy;" by the Nestorians, "Egyptians;" by Monophysites, the
"Chalcedonians:" by Donatists, "the traitors," and "the sinners," and
"servants of Antichrist;" and St. Peter's chair, "the seat of
pestilence;" and by the Luciferians, the Church was called "a brothel,"
"the devil's harlot," and "synagogue of Satan:" so that it might be
called a Note of the Church, as I have said, for the use of the most
busy and the most ignorant, that she was on one side and all other
bodies on the other.


6.

Yet, strange as it may appear, there was one title of the Church of a
very different nature from those which have been enumerated,--a title of
honour, which all men agreed to give her,--and one which furnished a
still more simple direction than such epithets of abuse to aid the busy
and the ignorant in finding her, and which was used by the Fathers for
that purpose. It was one which the sects could neither claim for
themselves, nor hinder being enjoyed by its rightful owner, though,
since it was the characteristic designation of the Church in the Creed,
it seemed to surrender the whole controversy between the two parties
engaged in it. Balaam could not keep from blessing the ancient people of
God; and the whole world, heresies inclusive, were irresistibly
constrained to call God's second election by its prophetical title of
the "Catholic" Church. St. Paul tells us that the heretic is "condemned
by himself;" and no clearer witness against the sects of the earlier
centuries was needed by the Church, than their own testimony to this
contrast between her actual position and their own. Sects, say the
Fathers, are called after the name of their founders, or from their
locality, or from their doctrine. So was it from the beginning: "I am of
Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas;" but it was promised to the
Church that she should have no master upon earth, and that she should
"gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad."
Her every-day name, which was understood in the marketplace and used in
the palace, which every chance comer knew, and which state-edicts
recognized, was the "Catholic" Church. This was that very description of
Christianity in those times which we are all along engaged in
determining. And it had been recognized as such from the first; the name
or the fact is put forth by St. Ignatius, St. Justin, St. Clement; by
the Church of Smyrna, St. Irenæus, Rhodon or another, Tertullian,
Origen, St. Cyprian, St. Cornelius; by the Martyrs, Pionius, Sabina, and
Asclepiades; by Lactantius, Eusebius, Adimantius, St. Athanasius, St.
Pacian, St. Optatus, St. Epiphanius, St. Cyril, St. Basil, St. Ambrose,
St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and Facundus. St. Clement
uses it as an argument against the Gnostics, St. Augustine against the
Donatists and Manichees, St. Jerome against the Luciferians, and St.
Pacian against the Novatians.


7.

It was an argument for educated and simple. When St. Ambrose would
convert the cultivated reason of Augustine, he bade him study the book
of Isaiah, who is the prophet, as of the Messiah, so of the calling of
the Gentiles and of the Imperial power of the Church. And when St. Cyril
would give a rule to his crowd of Catechumens, "If ever thou art
sojourning in any city," he says, "inquire not simply where the Lord's
house is, (for the sects of the profane also make an attempt to call
their own dens houses of the Lord,) nor merely where the Church is, but
where is the Catholic Church. For this is the peculiar name of this Holy
Body, the Mother of us all, which is the Spouse of our Lord Jesus
Christ."[256:1] "In the Catholic Church," says St. Augustine to the
Manichees, "not to speak of that most pure wisdom, to the knowledge of
which few spiritual men attain in this life so as to know it even in its
least measure,--as men, indeed, yet, without any doubt,--(for the
multitude of Christians are safest, not in understanding with quickness,
but in believing with simplicity,) not to speak of this wisdom, which ye
do not believe to be in the Catholic Church, there are many other
considerations which most sufficiently hold me in her bosom. I am held
by the consent of people and nations; by that authority which began in
miracles, was nourished in hope, was increased by charity, and made
steadfast by age; by that succession of priests from the chair of the
Apostle Peter, to whose feeding the Lord after His resurrection
commended His sheep, even to the present episcopate; lastly, by the very
title of Catholic, which, not without cause, hath this Church alone,
amid so many heresies, obtained in such sort, that, whereas all
heretics wish to be called Catholics, nevertheless to any stranger, who
asked where to find the 'Catholic' Church, none of them would dare to
point to his own basilica or home. These dearest bonds, then, of the
Christian Name, so many and such, rightly hold a man in belief in the
Catholic Church, even though, by reason of the slowness of our
understanding or our deserts, truth doth not yet show herself in her
clearest tokens. But among you, who have none of these reasons to invite
and detain me, I hear but the loud sound of a promise of the truth;
which truth, verily, if it be so manifestly displayed among you that
there can be no mistake about it, is to be preferred to all those things
by which I am held in the Catholic Church; but if it is promised alone,
and not exhibited, no one shall move me from that faith which by so many
and great ties binds my mind to the Christian religion."[257:1] When
Adimantius asked his Marcionite opponent, how he was a Christian who did
not even bear that name, but was called from Marcion, he retorts, "And
you are called from the Catholic Church, therefore ye are not Christians
either;" Adimantius answers, "Did we profess man's name, you would have
spoken to the point; but if we are called from being all over the world,
what is there bad in this?"[257:2]


8.

"Whereas there is one God and one Lord," says St. Clement, "therefore
also that which is the highest in esteem is praised on the score of
being sole, as after the pattern of the One Principle. In the nature
then of the One, the Church, which is one, hath its portion, which they
would forcibly cut up into many heresies. In substance then, and in
idea, and in first principle, and in pre-eminence, we call the ancient
Catholic Church sole; in order to the unity of one faith, the faith
according to her own covenants, or rather that one covenant in different
times, which, by the will of one God and through one Lord, is gathering
together those who are already ordained, whom God hath predestined,
having known that they would be just from the foundation of the
world. . . . . But of heresies, some are called from a man's name, as
Valentine's heresy, Marcion's, and that of Basilides (though they
profess to bring the opinion of Matthias, for all the Apostles had, as
one teaching, so one tradition); and others from place, as the Peratici;
and others from nation, as that of the Phrygians; and others from their
actions, as that of the Encratites; and others from their peculiar
doctrines, as the Docetæ and Hematites; and others from their
hypotheses, and what they have honoured, as Cainites and the Ophites;
and others from their wicked conduct and enormities, as those Simonians
who are called Eutychites."[258:1] "There are, and there have been,"
says St. Justin, "many who have taught atheistic and blasphemous words
and deeds, coming in the name of Jesus; and they are called by us from
the appellation of the men whence each doctrine and opinion began . . .
Some are called Marcians, others Valentinians, others Basilidians,
others Saturnilians."[258:2] "When men are called Phrygians, or
Novatians, or Valentinians, or Marcionites, or Anthropians," says
Lactantius, "or by any other name, they cease to be Christians; for they
have lost Christ's Name, and clothe themselves in human and foreign
titles. It is the Catholic Church alone which retains the true
worship."[258:3] "We never heard of Petrines, or Paulines, or
Bartholomeans, or Thaddeans," says St. Epiphanius; "but from the first
there was one preaching of all the Apostles, not preaching themselves,
but Christ Jesus the Lord. Wherefore also all gave one name to the
Church, not their own, but that of their Lord Jesus Christ, since they
began to be called Christians first at Antioch; which is the Sole
Catholic Church, having nought else but Christ's, being a Church of
Christians; not of Christs, but of Christians, He being One, they from
that One being called Christians. None, but this Church and her
preachers, are of this character, as is shown by their own epithets,
Manicheans, and Simonians, and Valentinians, and Ebionites."[259:1] "If
you ever hear those who are said to belong to Christ," says St. Jerome,
"named, not from the Lord Jesus Christ, but from some other, say
Marcionites, Valentinians, Mountaineers, Campestrians, know that it is
not Christ's Church, but the synagogue of Antichrist."[259:2]


9.

St. Pacian's letters to the Novatian Bishop Sympronian require a more
extended notice. The latter had required the Catholic faith to be proved
to him, without distinctly stating from what portion of it he dissented;
and he boasted that he had never found any one to convince him of its
truth. St. Pacian observes that there is one point which Sympronian
cannot dispute, and which settles the question, the very name Catholic.
He then supposes Sympronian to object that, "under the Apostles no one
was called Catholic." He answers, "Be it thus;[259:3] it shall have been
so; allow even that. When, after the Apostles, heresies had burst forth,
and were striving under various names to tear piecemeal and divide 'the
Dove' and 'the Queen' of God, did not the Apostolic people require a
name of their own, whereby to mark the unity of the people that was
uncorrupted, lest the error of some should rend limb by limb 'the
undefiled virgin' of God? Was it not seemly that the chief head should
be distinguished by its own peculiar appellation? Suppose this very day
I entered a populous city. When I had found Marcionites, Apollinarians,
Cataphrygians, Novatians, and others of the kind, who call themselves
Christians, by what name should I recognize the congregation of my own
people, unless it were named Catholic? . . . . Whence was it delivered
to me? Certainly that which has stood through so many ages was not
borrowed from man. This name 'Catholic' sounds not of Marcion, nor of
Apelles, nor of Montanus, nor does it take heretics for its authors."

In his second letter, he continues, "Certainly that was no accessory
name which endured through so many ages. And, indeed, I am glad for
thee, that, although thou mayest have preferred others, yet thou agreest
that the name attaches to us, which should you deny nature would cry
out. But and if you still have doubts, let us hold our peace. We will
both be that which we shall be named." After alluding to Sympronian's
remark that, though Cyprian was holy, "his people bear the name of
Apostaticum, Capitolinum, or Synedrium," which were some of the Novatian
titles of the Church, St. Pacian replies, "Ask a century, brother, and
all its years in succession, whether this name has adhered to us;
whether the people of Cyprian have been called other than Catholic? No
one of these names have I ever heard." It followed that such
appellations were "taunts, not names," and therefore unmannerly. On the
other hand it seems that Sympronian did not like to be called a
Novatian, though he could not call himself a Catholic. "Tell me
yourselves," says St. Pacian, "what ye are called. Do ye deny that the
Novatians are called from Novatian? Impose on them whatever name you
like; that will ever adhere to them. Search, if you please, whole
annals, and trust so many ages. You will answer, 'Christian.' But
if I inquire the genus of the sect, you will not deny that it is
Novatian. . . . Confess it without deceit; there is no wickedness in
the name. Why, when so often inquired for, do you hide yourself? Why
ashamed of the origin of your name? When you first wrote, I thought you
a Cataphrygian. . . . Dost thou grudge me my name, and yet shun thine
own? Think what there is of shame in a cause which shrinks from its own
name."

In a third letter: "'The Church is the Body of Christ.' Truly, the body,
not a member; the body composed of many parts and members knit in one,
as saith the Apostle, 'For the Body is not one member, but many.'
Therefore, the Church is the full body, compacted and diffused now
throughout the whole world; like a city, I mean, all whose parts are
united, not as ye are, O Novatians, some small and insolent portion, and
a mere swelling that has gathered and separated from the rest of the
body. . . . Great is the progeny of the Virgin, and without number her
offspring, wherewith the whole world is filled, wherewith the populous
swarms ever throng the circumfluous hive." And he founds this
characteristic of the Church upon the prophecies: "At length, brother
Sympronian, be not ashamed to be with the many; at length consent to
despise these festering spots of the Novatians, and these parings of
yours; and at length, to look upon the flocks of the Catholics, and the
people of the Church extending so far and wide. . . . Hear what David
saith, 'I will sing unto Thy name in the great congregation;' and again,
'I will praise Thee among much people;' and 'the Lord, even the most
mighty God, hath spoken, and called the world from the rising up of the
sun unto the going down thereof.' What! shall the seed of Abraham, which
is as the stars and the sand on the seashore for number, be contented
with your poverty? . . . Recognize now, brother, the Church of God
extending her tabernacles and fixing the stakes of her curtains on the
right and on the left; understand that 'the Lord's name is praised from
the rising up of the sun unto the going down thereof.'"


10.

In citing these passages, I am not proving what was the doctrine of the
Fathers concerning the Church in those early times, or what were the
promises made to it in Scripture; but simply ascertaining what, in
matter of fact, was its then condition relatively to the various
Christian bodies among which it was found. That the Fathers were able to
put forward a certain doctrine, that they were able to appeal to the
prophecies, proves that matter of fact; for unless the Church, and the
Church alone, had been one body everywhere, they could not have argued
on the supposition that it was so. And so as to the word "Catholic;" it
is enough that the Church was so called; that title was a confirmatory
proof and symbol of what is even otherwise so plain, that she, as St.
Pacian explains the word, was everywhere one, while the sects of the day
were nowhere one, but everywhere divided. Sects might, indeed, be
everywhere, but they were in no two places the same; every spot had its
own independent communion, or at least to this result they were
inevitably and continually tending.


11.

St. Pacian writes in Spain: the same contrast between the Church and
sectarianism is presented to us in Africa in the instance of the
Donatists; and St. Optatus is a witness both to the fact, and to its
notoriety, and to the deep impressions which it made on all parties.
Whether or not the Donatists identified themselves with the true Church,
and cut off the rest of Christendom from it, is not the question here,
nor alters the fact which I wish distinctly brought out and recognized,
that in those ancient times the Church was that Body which was spread
over the _orbis terrarum_, and sects were those bodies which were local
or transitory.

"What is that one Church," says St. Optatus, "which Christ calls 'Dove'
and 'Spouse'? . . . It cannot be in the multitude of heretics and
schismatics. If so, it follows that it is but in one place. Thou,
brother Parmenian, hast said that it is with you alone; unless, perhaps,
you aim at claiming for yourselves a special sanctity from your pride,
so that where you will, there the Church may be, and may not be, where
you will not. Must it then be in a small portion of Africa, in the
corner of a small realm, among you, but not among us in another part of
Africa? And not in Spain, in Gaul, in Italy, where you are not? And if
you will have it only among you, not in the three Pannonian provinces,
in Dacia, Mœsia, Thrace, Achaia, Macedonia, and in all Greece, where
you are not? And that you may keep it among yourselves, not in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Pamphylia, Phrygia, Cilicia, in the three Syrias,
in the two Armenias, in all Egypt, and in Mesopotamia, where you are
not? Not among such innumerable islands and the other provinces,
scarcely numerable, where you are not? What will become then of the
meaning of the word Catholic, which is given to the Church, as being
according to reason[263:1] and diffused every where? For if thus at your
pleasure you narrow the Church, if you withdraw from her all the
nations, where will be the earnings of the Son of God? where will be
that which the Father hath so amply accorded to Him, saying in the
second Psalm 'I will give thee the heathen for Thine inheritance and the
uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession,' &c.? . . The whole
earth is given Him with the nations; its whole circuit (_orbis_) is
Christ's one possession."[263:2]


12.

An African writer contemporary with St. Augustine, if not St. Augustine
himself, enumerates the small portions of the Donatist Sect, in and out
of Africa, and asks if they can be imagined to be the fulfilment of the
Scripture promise to the Church. "If the holy Scriptures have assigned
the Church to Africa alone, or to the scanty Cutzupitans or Mountaineers
of Rome, or to the house or patrimony of one Spanish woman, however the
argument may stand from other writings, then none but the Donatists have
possession of the Church. If holy Scripture determines it to the few
Moors of the Cæsarean province, we must go over to the Rogatists: if to
the few Tripolitans or Byzacenes and Provincials, the Maximianists have
attained to it; if in the Orientals only, it is to be sought for among
Arians, Eunomians, Macedonians, and others that may be there; for who
can enumerate every heresy of every nation? But if Christ's Church, by
the divine and most certain testimonies of Canonical Scriptures, is
assigned to all nations, whatever may be adduced, and from whatever
quarter cited, by those who say, 'Lo, here is Christ and lo there,' let
us rather hear, if we be His sheep, the voice of our Shepherd saying
unto us, 'Do not believe.' For they are not each found in the many
nations where she is; but she, who is everywhere, is found where they
are."[264:1]

Lastly, let us hear St. Augustine himself again in the same controversy:
"They do not communicate with us, as you say," he observes to
Cresconius, "Novatians, Arians, Patripassians, Valentinians, Patricians,
Apellites, Marcionites, Ophites, and the rest of those sacrilegious
names, as you call them, of nefarious pests rather than sects. Yet,
wheresoever they are, there is the Catholic Church; as in Africa it is
where you are. On the other hand, neither you, nor any one of those
heresies whatever, is to be found wherever is the Catholic Church.
Whence it appears, which is that tree whose boughs extend over all the
earth by the richness of its fruitfulness, and which be those broken
branches which have not the life of the root, but lie and wither, each
in its own place."[265:1]


13.

It may be possibly suggested that this universality which the Fathers
ascribe to the Catholic Church lay in its Apostolical descent, or again
in its Episcopacy; and that it was one, not as being one kingdom or
civitas "at unity with itself," with one and the same intelligence in
every part, one sympathy, one ruling principle, one organization, one
communion, but because, though consisting of a number of independent
communities, at variance (if so be) with each other even to a breach of
communion, nevertheless all these were possessed of a legitimate
succession of clergy, or all governed by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
But who will in seriousness maintain that relationship, or that sameness
of structure, makes two bodies one? England and Prussia are both of them
monarchies; are they therefore one kingdom? England and the United
States are from one stock; can they therefore be called one state?
England and Ireland are peopled by different races; yet are they not one
kingdom still? If unity lies in the Apostolical succession, an act of
schism is from the nature of the case impossible; for as no one can
reverse his parentage, so no Church can undo the fact that its clergy
have come by lineal descent from the Apostles. Either there is no such
sin as schism, or unity does not lie in the Episcopal form or in the
Episcopal ordination. And this is felt by the controversialists of this
day; who in consequence are obliged to invent a sin, and to consider,
not division of Church from Church, but the interference of Church with
Church to be the sin of schism, as if local dioceses and bishops with
restraint were more than ecclesiastical arrangements and by-laws of the
Church, however sacred, while schism is a sin against her essence. Thus
they strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel. Division is the schism, if
schism there be, not interference. If interference is a sin, division
which is the cause of it is a greater; but where division is a duty,
there can be no sin in interference.


14.

Far different from such a theory is the picture which the ancient Church
presents to us; true, it was governed by Bishops, and those Bishops came
from the Apostles, but it was a kingdom besides; and as a kingdom admits
of the possibility of rebels, so does such a Church involve sectaries
and schismatics, but not independent portions. It was a vast organized
association, co-extensive with the Roman Empire, or rather overflowing
it. Its Bishops were not mere local officers, but possessed a
quasi-ecumenical power, extending wherever a Christian was to be found.
"No Christian," says Bingham, "would pretend to travel without taking
letters of credence with him from his own bishop, if he meant to
communicate with the Christian Church in a foreign country. Such was the
admirable unity of the Church Catholic in those days, and the blessed
harmony and consent of her bishops among one another."[266:1] St.
Gregory Nazianzen calls St. Cyprian an universal Bishop, "presiding," as
the same author presently quotes Gregory, "not only over the Church of
Carthage and Africa, but over all the regions of the West, and over the
East, and South, and Northern parts of the world also." This is
evidence of a unity throughout Christendom, not of mere origin or of
Apostolical succession, but of government. Bingham continues "[Gregory]
says the same of Athanasius; that, in being made Bishop of Alexandria,
he was made Bishop of the whole world. Chrysostom, in like manner,
styles Timothy, Bishop of the universe. . . . . The great Athanasius, as
he returned from his exile, made no scruple to ordain in several cities
as he went along, though they were not in his own diocese. And the
famous Eusebius of Samosata did the like, in the times of the Arian
persecution under Valens. . . Epiphanius made use of the same power and
privilege in a like case, ordaining Paulinianus, St. Jerome's brother,
first deacon and then presbyter, in a monastery out of his own diocese
in Palestine."[267:1] And so in respect of teaching, before Councils met
on any large scale, St. Ignatius of Antioch had addressed letters to the
Churches along the coast of Asia Minor, when on his way to martyrdom at
Rome. St. Irenæus, when a subject of the Church of Smyrna, betakes
himself to Gaul, and answers in Lyons the heresies of Syria. The see of
St. Hippolytus, as if he belonged to all parts of the _orbis terrarum_,
cannot be located, and is variously placed in the neighbourhood of Rome
and in Arabia. Hosius, a Spanish Bishop, arbitrates in an Alexandrian
controversy. St. Athanasius, driven from his Church, makes all
Christendom his home, from Treves to Ethiopia, and introduces into the
West the discipline of the Egyptian Antony. St. Jerome is born in
Dalmatia, studies at Constantinople and Alexandria, is secretary to St.
Damasus at Rome, and settles and dies in Palestine.

Above all the See of Rome itself is the centre of teaching as well as
of action, is visited by Fathers and heretics as a tribunal in
controversy, and by ancient custom sends her alms to the poor Christians
of all Churches, to Achaia and Syria, Palestine, Arabia, Egypt, and
Cappadocia.


15.

Moreover, this universal Church was not only one; it was exclusive also.
As to the vehemence with which Christians of the Ante-nicene period
denounced the idolatries and sins of paganism, and proclaimed the
judgments which would be their consequence, this is well known, and led
to their being reputed in the heathen world as "enemies of mankind."
"Worthily doth God exert the lash of His stripes and scourges," says St.
Cyprian to a heathen magistrate; "and since they avail so little, and
convert not men to God by all this dreadfulness of havoc, there abides
beyond the prison eternal and the ceaseless flame and the everlasting
penalty. . . . Why humble yourself and bend to false gods? Why bow your
captive body before helpless images and moulded earth? Why grovel in the
prostration of death, like the serpent whom ye worship? Why rush into
the downfall of the devil, his fall the cause of yours, and he your
companion? . . . . Believe and live; you have been our persecutors in
time; in eternity, be companions of our joy."[268:1] "These rigid
sentiments," says Gibbon, "which had been unknown to the ancient world,
appear to have infused a spirit of bitterness into a system of love and
harmony."[268:2] Such, however, was the judgment passed by the first
Christians upon all who did not join their own society; and such still
more was the judgment of their successors on those who lived and died in
the sects and heresies which had issued from it. That very Father, whose
denunciation of the heathen has just been quoted, had already declared
it even in the third century. "He who leaves the Church of Christ," he
says, "attains not to Christ's rewards. He is an alien, an outcast, an
enemy. He can no longer have God for a Father, who has not the Church
for a Mother. If any man was able to escape who remained without the Ark
of Noah, then will that man escape who is out of doors beyond the
Church. . . What sacrifice do they believe they celebrate, who are
rivals of the Priests? If such men were even killed for confession of
the Christian name, not even by their blood is this stain washed out.
Inexplicable and heavy is the sin of discord, and is purged by no
suffering . . . They cannot dwell with God who have refused to be of one
mind in God's Church; a man of such sort may indeed be killed, crowned
he cannot be."[269:1] And so again St. Chrysostom, in the following
century, in harmony with St. Cyprian's sentiment: "Though we have
achieved ten thousand glorious acts, yet shall we, if we cut to pieces
the fulness of the Church, suffer punishment no less sore than they who
mangled His body."[269:2] In like manner St Augustine seems to consider
that a conversion from idolatry to a schismatical communion is no gain.
"Those whom Donatists baptize, they heal of the wound of idolatry or
infidelity, but inflict a more grievous stroke in the wound of schism;
for idolaters among God's people the sword destroyed, but schismatics
the gaping earth devoured."[269:3] Elsewhere, he speaks of the
"sacrilege of schism, which surpasses all wickednesses."[269:4] St.
Optatus, too, marvels at the Donatist Parmenian's inconsistency in
maintaining the true doctrine, that "Schismatics are cut off as branches
from the vine, are destined for punishments, and reserved, as dry wood,
for hell-fire."[269:5] "Let us hate them who are worthy of hatred," says
St. Cyril, "withdraw we from those whom God withdraws from; let us also
say unto God with all boldness concerning all heretics, 'Do not I hate
them, O Lord, that hate thee?'"[270:1] "Most firmly hold, and doubt in
no wise," says St. Fulgentius, "that every heretic and schismatic
soever, baptized in the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, unless
aggregated to the Catholic Church, how great soever have been his alms,
though for Christ's Name he has even shed his blood, can in no wise be
saved."[270:2] The Fathers ground this doctrine on St. Paul's words
that, though we have knowledge, and give our goods to the poor, and our
body to be burned, we are nothing without love.[270:3]


16.

One more remark shall be made: that the Catholic teachers, far from
recognizing any ecclesiastical relation as existing between the
Sectarian Bishops and Priests and their people, address the latter
immediately, as if those Bishops did not exist, and call on them to come
over to the Church individually without respect to any one besides; and
that because it is a matter of life and death. To take the instance of
the Donatists: it was nothing to the purpose that their Churches in
Africa were nearly as numerous as those of the Catholics, or that they
had a case to produce in their controversy with the Catholic Church; the
very fact that they were separated from the _orbis terrarum_ was a
public, a manifest, a simple, a sufficient argument against them. "The
question is not about your gold and silver," says St. Augustine to
Glorius and others, "not your lands, or farms, nor even your bodily
health is in peril, but we address your souls about obtaining eternal
life and fleeing eternal death. Rouse yourself therefore. . . . . You
see it all, and know it, and groan over it; yet God sees that there is
nothing to detain you in so pestiferous and sacrilegious a separation,
if you will but overcome your carnal affection, for the obtaining the
spiritual kingdom, and rid yourselves of the fear of wounding
friendships, which will avail nothing in God's judgment for escaping
eternal punishment. Go, think over the matter, consider what can be said
in answer. . . . No one blots out from heaven the Ordinance of God, no
one blots out from earth the Church of God: He hath promised her, she
hath filled, the whole world." "Some carnal intimacies," he says to his
kinsman Severinus, "hold you where you are. . . . What avails temporal
health or relationship, if with it we neglect Christ's eternal heritage
and our perpetual health?" "I ask," he says to Celer, a person of
influence, "that you would more earnestly urge upon your men Catholic
Unity in the region of Hippo." "Why," he says, in the person of the
Church, to the whole Donatist population, "Why open your ears to the
words of men, who say what they never have been able to prove, and close
them to the word of God, saying, 'Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the
heathen for Thine inheritance'?" At another time he says to them, "Some
of the presbyters of your party have sent to us to say, 'Retire from our
flocks, unless you would have us kill you.' How much more justly do we
say to them, 'Nay, do you, not retire from, but come in peace, not to
our flocks, but to the flocks of Him whose we are all; or if you will
not, and are far from peace, then do you rather retire from flocks, for
which Christ shed His Blood.'" "I call on you for Christ's sake," he
says to a late pro-consul, "to write me an answer, and to urge gently
and kindly all your people in the district of Sinis or Hippo into the
communion of the Catholic Church." He publishes an address to the
Donatists at another time to inform them of the defeat of their Bishops
in a conference: "Whoso," he says, "is separated from the Catholic
Church, however laudably he thinks he is living, by this crime alone,
that he is separated from Christ's Unity, he shall not have life, but
the wrath of God abideth on him." "Let them believe of the Catholic
Church," he writes to some converts about their friends who were still
in schism, "that is, to the Church diffused over the whole world, rather
what the Scriptures say of it than what human tongues utter in calumny."
The idea of acting upon the Donatists only as a body and through their
bishops, does not appear to have occurred to St. Augustine at
all.[272:1]


17.

On the whole, then, we have reason to say, that if there be a form of
Christianity at this day distinguished for its careful organization, and
its consequent power; if it is spread over the world; if it is
conspicuous for zealous maintenance of its own creed; if it is
intolerant towards what it considers error; if it is engaged in
ceaseless war with all other bodies called Christian; if it, and it
alone, is called "Catholic" by the world, nay, by those very bodies, and
if it makes much of the title; if it names them heretics, and warns them
of coming woe, and calls on them one by one, to come over to itself,
overlooking every other tie; and if they, on the other hand, call it
seducer, harlot, apostate, Antichrist, devil; if, however much they
differ one with another, they consider it their common enemy; if they
strive to unite together against it, and cannot; if they are but local;
if they continually subdivide, and it remains one; if they fall one
after another, and make way for new sects, and it remains the same; such
a religious communion is not unlike historical Christianity, as it comes
before us at the Nicene Era.


SECTION III.

THE CHURCH OF THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES.

The patronage extended by the first Christian Emperors to Arianism, its
adoption by the barbarians who succeeded to their power, the subsequent
expulsion of all heresy beyond the limits of the Empire, and then again
the Monophysite tendencies of Egypt and part of Syria, changed in some
measure the aspect of the Church, and claim our further attention. It
was still a body in possession, or approximating to the possession, of
the _orbis terrarum_; but it was not simply intermixed with sectaries,
as we have been surveying it in the earlier periods, rather it lay
between or over against large schisms. That same vast Association,
which, and which only, had existed from the first, which had been
identified by all parties with Christianity, which had been ever called
Catholic by people and by laws, took a different shape; collected itself
in far greater strength on some points of her extended territory than on
others; possessed whole kingdoms with scarcely a rival; lost others
partially or wholly, temporarily or for good; was stemmed in its course
here or there by external obstacles; and was defied by heresy, in a
substantive shape and in mass, from foreign lands, and with the support
of the temporal power. Thus not to mention the Arianism of the Eastern
Empire in the fourth century, the whole of the West was possessed by the
same heresy in the fifth; and nearly the whole of Asia, east of the
Euphrates, as far as it was Christian, by the Nestorians, in the
centuries which followed; while the Monophysites had almost the
possession of Egypt, and at times of the whole Eastern Church. I think
it no assumption to call Arianism, Nestorianism, and Eutychianism
heresies, or to identify the contemporary Catholic Church with
Christianity. Now, then, let us consider the mutual relation of
Christianity and heresy under these circumstances.


§ 1. _The Arians of the Gothic Race._

No heresy has started with greater violence or more sudden success than
the Arian; and it presents a still more remarkable exhibition of these
characteristics among the barbarians than in the civilized world. Even
among the Greeks it had shown a missionary spirit. Theophilus in the
reign of Constantius had introduced the dominant heresy, not without
some promising results, to the Sabeans of the Arabian peninsula; but
under Valens, Ulphilas became the apostle of a whole race. He taught the
Arian doctrine, which he had unhappily learned in the Imperial Court,
first to the pastoral Mœsogoths; who, unlike the other branches of
their family, had multiplied under the Mœsian mountains with neither
military nor religious triumphs. The Visigoths were next corrupted; by
whom does not appear. It is one of the singular traits in the history of
this vast family of heathens that they so instinctively caught, and so
impetuously communicated, and so fiercely maintained, a heresy, which
had excited in the Empire, except at Constantinople, little interest in
the body of the people. The Visigoths are said to have been converted by
the influence of Valens; but Valens reigned for only fourteen years, and
the barbarian population which had been admitted to the Empire amounted
to nearly a million of persons. It is as difficult to trace how the
heresy was conveyed from them to the other barbarian tribes. Gibbon
seems to suppose that the Visigoths acted the part of missionaries in
their career of predatory warfare from Thrace to the Pyrenees. But such
is the fact, however it was brought about, that the success in arms and
the conversion to Arianism, of Ostrogoths, Alani, Suevi, Vandals, and
Burgundians stand as concurrent events in the history of the times; and
by the end of the fifth century the heresy had been established by the
Visigoths in France and Spain, in Portugal by the Suevi, in Africa by
the Vandals, and by the Ostrogoths in Italy. For a while the title of
Catholic as applied to the Church seemed a misnomer; for not only was
she buried beneath these populations of heresy, but that heresy was one,
and maintained the same distinctive tenet, whether at Carthage, Seville,
Toulouse, or Ravenna.


2.

It cannot be supposed that these northern warriors had attained to any
high degree of mental cultivation; but they understood their own
religion enough to hate the Catholics, and their bishops were learned
enough to hold disputations for its propagation. They professed to stand
upon the faith of Ariminum, administering Baptism under an altered form
of words, and re-baptizing Catholics whom they gained over to their
sect. It must be added that, whatever was their cruelty or tyranny, both
Goths and Vandals were a moral people, and put to shame the Catholics
whom they dispossessed. "What can the prerogative of a religious name
profit us," says Salvian, "that we call ourselves Catholic, boast of
being the faithful, taunt Goths and Vandals with the reproach of an
heretical appellation, while we live in heretical wickedness?"[276:1]
The barbarians were chaste, temperate, just, and devout; the Visigoth
Theodoric repaired every morning with his domestic officers to his
chapel, where service was performed by the Arian priests; and one
singular instance is on record of the defeat of a Visigoth force by the
Imperial troops on a Sunday, when instead of preparing for battle they
were engaged in the religious services of the day.[276:2] Many of their
princes were men of great ability, as the two Theodorics, Euric and
Leovigild.


3.

Successful warriors, animated by a fanatical spirit of religion, were
not likely to be content with a mere profession of their own creed; they
proceeded to place their own priests in the religious establishments
which they found, and to direct a bitter persecution against the
vanquished Catholics. The savage cruelties of the Vandal Hunneric in
Africa have often been enlarged upon; Spain was the scene of repeated
persecutions; Sicily, too, had its Martyrs. Compared with these
enormities, it was but a little thing to rob the Catholics of their
churches, and the shrines of their treasures. Lands, immunities, and
jurisdictions, which had been given by the Emperors to the African
Church, were made over to the clergy of its conquerors; and by the time
of Belisarius, the Catholic Bishops had been reduced to less than a
third of their original number. In Spain, as in Africa, bishops were
driven from their sees, churches were destroyed, cemeteries profaned,
martyries rifled. When it was possible, the Catholics concealed the
relics in caves, keeping up a perpetual memory of these provisional
hiding-places.[277:1] Repeated spoliations were exercised upon the
property of the Church. Leovigild applied[277:2] its treasures partly to
increasing the splendour of his throne, partly to national works. At
other times, the Arian clergy themselves must have been the recipients
of the plunder: for when Childebert the Frank had been brought into
Spain by the cruelties exercised against the Catholic Queen of the
Goths, who was his sister, he carried away with him from the Arian
churches, as St. Gregory of Tours informs us, sixty chalices, fifteen
patens, twenty cases in which the gospels were kept, all of pure gold
and ornamented with jewels.[277:3]


4.

In France, and especially in Italy, the rule of the heretical power was
much less oppressive; Theodoric, the Ostrogoth, reigned from the Alps to
Sicily, and till the close of a long reign he gave an ample toleration
to his Catholic subjects. He respected their property, suffered their
churches and sacred places to remain in their hands, and had about his
court some of their eminent Bishops, since known as Saints, St. Cæsarius
of Arles, and St. Epiphanius of Pavia. Still he brought into the country
a new population, devoted to Arianism, or, as we now speak, a new
Church. "His march," says Gibbon,[277:4] "must be considered as the
emigration of an entire people; the wives and children of the Goths,
their aged parents, and most precious effects, were carefully
transported; and some idea may be formed of the heavy luggage that now
followed the camp by the loss of two thousand waggons, which had been
sustained in a single action in the war of Epirus." To his soldiers he
assigned a third of the soil of Italy, and the barbarian families
settled down with their slaves and cattle. The original number of the
Vandal conquerors of Africa had only been fifty thousand men, but the
military colonists of Italy soon amounted to the number of two hundred
thousand; which, according to the calculation adopted by the same author
elsewhere, involves a population of a million. The least that could be
expected was, that an Arian ascendency established through the extent of
Italy would provide for the sufficient celebration of the Arian worship,
and we hear of the Arians having a Church even in Rome.[278:1] The rule
of the Lombards in the north of Italy succeeded to that of the
Goths,--Arians, like their predecessors, without their toleration. The
clergy whom they brought with them seem to have claimed their share in
the possession of the Catholic churches;[278:2] and though the Court was
converted at the end of thirty years, many cities in Italy were for some
time afterwards troubled by the presence of heretical bishops.[278:3]
The rule of Arianism in France lasted for eighty years; in Spain for a
hundred and eighty; in Africa for a hundred; for about a hundred in
Italy. These periods were not contemporaneous; but extend altogether
from the beginning of the fifth to the end of the sixth century.


5.

It will be anticipated that the duration of this ascendency of error
had not the faintest tendency to deprive the ancient Church of the West
of the title of Catholic; and it is needless to produce evidence of a
fact which is on the very face of the history. The Arians seem never to
have claimed the Catholic name. It is more remarkable that the Catholics
during this period were denoted by the additional title of "Romans." Of
this there are many proofs in the histories of St. Gregory of Tours,
Victor of Vite, and the Spanish Councils. Thus, St. Gregory speaks of
Theodegisilus, a king of Portugal, expressing his incredulity at a
miracle, by saying, "It is the temper of the Romans, (for," interposes
the author, "they call men of our religion Romans,) and not the power of
God."[279:1] "Heresy is everywhere an enemy to Catholics," says the same
St. Gregory in a subsequent place, and he proceeds to illustrate it by
the story of a "Catholic woman," who had a heretic husband, to whom, he
says, came "a presbyter of our religion very Catholic;" and whom the
husband matched at table with his own Arian presbyter, "that there might
be the priests of each religion" in their house at once. When they were
eating, the husband said to the Arian, "Let us have some sport with this
presbyter of the Romans."[279:2] The Arian Count Gomachar, seized on the
lands of the Church of Agde in France, and was attacked with a fever; on
his recovery, at the prayers of the Bishop, he repented of having asked
for them, observing, "What will these Romans say now? that my fever came
of taking their land."[279:3] When the Vandal Theodoric would have
killed the Catholic Armogastes, after failing to torture him into
heresy, his presbyter dissuaded him, "lest the Romans should begin to
call him a Martyr."[279:4]


6.

This appellation had two meanings; one, which will readily suggest
itself, is its use in contrast to the word "barbarian," as denoting the
faith of the Empire, as "Greek" occurs in St. Paul's Epistles. In this
sense it would more naturally be used by the Romans themselves than by
others. Thus Salvian says, that "nearly all the Romans are greater
sinners than the barbarians;"[280:1] and he speaks of "Roman heretics,
of which there is an innumerable multitude,"[280:2] meaning heretics
within the Empire. And so St. Gregory the Great complains, that he "had
become Bishop of the Lombards rather than of the Romans."[280:3] And
Evagrius, speaking even of the East, contrasts "Romans and
barbarians"[280:4] in his account of St. Simeon; and at a later date,
and even to this day, Thrace and portions of Dacia and of Asia Minor
derive their name from Rome. In like manner, we find Syrian writers
sometimes speaking of the religion of the Romans, sometimes of the
Greeks,[280:5] as synonymes.


7.

But the word certainly contains also an allusion to the faith and
communion of the Roman See. In this sense the Emperor Theodosius, in his
letter to Acacius of Berœa, contrasts it with Nestorianism, which was
within the Empire as well as Catholicism; during the controversy raised
by that heresy, he exhorts him and others to show themselves "approved
priests of the Roman religion."[280:6] Again when the Ligurian nobles
were persuading the Arian Ricimer to come to terms with Anthemius, the
orthodox representative of the Greek Emperor,[280:7] they propose to him
to send St. Epiphanius as ambassador, a man "whose life is venerable to
every Catholic and Roman, and at least amiable in the eyes of a Greek
(_Græculus_) if he deserves the sight of him."[281:1] It must be
recollected, too, that the Spanish and African Churches actually were in
the closest union with the See of Rome at that time, and that that
intercommunion was the visible ecclesiastical distinction between them
and their Arian rivals. The chief ground of the Vandal Hunneric's
persecution of the African Catholics seems to have been their connexion
with their brethren beyond the sea,[281:2] which he looked at with
jealousy, as introducing a foreign power into his territory. Prior to
this he had published an edict calling on the "Homoüsian" Bishops (for
on this occasion he did not call them Catholic), to meet his own bishops
at Carthage and treat concerning the faith, that "their meetings to the
seduction of Christian souls might not be held in the provinces of the
Vandals."[281:3] Upon this invitation, Eugenius of Carthage replied,
that all the transmarine Bishops of the orthodox communion ought to be
summoned, "in particular because it is a matter for the whole world, not
special to the African provinces," that "they could not undertake a
point of faith _sine universitatis assensu_." Hunneric answered that if
Eugenius would make him sovereign of the _orbis terrarum_, he would
comply with his request. This led Eugenius to say that the orthodox
faith was "the only true faith;" that the king ought to write to his
allies abroad, if he wished to know it, and that he himself would write
to his brethren for foreign bishops, "who," he says, "may assist us in
setting before you the true faith, common to them and to us, and
especially the Roman Church, which is the head of all Churches."
Moreover, the African Bishops in their banishment in Sardinia, to the
number of sixty, with St. Fulgentius at their head, quote with
approbation the words of Pope Hormisdas, to the effect that they hold,
"on the point of free will and divine grace, what the Roman, that is,
the Catholic, Church follows and preserves."[282:1] Again, the Spanish
Church was under the superintendence of the Pope's Vicar[282:2] during
the persecutions, whose duty it was to hinder all encroachments upon
"the Apostolical decrees, or the limits of the Holy Fathers," through
the whole of the country.


8.

Nor was the association of Catholicism with the See of Rome an
introduction of that age. The Emperor Gratian, in the fourth century,
had ordered that the Churches which the Arians had usurped should be
restored (not to those who held "the Catholic faith," or "the Nicene
Creed," or were "in communion with the _orbis terrarum_,") but "who
chose the communion of Damasus,"[282:3] the then Pope. It was St.
Jerome's rule, also, in some well-known passages:--Writing against
Ruffinus, who had spoken of "our faith," he says, "What does he mean by
'his faith'? that which is the strength of the Roman Church? or that
which is contained in the volumes of Origen? If he answer, 'The Roman,'
then we are Catholics who have borrowed nothing of Origen's error; but
if Origen's blasphemy be his faith, then, while he is charging me with
inconsistency, he proves himself to be an heretic."[282:4] The other
passage, already quoted, is still more exactly to the point, because it
was written on occasion of a schism. The divisions at Antioch had thrown
the Catholic Church into a remarkable position; there were two Bishops
in the See, one in connexion with the East, the other with Egypt and the
West,--with which then was "Catholic Communion"? St. Jerome has no doubt
on the subject:--Writing to St. Damasus, he says, "Since the East tears
into pieces the Lord's coat, . . . therefore by me is the chair of Peter
to be consulted, and that faith which is praised by the Apostle's
mouth. . . . Though your greatness terrifies me, yet your kindness
invites me. From the Priest I ask the salvation of the victim, from the
Shepherd the protection of the sheep. Let us speak without offence; I
court not the Roman height: I speak with the successor of the Fisherman
and the disciple of the Cross. I, who follow none as my chief but
Christ, am associated in communion with thy blessedness, that is, with
the See of Peter. On that rock the Church is built, I know. Whoso shall
eat the Lamb outside that House is profane . . . . I know not Vitalis"
(the Apollinarian), "Meletius I reject, I am ignorant of Paulinus. Whoso
gathereth not with thee, scattereth; that is, he who is not of Christ is
of Antichrist."[283:1] Again, "The ancient authority of the monks,
dwelling round about, rises against me; I meanwhile cry out, If any be
joined to Peter's chair he is mine."[283:2]


9.

Here was what may be considered a _dignus vindice nodus_, the Church
being divided, and an arbiter wanted. Such a case had also occurred in
Africa in the controversy with the Donatists. Four hundred bishops,
though but in one region, were a fifth part of the whole Episcopate of
Christendom, and might seem too many for a schism, and in themselves too
large a body to be cut off from God's inheritance by a mere majority,
even had it been overwhelming. St. Augustine, then, who so often appeals
to the _orbis terrarum_, sometimes adopts a more prompt criterion. He
tells certain Donatists to whom he writes, that the Catholic Bishop of
Carthage "was able to make light of the thronging multitude of his
enemies, when he found himself by letters of credence joined both to the
Roman Church, in which ever had flourished the principality of the
Apostolical See, and to the other lands whence the gospel came to Africa
itself."[284:1]

There are good reasons then for explaining the Gothic and Arian use of
the word "Roman," when applied to the Catholic Church and faith, of
something beyond its mere connexion with the Empire, which the
barbarians were assaulting; nor would "Roman" surely be the most obvious
word to denote the orthodox faith, in the mouths of a people who had
learned their heresy from a Roman Emperor and Court, and who professed
to direct their belief by the great Latin Council of Ariminum.


10.

As then the fourth century presented to us in its external aspect the
Catholic Church lying in the midst of a multitude of sects, all enemies
to it, so in the fifth and sixth we see the same Church lying in the
West under the oppression of a huge, farspreading, and schismatical
communion. Heresy is no longer a domestic enemy intermingled with the
Church, but it occupies its own ground and is extended over against her,
even though on the same territory, and is more or less organized, and
cannot be so promptly refuted by the simple test of Catholicity.


§ 2. _The Nestorians._

The Churches of Syria and Asia Minor were the most intellectual portion
of early Christendom. Alexandria was but one metropolis in a large
region, and contained the philosophy of the whole Patriarchate; but
Syria abounded in wealthy and luxurious cities, the creation of the
Seleucidæ, where the arts and the schools of Greece had full
opportunities of cultivation. For a time too, for the first two hundred
years, as some think, Alexandria was the only See as well as the only
school of Egypt; while Syria was divided into smaller dioceses, each of
which had at first an authority of its own, and which, even after the
growth of the Patriarchal power, received their respective bishops, not
from the See of Antioch, but from their own metropolitan. In Syria too
the schools were private, a circumstance which would tend both to
diversity in religious opinion, and incaution in the expression of it;
but the sole catechetical school of Egypt was the organ of the Church,
and its Bishop could banish Origen for speculations which developed and
ripened with impunity in Syria.


2.

But the immediate source of that fertility in heresy, which is the
unhappiness of the ancient Syrian Church, was its celebrated Exegetical
School. The history of that School is summed up in the broad
characteristic fact, on the one hand that it devoted itself to the
literal and critical interpretation of Scripture, and on the other that
it gave rise first to the Arian and then to the Nestorian heresy. If
additional evidence be wanted of the connexion of heterodoxy and
biblical criticism in that age, it is found in the fact that, not long
after this coincidence in Syria, they are found combined in the person
of Theodore of Heraclea, so called from the place both of his birth and
his bishoprick, an able commentator and an active enemy of St.
Athanasius, though a Thracian unconnected except by sympathy with the
Patriarchate of Antioch.

The Antiochene School appears to have risen in the middle of the third
century; but there is no evidence to determine whether it was a local
institution, or, as is more probable, a discipline or method
characteristic generally of Syrian teaching. Dorotheus is one of its
earliest luminaries; he is known as a Hebrew scholar, as well as a
commentator on the sacred text, and he was the master of Eusebius of
Cæsarea. Lucian, the friend of the notorious Paul of Samosata, and for
three successive Episcopates after him separated from the Church though
afterwards a martyr in it, was the author of a new edition of the
Septuagint, and master of the chief original teachers of Arianism.
Eusebius of Cæsarea, Asterius called the Sophist, and Eusebius of Emesa,
Arians of the Nicene period, and Diodorus, a zealous opponent of
Arianism, but the master of Theodore of Mopsuestia, have all a place in
the Exegetical School. St. Chrysostom and Theodoret, both Syrians, and
the former the pupil of Diodorus, adopted the literal interpretation,
though preserved from its abuse. But the principal doctor of the School
was that Theodore, the master of Nestorius, who has just above been
mentioned, and who, with his writings, and with the writings of
Theodoret against St. Cyril, and the letter written by Ibas of Edessa to
Maris, was condemned by the fifth Ecumenical Council. Ibas was the
translator into Syriac, and Maris into Persian, of the books of Theodore
and Diodorus;[286:1] and thus they became immediate instruments in the
formation of the great Nestorian school and Church in farther Asia.

As many as ten thousand tracts of Theodore are said in this way to have
been introduced to the knowledge of the Christians of Mesopotamia,
Adiabene, Babylonia, and the neighbouring countries. He was called by
those Churches absolutely "the Interpreter," and it eventually became
the very profession of the Nestorian communion to follow him as such.
"The doctrine of all our Eastern Churches," says their Council under the
Patriarch Marabas, "is founded on the Creed of Nicæa; but in the
exposition of the Scriptures we follow St. Theodore." "We must by all
means remain firm to the commentaries of the great Commentator," says
the Council under Sabarjesus; "whoso shall in any manner oppose them, or
think otherwise, be he anathema."[287:1] No one since the beginning of
Christianity, except Origen and St. Augustine, has had so great literary
influence on his brethren as Theodore.[287:2]


3.

The original Syrian School had possessed very marked characteristics,
which it did not lose when it passed into a new country and into strange
tongues. Its comments on Scripture seem to have been clear, natural,
methodical, apposite, and logically exact. "In all Western Aramæa," says
Lengerke, that is, in Syria, "there was but one mode of treating whether
exegetics or doctrine, the practical."[287:3] Thus Eusebius of Cæsarea,
whether as a disputant or a commentator, is commonly a writer of sense
and judgment; and he is to be referred to the Syrian school, though he
does not enter so far into its temper as to exclude the mystical
interpretation or to deny the verbal inspiration of Scripture. Again, we
see in St. Chrysostom a direct, straightforward treatment of the sacred
text, and a pointed application of it to things and persons; and
Theodoret abounds in modes of thinking and reasoning which without any
great impropriety may be called English. Again, St. Cyril of Jerusalem,
though he does not abstain from allegory, shows the character of his
school by the great stress he lays upon the study of Scripture, and, I
may add, by the peculiar characteristics of his style, which will be
appreciated by a modern reader.


4.

It would have been well, had the genius of the Syrian theology been
ever in the safe keeping of men such as St. Cyril, St. Chrysostom, and
Theodoret; but in Theodore of Mopsuestia, nay in Diodorus before him, it
developed into those errors, of which Paul of Samosata had been the omen
on its rise. As its attention was chiefly directed to the examination of
the Scriptures, in its interpretation of the Scriptures was its
heretical temper discovered; and though allegory can be made an
instrument for evading Scripture doctrine, criticism may more readily be
turned to the destruction of doctrine and Scripture together. Theodore
was bent on ascertaining the literal sense, an object with which no
fault could be found: but, leading him of course to the Hebrew text
instead of the Septuagint, it also led him to Jewish commentators.
Jewish commentators naturally suggested events and objects short of
evangelical as the fulfilment of the prophetical announcements, and,
when it was possible, an ethical sense instead of a prophetical. The
eighth chapter of Proverbs ceased to bear a Christian meaning, because,
as Theodore maintained, the writer of the book had received the gift,
not of prophecy, but of wisdom. The Canticles must be interpreted
literally; and then it was but an easy, or rather a necessary step, to
exclude the book from the Canon. The book of Job too professed to be
historical; yet what was it really but a Gentile drama? He also gave up
the books of Chronicles and Ezra, and, strange to say, the Epistle of
St. James, though it was contained in the Peschito Version of his
Church. He denied that Psalms 22 and 69 [21 and 68] applied to our Lord;
rather he limited the Messianic passages of the whole book to four; of
which the eighth Psalm was one, and the forty-fifth [44] another. The
rest he explained of Hezekiah and Zerubbabel, without denying that they
might be accommodated to an evangelical sense.[288:1] He explained St.
Thomas's words, "My Lord and my God," as an exclamation of joy, and our
Lord's "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," as an anticipation of the day of
Pentecost. As may be expected he denied the verbal inspiration of
Scripture. Also, he held that the deluge did not cover the earth; and,
as others before him, he was heterodox on the doctrine of original sin,
and denied the eternity of punishment.


5.

Maintaining that the real sense of Scripture was, not the scope of a
Divine Intelligence, but the intention of the mere human organ of
inspiration, Theodore was led to hold, not only that that sense was one
in each text, but that it was continuous and single in a context; that
what was the subject of the composition in one verse must be the subject
in the next, and that if a Psalm was historical or prophetical in its
commencement, it was the one or the other to its termination. Even that
fulness, of meaning, refinement of thought, subtle versatility of
feeling, and delicate reserve or reverent suggestiveness, which poets
exemplify, seems to have been excluded from his idea of a sacred
composition. Accordingly, if a Psalm contained passages which could not
be applied to our Lord, it followed that that Psalm did not properly
apply to Him at all, except by accommodation. Such at least is the
doctrine of Cosmas, a writer of Theodore's school, who on this ground
passes over the twenty-second, sixty-ninth, and other Psalms, and limits
the Messianic to the second, the eighth, the forty-fifth, and the
hundred and tenth. "David," he says, "did not make common to the
servants what belongs to the Lord[289:1] Christ, but what was proper to
the Lord he spoke of the Lord, and what was proper to the servants, of
servants."[289:2] Accordingly the twenty-second could not properly
belong to Christ, because in the beginning it spoke of the "_verba
delictorum meorum_." A remarkable consequence would follow from this
doctrine, that as Christ was to be separated from His Saints, so the
Saints were to be separated from Christ; and an opening was made for a
denial of the doctrine of their _cultus_, though this denial in the
event has not been developed among the Nestorians. But a more serious
consequence is latently contained in it, and nothing else than the
Nestorian heresy, viz. that our Lord's manhood is not so intimately
included in His Divine Personality that His brethren according to the
flesh may be associated with the Image of the One Christ. Here St.
Chrysostom pointedly contradicts the doctrine of Theodore, though his
fellow-pupil and friend;[290:1] as does St. Ephrem, though a Syrian
also;[290:2] and St. Basil.[290:3]


6.

One other peculiarity of the Syrian school, viewed as independent of
Nestorius, should be added:--As it tended to the separation of the
Divine Person of Christ from His manhood, so did it tend to explain away
His Divine Presence in the Sacramental elements. Ernesti seems to
consider the school, in modern language, Sacramentarian: and certainly
some of the most cogent testimonies brought by moderns against the
Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist are taken from writers who are
connected with that school; as the author, said to be St. Chrysostom, of
the Epistle to Cæsarius, Theodoret in his Eranistes, and Facundus. Some
countenance too is given to the same view of the Eucharist, at least in
some parts of his works, by Origen, whose language concerning the
Incarnation also leans to what was afterwards Nestorianism. To these may
be added Eusebius,[291:1] who, far removed, as he was, from that
heresy, was a disciple of the Syrian school. The language of the later
Nestorian writers seems to have been of the same character.[291:2] Such
then on the whole is the character of that theology of Theodore which
passed from Cilicia and Antioch to Edessa first, and then to Nisibis.


7.

Edessa, the metropolis of Mesopotamia, had remained an Oriental city
till the third century, when it was made a Roman colony by
Caracalla.[291:3] Its position on the confines of two empires gave it
great ecclesiastical importance, as the channel by which the theology of
Rome and Greece was conveyed to a family of Christians, dwelling in
contempt and persecution amid a still heathen world. It was the seat of
various schools; apparently of a Greek school, where the classics were
studied as well as theology, where Eusebius of Emesa[291:4] had
originally been trained, and where perhaps Protogenes taught.[291:5]
There were also Syrian schools attended by heathen and Christian youths
in common. The cultivation of the native language had been an especial
object of its masters since the time of Vespasian, so that the pure and
refined dialect went by the name of the Edessene.[291:6] At Edessa too
St. Ephrem formed his own Syrian school, which lasted long after him;
and there too was the celebrated Persian Christian school, over which
Maris presided, who has been already mentioned as the translator of
Theodore into Persian.[291:7] Even in the time of the predecessor of
Ibas in the See (before A.D. 435) the Nestorianism of this Persian
School was so notorious that Rabbula the Bishop had expelled its
masters and scholars;[292:1] and they, taking refuge in a country which
might be called their own, had introduced the heresy to the Churches
subject to the Persian King.


8.

Something ought to be said of these Churches; though little is known
except what is revealed by the fact, in itself of no slight value, that
they had sustained two persecutions at the hands of the heathen
government in the fourth and fifth centuries. One testimony is extant as
early as the end of the second century, to the effect that in Parthia,
Media, Persia, and Bactria there were Christians who "were not overcome
by evil laws and customs."[292:2] In the early part of the fourth
century, a bishop of Persia attended the Nicene Council, and about the
same time Christianity is said to have pervaded nearly the whole of
Assyria.[292:3] Monachism had been introduced there before the middle of
the fourth century, and shortly after commenced that fearful persecution
in which sixteen thousand Christians are said to have suffered. It
lasted thirty years, and is said to have recommenced at the end of the
Century. The second persecution lasted for at least another thirty years
of the next, at the very time when the Nestorian troubles were in
progress in the Empire. Trials such as these show the populousness as
well as the faith of the Churches in those parts,--and the number of the
Sees, for the names of twenty-seven Bishops are preserved who suffered
in the former persecution. One of them was apprehended together with
sixteen priests, nine deacons, besides monks and nuns of his diocese;
another with twenty-eight companions, ecclesiastics or regulars; another
with one hundred ecclesiastics of different orders; another with one
hundred and twenty-eight; another with his chorepiscopus and two hundred
and fifty of his clergy. Such was the Church, consecrated by the blood
of so many martyrs, which immediately after its glorious confession fell
a prey to the theology of Theodore; and which through a succession of
ages manifested the energy, when it had lost the pure orthodoxy of
Saints.


9.

The members of the Persian school, who had been driven out of Edessa by
Rabbula, found a wide field open for their exertions under the pagan
government with which they had taken refuge. The Persian monarchs, who
had often prohibited by edict[293:1] the intercommunion of the Church
under their sway with the countries towards the west, readily extended
their protection to exiles, whose very profession was the means of
destroying its Catholicity. Barsumas, the most energetic of them, was
placed in the metropolitan See of Nisibis, where also the fugitive
school was settled under the presidency of another of their party; while
Maris was promoted to the See of Ardaschir. The primacy of the Church
had from an early period belonged to the See of Seleucia in Babylonia.
Catholicus was the title appropriated to its occupant, as well as to the
Persian Primate, as being deputies of the Patriarch of Antioch, and was
derived apparently from the Imperial dignity so called, denoting their
function as Procurators-general, or officers in chief for the regions in
which they were placed. Acacius, another of the Edessene party, was put
into this principal See, and suffered, if he did not further, the
innovations of Barsumas. The mode by which the latter effected those
measures has been left on record by an enemy. "Barsumas accused Babuæus,
the Catholicus, before King Pherozes, whispering, 'These men hold the
faith of the Romans, and are their spies. Give me power against them to
arrest them.'"[294:1] It is said that in this way he obtained the death
of Babuæus, whom Acacius succeeded. When a minority resisted[294:2] the
process of schism, a persecution followed. The death of seven thousand
seven hundred Catholics is said by Monophysite authorities to have been
the price of the severance of the Chaldaic Churches from
Christendom.[294:3] Their loss was compensated in the eyes of the
Government by the multitude of Nestorian fugitives, who flocked into
Persia from the Empire, numbers of them industrious artisans, who sought
a country where their own religion was in the ascendant.


10.

That religion was founded, as we have already seen, in the literal
interpretation of Holy Scripture, of which Theodore was the principal
teacher. The doctrine, in which it formally consisted, is known by the
name of Nestorianism: it lay in the ascription of a human as well as a
Divine Personality to our Lord; and it showed itself in denying the
title of "Mother of God," or θεοτόκος, to the Blessed Mary. As to our
Lord's Personality, the question of language came into the controversy,
which always serves to perplex a subject and make a dispute seem a
matter of words. The native Syrians made a distinction between the word
"Person," and "Prosopon," which stands for it in Greek; they allowed
that there was one Prosopon or Parsopa, as they called it, and they
heldthat there were two Persons. If it is asked what they meant by
_parsopa_, the answer seems to be, that they took the word merely in
the sense of _character_ or _aspect_, a sense familiar to the Greek
_prosopon_, and quite irrelevant as a guarantee of their orthodoxy. It
follows moreover that, since the _aspect_ of a thing is its impression
upon the beholder, the personality to which they ascribed unity must
have laid in our Lord's manhood, and not in His Divine Nature. But it is
hardly worth while pursuing the heresy to its limits. Next, as to
the phrase "Mother of God," they rejected it as unscriptural; they
maintained that St. Mary was Mother of the humanity of Christ, not of
the Word, and they fortified themselves by the Nicene Creed, in which no
such title is ascribed to her.


11.

Whatever might be the obscurity or the plausibility of their original
dogma, there is nothing obscure or attractive in the developments,
whether of doctrine or of practice, in which it issued. The first act of
the exiles of Edessa, on their obtaining power in the Chaldean
communion, was to abolish the celibacy of the clergy, or, in Gibbon's
forcible words, to allow "the public and reiterated nuptials of the
priests, the bishops, and even the patriarch himself." Barsumas, the
great instrument of the change of religion, was the first to set an
example of the new usage, and is even said by a Nestorian writer to have
married a nun.[295:1] He passed a Canon at Councils, held at Seleucia
and elsewhere, that bishops and priests might marry, and might renew
their wives as often as they lost them. The Catholicus who followed
Acacius went so far as to extend the benefit of the Canon to Monks, that
is, to destroy the Monastic order; and his two successors availed
themselves of this liberty, and are recorded to have been fathers. A
restriction, however, was afterwards placed upon the Catholicus, and
upon the Episcopal order.


12.

Such were the circumstances, and such the principles, under which the
See of Seleucia became the Rome of the East. In the course of time the
Catholicus took on himself the loftier and independent title of
Patriarch of Babylon; and though Seleucia was changed for Ctesiphon and
for Bagdad,[296:1] still the name of Babylon was preserved from first to
last as a formal or ideal Metropolis. In the time of the Caliphs, it was
at the head of as many as twenty-five Archbishops; its Communion
extended from China to Jerusalem; and its numbers, with those of the
Monophysites, are said to have surpassed those of the Greek and Latin
Churches together. The Nestorians seem to have been unwilling, like the
Novatians, to be called by the name of their founder,[296:2] though they
confessed it had adhered to them; one instance may be specified of their
assuming the name of Catholic,[296:3] but there is nothing to show it
was given them by others.

"From the conquest of Persia," says Gibbon, "they carried their
spiritual arms to the North, the East, and the South; and the simplicity
of the Gospel was fashioned and painted with the colours of the Syriac
theology. In the sixth century, according to the report of a Nestorian
traveller, Christianity was successfully preached to the Bactrians, the
Huns, the Persians, the Indians, the Persarmenians, the Medes, and the
Elamites: the Barbaric Churches from the gulf of Persia to the Caspian
Sea were almost infinite; and their recent faith was conspicuous in the
number and sanctity of their monks and martyrs. The pepper coast of
Malabar and the isles of the ocean, Socotra and Ceylon, were peopled
with an increasing multitude of Christians, and the bishops and clergy
of those sequestered regions derived their ordination from the
Catholicus of Babylon. In a subsequent age, the zeal of the Nestorians
overleaped the limits which had confined the ambition and curiosity both
of the Greeks and Persians. The missionaries of Balch and Samarcand
pursued without fear the footsteps of the roving Tartar, and insinuated
themselves into the camps of the valleys of Imaus and the banks of the
Selinga."[297:1]


§ 3. _The Monophysites._

Eutyches was Archimandrite, or Abbot, of a Monastery in the suburbs of
Constantinople; he was a man of unexceptionable character, and was of
the age of seventy years, and had been Abbot for thirty, at the date of
his unhappy introduction into ecclesiastical history. He had been the
friend and assistant of St. Cyril of Alexandria, and had lately taken
part against Ibas, Bishop of Edessa, whose name has occurred in the
above account of the Nestorians. For some time he had been engaged in
teaching a doctrine concerning the Incarnation, which he maintained
indeed to be none other than that of St. Cyril's in his controversy with
Nestorius, but which others denounced as a heresy in the opposite
extreme, and substantially a reassertion of Apollinarianism. The subject
was brought before a Council of Constantinople, under the presidency of
Flavian, the Patriarch, in the year 448; and Eutyches was condemned by
the assembled Bishops of holding the doctrine of One, instead of Two
Natures in Christ.


2.

It is scarcely necessary for our present purpose to ascertain accurately
what he held, and there has been a great deal of controversy on the
subject; partly from confusion between him and his successors, partly
from the indecision or the ambiguity which commonly attaches to the
professions of heretics. If a statement must here be made of the
doctrine of Eutyches himself, in whom the controversy began, let it be
said to consist in these two tenets:--in maintaining first, that "before
the Incarnation there were two natures, after their union one," or that
our Lord was of or from two natures, but not in two;--and, secondly,
that His flesh was not of one substance with ours, that is, not of the
substance of the Blessed Virgin. Of these two points, he seemed willing
to abandon the second, but was firm in his maintenance of the first. But
let us return to the Council of Constantinople.

In his examination Eutyches allowed that the Holy Virgin was
consubstantial with us, and that "our God was incarnate of her;" but he
would not allow that He was therefore, as man, consubstantial with us,
his notion apparently being that union with the Divinity had changed
what otherwise would have been human nature. However, when pressed, he
said, that, though up to that day he had not permitted himself to
discuss the nature of Christ, or to affirm that "God's body is man's
body though it was human," yet he would allow, if commanded, our Lord's
consubstantiality with us. Upon this Flavian observed that "the Council
was introducing no innovation, but declaring the faith of the Fathers."
To his other position, however, that our Lord had but one nature after
the Incarnation, he adhered: when the Catholic doctrine was put before
him, he answered, "Let St. Athanasius be read; you will find nothing of
the kind in him."

His condemnation followed: it was signed by twenty-two Bishops and
twenty-three Abbots;[298:1] among the former were Flavian of
Constantinople, Basil metropolitan of Seleucia in Isauria, the
metropolitans of Amasea in Pontus, and Marcianopolis in Mœsia, and
the Bishop of Cos, the Pope's minister at Constantinople.


3.

Eutyches appealed to the Pope of the day, St. Leo, who at first hearing
took his part. He wrote to Flavian that, "judging by the statement of
Eutyches, he did not see with what justice he had been separated from
the communion of the Church." "Send therefore," he continued, "some
suitable person to give us a full account of what has occurred, and let
us know what the new error is." St. Flavian, who had behaved with great
forbearance throughout the proceedings, had not much difficulty in
setting the controversy before the Pope in its true light.

Eutyches was supported by the Imperial Court, and by Dioscorus the
Patriarch of Alexandria; the proceedings therefore at Constantinople
were not allowed to settle the question. A general Council was summoned
for the ensuing summer at Ephesus, where the third Ecumenical Council
had been held twenty years before against Nestorius. It was attended by
sixty metropolitans, ten from each of the great divisions of the East;
the whole number of bishops assembled amounted to one hundred and
thirty-five.[299:1] Dioscorus was appointed President by the Emperor,
and the object of the assembly was said to be the settlement of a
question of faith which had arisen between Flavian and Eutyches. St.
Leo, dissatisfied with the measure altogether, nevertheless sent his
legates, but with the object, as their commission stated, and a letter
he addressed to the Council, of "condemning the heresy, and reinstating
Eutyches if he retracted." His legates took precedence after Dioscorus
and before the other Patriarchs. He also published at this time his
celebrated Tome on the Incarnation, in a letter addressed to Flavian.

The proceedings which followed were of so violent a character, that the
Council has gone down to posterity under the name of the Latrocinium or
"Gang of Robbers." Eutyches was honourably acquitted, and his doctrine
received; but the assembled Fathers showed some backwardness to depose
St. Flavian. Dioscorus had been attended by a multitude of monks,
furious zealots for the Monophysite doctrine from Syria and Egypt, and
by an armed force. These broke into the Church at his call; Flavian was
thrown down and trampled on, and received injuries of which he died the
third day after. The Pope's legates escaped as they could; and the
Bishops were compelled to sign a blank paper, which was afterwards
filled up with the condemnation of Flavian. These outrages, however,
were subsequent to the Synodical acceptance of the Creed of Eutyches,
which seems to have been the spontaneous act of the assembled Fathers.
The proceedings ended by Dioscorus excommunicating the Pope, and the
Emperor issuing an edict in approval of the decision of the Council.


4.

Before continuing the narrative, let us pause awhile to consider what it
has already brought before us. An aged and blameless man, the friend of
a Saint, and him the great champion of the faith against the heresy of
his day, is found in the belief and maintenance of a doctrine, which he
declares to be the very doctrine which that Saint taught in opposition
to that heresy. To prove it, he and his friends refer to the very words
of St. Cyril; Eustathius of Berytus quoting from him at Ephesus as
follows: "We must not then conceive two natures, but one nature of the
Word incarnate."[300:1] Moreover, it seems that St. Cyril had been
called to account for this very phrase, and had appealed more than once
to a passage, which is extant as he quoted it, in a work by St.
Athanasius.[301:1] Whether the passage in question is genuine is very
doubtful, but that is not to the purpose; for the phrase which it
contains is also attributed by St. Cyril to other Fathers, and was
admitted by Catholics generally, as by St. Flavian, who deposed
Eutyches, nay was indirectly adopted by the Council of Chalcedon itself.


5.

But Eutyches did not merely insist upon a phrase; he appealed for his
doctrine to the Fathers generally; "I have read the blessed Cyril, and
the holy Fathers, and the holy Athanasius," he says at Constantinople,
"that they said, 'Of two natures before the union,' but that 'after the
union' they said 'but one.'"[301:2] In his letter to St. Leo, he appeals
in particular to Pope Julius, Pope Felix, St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, St.
Gregory Nazianzen, St. Basil, Atticus, and St. Proclus. He did not
appeal to them unreservedly certainly, as shall be presently noticed; he
allowed that they might err, and perhaps had erred, in their
expressions: but it is plain, even from what has been said, that there
could be no _consensus_ against him, as the word is now commonly
understood. It is also undeniable that, though the word "nature" is
applied to our Lord's manhood by St. Ambrose, St. Gregory Nazianzen and
others, yet on the whole it is for whatever reason avoided by the
previous Fathers; certainly by St. Athanasius, who uses the words
"manhood," "flesh," "the man," "economy," where a later writer would
have used "nature:" and the same is true of St. Hilary.[301:3] In like
manner, the Athanasian Creed, written, as it is supposed, some twenty
years before the date of Eutyches, does not contain the word "nature."
Much might be said on the plausibility of the defence, which Eutyches
might have made for his doctrine from the history and documents of the
Church before his time.


6.

Further, Eutyches professed to subscribe heartily the decrees of the
Council of Nicæa and Ephesus, and his friends appealed to the latter of
these Councils and to previous Fathers, in proof that nothing could be
added to the Creed of the Church. "I," he says to St. Leo, "even from my
elders have so understood, and from my childhood have so been
instructed, as the holy and Ecumenical Council at Nicæa of the three
hundred and eighteen most blessed Bishops settled the faith, and which
the holy Council held at Ephesus maintained and defined anew as the only
faith; and I have never understood otherwise than as the right or only
true orthodox faith hath enjoined." He says at the Latrocinium, "When I
declared that my faith was conformable to the decision of Nicæa,
confirmed at Ephesus, they demanded that I should add some words to it;
and I, fearing to act contrary to the decrees of the First Council of
Ephesus and of the Council of Nicæa, desired that your holy Council
might be made acquainted with it, since I was ready to submit to
whatever you should approve."[302:1] Dioscorus states the matter more
strongly: "We have heard," he says, "what this Council" of Ephesus
"decreed, that if any one affirm or opine anything, or raise any
question, beyond the Creed aforesaid" of Nicæa, "he is to be
condemned."[302:2] It is remarkable that the Council of Ephesus, which
laid down this rule, had itself sanctioned the Theotocos, an addition,
greater perhaps than any before or since, to the letter of the primitive
faith.


7.

Further, Eutyches appealed to Scripture, and denied that a human nature
was there given to our Lord; and this appeal obliged him in consequence
to refuse an unconditional assent to the Councils and Fathers, though he
so confidently spoke about them at other times. It was urged against him
that the Nicene Council itself had introduced into the Creed
extra-scriptural terms. "'I have never found in Scripture,' he said,"
according to one of the Priests who were sent to him, "'that there are
two natures.' I replied, 'Neither is the Consubstantiality,'" (the
Homoüsion of Nicæa,) "'to be found in the Scriptures, but in the Holy
Fathers who well understood them and faithfully expounded them.'"[303:1]
Accordingly, on another occasion, a report was made of him, that "he
professed himself ready to assent to the Exposition of Faith made by the
Holy Fathers of the Nicene and Ephesine Councils and he engaged to
subscribe their interpretations. However, if there were any accidental
fault or error in any expressions which they made, this he would neither
blame nor accept; but only search the Scriptures, as being surer than
the expositions of the Fathers; that since the time of the Incarnation
of God the Word . . he worshipped one Nature . . . that the doctrine
that our Lord Jesus Christ came of Two Natures personally united, this
it was that he had learned from the expositions of the Holy Fathers; nor
did he accept, if ought was read to him from any author to [another]
effect, because the Holy Scriptures, as he said, were better than the
teaching of the Fathers."[304:1] This appeal to the Scriptures will
remind us of what has lately been said of the school of Theodore
in the history of Nestorianism, and of the challenge of the Arians
to St. Avitus before the Gothic King.[304:2] It had also been the
characteristic of heresy in the antecedent period. St. Hilary brings
together a number of instances in point, from the history of Marcellus,
Photinus, Sabellius, Montanus, and Manes; then he adds, "They all speak
Scripture without the sense of Scripture, and profess a faith without
faith."[304:3]


8.

Once more; the Council of the Latrocinium, however, tyrannized over by
Dioscorus in the matter of St. Flavian, certainly did acquit Eutyches
and accept his doctrine canonically, and, as it would appear, cordially;
though their change at Chalcedon, and the subsequent variations of the
East, make it a matter of little moment how they decided. The Acts of
Constantinople were read to the Fathers of the Latrocinium; when they
came to the part where Eusebius of Dorylæum, the accuser of Eutyches,
asked him, whether he confessed Two Natures after the Incarnation, and
the Consubstantiality according to the flesh, the Fathers broke in upon
the reading:--"Away with Eusebius; burn him; burn him alive; cut him in
two; as he divided, so let him be divided."[305:1] The Council seems to
have been unanimous, with the exception of the Pope's Legates, in the
restoration of Eutyches; a more complete decision can hardly be
imagined.

It is true the whole number of signatures now extant, one hundred and
eight, may seem small out of a thousand, the number of Sees in the East;
but the attendance of Councils always bore a representative character.
The whole number of East and West was about eighteen hundred, yet the
second Ecumenical Council was attended by only one hundred and fifty,
which is but a twelfth part of the whole number; the Third Council by
about two hundred, or a ninth; the Council of Nicæa itself numbered only
three hundred and eighteen Bishops. Moreover, when we look through the
names subscribed to the Synodal decision, we find that the misbelief, or
misapprehension, or weakness, to which this great offence must be
attributed, was no local phenomenon, but the unanimous sin of Bishops in
every patriarchate and of every school of the East. Three out of the
four patriarchs were in favour of the heresiarch, the fourth being on
his trial. Of these Domnus of Antioch and Juvenal of Jerusalem acquitted
him, on the ground of his confessing the faith of Nicæa and Ephesus: and
Domnus was a man of the fairest and purest character, and originally a
disciple of St. Euthemius, however inconsistent on this occasion, and
ill-advised in former steps of his career. Dioscorus, violent and bad
man as he showed himself, had been Archdeacon to St. Cyril, whom he
attended at the Council of Ephesus; and was on this occasion supported
by those Churches which had so nobly stood by their patriarch Athanasius
in the great Arian conflict. These three Patriarchs were supported by
the Exarchs of Ephesus and Cæsarea in Cappadocia; and both of these as
well as Domnus and Juvenal, were supported in turn by their subordinate
Metropolitans. Even the Sees under the influence of Constantinople,
which was the remaining sixth division of the East, took part with
Eutyches. We find among the signatures to his acquittal the Bishops of
Dyrrachium, of Heraclea in Macedonia, of Messene in the Peloponese, of
Sebaste in Armenia, of Tarsus, of Damascus, of Berytus, of Bostra in
Arabia, of Amida in Mesopotamia, of Himeria in Osrhoene, of Babylon, of
Arsinoe in Egypt, and of Cyrene. The Bishops of Palestine, of Macedonia,
and of Achaia, where the keen eye of St. Athanasius had detected the
doctrine in its germ, while Apollinarianism was but growing into form,
were his actual partisans. Another Barsumas, a Syrian Abbot, ignorant of
Greek, attended the Latrocinium, as the representative of the monks of
his nation, whom he formed into a force, material or moral, of a
thousand strong, and whom at that infamous assembly he cheered on to the
murder of St. Flavian.


9.

Such was the state of Eastern Christendom in the year 449; a heresy,
appealing to the Fathers, to the Creed, and, above all, to Scripture,
was by a general Council, professing to be Ecumenical, received as true
in the person of its promulgator. If the East could determine a matter
of faith independently of the West, certainly the Monophysite heresy was
established as Apostolic truth in all its provinces from Macedonia to
Egypt.

There has been a time in the history of Christianity, when it had been
Athanasius against the world, and the world against Athanasius. The need
and straitness of the Church had been great, and one man was raised up
for her deliverance. In this second necessity, who was the destined
champion of her who cannot fail? Whence did he come, and what was his
name? He came with an augury of victory upon him, which even Athanasius
could not show; it was Leo, Bishop of Rome.


10.

Leo's augury of success, which even Athanasius had not, was this, that
he was seated in the chair of St. Peter and the heir of his
prerogatives. In the very beginning of the controversy, St. Peter
Chrysologus had urged this grave consideration upon Eutyches himself, in
words which have already been cited: "I exhort you, my venerable
brother," he had said, "to submit yourself in everything to what has
been written by the blessed Pope of Rome; for St. Peter, who lives and
presides in his own See, gives the true faith to those who seek
it."[307:1] This voice had come from Ravenna, and now after the
Latrocinium it was echoed back from the depths of Syria by the learned
Theodoret. "That all-holy See," he says in a letter to one of the
Pope's Legates, "has the office of heading (ἡγεμονίαν) the whole world's
Churches for many reasons; and above all others, because it has remained
free of the communion of heretical taint, and no one of heterodox
sentiments hath sat in it, but it hath preserved the Apostolic grace
unsullied."[307:2] And a third testimony in encouragement of the
faithful at the same dark moment issued from the Imperial court of the
West. "We are bound," says Valentinian to the Emperor of the East, "to
preserve inviolate in our times the prerogative of particular reverence
to the blessed Apostle Peter; that the most blessed Bishop of Rome,
to whom Antiquity assigned the priesthood over all (κατὰ πάντων) may
have place and opportunity of judging concerning the faith and the
priests."[307:3] Nor had Leo himself been wanting at the same time in
"the confidence" he had "obtained from the most blessed Peter and head
of the Apostles, that he had authority to defend the truth for the peace
of the Church."[308:1] Thus Leo introduces us to the Council of
Chalcedon, by which he rescued the East from a grave heresy.


11.

The Council met on the 8th of October, 451, and was attended by the
largest number of Bishops of any Council before or since; some say by as
many as six hundred and thirty. Of these, only four came from the West,
two Roman Legates and two Africans.[308:2]

Its proceedings were opened by the Pope's Legates, who said that they
had it in charge from the Bishop of Rome, "which is the head of all the
Churches," to demand that Dioscorus should not sit, on the ground that
"he had presumed to hold a Council without the authority of the
Apostolic See, which had never been done nor was lawful to do."[308:3]
This was immediately allowed them.

The next act of the Council was to give admission to Theodoret, who had
been deposed at the Latrocinium. The Imperial officers present urged his
admission, on the ground that "the most holy Archbishop Leo hath
restored him to the Episcopal office, and the most pious Emperor hath
ordered that he should assist at the holy Council."[308:4]

Presently, a charge was brought forward against Dioscorus, that, though
the Legates had presented a letter from the Pope to the Council, it had
not been read. Dioscorus admitted not only the fact, but its relevancy;
but alleged in excuse that he had twice ordered it to be read in vain.

In the course of the reading of the Acts of the Latrocinium and
Constantinople, a number of Bishops moved from the side of Dioscorus
and placed themselves with the opposite party. When Peter, Bishop of
Corinth, crossed over, the Orientals whom he joined shouted, "Peter
thinks as does Peter; orthodox Bishop, welcome."


12.

In the second Session it was the duty of the Fathers to draw up a
confession of faith condemnatory of the heresy. A committee was formed
for the purpose, and the Creed of Nicæa and Constantinople was read;
then some of the Epistles of St. Cyril; lastly, St. Leo's Tome, which
had been passed over in silence at the Latrocinium. Some discussion
followed upon the last of these documents, but at length the Bishops
cried out, "This is the faith of the Fathers; this is the faith of the
Apostles: we all believe thus; the orthodox believe thus; anathema to
him who does not believe thus. Peter has thus spoken through Leo; the
Apostles taught thus." Readings from the other Fathers followed; and
then some days were allowed for private discussion, before drawing up
the confession of faith which was to set right the heterodoxy of the
Latrocinium.

During the interval, Dioscorus was tried and condemned; sentence was
pronounced against him by the Pope's Legates, and ran thus: "The most
holy Archbishop of Rome, Leo, through us and this present Council, with
the Apostle St. Peter, who is the rock and foundation of the Catholic
Church and of the orthodox faith, deprives him of the Episcopal dignity
and every sacerdotal ministry."

In the fourth Session the question of the definition of faith came on
again, but the Council got no further than this, that it received the
definitions of the three previous Ecumenical Councils; it would not add
to them what Leo required. One hundred and sixty Bishops however
subscribed his Tome.


13.

In the fifth Session the question came on once more; some sort of
definition of faith was the result of the labours of the committee, and
was accepted by the great majority of the Council. The Bishops cried
out, "We are all satisfied with the definition; it is the faith of the
Fathers: anathema to him who thinks otherwise: drive out the
Nestorians." When objectors appeared, Anatolius, the new Patriarch of
Constantinople, asked "Did not every one yesterday consent to the
definition of faith?" on which the Bishops answered, "Every one
consented; we do not believe otherwise; it is the Faith of the Fathers;
let it be set down that Holy Mary is the Mother of God: let this be
added to the Creed; put out the Nestorians."[310:1] The objectors were
the Pope's Legates, supported by a certain number of Orientals: those
clear-sighted, firm-minded Latins understood full well what and what
alone was the true expression of orthodox doctrine under the emergency
of the existing heresy. They had been instructed to induce the Council
to pass a declaration to the effect, that Christ was not only "of," but
"in" two natures. However, they did not enter upon disputation on the
point, but they used a more intelligible argument: If the Fathers did
not consent to the letter of the blessed Bishop Leo, they would leave
the Council and go home. The Imperial officers took the part of the
Legates. The Council however persisted: "Every one approved the
definition; let it be subscribed: he who refuses to subscribe it is a
heretic." They even proceeded to refer it to Divine inspiration. The
officers asked if they received St. Leo's Tome; they answered that they
had subscribed it, but that they would not introduce its contents into
their definition of faith. "We are for no other definition," they said;
"nothing is wanting in this."


14.

Notwithstanding, the Pope's Legates gained their point through the
support of the Emperor Marcian, who had succeeded Theodosius. A fresh
committee was obtained under the threat that, if they resisted, the
Council should be transferred to the West. Some voices were raised
against this measure; the cries were repeated against the Roman party,
"They are Nestorians; let them go to Rome." The Imperial officers
remonstrated, "Dioscorus said, 'Of two natures;' Leo says, 'Two
natures:' which will you follow, Leo or Dioscorus?" On their answering
"Leo," they continued, "Well then, add to the definition, according to
the judgment of our most holy Leo." Nothing more was to be said. The
committee immediately proceeded to their work, and in a short time
returned to the assembly with such a definition as the Pope required.
After reciting the Creed of Nicæa and Constantinople, it observes, "This
Creed were sufficient for the perfect knowledge of religion, but the
enemies of the truth have invented novel expressions;" and therefore it
proceeds to state the faith more explicitly. When this was read through,
the Bishops all exclaimed, "This is the faith of the Fathers; we all
follow it." And thus ended the controversy once for all.

The Council, after its termination, addressed a letter to St. Leo; in it
the Fathers acknowledge him as "constituted interpreter of the voice of
Blessed Peter,"[311:1] (with an allusion to St. Peter's Confession in
Matthew xvi.,) and speak of him as "the very one commissioned with the
guardianship of the Vine by the Saviour."


15.

Such is the external aspect of those proceedings by which the Catholic
faith has been established in Christendom against the Monophysites. That
the definition passed at Chalcedon is the Apostolic Truth once delivered
to the Saints is most firmly to be received, from faith in that
overruling Providence which is by special promise extended over the acts
of the Church; moreover, that it is in simple accordance with the faith
of St. Athanasius, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and all the other Fathers,
will be evident to the theological student in proportion as he becomes
familiar with their works: but the historical account of the Council is
this, that a formula which the Creed did not contain, which the Fathers
did not unanimously witness, and which some eminent Saints had almost in
set terms opposed, which the whole East refused as a symbol, not once,
but twice, patriarch by patriarch, metropolitan by metropolitan, first
by the mouth of above a hundred, then by the mouth of above six hundred
of its Bishops, and refused upon the grounds of its being an addition to
the Creed, was forced upon the Council, not indeed as being such an
addition, yet, on the other hand, not for subscription merely, but for
acceptance as a definition of faith under the sanction of an
anathema,--forced on the Council by the resolution of the Pope of the
day, acting through his Legates and supported by the civil power.[312:1]


16.

It cannot be supposed that such a transaction would approve itself to
the Churches of Egypt, and the event showed it: they disowned the
authority of the Council, and called its adherents Chalcedonians,[313:1]
and Synodites.[313:2] For here was the West tyrannizing over the East,
forcing it into agreement with itself, resolved to have one and one only
form of words, rejecting the definition of faith which the East had
drawn up in Council, bidding it and making it frame another, dealing
peremptorily and sternly with the assembled Bishops, and casting
contempt on the most sacred traditions of Egypt! What was Eutyches to
them? He might be guilty or innocent; they gave him up: Dioscorus had
given him up at Chalcedon;[313:3] they did not agree with him:[313:4] he
was an extreme man; they would not call themselves by human titles; they
were not Eutychians; Eutyches was not their master, but Athanasius and
Cyril were their doctors.[313:5] The two great lights of their Church,
the two greatest and most successful polemical Fathers that Christianity
had seen, had both pronounced "One Nature Incarnate," though allowing
Two before the Incarnation; and though Leo and his Council had not gone
so far as to deny this phrase, they had proceeded to say what was the
contrary to it, to explain away, to overlay the truth, by defining that
the Incarnate Saviour was "in Two Natures." At Ephesus it had been
declared that the Creed should not be touched; the Chalcedonian Fathers
had, not literally, but virtually added to it: by subscribing Leo's
Tome, and promulgating their definition of faith, they had added what
might be called, "The Creed of Pope Leo."


17.

It is remarkable, as has been just stated, that Dioscorus, wicked man
as he was in act, was of the moderate or middle school in doctrine, as
the violent and able Severus after him; and from the first the great
body of the protesting party disowned Eutyches, whose form of the heresy
took refuge in Armenia, where it remains to this day. The Armenians
alone were pure Eutychians, and so zealously such that they innovated on
the ancient and recognized custom of mixing water with the wine in the
Holy Eucharist, and consecrated the wine by itself in token of the one
nature, as they considered, of the Christ. Elsewhere both name and
doctrine of Eutyches were abjured; the heretical bodies in Egypt and
Syria took a title from their special tenet, and formed the Monophysite
communion. Their theology was at once simple and specious. They based it
upon the illustration which is familiar to us in the Athanasian Creed,
and which had been used by St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Cyril, St.
Augustine, Vincent of Lerins, not to say St. Leo himself. They argued
that as body and soul made up one man, so God and man made up but one,
though one compound Nature, in Christ. It might have been charitably
hoped that their difference from the Catholics had been a simple matter
of words, as it is allowed by Vigilius of Thapsus really to have been in
many cases; but their refusal to obey the voice of the Church was a
token of real error in their faith, and their implicit heterodoxy is
proved by their connexion, in spite of themselves, with the extreme or
ultra party whom they so vehemently disowned.

It is very observable that, ingenious as is their theory and sometimes
perplexing to a disputant, the Monophysites never could shake themselves
free of the Eutychians; and though they could draw intelligible lines on
paper between the two doctrines, yet in fact by a hidden fatality their
partisans were ever running into or forming alliance with the
anathematized extreme. Thus Peter the Fuller the Theopaschite
(Eutychian), is at one time in alliance with Peter the Stammerer, who
advocated the Henoticon (which was Monophysite). The Acephali, though
separating from the latter Peter for that advocacy, and accused by
Leontius of being Gaianites[315:1] (Eutychians), are considered by
Facundus as Monophysites.[315:2] Timothy the Cat, who is said to have
agreed with Dioscorus and Peter the Stammerer, who signed the Henoticon,
that is, with two Monophysite Patriarchs, is said nevertheless,
according to Anastasius, to have maintained the extreme tenet, that "the
Divinity is the sole nature of Christ."[315:3] Severus, according to
Anastasius,[315:3] symbolized with the Phantasiasts (Eutychians), yet he
is more truly, according to Leontius, the chief doctor and leader of the
Monophysites. And at one time there was an union, though temporary,
between the Theodosians (Monophysites) and the Gaianites.


18.

Such a division of an heretical party, into the maintainers, of an
extreme and a moderate view, perspicuous and plausible on paper, yet in
fact unreal, impracticable, and hopeless, was no new phenomenon in the
history of the Church. As Eutyches put forward an extravagant tenet,
which was first corrected into the Monophysite, and then relapsed
hopelessly into the doctrine of the Phantasiasts and the Theopaschites,
so had Arius been superseded by the Eusebians and had revived in
Eunomius; and as the moderate Eusebians had formed the great body of the
dissentients from the Nicene Council, so did the Monophysites include
the mass of those who protested against Chalcedon; and as the Eusebians
had been moderate in creed, yet unscrupulous in act, so were the
Monophysites. And as the Eusebians were ever running individually into
pure Arianism, so did the Monophysites run into pure Eutychianism. And
as the Monophysites set themselves against Pope Leo, so had the
Eusebians, with even less provocation, withstood and complained of Pope
Julius. In like manner, the Apollinarians had divided into two sects;
one, with Timotheus, going the whole length of the inferences which the
tenet of their master involved, and the more cautious or timid party
making an unintelligible stand with Valentinus. Again, in the history of
Nestorianism, though it admitted less opportunity for division of
opinion, the See of Rome was with St. Cyril in one extreme, Nestorius in
the other, and between them the great Eastern party, headed by John of
Antioch and Theodoret, not heretical, but for a time dissatisfied with
the Council of Ephesus.


19.

The Nestorian heresy, I have said, gave less opportunity for doctrinal
varieties than the heresy of Eutyches. Its spirit was rationalizing, and
had the qualities which go with rationalism. When cast out of the Roman
Empire, it addressed itself, as we have seen, to a new and rich field of
exertion, got possession of an Established Church, co-operated with the
civil government, adopted secular fashions, and, by whatever means,
pushed itself out into an Empire. Apparently, though it requires a very
intimate knowledge of its history to speak except conjecturally, it was
a political power rather than a dogma, and despised the science of
theology. Eutychianism, on the other hand, was mystical, severe,
enthusiastic; with the exception of Severus, and one or two more, it was
supported by little polemical skill; it had little hold upon the
intellectual Greeks of Syria and Asia Minor, but flourished in Egypt,
which was far behind the East in civilization, and among the native
Syrians. Nestorianism, like Arianism[317:1] before it, was a cold
religion, and more fitted for the schools than for the many; but the
Monophysites carried the people with them. Like modern Jansenism, and
unlike Nestorianism, the Monophysites were famous for their austerities.
They have, or had, five Lents in the year, during which laity as well as
clergy abstain not only from flesh and eggs, but from wine, oil, and
fish.[317:2] Monachism was a characteristic part of their ecclesiastical
system: their Bishops, and Maphrian or Patriarch, were always taken from
the Monks, who are even said to have worn an iron shirt or breastplate
as a part of their monastic habit.[317:3]


20.

Severus, Patriarch of Antioch at the end of the fifth century, has
already been mentioned as an exception to the general character of the
Monophysites, and, by his learning and ability, may be accounted the
founder of its theology. Their cause, however, had been undertaken by
the Emperors themselves before him. For the first thirty years after the
Council of Chalcedon, the protesting Church of Egypt had been the scene
of continued tumult and bloodshed. Dioscorus had been popular with the
people for his munificence, in spite of the extreme laxity of his
morals, and for a while the Imperial Government failed in obtaining the
election of a Catholic successor. At length Proterius, a man of fair
character, and the Vicar-general of Dioscorus on his absence at
Chalcedon, was chosen, consecrated, and enthroned; but the people rose
against the civil authorities, and the military, coming to their
defence, were attacked with stones, and pursued into a church, where
they were burned alive by the mob. Next, the popular leaders prepared to
intercept the supplies of grain which were destined for Constantinople;
and, a defensive retaliation taking place, Alexandria was starved. Then
a force of two thousand men was sent for the restoration of order, who
permitted themselves in scandalous excesses towards the women of
Alexandria. Proterius's life was attempted, and he was obliged to be
attended by a guard. The Bishops of Egypt would not submit to him; two
of his own clergy, who afterward succeeded him, Timothy and Peter,
seceded, and were joined by four or five of the Bishops and by the mass
of the population;[318:1] and the Catholic Patriarch was left without a
communion in Alexandria. He held a council, and condemned the
schismatics; and the Emperor, seconding his efforts, sent them out of
the country, and enforced the laws against the Eutychians. An external
quiet succeeded; then Marcian died; and then forthwith Timothy (the Cat)
made his appearance again, first in Egypt, then in Alexandria. The
people rose in his favour, and carried in triumph their persecuted
champion to the great Cæsarean Church, where he was consecrated
Patriarch by two deprived Bishops, who had been put out of their sees,
whether by a Council of Egypt or of Palestine.[318:2] Timothy, now
raised to the Episcopal rank, began to create a new succession; he
ordained Bishops for the Churches of Egypt, and drove into exile those
who were in possession. The Imperial troops, who had been stationed in
Upper Egypt, returned to Alexandria; the mob rose again, broke into the
Church, where St. Proterius was in prayer, and murdered him. A general
ejectment of the Catholic clergy throughout Egypt followed. On their
betaking themselves to Constantinople to the new Emperor, Timothy and
his party addressed him also. They quoted the Fathers, and demanded the
abrogation of the Council of Chalcedon. Next they demanded a conference;
the Catholics said that what was once done could not be undone; their
opponents agreed to this and urged it, as their very argument against
Chalcedon, that it added to the faith, and reversed former
decisions.[319:1] After a rule of three years, Timothy was driven out
and Catholicism restored; but then in turn the Monophysites rallied, and
this state of warfare and alternate success continued for thirty years.


21.

At length the Imperial Government, wearied out with a dispute which was
interminable, came to the conclusion that the only way of restoring
peace to the Church was to abandon the Council of Chalcedon. In the year
482 was published the famous _Henoticon_ or Pacification of Zeno, in
which the Emperor took upon himself to determine a matter of faith. The
Henoticon declared that no symbol of faith but that of the Nicene Creed,
commonly so called, should be received in the Churches; it anathematized
the opposite heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, and it was silent on
the question of the "One" or "Two Natures" after the Incarnation. This
middle measure had the various effects which might be anticipated. It
united the great body of the Eastern Bishops, who readily relaxed into
the vague profession of doctrine from which they had been roused by the
authority of St. Leo. All the Eastern Bishops signed this Imperial
formulary. But this unanimity of the East was purchased by a breach with
the West; for the Popes cut off the communication between Greeks and
Latins for thirty-five years. On the other hand, the more zealous
Monophysites, disgusted at their leaders for accepting what they
considered an unjustifiable compromise, split off from the Eastern
Churches, and formed a sect by themselves, which remained without
Bishops (_acephali_) for three hundred years, when at length they were
received back into the communion of the Catholic Church.


22.

Dreary and waste was the condition of the Church, and forlorn her
prospects, at the period which we have been reviewing. After the brief
triumph which attended the conversion of Constantine, trouble and trial
had returned upon her. Her imperial protectors were failing in power or
in faith. Strange forms of evil were rising in the distance and were
thronging for the conflict. There was but one spot in the whole of
Christendom, one voice in the whole Episcopate, to which the faithful
turned in hope in that miserable day. In the year 493, in the
Pontificate of Gelasius, the whole of the East was in the hands of
traitors to Chalcedon, and the whole of the West under the tyranny of
the open enemies of Nicæa. Italy was the prey of robbers; mercenary
bands had overrun its territory, and barbarians were seizing on its
farms and settling in its villas. The peasants were thinned by famine
and pestilence; Tuscany might be even said, as Gelasius words it, to
contain scarcely a single inhabitant.[320:1] Odoacer was sinking before
Theodoric, and the Pope was changing one Arian master for another. And
as if one heresy were not enough, Pelagianism was spreading with the
connivance of the Bishops in the territory of Picenum. In the North of
the dismembered Empire, the Britons had first been infected by
Pelagianism, and now were dispossessed by the heathen Saxons. The
Armoricans still preserved a witness of Catholicism in the West of Gaul;
but Picardy, Champagne, and the neighbouring provinces, where some
remnant of its supremacy had been found, had lately submitted to the
yet heathen Clovis. The Arian kingdoms of Burgundy in France, and of the
Visigoths in Aquitaine and Spain, oppressed a zealous and Catholic
clergy, Africa was in still more deplorable condition under the cruel
sway of the Vandal Gundamond: the people indeed uncorrupted by the
heresy,[321:1] but their clergy in exile and their worship suspended.
While such was the state of the Latins, what had happened in the East?
Acacius, the Patriarch of Constantinople, had secretly taken part
against the Council of Chalcedon and was under Papal excommunication.
Nearly the whole East had sided with Acacius, and a schism had begun
between East and West, which lasted, as I have above stated, for
thirty-five years. The Henoticon was in force, and at the Imperial
command had been signed by all the Patriarchs and Bishops throughout the
Eastern Empire.[321:2] In Armenia the Churches were ripening for the
pure Eutychianism which they adopted in the following century; and in
Egypt the Acephali, already separated from the Monophysite Patriarch,
were extending in the east and west of the country, and preferred the
loss of the Episcopal Succession to the reception of the Council of
Chalcedon. And while Monophysites or their favourers occupied the
Churches of the Eastern Empire, Nestorianism was making progress in the
territories beyond it. Barsumas had held the See of Nisibis, Theodore
was read in the schools of Persia, and the successive Catholici of
Seleucia had abolished Monachism and were secularizing the clergy.


23.

If then there is now a form of Christianity such, that it extends
throughout the world, though with varying measures of prominence or
prosperity in separate places;--that it lies under the power of
sovereigns and magistrates, in various ways alien to its faith;--that
flourishing nations and great empires, professing or tolerating the
Christian name, lie over against it as antagonists;--that schools of
philosophy and learning are supporting theories, and following out
conclusions, hostile to it, and establishing an exegetical system
subversive of its Scriptures;--that it has lost whole Churches by
schism, and is now opposed by powerful communions once part of
itself;--that it has been altogether or almost driven from some
countries;--that in others its line of teachers is overlaid, its flocks
oppressed, its Churches occupied, its property held by what may be
called a duplicate succession;--that in others its members are
degenerate and corrupt, and are surpassed in conscientiousness and in
virtue, as in gifts of intellect, by the very heretics whom it
condemns;--that heresies are rife and bishops negligent within its own
pale;--and that amid its disorders and its fears there is but one Voice
for whose decisions the peoples wait with trust, one Name and one See to
which they look with hope, and that name Peter, and that see Rome;--such
a religion is not unlike the Christianity of the fifth and sixth
Centuries.[322:1]


FOOTNOTES:

[208:1] [This juxtaposition of names has been strangely distorted by
critics. In the intention of the author, Guizot matched with Pliny, not
with Frederick.]

[213:1] Vid. Muller de Hierarch. et Ascetic. Warburton, Div. Leg. ii. 4.
Selden de Diis Syr. Acad. des Inscript. t. 3, hist. p. 296, t. 5, mem.
p. 63, t. 16, mem. p. 267. Lucian. Pseudomant. Cod. Theod. ix. 16.

[214:1] Acad. t. 16. mem. p. 274.

[215:1] Apol. 25. Vid. also Prudent. in hon. Romani, circ. fin. and
Lucian de Deo Syr. 50.

[215:2] Vid. also the scene in Jul. Firm. p. 449.

[216:1] Tac. Ann. ii. 85; Sueton. Tiber. 36.

[216:2] August. 93.

[216:3] De Superst. 3.

[216:4] De Art. Am. i. init.

[217:1] Sat. iii. vi.

[217:2] Tertul. Ap. 5.

[218:1] Vit. Hel. 3.

[219:1] Vid. Tillemont, Mem. and Lardner's Hist. Heretics.

[221:1] Bampton Lect. 2.

[222:1] Burton, Bampton Lect. note 61.

[223:1] Burton, Bampton Lect. note 44.

[223:2] Montfaucon, Antiq. t. ii. part 2, p. 353.

[223:3] Hær. i. 20.

[223:4] De Præscr. 43.

[225:1] Vid. Kortholt, in Plin. et Traj. Epp. p. 152. Comment. in Minuc.
F. &c.

[228:1] "Itaque imposuistis in cervicibus nostris sempiternum dominum,
quem dies et noctes timeremus; quis enim non timeat omnia providentem et
cogitantem et animadvertentem, et omnia ad se pertinere putantem,
curiosum, et plenum negotii Deum?"--_Cic. de Nat. Deor._ i. 20.

[228:2] Min. c. 11. Lact. v. 1, 2, vid. Arnob. ii. 8, &c.

[228:3] Origen, contr. Cels. i. 9, iii. 44, 50, vi. 44.

[229:1] Prudent. in hon. Fruct. 37.

[229:2] Evan. Dem. iii. 3, 4.

[229:3] Mort. Peregr. 13.

[229:4] c. 108.

[229:5] i. e. Philop. 16.

[229:6] De Mort. Pereg. ibid.

[229:7] Ruin. Mart. pp. 100, 594, &c.

[230:1] Prud. in hon. Rom. vv. 404, 868.

[230:2] We have specimens of _carmina_ ascribed to Christians in the
Philopatris.

[230:3] Goth. in Cod. Th. t. 5, p. 120, ed. 1665. Again, "Qui malefici
vulgi consuetudine nuncupantur." Leg. 6. So Lactantius, "Magi et ii quos
verè maleficos vulgus appellat." Inst. ii. 17. "Quos et maleficos vulgus
appellat." August. Civ. Dei, x. 19. "Quos vulgus mathematicos vocat."
Hieron. in Dan. c. ii. Vid. Gothof. in loc. Other laws speak of those
who were "maleficiorum labe polluti," and of the "maleficiorum scabies."

[230:4] Tertullian too mentions the charge of "hostes principum
Romanorum, populi, generis humani, Deorum, Imperatorum, legum, morum,
naturæ totius inimici." Apol. 2, 35, 38, ad. Scap. 4, ad. Nat. i. 17.

[231:1] Evid. part ii. ch. 4.

[232:1] Heathen Test. 9.

[233:1] Gothof. in Cod. Th. t. 5, p. 121.

[233:2] Cic. pro Cluent. 61. Gieseler transl. vol. i. p. 21, note 5.
Acad. Inscr. t. 34, hist. p. 110.

[234:1] De Harusp. Resp. 9.

[234:2] De Legg. ii. 8.

[234:3] Acad. Inscr. ibid.

[234:4] Neander, Eccl. Hist. tr. vol. i. p. 81.

[234:5] Muller, p. 21, 22, 30. Tertull. Ox. tr. p. 12, note _p_.

[235:1] Gibbon, Hist. ch. 16, note 14.

[235:2] Epit. Instit. 55.

[236:1] Gibbon, ibid. Origen admits and defends the violation of the
laws: οὐκ ἄλογον συνθήκας παρὰ τὰ νενομισμένα ποιεῖν, τὰς ὑπὲρ ἁληθείας. c. Cels. i. 1.

[237:1] Hist. p. 418.

[237:2] In hon. Rom. 62. In Act. S. Cypr. 4, Tert. Apol. 10, &c.

[238:1] Apol. i. 3, 39, Oxf. tr.

[241:1] Julian ap. Cyril, pp. 39, 194, 206, 335. Epp. pp. 305, 429, 438,
ed. Spanh.

[242:1] Niebuhr ascribes it to the beginning of the tenth.

[245:1] Sirm. Opp. ii. p. 225, ed. Ven.

[247:1] Proph. Office, p. 132 [Via Media, vol. i. p. 109].

[247:2] [Since the publication of this volume in 1845, a writer in a
Conservative periodical of great name has considered that no happier
designation could be bestowed upon us than that which heathen statesmen
gave to the first Christians, "enemies of the human race." What a
remarkable witness to our identity with the Church of St. Paul ("a
pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition throughout the world"), of St.
Ignatius, St. Polycarp, and the other Martyrs! In this matter,
Conservative politicians join with Liberals, and with the movement
parties in Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy, in their view of
our religion.

"The Catholics," says the _Quarterly Review_ for January, 1873, pp.
181-2, "wherever they are numerous and powerful in a Protestant nation,
_compel_ (sic) as it were by a law of their being, that nation to treat
them with stern repression and control. . . . Catholicism, if it be true
to itself, and its mission, _cannot_ (sic) . . . wherever and whenever
the opportunity is afforded it, abstain from claiming, working for, and
grasping that supremacy and paramount influence and control, which it
conscientiously believes to be its inalienable and universal due. . . .
By the force of circumstances, by the inexorable logic of its claims, it
must be the intestine foe or the disturbing element of every state in
which it does not bear sway; and . . . it must now stand out in the
estimate of all Protestants, Patriots and Thinkers" (philosophers and
historians, as Tacitus?) "as the _hostis humani generis_ (sic), &c."]

[254:1] De Præscr. Hær. 41, Oxf. tr.

[254:2] χρονῖται.

[256:1] Cat. xviii. 26.

[257:1] Contr. Ep. Manich. 5.

[257:2] Origen, Opp. t. i. p. 809.

[258:1] Strom. vii. 17.

[258:2] c. Tryph. 35.

[258:3] Instit. 4. 30.

[259:1] Hær. 42, p. 366.

[259:2] In Lucif. fin.

[259:3] The Oxford translation is used.

[263:1] _Rationabilis_; apparently an allusion to the civil officer
called _Catholicus_ or _Rationalis_, receiver-general.

[263:2] Ad. Parm. ii. init.

[264:1] De Unit. Eccles. 6.

[265:1] Contr. Cresc. iv. 75; also iii. 77.

[266:1] Antiq. ii. 4, § 5.

[267:1] Antiq. 5, § 3. [Bingham apparently in this passage is indirectly
replying to the Catholic argument for the Pope's Supremacy drawn from
the titles and acts ascribed to him in antiquity; but that argument is
cumulative in character, being part of a whole body of proof; and there
is moreover a great difference between a rhetorical discourse and a
synodal enunciation as at Chalcedon.]

[268:1] Ad Demetr. 4, &c. Oxf. Tr.

[268:2] Hist. ch. xv.

[269:1] De Unit. 5, 12.

[269:2] Chrys. in Eph. iv.

[269:3] De Baptism. i. 10.

[269:4] c. Ep. Parm. i. 7.

[269:5] De Schism. Donat. i. 10.

[270:1] Cat. xvi. 10.

[270:2] De Fid. ad Petr. 39. [82.]

[270:3] [Of course this solemn truth must not be taken apart from the
words of the present Pope, Pius IX., concerning invincible ignorance:
"Notum nobis vobisque est, eos, qui invincibili circa sanctissimam
nostram religionem ignorantiâ laborant, quique naturalem legem ejusque
præcepta in omnium cordibus a Deo insculpta sedulo servantes, ac Deo
obedire parati, honestam rectamque vitam agunt, posse, divinæ lucis et
gratiæ operante virtute, æternam consequi vitam, cùm Deus, qui omnium
mentes, animos, cogitationes, habitusque planè intuetur, scrutatur et
noscit, pro summâ suâ bonitate et clementia, minimè patiatur quempiam
æternis puniri suppliciis, qui voluntariæ culpæ reatum non habeat."]

[272:1] Epp. 43, 52, 57, 76, 105, 112, 141, 144.

[276:1] De Gubern. Dei, vii. p. 142. Elsewhere, "Apud Aquitanicos quæ
civitas in locupletissimâ ac nobilissimâ sui parte non quasi lupanar
fuit? Quis potentum ac divitum non in luto libidinis vixit? Haud multum
matrona abest à vilitate servarum, ubi paterfamilias ancillarum maritus
est? Quis autem Aquitanorum divitum non hoc fuit?" (pp. 134, 135.)
"Offenduntur barbari ipsi impuritatibus nostris. Esse inter Gothos non
licet scortatorem Gothum; soli inter eos præjudicio nationis ac nominis
permittuntur impuri esse Romani" (p. 137). "Quid? Hispanias nonne vel
eadem vel majora forsitan vitia perdiderunt? . . . Accessit hoc ad
manifestandam illic impudicitiæ damnationem, ut Wandalis potissimum, id
est, pudicis barbaris traderentur" (p. 137). Of Africa and Carthage, "In
urbe Christianâ, in urbe ecclesiasticâ, . . . viri in semetipsis feminas
profitebantur," &c. (p. 152).

[276:2] Dunham, Hist. Spain, vol. i. p. 112.

[277:1] Aguirr. Concil. t. 2, p. 191.

[277:2] Dunham, p. 125.

[277:3] Hist. Franc. iii. 10.

[277:4] Ch. 39.

[278:1] Greg. Dial. iii. 30.

[278:2] Ibid. 20.

[278:3] Gibbon, Hist. ch. 37.

[279:1] De Glor. Mart. i. 25.

[279:2] Ibid. 80.

[279:3] Ibid. 79.

[279:4] Vict. Vit. i. 14.

[280:1] De Gub. D. iv. p. 73.

[280:2] Ibid. v. p. 88.

[280:3] Epp. i. 31.

[280:4] Hist. vi. 23.

[280:5] Cf. Assem. t. i. p. 351, not. 4, t. 3, p. 393.

[280:6] Baron. Ann. 432, 47.

[280:7] Gibbon, Hist. ch. 36.

[281:1] Baron. Ann. 471, 18.

[281:2] Vict. Vit. iv. 4.

[281:3] Vict. Vit. ii. 3-15.

[282:1] Aguirr. Conc. t. 2, p. 262.

[282:2] Aguirr. ibid. p. 232.

[282:3] Theod. Hist. v. 2.

[282:4] c. Ruff. i. 4.

[283:1] Ep. 15.

[283:2] Ep. 16.

[284:1] Aug. Epp. 43. 7.

[286:1] Assem. iii. p. 68.

[287:1] Ibid. t. 3, p. 84, note 3.

[287:2] Wegnern, Proleg. in Theod. Opp. p. ix.

[287:3] De Ephrem Syr. p. 61.

[288:1] Lengerke, de Ephrem Syr. pp. 73-75.

[289:1] δεσπότου, vid. La Croze, Thesaur. Ep. t. 3, § 145.

[289:2] Montf. Coll. Nov. t. 2, p. 227.

[290:1] Rosenmuller, Hist. Interpr. t. 3, p. 278.

[290:2] Lengerke, de Ephr. Syr. pp. 165-167.

[290:3] Ernest. de Proph. Mess. p. 462.

[291:1] Eccl. Theol. iii. 12.

[291:2] Professor Lee's Serm. Oct. 1838, pp. 144-152.

[291:3] Noris. Opp. t. 2, p. 112.

[291:4] Augusti. Euseb. Em. Opp.

[291:5] Asseman. Bibl. Or. p. cmxxv.

[291:6] Hoffman, Gram. Syr. Proleg. § 4.

[291:7] The educated Persians were also acquainted with Syriac. Assem.
t. i. p. 351, not.

[292:1] Asseman., p. lxx.

[292:2] Euseb. Præp. vi. 10.

[292:3] Tillemont, Mem. t. 7, p. 77.

[293:1] Gibbon, ch. 47.

[294:1] Asseman. p. lxxviii.

[294:2] Gibbon, ibid.

[294:3] Asseman. t. 2, p. 403, t. 3, p. 393.

[295:1] Asseman. t. 3, p. 67.

[296:1] Gibbon, ibid.

[296:2] Assem. p. lxxvi.

[296:3] Ibid. t. 3, p. 441.

[297:1] Ch. 47.

[298:1] Fleur. Hist. xxvii. 29.

[299:1] Gibbon, ch. 47.

[300:1] Concil. Hard. t. 2, p. 127.

[301:1] Petav. de Incarn. iv. 6, § 4.

[301:2] Concil. Hard. t. 2, p. 168.

[301:3] Vid. the Author's Athan. trans. [ed. 1881, vol. ii. pp. 331-333,
426-429, and on the general subject his Theol. Tracts, art. v.]

[302:1] Fleury, Oxf. tr. xxvii. 39.

[302:2] Ibid. 41. In like manner, St. Athanasius in the foregoing age
had said, "The faith confessed at Nicæa by the Fathers, according to the
Scriptures, is sufficient for the overthrow of all misbelief." ad Epict.
init. Elsewhere, however, he explains his statement, "The decrees of
Nicæa are right and sufficient for the overthrow of all heresy,
_especially_ the Arian," ad. Max. fin. St. Gregory Nazianzen, in like
manner, appeals to Nicæa; but he "adds an explanation on the doctrine of
the Holy Spirit which was left deficient by the Fathers, because the
question had not then been raised." Ep. 102, init. This exclusive
maintenance, and yet extension of the Creed, according to the exigences
of the times, is instanced in other Fathers. Vid. Athan. tr. [ed. 1881,
vol. ii. p. 82.]

[303:1] Fleury, ibid. 27.

[304:1] Concil. Hard. t. 2, p. 141. [A negative is omitted in the Greek,
but inserted in the Latin.]

[304:2] Supr. p. 245.

[304:3] Ad Const. ii. 9. Vid. Athan. tr. [ed. 1881, vol. ii. p. 261.]

[305:1] Concil. Hard. t. 2, p. 162.

[307:1] Fleury, Hist. Oxf. tr. xxvii. 37.

[307:2] Ep. 116.

[307:3] Conc. Hard. t. 2, p. 36.

[308:1] Ep. 43.

[308:2] Fleury, Hist. Oxf. tr. xxviii. 17, note _l_.

[308:3] Concil. Hard. t. 2, p. 68.

[308:4] Fleury, Oxf. tr. xxviii. 2, 3.

[310:1] Ibid. 20.

[311:1] Conc. Hard. t. 2, p. 656.

[312:1] [Can any so grave an _ex parte_ charge as this be urged against
the recent Vatican Council?]

[313:1] I cannot find my reference for this fact; the sketch is formed
from notes made some years since, though I have now verified them.

[313:2] Leont. de Sect. v. p. 512.

[313:3] Concil. Hard. t. 2, p. 99, vid. also p. 418.

[313:4] Renaud. Patr. Alex. p. 115.

[313:5] Assem. t. 2, pp. 133-137.

[315:1] Leont. de Sect. vii. pp. 521, 2.

[315:2] Fac. i. 5, circ. init.

[315:3] Hodeg. 20, p. 319.

[317:1] _i. e._ Arianism in the East: "Sanctiores aures plebis quam
corda sunt sacerdotum." S. Hil. contr. Auxent. 6. It requires some
research to account for its hold on the barbarians. Vid. _supr._ pp.
274, 5.

[317:2] Gibbon, ch. 47.

[317:3] Assem. t. 2, de Monoph. circ. fin.

[318:1] Leont. Sect. v. init.

[318:2] Tillemont, t. 15, p. 784.

[319:1] Tillemont, Mem. t. 15, pp. 790-811.

[320:1] Gibbon, Hist. ch. 36, fin.

[321:1] Gibbon, Hist. ch. 36, fin.

[321:2] Gibbon, Hist. ch. 47.

[322:1] [The above sketch has run to great length, yet it is only part
of what might be set down in evidence of the wonderful identity of type
which characterizes the Catholic Church from first to last. I have
confined myself for the most part to her political aspect; but a
parallel illustration might be drawn simply from her doctrinal, or from
her devotional. As to her devotional aspect, Cardinal Wiseman has shown
its identity in the fifth compared with the nineteenth century, in an
article of the _Dublin Review_, quoted in part in _Via Media_, vol. ii.
p. 378. Indeed it is confessed on all hands, as by Middleton, Gibbon,
&c., that from the time of Constantine to their own, the system and the
phenomena of worship in Christendom, from Moscow to Spain, and from
Ireland to Chili, is one and the same. I have myself paralleled Medieval
Europe with modern Belgium or Italy, in point of ethical character in
"Difficulties of Anglicans," vol. i. Lecture ix., referring the identity
to the operation of a principle, insisted on presently, the Supremacy of
Faith. And so again, as to the system of Catholic doctrine, the type of
the Religion remains the same, because it has developed according to the
"analogy of faith," as is observed in _Apol._, p. 196, "The idea of the
Blessed Virgin was, as it were, _magnified_ in the Church of Rome, as
time went on, but so were _all_ the Christian ideas, as that of the
Blessed Eucharist," &c.]




