PART II

_Nur für Schwindelfreie_.

(From _Alpine Recollections_.)




1

Light reveals to us beauty--but also ugliness. Throw vitriol in the
face of a beautiful woman, and the beauty is gone, no power on earth
will enable us to look upon her with the same rapture as before. Could
even the sincerest, deepest love endure the change? True, the idealists
will hasten to say that love overcomes all things. But idealism needs
be prompt, for if she leaves us one single moment in which to _see_,
we shall see such things as are not easily explained away. That is why
idealists stick so tight so logic. In the twinkling of an eye logic
will convey us to the remotest conclusions and forecasts. Reality could
never overtake her. Love is eternal, and consequently a disfigured face
will seem as lovely to us as a fresh one. This is, of course, a lie,
but it helps to preserve old tastes and obscures danger. Real danger,
however, was never dispelled by words. In spite of Schiller and eternal
love, in the long run vitriol triumphs, and the agreeable young man is
forced to abandon his beloved and acknowledge himself a fraud. Light,
the source of his life and hope, has now destroyed hope and life for
him. He will not return to idealism, and he will hate logic: light,
that seemed to him so beautiful, will have become hideous. He will turn
to darkness, where logic and its binding conclusions have no power, but
where the fancy is free for all her vagaries. Without light we should
never have known that vitriol ruins beauty. No science, nor any art can
give us what darkness gives. It is true, in our young days when all
was new, light brought us great happiness and joy. Let us, therefore,
remember it with gratitude, as a benefactor we no longer need. Do after
all let us dispense with gratitude, for it belongs to the calculating,
bourgeois virtues. _Do ut des_. Let us forget light, and gratitude, and
the qualms of self-important idealism, let us go bravely to meet the
coming night. She promises us great power over reality. Is it worth
while to give up our old tastes and lofty convictions? Love and light
have not availed against vitriol. What a horror would have seized us
at the thought, once upon a time! That short phrase can annul all
Schiller. We have shut our eyes and stopped our ears, we have built
huge philosophic systems to shield us from this tiny thought. And
now--now it seems we have no more feeling for Schiller and the great
systems, we have no pity on our past beliefs. We now are seeking for
words with which to sing the praises of our former enemy. Night, the
dark, deaf, impenetrable night, peopled with horrors--does she not
now loom before us, infinitely beautiful? Does she not draw us with
her still, mysterious, fathomless beauty, far more powerfully than
noisy, narrow day? It seems as if, in a short while, man will feel that
the same incomprehensible, cherishing power which threw us out into
the universe and set us, like plants, to reach to the light, is now
gradually transferring us to a new direction, where a new life awaits
us with all its stores. _Fata volentem ducunt, nolentem trahunt._ And
perhaps the time is near when the impassioned poet, casting a last look
to his past, will boldly and gladly cry:

_Hide thyself, sun! O darkness, be welcome_!


2

Psychology at last leads us to conclude that the most generous
human impulses spring from a root of egoism. Tolstoy's "love to
one's neighbour," for example, proves to be a branch of the old
self-love. The same may be said of Kant's idealism, and even of
Plato's. Though they glorify the service of the idea, in practice
they succeed in getting out of the vicious circle of egoism no better
than the ordinary mortal, who is neither a genius nor a flower of
culture. In my eyes this is "almost" an absolute truth. (It is never
wrong to add the retractive "almost"; truth is too much inclined to
exaggerate its own importance, and one must guard oneself against
its despotic authority.) Thus--all men are egoists. Hence follows
a great deal. I even think this proposition might provide better
grounds for metaphysical conclusions than the doubtful capacity for
compassion and love for one's neighbour which has been so tempting
to dogma. For some reason men have imagined that love for oneself
is more natural and comprehensible than love for another. Why? Love
for others is only a little-rarer, less widely diffused than love
to oneself. But then hippopotami and rhinoceros, even in their own
tropical regions, are less frequent than horses and mules. Does it
follow that they are less natural and transcendental? Positivism is
not incumbent upon blood-thirsty savages. Nay, as we know, many of
them are less positive-minded than our learned men. For instance, a
future life is to them such an infallible reality that they even enter
into contracts, part of which is to be fulfilled in the next world. A
German metaphysician won't go as far as that. Hence it follows that
the way to know the other world is not by any means through love,
sympathy, and self-denial, as Schopenhauer taught. On the contrary, it
appears as if love for others were only an impediment to metaphysical
flights. Love and sympathy chain the eye to the misery of this earth,
where such a wide field for active charity opens out. The materialists
were mostly very good men--a fact which bothered the historians of
philosophy. They preached Matter, believed in nothing, and were
ready to perform all kinds of sacrifices for their neighbours. How
is this? It is a case of clearest logical consequence: man loves his
neighbour, he sees that heaven is indifferent to misery, therefore
he takes upon himself the rôle of Providence. Were he indifferent
to the sufferings of others, he would easily become an idealist and
leave his neighbours to their fate. Love and compassion kill belief,
and make a man a positivist and a materialist in his philosophical
outlook. If he feels the misery of others, he leaves off meditating
and wants to act. Man only thinks properly when he realises he has
nothing to do, his hands are tied. That is why any profound thought
must arise from despair. Optimism, on the other hand, the readiness
to jump hastily from one conclusion to another, may be regarded as an
inevitable sign of narrow self-sufficiency, which dreads doubt and
is consequently always superficial. If a man offers you a solution
of eternal questions, it shows he has not even begun to think about
them. He has only "acted." Perhaps it is not necessary to think--who
can say how we ought or ought not to live? And how could we be brought
to live "as we ought," when our own nature is and always will be an
incalculable mystery. There is no mistake about it, nobody _wants_
to think, I do not speak here of logical thinking. That, like any
other natural function, gives man great pleasure. For this reason
philosophical systems, however complicated, arouse real and permanent
interest in the public provided they only require from man the logical
exercise of the mind, and nothing else. But to think---really to
think--surely this means a relinquishing of logic. It means living a
new life. It means a permanent sacrifice of the dearest habits, tastes,
attachments, without even the assurance that the sacrifice will bring
any compensation. Artists and philosophers like to imagine the thinker
with a stern face, a profound look which penetrates into the unseen,
and a noble bearing--an eagle preparing for flight. Not at all. A
thinking man is one who has lost his balance, in the vulgar, not in
the tragic sense. Hands raking the air, feet flying, face scared and
bewildered, he is a caricature of helplessness and pitiable perplexity.
Look at the aged Turgenev, his Poems in Prose and his letter to
Tolstoy. Maupassant thus tells of his meeting with Turgenev: " There
entered a giant with a silvery head." Quite so! The majestic patriarch
and master, of course! The myth of giants with silver locks is firmly
established in the heart of man. Then suddenly enters Turgenev in his
Prose Poems--pale, pitiful, fluttering like a bird that has been
"winged." Turgenev, who has taught us everything--how can he be so
fluttered and bewildered? How could he write his letter to Tolstoy?
Did he not know that Tolstoy was finished, the source of his creative
activity dried up, that he must seek other activities. Of course he
knew--and still he wrote that letter. But it was not for Tolstoy, nor
even for Russian literature, which, of course, is not kept going by the
death-bed letters and covenants of its giants. In the dreadful moments
of the end, Turgenev, in spite of his noble size and silver locks, did
not know what to say or where to look for support and consolation. So
he turned to literature, to which he had given his life.... He yearned
that she, whom he had served so long and loyally, should just once
help him, save him from the horrible and thrice senseless nightmare.
He stretched out his withered, numbing hands to the printed sheets
which still preserve the traces of the Soul of a living, suffering
man. He addressed his late enemy Tolstoy with the most flattering
name: "Great writer of the Russian land"; recollected that he was his
contemporary, that he himself was a great writer of the Russian land.
But this he did not express aloud. He only said, "I can no longer----"
He praised a strict school of literary and general education. To the
last he tried to preserve his bearing of a giant with silvery locks.
And we were gratified. The same persons who are indignant at Gogol's
correspondence, quote Turgenev's letter with reverence. The attitude
is everything. Turgenev knew how to pose passably well, and this is
ascribed to him as his greatest merit. _Mundus vult decipi, ergo
decipiatur_. But Gogol and Turgenev felt substantially the same. Had
Turgenev burnt his own manuscripts and talked of himself instead of
Tolstoy, before death, he would have been accounted mad. Moralists
would have reproached him for his display of extreme egoism.... And
Philosophy? Philosophy seems to be getting rid of certain prejudices.
At the moment when men are least likely to play the hypocrite and lie
to themselves Turgenev and Gogol placed their personal fate higher
than the destinies of Russian literature. Does not this betray a
"secret" to us? Ought we not to see in absolute egoism an inalienable
and great, yes, very great quality of human nature? Psychology,
ignoring the threats of morality, has led us to a new knowledge. Yet
still, in spite of the instances we have given, the mass of people
will, as usual, see nothing but malice in every attempt to reveal
the human impulses that underlie "lofty" motives. To be merely men
seems humiliating to men. So now malice will also be detected in my
interpretation of Turgenev's letter, no matter what assurance I offer
to the contrary.


3

_On Method_.--A certain naturalist made the following experiment:
A glass jar was divided into two halves by a perfectly transparent
glass partition. On the one side of the partition he placed a pike,
on the other a number of small fishes such as form the prey of the
pike. The pike did not notice the partition, and hurled itself on its
prey, with, of course, the result only of a bruised nose. The same
happened many times, and always the same result. At last, seeing all
its efforts ended so painfully, the pike abandoned the hunt, so that
in a few days, when the partition had been removed it continued to
swim about among the small fry without daring to attack them.... Does
not the same happen with us? Perhaps the limits between "this world"
and "the other world" are also essentially of an experimental origin,
neither rooted in the nature of things, as was thought before Kant, or
in the nature of our reason, as was thought after Kant. Perhaps indeed
a partition does exist, and make vain all attempts to cross over.. But
perhaps there comes a moment when the partition is removed. In our
minds, however, the conviction is firmly rooted that it is impossible
to pass certain limits, and painful to try: a conviction founded on
experience. But in this case we should recall the old scepticism of
Hume, which idealist philosophy has regarded as mere subtle mind-play,
valueless after Kant's critique. The most lasting and varied experience
cannot lead to any binding and universal conclusion. Nay, all our
_a priori_, which are so useful for a certain time, become sooner
or later extremely harmful. A philosopher should not be afraid of
scepticism, but should go on bruising his jaw. Perhaps the failure
of metaphysics lies in the caution and timidity of metaphysicians,
who seem ostensibly so brave. They have sought for rest--which they
describe as the highest boon. Whereas they should have valued more than
anything restlessness, aimlessness, even purposelessness. How can you
tell when the partition will be removed? Perhaps at the very moment
when man ceased his painful pursuit, settled all his questions and
rested on his laurels, inert, he could with one strong push have swept
through the pernicious fence which separated him from the unknowable.
There is no need for man to move according to a carefully-considered
plan. This is a purely aesthetic demand which need not bind us. Let
man senselessly and deliriously knock his head against the wall--if
the wall go down at last, will he value his triumph any the less?
Unfortunately for us the illusion has been established in us that plan
and purpose are the best guarantee of success. What a delusion it is!
The opposite is true. The best of all that genius has revealed to us
has been revealed as the result of fantastic, erratic, apparently
ridiculous and useless, but relentlessly stubborn seeking. Columbus,
tired of sitting on the same spot, sailed west to look for India. And
genius, in spite of vulgar conception, is a condition of chaos and
unutterable restlessness. Not for nothing has genius been counted kin
to madness. Genius flings itself hither and thither because it has not
the _Sitzfleisch_ necessary for industrious success in mediocrity.
We may be sure that earth has seen much more genius than history
has recorded; since genius is acknowledged only when it has been
serviceable. When the tossing-about has led to no useful issue--which
is the case in the majority of instances--it arouses only a feeling
of disgust and abomination in all witnesses. "He can't rest and he
can't let others rest." If Lermontov and Dostoevsky had lived in times
when there was no demand for books, nobody would have noticed them.
Lermontov's early death would have passed unregretted. Perhaps some
settled and virtuous citizen would have remarked, weary of the young
man's eternal and dangerous freaks: "For a dog a dog's death." The same
of Gogol, Tolstoy, Poushkin. Now they are praised because they left
interesting books.... And so we need pay no attention to the cry about
the futility and worthlessness of scepticism, even scepticism pure and
unadulterated, scepticism which has no ulterior motive of clearing
the way for a new creed. To knock one's head against the wall out of
hatred for the wall: to beat against established and obstructive ideas,
because one detests them: is it not an attractive proposition? And
then, to see ahead uncertainly and limitless possibilities, instead of
up-to-date "ideals," is not this too fascinating? The highest good is
rest! I shall not argue: _de gustibus aut nihil aut bene_.... By the
way, isn't it a superb principle? And this superb principle has been
arrived at perfectly by chance, unfortunately not by me, but by one of
the comical characters in Tchekhov's _Seagull_. He mixed up two Latin
proverbs, and the result was a splendid maxim which, in order to become
an _a priori_, awaits only universal acceptance.


4

Metaphysicians praise the transcendental, and carefully avoid it.
Nietzsche hated metaphysics, he praised the earth--_bleib nur der
Erde treu, O meine Bruder_--and always lived in the realm of the
transcendental. Of course the metaphysicians behave better: this is
indisputable. He who would be a teacher must proclaim the metaphysical
point of view, and he may become a hero without ever smelling powder.
In these anxious days, when positivism seems to fall short, one cannot
do better than turn to metaphysics. Then the young man need not any
more envy Alexander the Macedonian. With the assistance of a few
books not only earthly states are conquered, but the whole mysterious
universe. Metaphysics is the great art of swerving round dangerous
experience. So metaphysicians should be called the positivists _par
excellence_. They do not despise all experience, as they assert, but
_only the dangerous experiences_. They adapt the safest of all methods
of selfdefence, what the English call protective mimicry. Let us repeat
to all students--professors know it already: he who would be a sincere
metaphysician must avoid risky experience. Schiller once asked: How can
tragedy give delight? The answer--to put it in our own words--was: If
we are to obtain delight from tragedy, it must be seen only upon the
stage.--In order to love the transcendental it also should be known
only from the stage, or from books of the philosophers. This is called
idealism, the nicest word ever invented by philosophising men.


5

_Poetae nascuntur_.--Wonderful is man. Knowing nothing about it, he
asserts the existence of an objective impossibility. Even a little
while ago, before the invention of the telephone and telegraph, men
would have declared it impossible for Europe to converse with America.
Now it is possible. We cannot produce poets, therefore we say they are
born. Certainly we cannot make a child a poet by forcing him to study
literary models, from the most ancient to the most modern. Neither will
anybody hear us in America no matter how loud we shout here. To make a
poet of a man, he must not be developed along ordinary lines. Perhaps
books should be kept from him. Perhaps it is necessary to perform some
apparently dangerous operation on him: fracture his skull or throw
him out of a fourth-storey window. I will refrain from recommending
these methods as a substitute for paedagogy. But that is not the
point. Look at the great men, and the poets. Except John Stuart Mill
and a couple of other positivist thinkers, who had learned fathers
and virtuous mothers, none of the great men can boast of, or better,
complain of, a proper upbringing. In their lives nearly always the
decisive part was played by accident, accident which reason would dub
meaninglessness, if reason ever dared raise its voice against obvious
success. Something like a broken skull or a fall from the fourth
floor--not metaphorically, but often absolutely literally--has proved
the commencement, usually concealed but occasionally avowed, of the
activity of genius. But we repeat automatically: _poetae nascuntur_,
and are deeply convinced that this extraordinary truth is so lofty it
needs no verification.


6

"Until Apollo calls him to the sacrifice, ignobly the poet is plunged
in the cares of this shoddy world; silent is his lyre, cold sleeps his
soul, of all the petty children of earth most petty it seems is he."
Pisaryev, the critic, was exasperated by these verses. Presumably, if
they had not belonged to Poushkin, all the critics along with Pisaryev
would have condemned them and their author to oblivion. Suspicious
verse! Before Apollo calls to him--the poet is the most insignificant
of mortals! In his free hours, the ordinary man finds some more or less
distinguished distraction fox himself: he hunts, attends exhibitions
of pictures, or the theatre, and finally rests in the bosom of his
family. But the poet is incapable of normal existence. Immediately he
has finished with Apollo, forgetting all about altars and sacrifices,
he proceeds to occupy himself with unworthy objects. Or he abandons
himself to the _dolce far niente_, the customary pastime of all
favourites of the Muses. Let us here remark that not only all poets,
but all writers and artists in general are inclined to lead bad lives.
Think what Tolstoy tells us, in _Confession_ and elsewhere, of the best
representatives of literature in the fifties. On the whole it is just
as Poushkin says in his verses. Whilst he is engaged in composition,
an author is a creature of some consequence: apart from this, he is
nothing. Why are Apollo and the Muses so remiss? Why do they draw to
themselves wayward or vicious votaries, instead of rewarding virtue?
We dare not suspect the gods, even the dethroned, of bad intentions.
Apollo loved virtuous persons--and yet virtuous persons are evidently
mediocre and unfit for the sacred offices. If any man is overcome with
a great desire to serve the god of song, let him get rid of his virtues
at once. Curious that this truth is so completely unknown to men. They
think that through virtue they can truly deserve the favour and choice
of Apollo. And since industry is the first virtue, they peg away,
morning, noon, and night. Of course, the more they work the less they
do. Which really puzzles and annoys them. They even fling aside the
sacred arts, and all the labours of a devotee; they give themselves up
to idleness and other bad habits. And sometimes it so happens, that
just as a man decides that it is all no good, the Muses suddenly visit
him. So it was with Dostoevsky and others; Schiller alone managed
to get round Apollo. But perhaps it was only his biographers he got
round. Germans are so trustful, so easy to deceive. The biographers
saw nothing unusual in Schiller's habit of keeping his feet in cold
water whilst he worked. No doubt they felt that if the divine poet had
lived in the Sahara, where water is precious as gold, and the inspired
cannot take a footbath every day, then the speeches of the Marquis of
Pola would have lacked half their nobleness, at least. And apparently
Schiller was not so wonderfully chaste, if he needed such artificial
resources in the composition of his fine speeches. In a word, we must
believe Poushkin. A poet is, on the one hand, among the elect; on the
other hand, he is one of the most insignificant of mortals. Hence we
can draw a very consoling conclusion: the most insignificant of men
are not altogether so worthless as we imagine. They may not be fit to
occupy government positions or professorial chairs, but they are often
extremely at home on Parnassus and such high places. Apollo rewards
vice, and virtue, as everybody knows, is so satisfied with herself she
needs no reward. Then why do the pessimists lament? Leibnitz was quite
right: we live in the best possible of worlds. I would even suggest
that we leave out the modification "possible."


7

It is _Das Ewig Weibliche_, with Russian writers. Poushkin and
Lermontov loved women and were not afraid of them; Poushkin, who
trusted his own nature, was often in love, and always sang his love of
the moment. When infatuated with a bacchante, he glorified bacchantes.
When he married, he warbled of a modest, nun-like beauty, his wife.
A synthesising mind would probably not know what to do with all
Poushkin's sorts of love. Nor is Lermontov any better. He abused women,
but, as Byelinsky observed after meeting him, he loved women more than
anything in the world. And again, not women of one mould only: any and
all attractive females: the wild Bella, the lovely Mary, Thamar; one
and all, no matter of what race or condition. Every time Lermontov is
in love, he assures us his love is so deep and ardent and even moral,
that we cannot judge him without conpunction. Vladimir Soloviov alone
was not afraid to condemn him. He brought Poushkin as well as Lermontov
to account for their moral irregularities, and he even went so far as
to say that it was not he himself who judged them, but Fate, in whose
service he acted as public denouncer. Lermontov and Poushkin, both
dying young, had deserved death for their frivolities. But there was
nobody else besides Vladimir Soloviov to darken the memories of the two
poets. It is true Tolstoy cannot forgive Poushkin's dissolute life, but
he does not apply to Fate for a verdict. According to Tolstoy morality
can cope even with a Titan like Poushkin. In Tolstoy's view morality
grows stronger the harder the job it has to tackle. It pardons the
weak offenders without waste of words, but it never forgives pride and
self-confidence. If Tolstoy's edicts had been executed, all memorials
to Poushkin would have disappeared; chiefly because of the poet's
addiction to the eternal female. In such a case Tolstoy is implacable.
He admits the the kind of love whose object is the establishing of
a family, but no more. Don Juan is a hateful transgressor. Think of
Levin, and his attitude to prostitutes. He is exasperated, indignant,
even forgets the need for compassion, and calls them "beasts." In the
eternal female Tolstoy sees temptation, seduction, sin, _great danger_.
Therefore it is necessary to keep quite away from the danger. But
surely danger is the dragon which guards every treasure on earth. And
again, no matter what his precautions, a man will meet his fate sooner
or later, and come into conflict with the dragon. Surely this is an
axiom. Poushkin and Lermontov loved danger, and therefore sought women.
They paid a heavy price, but while they lived they lived freely and
lightly. If they had cared to peep in the book of destinies, they might
have averted or avoided their sad end. But they preferred to trust
their star--lucky or unlucky. Tolstoy was the first among us--we cannot
speak of Gogol--who began to fear life. He was the first to start open
moralising. In so far as public opinion and personal dignity demand
it, he did go to meet his dangers: but not a step further. So he
avoided women, art, and philosophy. Love _per se_, that is, love which
does not lead to a family, like wisdom _per se_, which is wisdom that
has no utilitarian motive, and like art for art's sake, seemed to him
the worst of temptations, leading to the destruction of the soul. When
he plunged too deep in thinking, he was seized with panic. "It seemed
to me I was going mad, so I went away to the Bashkirs for koumiss."
Such confessions are common in his works. And surely there is no other
way with temptations, than to cut short, at once, before it is too
late. Tolstoy preserved himself on account of his inborn instinct for
departing betimes from a dangerous situation. Save for this cautious
prompting he would probably have ended like Lermontov or Poushkin.
True, he might have gone deeper into nature, and revealed us rare
secrets, instead of preaching at us abstinence, humility, simplicity
and so on. But such luck fell to the fate of Dostoevsky. Dostoevsky
had very muddled relations with morality. He was too racked by disease
and circumstance to get much profit out of the rules of morality. The
hygiene of the soul, like that of the body, is beneficial only to
healthy men. To the sick it is simply harmful. The more Dostoevsky
engaged himself with high morality, the more inextricably entangled
he became. He wanted to respect the personality in a woman, and only
the personality, and so he came to the point where he could not look
on any woman, however ugly, with indifference. The elder Karamazov and
his affair with Elizabeth Smerdyascha (Stinking Lizzie)--in what other
imagination could such a union have been contemplated? Dostoevsky, of
course, reprimands Karamazov, and thanks to the standards of modern
criticism, such a reprimand is accounted sufficient to exonerate our
author. But there are other standards. If a writer sets out to tell you
that no drab could be so loathsome that her ugliness would make you
forget she was woman; and if for illustration of this novel idea we
are told the history of Fiodov Karamazov with the deformed, repulsive
idiot, Stinking Lizzie; then, in face of such "imaginative art" it is
surely out of place to preserve the usual confidence in that writer.
We do not speak of the interest and _appreciation_ of Dostoevsky's
tastes and ideas. Not for one moment will I assert that those who
with Poushkin and Lermontov can see the Eternal Female only in young
and charming women, have any advantage over Dostoevsky. Of course,
we are not forbidden to live according to our tastes, and we may,
like Tolstoy, call certain women "beasts." But who has given us the
right to assert that we are higher or better than Dostoevsky? Judging
"objectively," all the points go to show that Dostoevsky is better--at
any rate he saw further, deeper. He could find an original interest,
he could discover _das ewig Weibliche_ where we should see nothing of
attraction at all, where Goethe would avert his face. Stinking Lizzie
is not a beast, as Levin would say, but a woman who is able, if even
for a moment, to arouse a feeling of love in a man. And we thought she
was worse than nothing, since she roused in us only disgust. Dostoevsky
made a discovery, we with our refined feelings missed it. His
distorted, abnormal sense showed a greater sensitiveness, in which our
high morality was deficient.... And the road to the great truth this
time, as ever, is through deformity. Idealists will not agree. They are
quite justly afraid that one may not reach the truth, but may get stuck
in the mud. Idealists are careful men, and not nearly so stupid as
their ideals would lead us to suppose.


8

New ideas, even our own, do not quickly conquer our sympathies. We must
first get accustomed to them.


9

_A point of view_.--Every writer, thinker--even every educated person
thinks it necessary to have a permanent point of view. He climbs up
some elevation and never climbs down again all his days. Whatever
he sees from this point of view, he believes to be reality, truth,
justice, good--and what he does not see he excludes from existence.
Man is not much to blame for this. Surely there is no very great joy
in moving from point of view to point of view, shifting one's camp
from peak to peak. We have no wings, and "a winged thought" is only
a nice metaphor--unless, of course, it refers to logical thinking.
There to be sure great volatility is usual, a lightness which comes
from perfect naïveté, if not ignorance. He who really wishes to know
something, and not merely to have a philosophy, does not rely on logic
and is not allured by reason. He must clamber from summit to summit,
and, if necessary, hibernate in the dales. For a wide horizon leads
to illusions, and in order to familiarise oneself with any object,
it is essential to go close up to it, touch it, feel it, examine it
from top to bottom and on every side. One must be ready, should this
be impossible otherwise, to sacrifice the customary position of the
body: to wriggle, to lie flat, to stand on one's head, in a word, to
assume the most unnatural of attitudes. Can there be any question of a
permanent point of view? The more mobility and elasticity a man has,
the less he values the ordinary equilibrium of his body; the oftener
he changes his outlook, the more he will take in. If, on the other
hand, he imagines that from this or the other pinnacle he has the most
comfortable survey of the world and life, leave him alone; he will
never know anything. Nay, he does not want to know, he cares more about
his personal convenience than about the quality of his work. No doubt
he will attain to fame and success, and thus brilliantly justify his
"point of view."


10

_Fame_.--"A thread from everyone, and the naked will have a shirt."
There is no beggar but has his thread of cotton, and he will not
grudge it to a naked man--no, nor even to a fully dressed one; but
will bestow it on the first comer. The poor, who want to forget their
poverty, are very ready with their threads. Moreover, they prefer to
give them to the rich, rather than to a fellow-tramp. To load the rich
with benefits, must not one be very rich indeed? That is why fame is
so easily got. An ambitious person asks admiration and respect from
the crowd, and is rarely denied. The mob feel that their throats are
their own, and their arms are strong. Why not vociferate and clap,
seeing that you can turn the head not only of a beggar like yourself,
but of a future hero, God knows how almighty a person. The humiliated
citizen who has hitherto been hauled off to the police station if he
shouted, suddenly feels that his throat has acquired a new value. Never
before has anyone given a rap for his worthless opinion, and now seven
cities are ready to quarrel for it, as for the right to claim Homer.
The citizen is delighted, he shouts at the top of his voice, and is
ready to throw all his possessions after his shouts. So the hero is
satisfied. The greater the shout, the deeper his belief in himself
and his mission. What will a hero not believe! For he forgets so soon
the elements of which his fame and riches are made. Heroes usually
are convinced that they set out on their noble career, not to beg
shouts from beggars, but to heap blessings on mankind. If they could
only call to mind with what beating hearts they awaited their first
applause, their first alms, how timidly they curried favour with ragged
beggars, perhaps they would speak less assuredly of their own merits.
But our memory is fully acquainted with Herbert Spencer and his law of
adaptability, and thus many a worthy man goes gaily on in full belief
in his own stupendous virtue.


11

_In defence of righteousness_.--Inexperienced and ingenuous people see
in righteousness merely a burden which lofty people have assumed out
of respect for law or for some other high and inexplicable reason. But
a righteous man has not only duties but rights. True, sometimes, when
the law is against him, he has to compromise. Yet how rarely does the
law desert him! No cruelty matters in him, so long as he does not
infringe the statutes. Nay, he will ascribe his cruelty as a merit to
himself, since he acts out of no personal considerations, but in the
name of sacred justice. No matter what he may do, once he is sanctioned
he sees in his actions only merit, merit, merit. Modesty forbids him to
say too much--but if he were to let go, what a luxurious panegyric he
might deliver to himself! Remembering his works, he praises himself at
all times; not aloud, but inwardly. The nature of virtue demands it:
man must rejoice in his morality and ever keep it in mind. And after
that, people declare that it is hard to be righteous. Whatever the
other virtues may be, certainly righteousness has its selfish side. As
a rule it is decidedly worth while to make considerable sacrifices in
order later on to enjoy in calm confidence all that surety and those
rights bestowed on a man by morality and public approval. Look at a
German who has paid his contribution to a society for the assistance of
the indigent. Not one stray farthing will he give, not to a poor wretch
who is starving before his eyes. And in this he feels right. This is
righteousness out and out: pay your tax and enjoy the privileges of a
high-principled man. So righteousness is much in vogue with cultured,
commercial nations. Russians have not quite got there. They are
afraid of the exactions of righteousness, not guessing the enormous
advantages derived. A Russian has a permanent relationship with his
conscience, which costs him far more than the most moral German, or
even Englishman, has to pay for his righteousness.


12

The best way of getting rid of tedious, played-out truths is to stop
paying them the tribute of respect and to treat them with a touch of
easy familiarity and derision. To put into brackets, as Dostoevsky did,
such words as good, self-sacrifice, progress, and so on, will alone
achieve you much more than many brilliant arguments would do. Whilst
you still contest a certain truth, you still believe in it, and this
even the least penetrating individual will perceive. But if you favour
it with no serious attention, and only throw out a scornful remark now
and then, the result is different. It is evident you have ceased to be
afraid of the old truth, you no longer respect it. And this sets people
thinking.


13

_Four walls_.--Arm-chair philosophy is being condemned--rightly.
An arm-chair thinker is busy deciding on everything that is taking
place in the world: the state of the world market, the existence of
a world-soul, wireless telegraphy and the life after death, the cave
dweller and the perfectibility of man, and so on and so on. His chief
business is so to select his statements that there shall be no internal
contradiction; and this will give an appearance of truth. Such work,
which is quite amusing and even interesting, leads at last to very
poor results. Surely verisimilitudes of truth are not truth: nor have
necessarily anything in common with truth. Again, a man who undertakes
to talk of everything probably knows nothing. Thus a swan can fly, and
walk, and swim. But it flies indifferently, walks badly, and swims
poorly. An arm-chair philosopher, enclosed by four walls, sees nothing
but those four walls, and yet of these precisely he does not choose
to speak. If by accident he suddenly realised them and spoke of them
his philosophy might acquire an enormous value. This may happen when a
study is converted into a prison: the same four walls, but impossible
not to think of them! Whatever the prisoner turns his mind to--Homer,
the Greek-Persian wars, the future world-peace, the bygone geological
cataclysms--still the four walls enclose it all. The calm of the study
supplanted by the pathos of imprisonment. The prisoner has no more
contact with the world, and no less. But now he no longer slumbers
and has grayish dreams called world-conceptions. He is wide awake and
strenuously living. His philosophy is worth hearing. But man is not
distinguished for his powers of discrimination. He sees solitude and
four walls, and says: a study. He dreams of the market-place, where
there is noise and jostling, physical bustle, and decides that there
alone life is to be met. He is wrong as usual. In the market-place,
among the crowd, do not men sleep their deadest sleep? And is not the
keenest spiritual activity taking place in seclusion?


14

The Spartans made their helots drunk as an example and warning to their
noble youths. A good method, no doubt, but what are we of the twentieth
century to do? Whom shall we make drunk? We have no slaves, so we have
instituted a higher literature. Novels and stories describe drunken,
dissolute men, and paint them in such horrid colours that every reader
feels all his desire for vice depart from him. Unfortunately only our
Russians are either too conscientious or not sufficiently rectilinear
in their minds. Instead of showing the drunken helot as an object of
repugnance, as the Spartans did, they try to describe vice truthfully.
Realism has taken hold. Indeed, why make a fuss? What does it matter if
the writer's description is a little more or less ugly than the event?
Was justice invented that everything, _even evil,_ should be kept
intact? Surely evil must be simply rooted out, banned, placed outside
the pale. The Spartans did not stand on ceremony with living men, and
yet our novelists are afraid of being unjust to imaginary drunken
helots. And, so to speak, out of humane feeling too.... How naive one
must be to accept such a justification! Yet everybody accepts it.
Tolstoy alone, towards the end, guessed that humanitarianism is only
a pretext in this case, and that we Russians have described vice not
only for the purpose of scaring our readers. In modern masters the word
vice arouses not disgust, but insatiable curiosity. Perhaps the wicked
thing has been persecuted in vain, like so many other good things.
Perhaps it should have been studied, perhaps it held mysteries.... On
the strength of this "perhaps" morality was gradually abandoned, and
Tolstoy remained almost alone in his indignation. Realism reigns, and
a drunken helot arouses envy in timid readers who do not know where to
put their trust, whether in the traditional rules or in the appeal of
the master. A drunken helot an ideal! What have we come to? Were it not
better to have stuck to Lycurgus? Have we not paid too dearly for our
progress?

Many people think we have paid too dearly--not to mention Tolstoy,
who is now no longer taken quite seriously, though still accounted
a great man. Any mediocre journalist enjoys greater influence than
this master-writer of the Russian land. It is inevitable. Tolstoy
insists on thinking about things which are nobody's concern. He has
long since abandoned this world--and does he continue to exist in
any other? Difficult question! "Tolstoy writes books and letters,
therefore he exists." This inference, once so convincing, now has
hardly any effect on us: particularly if we take into account what it
is that Tolstoy writes. In several of his last letters he expresses
opinions which surely have no meaning for an ordinary man. They can
be summed up in a few words. Tolstoy professes an extreme egoism,
sollipsism, solus-ipse-ism. That is, in his old age, after infinite
attempts to love his neighbour, he comes to the conclusion that not
only is it impossible to love one's neighbour, but that there _is_ no
neighbour, that in all the world Tolstoy alone exists, that there is
even no world, but only Tolstoy: a view so obviously absurd, that it
is not worth refuting. By the way, there is also no possibility of
refuting it, unless you admit that logical inferences are non-binding.
Sollipsism dogged Tolstoy already in early youth, but at that time
he did not know what to do with the impertinent, oppressive idea,
so he ignored it. Finally, he came to it. The older a man becomes,
the more he learns how to make use of impertinent ideas. Fairly
recently Tolstoy could pronounce such a dictum: "Christ taught men
not to do stupid things." Who but Tolstoy could have ventured on such
an interpretation of the gospels? Why have we all held--all of us
but Tolstoy--that these words contained the greatest blasphemy on
Christ and His teaching? But it was Tolstoy's last desperate attempt
to save himself from sollipsism, without at the same time flying in
the face of logic: even Christ appeared among men only to teach them
common sense. Whence follows that "mad" thoughts may be rejected
with an easy conscience, and the advantage, as usual, remains with
the wholesome, reasonable, sensible thoughts. There is room for good
and for reason. Good is self-understood; it need not be explained.
If only good existed in the world, there would exist no questions,
neither simple nor ultimate. This is why youth never questions. What
indeed should it question: the song of the nightingale, the morning
of May, happy laughter, all the predicates of youth? Do these need
interpretation? On the contrary, any explanation is reduced to these
The proper questions arise only on contact with evil. A hawk struck
a nightingale, flowers withered, Boreas froze laughing youth--and in
terror our questions arose. "That is evil. The ancients were right.
Not in vain is our earth called a vale of tears and sorrow." And
once questions are started, it is impossible and unseemly to hurry
the answers, still less anticipate the questions. The nightingale
is dead and will sing no longer, the listener is frozen to death and
can hear no more songs. The situation is so palpably absurd that only
with the intention of getting rid of the question at any cost will
one strive for a sensible answer. The answer must be absurd--if you
don't want it, don't question. But if you must question, then be ready
beforehand to reconcile yourself with something like sollipsism or
modern realism. Thought is in a dilemma, and dare not take the leap to
get out. We laugh at philosophy, and, as long as possible, avoid evil.
But nearly all men feel the intolerable cramp of such a situation, and
each at his risk ventures to swim to shore on some more or less witty
theory. A few courageous ones speak the truth--but they are neither
understood nor respected. When a man's words show the depth of the
pain through which he has passed, he is not, indeed, condemned, but
the world begins to talk of his tragic state of soul, and to take
on a mournful look fitting to the occasion. Others more scrupulous
feel that phrases and mournful looks are unfitting, yet they cannot
dwell at length on the tragedies of outsiders, so they take on an
exaggeratedly stern bearing, as if to say, "We feel deeply, but we do
not wish to show our feeling." They really feel nothing, only want
to make others believe how sensitive and modest they are. At times
this leads to curious results, even in writers of the first order
of renown. Thus Anatole France, the inventor of that most charming
smile which is intended to convince men that he feels everything and
understands everything, but does not cry out, because that would not
be fitting, in one of his novels takes upon himself the noble rôle of
advocate of the victims of a crime, against the criminal. "Our time,"
he says, "out of _pity_ to the criminal forgets the sufferings of his
victim." This, I repeat, is one of the most curious misrepresentations
of modern endeavour. It is true we in Russia talk a good deal about
compassion, particularly to criminals, and Anatole France is by no
means the only man who thinks that our distinguishing characteristic is
extreme sensitiveness and tender-heartedness. But as a matter of fact
the modern man who thinks for himself is not drawn to the criminal by
a sense of compassion, which would incontestably be better applied to
the victim, but by curiosity, or if you like, inquisitiveness. For
thousands of years man has sought to solve the great mystery of life
through a God-conception--with theodicy and metaphysical theories as
a result, both of which deny the possibility of a mystery. Theodicy
has long ago wearied us. The mechanistic theories, which contend that
there is nothing special in life, that its appearance and disappearance
depend on the same laws as those of the conservation of energy and
the indestructibility of matter, these look more plausible at first
sight, but people do not take to them. And no theory can survive men's
reluctance to believe in it. In a word, good has not justified the
expectations placed on it. Reason has done no better. So overwrought
mankind has turned from its old idols and enthroned madness and evil.
The smiling Anatole argues, and proves--proves excellently. But who
does not know what his proofs amount to?--and who wants them? It may be
our children will take fright at the task we have undertaken, will call
us "squandering parents," and will set themselves again to heaping up
treasures, spiritual and material. Again they will believe in ideals,
progress, and such like. For my own part, I have hardly any doubt of
it. Sollipsism and the cult of groundlessness are not lasting, and,
most of all, they are not to be handed down. The final triumph, in life
as in old comedies, rests with goodness and common sense. History has
known many epochs like ours, and gone through with them. Degeneration
follows on the heels of immoderate curiosity, and sweeps away all
refined and exaggerately well-informed individuals. Men of genius have
no posterity--or their children are idiots. Not for nothing is nature
so majestically serene: she has hidden her secrets well enough. Which
is not surprising, considering how unscrupulous she is. No despot, not
the greatest villain on earth, has ever wielded power with the cruelty
and heartlessness of nature. The least violation of her laws--and
the severest punishment follows. Disease, deformity, madness, death
--what has not our common mother contrived to keep us in subjection?
True, certain optimists think that nature does not punish us, but
educates us. So Tolstoy sees it. "Death and sufferings, like animated
scarecrows, boo at man and drive him into the one way of life open to
him: for life is subject to its own law of reason." Not a bad method
of upbringing. Exactly like using wolves and bears. Unfortunate man,
bolting from one booing monster, is not always able in time to dodge
into the one correct way, and dashes straight into the maw of another
beast of prey. Then what? And this often happens. Without disparagement
of the optimists, we may say that sooner or later it happens to every
man. After which no more running. You won't tear yourself out of the
claws of madness or disease. Only one thing is left: in spite of
traditions, theodicy, wiseacres, and most of all in spite of oneself,
to go on praising mother nature and her great goodness. Let future
generations reject us, let history stigmatise our names, as the names
of traitors to the human cause--still we will compose hymns to
deformity, destruction, madness, chaos, darkness. And after that--let
the grass grow.


15

Astrology and alchemy lived their day and died a natural death.
But they left a posterity--chemistry inventing dyes, and astronomy
accumulating formulae. So it is. Geniuses beget idiots: especially when
the mothers are very virtuous, as in this case, when their virtue
is extraordinary. For the mothers are public utility and morality.
The alchemists wasted their time seeking the philosopher's stone; the
astrologers, swindled people telling fortunes by the stars. Wedded to
utility these two fathers have begotten the chemists and astronomers.
... Nobody will dispute the genealogy. Perhaps even none will dispute
that, from idiotic children one may, with a measure of probability,
infer genius in the parents. There are certain indications that this is
so--though of course one may not go beyond supposition. But supposition
is enough. There are more arguments in store. For instance--our day is
so convinced of the absolute nonsense and uselessness of alchemy and
astrology that no one dreams of verifying the conviction. We know there
were many charlatans and liars amongst alchemists and astrologers. But
what does this prove? In every department there are the same mediocre
creatures who speculate on human credulity. However positive our
science of medicine is, there are many fraudulent doctors who rob their
patients. The alchemists and astrologers were, in all probability,
the most remarkable men of their time. I will go further: in spite
of dye-stuffs and formulae, even in our nineteenth century, which
was so famous for its inventions and discoveries, the most eminent,
talented men still sought the philosopher's stone and forecast the
destinies of man. And those among them who were possessed of a poetic
gift won universal attention. In the old days, _consensu sapientium_,
a poet was allowed all kinds of liberties: he might speak of fate,
miracles, spirits, the life beyond--indeed of anything, provided he was
interesting. That was enough. The nineteenth century paid its tribute
to restlessness. Never were there so many disturbing, throbbing writers
as during the epoch of telephones and telegraphs. It was held indecent
to speak in plain language of the vexed and troubled aspirations of
the human spirit. Those guilty of the indecency were even dosed with
bromides and treated with shower-baths and concentrated foods. But all
this is external, it belongs to a history of "fashions" and cannot
interest us here. The point is that alchemy and astrology did not die,
they only shammed death and left the stage for a time. Now, apparently,
they are tired of seclusion and are coming forward again, having pushed
their unsuccessful children into the background. Well, so be it. _A la
bonne heure_!...


16

Man comes to the pass where all experience seems exhausted. Wherever he
go, whatever he see, all is old and wearyingly familiar. Most people
explain this by saying that they really know everything, and that from
what they have experienced they can infer all experience. This phase
of the exhaustion of life usually comes to a man between thirty-five
and forty--the best period, according to Karamzin. Not seeing anything
new, the individual assumes he is completely matured and has the right
to judge of everything. Knowing what has been he can forecast what will
be. But Karamzin was mistaken about the best period, and the "mature"
people are mistaken about the "nothing new can happen." The fact of
spiritual stagnation should not be made the ground for judging all
life's possibilities from known possibilities. On the contrary, such
stagnation should prove that however rich and multifarious the past may
have been, it has not exhausted a tittle of the whole possibilities.
From that which has been it is impossible to infer what will be.
Moreover, it is unnecessary--except, perhaps, to give us a sense of
our full maturity and let us enjoy all the charms of the best period
of life, so eloquently described by Karamzin. The temptation is not
overwhelming. So that, if man is under the necessity of enduring a
period of arrest and stagnation, and until such time as life re-starts
is doomed to meditation, would it not be better to use this meditating
_interregnum_ for a directly opposite purpose from the one indicated:
that is to say, for the purpose of finding in our past signs which tell
us that the future has every right to be anything whatsoever, like or
utterly unlike the past. Such signs, given a good will to find them,
may be seen in plenty. At times one comes to the conclusion that the
natural connection of phenomena, as hitherto observed, is not at all
inevitable for the future, and that miracles which so far have seemed
impossible, may come to seem possible, even natural, far more natural
than that loathsome law of sequence, the law of the regularity of
phenomena. We are bored stiff with regularity and sequence--confess
it, you also, you men of science. At the mere thought that, however we
may think, we can get no further than the acknowledgment of the old
regularity, an invincible disgust to any kind of mental work overcomes
us. To discover another law--still another--when already we have far
more than we can do with! Surely if there is any will-to-think left
in us, it is established in the supposition that the mind cannot and
must not have any bounds, any limits; and that the theory of knowledge,
which is based on the _history_ of knowledge and on a few very doubtful
assumptions, is only a piece of property belonging to a certain caste,
and has nothing to do with us others_--und die Natur zuletzt sich doch
ergründe._ What a mad impatience seizes us at times when we realise
that we shall never fathom the great mystery! Every individual in
the world must have felt at one time the mad desire to unriddle the
universe. Even the stodgy philosophers who invented the theory of
knowledge have at times made surreptitious sorties, hoping to open a
path to the unknown, in spite of their own fat, senseless books that
demonstrate the advantages of scientific knowledge. Man either lives in
continuous experience, or he frees himself from conclusions imposed by
limited experience. All the rest is the devil. From the devil come the
blandishments with which Karamzin charmed himself and his readers....
Or is it the contrary? Who will answer! Once again, as usual, at the
end of a pathetic speech one is left with a conjecture. Let every man
please himself. But what about those who would like to live according
to Karamzin, but cannot? I cannot speak for them. Schiller recommended
hope. Will it do? To be frank, hardly. He who has once lost his peace
of mind will never find it again.


17

Ever since Kant succeeded in convincing
the learned that the world of phenomena is quite other than the world
of true reality, and that even our own existence is not our real
existence, but only the visible manifestation of a mysterious, unknown
substance (substantia)--philosophy has been stuck in a new rut, and
cannot move a single millimetre out of the track laid out by the
great Königsbergian. Backward or forward it can go, but necessarily
in the Kantian rut. For how can you get out of the counterposing
of the phenomenon against the thing-in-itself? This proposition,
this counterposing seems inalterable, so there is nothing left but
to stick your head in the heavy draught-collar of the theory of
knowledge. Which most philosophers do, even with a glad smile, which
inevitably rouses a suspicion that they have got what they wanted,
and their "metaphysical need" was nothing more than a need for a
harness. Otherwise they would have kicked at the sight of the collar.
Surely the contraposition between the world of phenomena and the
thing-in-itself is an invention of the reasoning mind, as is the
theory of knowledge deduced from this contraposing. Therefore the
freedom-loving spirit could reject it in the very beginning--and
_basta!_ With the devil one must be very cautious. We know quite well
that if he only gets hold of the tip of your ear he will carry off
your whole body. So it is with Reason. Grant it one single assumption,
admit but one proposition--and _finita la commedia_. You are in the
toils. Metaphysics cannot exist side-by-side with reason. Everything
metaphysical is absurd, everything reasonable is--positive. So we come
upon a dilemma. The fundamental predicate of metaphysics is absurdity:
and yet surely many positive assertions can lay legitimate claim to
that self-same, highly-respectable predicate. What then? Is there means
of distinguishing a metaphysical absurdity from a perfectly ordinary
one? May one have recourse to criteria? Will not the very criterion
prove a pitfall wherein cunning reason will catch the poor man who was
rushing out to freedom? There can be no two answers to this question.
All services rendered by reason must be paid for sooner or later at
the exorbitant price of self-renunciation. Whether you accept the
assistance in the noble form of the theory of knowledge, or merely as
a humble criterion, at last you will be driven forth into the streets
of positivism. This happens all the time to young, inexperienced minds.
They break the bridle and dash forward into space, to find themselves
rushing into the same old Rome, whither, as we know, all roads lead:
or, to use more lofty language, rushing into the stable whither also
all roads lead. The only way to guard against positivism--granting,
of course, that positivism no longer attracts your sympathies--is to
cease to fear any absurdities, whether rational or metaphysical, and
systematically to reject all the services of reason. Such behaviour has
been known in philosophy; and I make bold to recommend it. _Credo, quia
absurdum_ comes from the Middle Ages. Modern instances are Nietzsche
and Schopenhauer. Both present noble examples of indifference to logic
and common-sense: particularly Schopenhauer, who, a Kantian, even in
the name of Kant made such daring sallies against reason, driving her
into confusion and shame. That astounding Kantian even went so far, in
the master's name still, as to attempt the overthrow of the space and
time notions. He admitted clairvoyance--and to this day the learned are
bothered whether to class that admission among the metaphysical or the
ordinary absurdities. Really, I can't advise them. A very clever man
insists on an enormous absurdity, so I am satisfied. Schopenhauer's
whole campaign against intellect is very comforting. It is evident
that, though he set out from the Kantian stable, he soon got sick
of hauling along down the cart-ruts, and having broken the shafts,
he trotted jauntily into a jungle of irreconcilable contradictions,
without reflecting in the least where he was making for. The primate
of will over reason; and music as the expression of our deepest
essence; are not these assertions sufficient to show us how dexterously
he wriggled out from the harness of synthetic judgments _a priori_
which Kant had placed upon every thinker. There is indeed much more
music than logic in the philosophy of Schopenhauer; Not for nothing
is he excluded from the universities. But of course one may speak of
him in the open; not of his ideas, naturally, but of his music. The
European market is glutted with ideas. How neat and nicely-finished and
logically well-turned-out those ideas are. Schopenhauer had no such
goods. But what lively and splendid contradictions he boldly spreads
on his stall, often even without suspicion that he ought to hide them
from the police. Schopenhauer cries and laughs and gets furious or
glad, without ever realising that this is forbidden to a philosopher.
"Do not speak, but sing," said Zarathustra, and Schopenhauer ready
fulfilled the command in great measure. Philosophy may be music--though
it doesn't follow that music may be called philosophy. When a man
has done his work, and gives himself up to looking and listening and
pleasantly accepting everything, hiding nothing from himself, then he
begins to "philosophise." What good are abstract formulae to him? Why
should he ask himself, before he begins to think: "What can I think
about, what are the limits of thought?" He will think, and those who
like can do the summing up and the building of theories of knowledge.
What is the earthly use of talking about beauty? Beautiful things must
be created. Not one single aesthetic theory has so far been able to
guess what direction the artists' mind will next take, or what are the
limits to his creative activity. The same with the theory of knowledge.
It may arrest the work of a man of learning, if he be himself afraid
that he is going too far, but it is powerless to pre-determine human
thought. Even Kant's counterposing of things-in-themselves to the world
of phenomena cannot finally clip the wings of human curiosity. There
will come a time when this unshakeable foundation of positivism will
be shaken. All gnosiological disputes as to what thought can or cannot
achieve will seem to our posterity just as amusing as the disputes
of the schoolmen seem to us. "Why did they argue about the nature of
truth, when they might have gone out and looked for truth itself?" the
future historians will ask. Let us have an answer ready for them. Our
contemporaries do not want to go out and seek, so they make a great
deal of talk about a theory of knowledge.

"Trust not thyself, young dreamer."--However sincerely you may long
for truth, whatever sufferings and horrors you may have surpassed, do
not believe your own self, young dreamer. What you are looking for,
you won't find. At the utmost, if you have a gift for writing you will
bring out a nice original book. Even--do not be offended--you may
be satisfied with such a result. In Nietzsche's letters relating to
the year 1888, the year when Brandes discovered him, you will find a
sad confirmation of the above. Had not Nietzsche struggled, sought,
suffered?--and behold, towards the end of his life, when it would
have seemed that all mundane rewards had become trivial to him, he
threw himself with rapture on the tidings of first fame, and rushed
to share his joy with all his friends, far and near. He does not tire
of telling in dozens of letters and in varying forms the story of how
Brandes first began his lectures on him, Nietzsche, how the audience
consisted of three hundred people, and he even quotes Brandes' placard
announcement in the original Danish. Fame just threw him a smile,
and forgotten are all the horrible experiences of former days. The
loneliness, the desertedness, the cave in the mountain, the man into
whose mouth the serpent climbed--all forgotten, every thought turned to
the ordinary, easily-comprehensible good. Such is man.

    _Mit gier'ger Hand nach Schätzen gräbt_
    _Und froh ist wenn er Regenwürmer findet_.


19

When a man is young he writes because it seems to him he has discovered
a new almighty truth which he must make haste to impart to forlorn
mankind. Later, becoming more modest, he begins to doubt his truths:
and then he writes to convince himself. A few more years go by, and
he knows he was mistaken all round, so there is no need to convince
himself. Nevertheless he continues to write, because he is not fit for
any other work, and to be accounted a "superfluous" man is so horrible.


20

A very original man is often a banal writer, and vice versa. We tend
so often to write not about what is going on in us, but of our _pia
desideria_. Thus restless, sleepless men sing the glory of sleep
and rest, which have long been sung to death. And those who sleep
ten hours on end and are always up to the mark must perforce dream
about adventures and storms and dangers, and even extol everything
problematical.


21

When one reads the books of long-dead men, a strange sensation comes
over one. These men who lived two hundred, three hundred, three
thousand years ago are so far off now from this writing which they have
left on earth. Yet we look for eternal truths in their works.


22

The truth which I have the right to announce so solemnly to-day, even
to the first among men, will probably be a stale old lie on my lips
to-morrow. So I will deprive myself of the right of calling such a
truth my own. Probably I shall deprive no one but myself: others will
go on loving and praising the self-same truth, living with it.


23

A writer who cannot lie with inspiration--and that is a great art,
which few may accomplish--loves to make an exhibition of honesty and
frankness. Nothing else is left him to do.


24

_The source of originality_.--A man who has lost all hope of rooting
out of himself a certain radical defect of character, or even of hiding
the flaw from others, turns round and tries to find in his defect a
pertain merit. If he succeeds in convincing his acquaintances, he
achieves a double gain: first, he quiets his conscience, and then he
acquires a reputation for being original.


25

Men begin to strive towards great ends when they feel they cannot cope
with the little tasks of life. They often have their measure of success.


26

A belch interrupts the loftiest meditation. You may draw a conclusion
if you like: if you don't like, you needn't.


27

_A woman of conviction_.--We forgive a man his "convictions," however
unwillingly. It goes without saying that we balk at any individual who
believes in his own infallibility, but one must reconcile oneself
with necessity. It is ugly and preposterous to have corns on one's
hands, but still, they can't be avoided in this unparadisal earth of
sweat and labour. But why see an ideal in callosities? In practical
life, particularly in the social political life to which we are
doomed, convictions are a necessity. Unity is strength, and unity is
possible only among people who think alike. Again, a deep conviction
is in itself a strong force, far more powerful than the most logical
argumentation. Sometimes one has only to pronounce in a full, round,
vibrating chest voice, such as is peculiar to people of conviction,
some trifling sentence, and an audience hitherto unconvinced is carried
away. Truth is often dumb, particularly a new truth, which is most
shy of people, and which has a feeble, hoarse voice. But in certain
situations that which will influence the crowd is more important than
that which is genuine truth. Convictions are necessary to a public
man; but he who is too clever to believe in himself entirely, and is
not enough of an actor to look as if he believed, he had best give up
public work altogether. At the same time he will realise that lack
of convictions is not profitable, and will look with more indulgence
on such as are bound to keep themselves well supplied. Yet all the
more will he dislike those men who without any necessity disfigure
themselves with the coarse tattoo marks. And particularly he will
object to such women. What can be more intolerable than a woman of
conviction. She lives in a family, without having to grind for her
daily bread--why disfigure herself? Why wilfully rub her hands into
corns, when she might keep them clean and pretty! Women, moreover,
usually pick up their convictions ready-made from the man who interests
them most at the moment. And never do they do this so vigorously as
when the man himself seems incapable of paving the way to his ideas!
They are full of feeling for him; they rush to the last extremities
of resource. Will not their feeble little fists help him? It may be
touching, but in the end it is intolerable. So it is much pleasanter
to meet a woman who believes in her husband and does not consider it
necessary to help him. She can then dispense with convictions.


28

_Emancipation of women_.--The one and only way of mastering an enemy
is to learn the use of his weapons. Starting from this, modern woman,
weary of being the slave of man, tries to learn all his tricks. Hard
is slavery, wonderful is freedom! Slavery at last is so unendurable
that a human being will sacrifice, everything for freedom. Of what use
are his virtues to a prisoner languishing in prison? He has one aim,
one object--to get out of prison, and he values only such qualities
in himself as will assist his escape. If it is necessary to break
an iron grating by physical force, then strong muscles will seem to
the prisoner the most desirable of all things. If cunning will help
him, cunning is the finest thing on earth. Something the same happens
with woman. She became convinced that man owed his priority chiefly
to education and a trained mind, so she threw herself on books and
universities. Learning that promises freedom is light, everything else
darkness. Of course, it is a delusion, but you could never convince her
of it, for that would mean the collapse of her best hopes of freedom.
So that in the end woman will be as well-informed as man, she will
furnish herself with broad views and unshakeable convictions, with a
philosophy also--and in the end she may even learn to think logically.
Then, probably, the many misunderstandings between the sexes will
cease. But heavens, how tedious it will be! Men will argue, women will
argue, children will probably be born fully instructed, understanding
everything. With what pain will the men of the future view our women,
capricious, frivolous, uninformed creatures, understanding nothing and
desiring to understand nothing. A whole half of the human race neither
would nor could have any understanding! But the hope lies there. Maybe
we can do without understanding. Perhaps a logical mind is not an
attribute, but a curse. In the struggle for existence, however, and the
survival of the fittest, not a few of the best human qualities have
perished. Obviously woman's illogicality is also destined to disappear.
It is a thousand pities.


29

All kinds of literature are good, except the tedious, said Voltaire.
We may enlarge the idea. All men and all activities are good, except
the tedious. Whatever your failings and your vices, if you are only
amusing or interesting all is forgiven you. Accordingly, frankness and
naturalness are quite rightly considered doubtful virtues. If people
say that frankness and naturalness are virtues, always take it _cum
grano salis_. Sometimes it is permissible and even opportune to fire
off truth of all sorts. Sometimes one may stretch oneself like a log
across the road. But God forbid that such sincere practices should be
raised into a principle. To out with the truth at all times, always to
reveal oneself entirely, besides being impossible to accomplish, never
having been accomplished even in the confessions of the greatest men,
is moreover a far more risky business than it seems. I can confidently
assert that if any man tried to tell the whole truth about himself, not
metaphorically, for every metaphor is a covering ornament, but in plain
bare words, that man would ruin himself for ever, for he would lose
all interest in the eyes of his neighbours, and even in his own eyes.
Each of us bears in his soul a heavy wound, and knows it, yet carries
himself, _must_ carry himself as if he were aware of nothing, while all
around keep up the pretence. Remember Lermontov:

    _Look! around you, playfully_
    _The crowd moves on the usual road_.
    _Scarce a mark of trouble on the festive faces_,
    _Not one indecent tear_!
    _And yet is barely one amongst them_
    _But is crushed by heavy torture_,
    _Or has gathered the wrinkles of young age_
    _Save from crime or loss_.

These words are horribly true--and the really horrible should be
concealed, it frightens one off. I admit, Byron and Lermontov could
make it alluring. But all that is alluring depends on vagueness,
remoteness. Any monster may be beautiful in the distance. And no
man can be interesting unless he keep a certain distance between
himself and people. Women do not understand this. If they like a
man, they try to come utterly near to him, and are surprised that he
does not meet their frankness with frankness, and admit them to his
holy of holies. But in the innermost sanctuary the only beauty is
inaccessibility. As a rule it is not a sanctuary but a lair where the
wounded beast in man has run to lick his wounds. And shall this be
done in public? People generally, and women particularly, ought to be
given something positive. In books one may still sing the praise of
wounds, hopelessness, and despair--whatever you like, for books are
still literature, a conventionality. But to strip one's anguish in the
open market, to confess an incurable disease to others, this is to
kill one's soul, not to relieve it. All, even the best men, have some
aversion for you. Perhaps in the interest of order and decorum they
will grant you a not-too-important place in their philosophy of life.
For in a philosophy of life, as in a cemetery, a place is prepared for
each and all, and everyone is welcome. There also are enclosures where
rubbish is dumped to rot. But for those who have as yet no desire to
be fitted into a world-philosophy, I would advise them to keep their
tongue between their teeth, or like Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, take to
literature. To a writer, in books and only in books, all is permitted
provided he has talent. But in actual living even a writer must not
let loose too much, lest people should guess that in his books he is
telling the truth.


30

Poushkin asserts that the poet himself can and must be the judge of
his own work. "Are you content, exacting artist? Content, then let
the mob revile." It is needless to argue against this, for how could
you prove that the supreme verdict belongs not to the poet himself,
but to public opinion? Nor, for that matter, can we prove Poushkin
right. We must agree or disagree, as we like. But we cannot reject the
evidence. Whether you like it or not, Poushkin was evidently satisfied
with his own work, and did not need his reader's sanction. Happy man!
And it seems to me he owed his happiness exclusively to his inability
to pass beyond certain limits. I doubt-if all poets would agree to
repeat Poushkin's verse quoted above. I decidedly refuse to believe
that Shakespeare, for instance, after finishing _Hamlet_ or _King
Lear_ could have said to himself: "I, who judge my work more strictly
than any other can judge, am satisfied." I do not think he can even
have thought for a moment of the merits of his works, _Hamlet_ or
_King Lear_. To Shakespeare, after Hamlet, the word "satisfied" must
have lost all its meaning, and if he used it, it was only by force of
habit, as we sometimes call to a dead person. His own works must have
seemed to him imperfect, mean, pitiful, like the sob of a child or the
moaning of a sick man. He gave them to the theatre, and most probably
was surprised that they had any success. Perhaps he was glad that his
tears were of some use, if only for amusing and instructing people. And
probably in this sense the verdict of the crowd was dearer to him than
his own verdict. He could not help accusing his own offspring--thank
heaven, other people acquitted it. True, they acquitted it because
they did not understand, or understood imperfectly, but this did not
matter. "Use every man after his desert, and who should 'scape a
whipping?" asked Hamlet. Shakespeare knew that a strict tribunal would
reject his works: for they contain so many terrible questions, and not
one perfect answer. Could anyone be "satisfied" at that rate? Perhaps
with _Comedy of Errors, Twelfth Night_, or even _Richard III_.--but
after _Hamlet_ a man may find rest only in his grave. To speak the
whole truth, I doubt if Poushkin himself maintained the view we have
quoted till the end of his days, or even if he spoke all he felt when
he wrote the poem in 1830. Possibly he felt how little a poet can be
satisfied with his work, but pride prevented his admitting it, and he
tried to console himself with his superiority over the crowd. Which
is undeniably a right thing to do. Insults--and Poushkin had to endure
many--are answered with contempt; and woe to the poor wretch who feels
impelled to justify his contempt by his own merits, according to the
stern voice of conscience. Such niceness is dangerous and unnecessary.
If a man would preserve his strength and his confidence he must give
up magnanimity, he must learn to despise people, and even if he cannot
despise them he must have the air of one who would not give a pin's
head for anybody. He must appear always content. ... Poushkin was a
clever man and a deep nature.


31

_Metaphysics against their will_.--It often occurs to us that evil is
not altogether so, unnecessary, after all. Diseases, humiliations,
miseries, deformity, failure, and all the rest of those plants which
flourish with such truly tropical luxuriance on our planet, are
probably essential to man. Poets sing plentifully of sorrow.

"_Nous sommes les apprentis, la douleur est notre maître_," said
de Musset. On this subject everybody can bring forth a quotation,
not only from the philosophers, who are a cold, heartless tribe,
but from tender, gentle, or sentimental poets. Doubtless one knows
many instances where suffering has profited a man. True also, one
knows many cases of the direct opposite. And these are all cases of
profound, earnest, outrageous, incredibly outrageous suffering. Look
at Tchekhov's men and women--plainly drawn from life, or at any rate,
exceedingly life-' like. Uncle Vanya, an old man of fifty, cries beside
himself all over the stage, "My life is done for, my life is done for,"
and senselessly shoots at a harmless professor. The hero in _A Tedious
Story_ was a quiet, happy man engaged in work of real importance, when
suddenly a horrible disease stole upon him, not killing him, but taking
him between its loathsome jaws. But what for? Then Tchekhov's girls and
women! They are mostly young, innocent, fascinating. And always there
lies in wait for them round every corner a meaningless, rude, ugly
misery which murders even the most modest hopes. They sob bitterly, but
fate takes no notice. How explain such horrors? Tchekhov is silent.
He does not weep himself--he left off long ago, and besides it is a
humiliating thing for a grown-up person to do. Setting one's teeth, it
is necessary either to keep silent or--to explain. Well, metaphysics
under takes the explanation. Where common sense stops, metaphysics must
take another stride. "We have seen," it says, "many instances where
at first glance suffering seemed absurd and needless, but where later
on a profound significance was revealed. Thus it may be that what we
cannot explain may find its explanation in time. 'Life is lost,' cries
Uncle Vanya, 'Life is done for,' repeat the voices of girls innocently
perishing--yet nothing is lost. The very horror which a drowning man
experiences goes to show that the drowning is nothing final. It is
only the beginning of greater events. The less a man has fulfilled in
experience, the more in him remains of unsatisfied passion and desire,
the greater are the grounds for thinking that his essence cannot be
destroyed, but must manifest itself somehow or other in the universe.
Voluntary asceticism and self-denial, such common human phenomena,
help to solve the riddle. Nobody compels a man, he imposes suffering
and abstinence on himself. It is an incomprehensible instinct, but
still an instinct which, rooted in the depths of our nature, prompts
us to a decision repugnant to reason: renounce life, save yourself. The
majority of men do not hear or do not heed the prompting. And then
nature, which cannot rely on our sensibility, has recourse to violence.
She shows glimpses of Paradise to us in our youth, awakens hopes and
impossible desires, and at the moment of our supreme expectation she
shows us the hollowness of our hope. Nearly every life can be summed
up in a few words: man was shown heaven--and thrown into the mud. We
are all ascetics--voluntary or involuntary. Here on earth dreams and
hopes are only awakened, not fulfilled. And he who has endured most
suffering, most privation, will awaken in the afterwards most keenly
alive." Such long speeches metaphysics whispers to us. And we repeat
them, often leaving out the "it may be." Sometimes we believe them,
and forge our philosophies from them. Even we go so far as to assert
that had we the power we would change nothing, absolutely nothing in
the world. And yet, if by some miracle such power came into our hands,
how triumphantly we would send to the devil all philosophies and lofty
world-conceptions, all ideals and metaphysics, and plainly and simply,
without reflection, abolish sufferings, deformities, failures, all
those things to which we attach such a high educational value, abolish
them from the face of the earth. We are fed up, oh, how fed up we are
with carrying on our studies. But it can't be helped. _Faute de mieux,_
let us keep on inventing systems, thinking them out. But let us agree
not to be cross with those who don't want to have anything to do with
our systems. Really, they have a perfect right.


32

Old age must be respected--so all say, even the old. And the young
willingly meet the demand. But in such spontaneous, even often emphatic
respect, is there not something insulting to old age. Every young man,
by his voluntary deference, seems to say: "And still the rising star
shines brighter than the setting." And the old, accepting the respect,
are well aware that they can count on nothing more. The young are
attentive and respectful to the old only upon the express condition
that the latter shall behave like old people, and stand aside from
life. Let a real man try to follow Faust's example, and what a shindy
there will be! The old, being as a rule helpless, are compelled to
bow to public opinion and behave as if their only interests were
the interests of righteousness, good name, and such-like Platonic
attributes. Only a few go against the convention, and these are
monsters and degenerates. We do not wish old men to have desires, so
that life is arranged as if old men desired nothing. This, of course,
is no great matter: even the young are compelled to be satisfied
with less than nothing, in our system. We are not out to meddle with
human rights. Our point is that science and philosophy take enforced
appearances for reality. Grey hair is supposed to be a sure sign of
victory over the passions. Hence, seeing that we must all come to
grey hairs, therefore the ultimate business of man is to overcome the
passions.... On this granite foundation whole systems of philosophy are
built. It is not worth while quarrelling with a custom--let us continue
to pay respect to old age. But let us look in other directions for
philosophic bases. It is time to open a free road to the passions even
in the province of metaphysics.


33

_Dostoevsky_--_advocatus diaboli_.--Dostoevsky, like Nietzsche,
disliked Protestantism, and tried every means of degrading it in
the eyes of the world. As normally he was not over scrupulous, it is
probable he never took the trouble to acquaint himself with Luther's
teaching. His flair did not deceive him: the Protestant religion and
morality was most unsuitable to him and his kind. But does this mean
that it was to be calumniated, and judged, as Dostoevsky judged it,
merely by the etymological meaning of a word? Protestant--a protester,
one who only protests and has no positive content. A child's text-book
of history will show the absurdity of the definition. Protestantism
is, on the whole, the most positive, _assertive_ creed of all the
Christian religions. It certainly protested against Catholicism, but
against the destructive tendencies in the latter, and in the name of
positive ideals. Catholicism relied too much on its power and its
spell, and most of all on the infallibility of its dogmas to which it
offered millions of victims. To maim and mutilate a man _ad majorem
gloriam Dei_ was considered a perfectly proper thing in the Middle
Ages, the period of bloom for Catholicism. At the risk of appearing
paradoxical, I venture to assert that ideas have been invented only for
the purpose of giving the right to mutilate people. The Middle Ages
nourished a mysterious, incomprehensible hatred for everything normal,
self-satisfied, complete. A young, healthy, handsome man, at peace
with himself, aroused suspicion and hostility in a believing Catholic.
His very appearance offended religion and confuted dogma. It was not
necessary to examine him. Even though he went to church, and gave no
sign of doubt, either in deed or word, yet he must be a heretic, to
be converted at all cost. And we know the Catholic cost: privation,
asceticism, mortification of the flesh. The most normal person, kept
on a monastic regime, will lose his spiritual balance, and all those
virtues which belong to a healthy spirit and a healthy body. This was
all Catholicism needed. It tried to obtain from people the _extreme
endeavour_ of their whole being. Ordinary, natural love, which found
its satisfaction--this was sinful. Monks and priests were condemned
to celibacy--hence monstrous and abnormal passions developed. Poverty
was preached, and the most unheard-of greed appeared in the world,
the more secret the stronger it became. Humility was essential--and
out of bare-footed monks sprang despots who had no limits to their
ambitions. Luther was the last man to understand the meaning and
value of the tasks which Catholicism had set itself. What he saw in
Rome was not the accidental outcome of this or the other historical
circumstance, but a result of the age-long effort of generations that
had striven to attribute to life as alarming and dangerous a nature as
possible. The sincere, direct, rustic German monk was too simple-minded
to make out what was going on in Rome. He thought there existed one
truth, and that the essence of Catholicism lay in what seemed to him
an exemplary, virtuous life. He went direct to his aim? What meaning
can monasticism have? Why deprive a priest of family happiness? How
accept the licentiousness of the pope's capital? The common sense of
the normal German revolted against the absurdity of such a state of
things--and Luther neither could nor _would_ see any good where common
sense was utterly forgotten. The violent oscillation of life resulting
from the continuous quick passage from asceticism and blind faith to
unbelief and freedom of the passions aroused a mystic horror in the
honest monk and released the enormous powers in him necessary to start
the great struggle. How could he help protesting? And who was the
denier, Luther, or the Rome which passed on from the keeping of the
Divine Word to the arbitrary ordaining of all the mysteries of life?
Luther might have forgiven the monks had they confined themselves
to sophistries. But mediaeval monks had nothing in common with our
philosophers. They did not look for world-conceptions in books, and
logical tournaments amused them only moderately. They threw themselves
into the deeps of life, they experimented on themselves and their
neighbours. They passed from mortification to licentious bacchanalia.
They feared nothing, spared nothing. In a word, the Rome against which
Luther arose had undertaken to build Babylon again, not with stones,
but with human souls. Luther, horrified, withdrew, and with him half
Europe was withdrawn. That is his positive merit. And Dostoevsky
attacked Lutheranism, and pitied the old Catholicism and the breathless
heights to which its "spiritual" children had risen. Wholesome
morality and its support is not enough for Dostoevsky. All this is not
"positive," it is only "protest." Whether I am believed or not, I will
repeat that Vladimir Soloviov, who held that Dostoevsky was a prophet,
is wrong, and that N. K. Mikhailovsky, who calls him a cruel talent
and a grubber after buried treasure, is right. Dostoevsky grubs after
buried treasure--no doubt about that. And, therefore, it would be more
becoming in the younger generation that still marches under the flag
of pious idealism if, instead of choosing him as a spiritual leader,
they avoided the old sorcerer, in whom only those gifted with great
shortsightedness or lack of experience in life could fail to see the
dangerous man.


34

It is boring and difficult to convince people, and after all, not
necessary. It would be much better if every individual kept his own
opinions. Unfortunately, it cannot be. Whether you like it or not, you
have to admit the law of gravitation. Some people find it necessary
to admit the origin of man from the monkey. In the empirical realm,
however humiliating it may be, there are certain real, binding,
universal truths against which no rebellion will avail. With what
pleasure would we declare to a representative of science that fire does
not burn, that rattlesnakes are not poisonous, that a fall from a high
tower is perfectly agreeable, etc., etc., supposing he were obliged
to prove to us the contrary. Unluckily the scientific person is free
from the burden of proof: nature proves, and thoroughly. If nature,
like metaphysics, set out to compel us through syllogisms or sermons
to believe in her, how little she would get out of us. She is much
more sagacious. Morality and logic she has left to Hegel and Spinoza,
for herself she has taken a cudgel. Now then, try to argue against
_this_! You will give in against your will. The cleverest of all the
metaphysicians, Catholic inquisitors, imitated nature. They rarely
tried the word, and trusted to the fire of faggots rather than of the
heart. Had they only had more power, it would not be possible to find
two people in the whole world disbelieving in the infallibility of the
Pope. Metaphysical ideas, dreamily expecting to conquer the world by
reasoned exposition, will never attain dominion. If they are bent on
success, let them try more effective methods of convincing.


35

_Evolution_.--In recent years we see more and more change in the
philosophies of writers and even of non-literary people. The old men
are beside themselves--such shiftiness seems indecent. After all,
convictions are not gloves. But the young carelessly pass on from
one idea to another. Irresolute men are somewhat timid, and although
they abandon their former convictions they do not declare the change
openly. Others, however, plainly announce, as if it were nothing, how
far they now are from the beliefs they held six months ago. One even
publishes whole volumes relating how he passed on from one philosophy
to another, and then to a third. People see nothing alarming in that
kind of "evolution." They believe it is in the ordering of things.
But not so at all! The readiness to leave off one set of convictions
in order to assume another set shows complete indifference to
convictions altogether. Not for nothing do the old sound the alarm.
But to us who have fought so long against all kinds of constancy, the
levity of the young is a pleasant sight. They will don materialism,
positivism, Kantianism, spiritualism, and so on, one after the other,
till they realise that all theories, ideas and ideals are as of little
consequence as the hoop-skirts and crinolines of our grandmothers. Then
they will begin to live without ideals and pre-arranged purposes,
without foresight, relying on chance and their own ready wit. This way,
too, must be tried. Perhaps we shall do better by it.... Anyhow, it
will be more fun.


36

_Strength of will_.--Weakness and paralysis of the will, a very
dangerous disease in our times, and in most other times, consists
not in the absolute loss of desire, such as takes place in the very
old, but in the loss of the capacity to translate desire into deed. A
diseased will is often met in violently passionate men, so that the
proverb--"Say I will not, not I cannot"--does not always hold good. Man
often would, but cannot. And then the force of desire instead of moving
to outward creation, works inwardly. This is justly considered the
most dangerous effect of the weakening of the will. For inward working
is destructive working. Man does not only, to put it scientifically,
fail to adapt nature to his needs, but he loses his own power of
adaptability to outward circumstances. The most ordinary doctor, or
even anybody, decides that he has before him a pathological case which
must be treated with care. The patient is of the same opinion, whilst
he still hopes. But when the treatment has had no results, the doctor
draws back and speaks of the inadequacy of his science. Then what is
the patient to retire upon? It is disgusting to speak of an incurable
disease. So he begins to think, think, think--all the time about things
of which nobody thinks. He is gradually forgotten, and gradually he
forgets everything--but first of all, that widespread truth which
asserts that no judgments are valid save those that are accepted
and universal. Not that he disputes the truth: he _forgets it_, and
there is none to remind him. To him all his judgments seem valid and
important. Of course he cannot advance the principle: let all men turn
from the external world into themselves. But why advance a principle
at all? One can simply say: I am indifferent to the destinies of the
external world. I do not want to move mountains or turn rivers aside or
rearrange the map of Europe. I don't even want to go to the tobacconist
to buy cigarettes. I don't want _to do_ anything. I want to think that
my inaction is the most important thing on earth, that any "disease" is
better than health, and so on and so on without end. To what thought's
will not a man abandoned by medicine and doctors sink down! His
judgments are not binding on us, that is as clear as day. But are they
uninteresting? And is that paralysis, that weakness of will, a disease
only?


37

_Death and metaphysics_.--A superficial observer knows that the best
things in life are hard to attain. Some psychologists even consider
that the chief beauty of the highest things consists in their
unattainability. This is surely not true--yet there is a grain in it.
The roads to good things are dangerous to travel. Is it because nature
is so much poorer than we imagine, so she must lock up her blessings,
or is there some greater meaning in it, that we have not guessed? For
the fact is, the more alluring an end we have in view, the more risks
and horrors we must undertake to get there. May we not also make a
contrary suggestion: that behind every danger something good is hidden,
and that therefore danger serves as an indication, a mark to guide us
onwards, not as a warning, as we are taught to believe. To decide this
would be to decide that behind death, the greatest of dangers, must
lie the most promising things. It is as well not to speculate further.
We had best stop lest we quarrel even with metaphysics. Traditional
metaphysics has always been able to illumine our temporal existence
with the reflected beams of eternity. Let us follow the example. Let
us make no attempt to know the absolute. If you have discovered a
comforting hypothesis, even in the upper transcendental air, drag it
quickly to earth where labouring men forever await even an imaginary
relief from their lot. We must make use of everything, even of death,
to serve the ends of this life of ours.


38

_The future_.--A clever, reasonable boy, accustomed to trust his
common sense, read in a book for children a description of a shipwreck
which occurred just as the passengers were eating their sweets at
dessert. He was astonished to learn that everyone, women and children
as well, who could give no assistance-whatever in saving the ship,
left their dessert and rushed on deck with wailing and tears. Why
wail, why rush about, why be stupidly agitated? The crew knew their
business and would do all that could be done. If you are going to
perish, perish you will, no matter how you scream. It seemed to
the boy that if he had been on the ship he would just have gone on
eating his sweets to the last moment. Justice should be done to this
judicious and irreproachable opinion. There remained only a few minutes
to live--would it not have been better to enjoy them? The logic is
perfect, worthy of Aristotle. And it was found impossible to prove to
the boy that he would have left his sweets, even his favourite sweets,
under the same circumstances, and rushed, and screamed with the rest.
Hence a moral--do not decide about the future. To-day common sense is
uppermost, and sweets are your highest law. But to-morrow you will
get rid of normality and sense, you will link on with nonsense and
absurdity, and probably you will even get a taste for bitters. What do
you think?


39

A priori _synthetic judgments_.--Kant, as we know, found in mathematics
and the natural sciences _a priori_ synthetic judgments. Was he right
or wrong? Are the judgments he indicated _a priori_ or _a posteriori_?
Anyhow, one thing is certain: they are not accepted as absolutely,
but only as relatively indisputable. In metaphysics, where the only
curious and important truths are hidden, the case is different. Kant
was compelled to admit that just where metaphysics begin the capacity
of our human reason to judge _a priori_ ends. But since we cannot
dispense with metaphysical judgments, he proposed to substitute
for them postulates. At the same time he admitted the optimistic
presupposition that in the domain of the transcendental we shall find
all that we miss in the world of phenomena. So that, because he could
not invent a truly scientific metaphysics, he contrived to present us
with a non-scientific sort. Which is to say, after many round-about
journeys he brings his readers along the opposite way right back to the
very spot from which he led them off. Surely non-scientific metaphysics
existed before Kant: the mediaeval philosophers had plenty of
phantasies and speculations, all supported by "moral" proofs. If Kant
wanted to reform metaphysics, he should have got rid of its favourite
method of obtaining truths through inferential "conclusions." Men are
greedy, they want to learn much, and get their knowledge cheap. So
they think that every truth they have paid for with experience and loss
of energy entitles them to a few more truths gratis: or, in philosophic
language, _a priori_, by deduction. They are not ashamed to speculate
with a gift that has been given them. Instead of looking, listening,
touching, _seeking_, they want to infer and conclude. Certainly if they
could wring any secret out of nature, no matter by what means, cunning,
impudence, fraud, we would forgive them--conquerors are not judged.
But nothing comes of their "conclusions" save metaphysical systems and
empty prattle. It is surely time to give up conclusions, and get truth
_a posteriori_, as did Shakspeare, Goethe, Dostoevsky; that is, every
time you want to know anything, go and look and find out. And if one is
lazy, or horrified at a new experiment, let him train himself to look
on ultimate questions with indifference, as the positivists do. But
moral, ontological and such like arguments!--really, it is disgusting
to talk about them. Every new experiment is interesting; but our
conclusions, _i.e._, synthetic judgments _a priori,_ are mostly pompous
lies, not worth the scrap of paper on which they are recorded.


40

_General rules_.--People go to philosophers for general principles.
And since philosophers are human, they are kept busy supplying the
market with general principles. But what sense is there in them? None
at all. Nature demands individual creative activity from us. Men won't
understand this, so they wait forever for the ultimate truths from
philosophy, which they will never get. Why should not every grown-up
person be a creator, live in his own way at his own risk and have his
own experience? Children and raw youths must go in leading strings. But
adult people who want to feel the reins should be despised. They are
cowards, and slothful: afraid to try, they eternally go to the wise for
advice. And the wise do not hesitate to take the responsibility for the
lives of others. They invent general rules, as if they had access to
the sources of knowledge. What foolery! The wise are no wiser than the
stupid--they have only more conceit and effrontery. Every intelligent
man laughs in his soul at "bookish" views. And are not books the work
of the wise? They are often extremely interesting--but only in so far
as they do not contain general rules. Woe to him, who would build
up his life according to Hegel, Schopenhauer, Tolstoy, Schiller, or
Dostoevsky. He must read them, but he must have sense, a mind of his
own to live with. Those who have tried to live according to theories
from books have found this out. At the best, their efforts produced
banality. There is no alternative. Whether man likes or not he will
at last have to realise that cliches are worthless, and that he must
live from himself. There are no all-binding, universal judgments--let
us manage with non-binding, non-universal ones. Only professors will
suffer for it....


41

_Metaphysical consolations_.--Metaphysics mercilessly persecutes all
eudaemonistic doctrines, seeing in them a sort of _laesio majestatis_
of human dignity. Our dignity forbids us to place human happiness in
the highest goal. Suppose it is so? But why then invent consolations,
even metaphysical ones? Why give to such a "pure" ideal concept as
metaphysics such a coarse "sensual" partner as consolation?--sensual
in the Kantian meaning of the word. Metaphysics had much better
associate herself with proud disconsolation. Consolation brings
calm and ease, even quiet gratification to the soul. But surely, if
metaphysics condescend to accept any assistance whatever, she must
scorn all earthly gratifications, leave them to wingless positivism
and materialism. What are joys and pains to metaphysics?--she is one
thing, they another. Yet all of a sudden metaphysicians begin to shout
about consolations. Evidently there is a misunderstanding here, and a
big one. The more you pierce to the ultimate ends of the "infinite"
metaphysical problems, the more finite they reveal themselves.
Metaphysicians only look out for some new boon--I nearly said pleasure.
Voltaire said that if there was no God, then He should be invented. We
explain these words by the great Frenchman's extreme positivism. But
the form only is positive, the content is purely metaphysical. All that
a metaphysician wants to do is to convince himself that God exists. No
matter whether he is mistaken or not, he has found a consolation. It
is impossible for him to see that his belief in a certain fact does
not make that fact veritable. The whole question is whether there
does exist a supreme, conscious First Cause, or whether we are slaves
to the laws of dead necessity. But what does the metaphysician care
about this real question! Having declared himself the avowed enemy
of eudaemonism, he next seeks consolation, nothing but consolation.
To doubt his right to be consoled drives him to fury and madness. He
is prepared to support his convictions by every means--ranging from
righteous indignation to fists. It is obviously futile to try to
enlighten such a creature. Once a man cares nothing for God, and seeks
only to make the best of his life, you will not tear away his attention
from the immediate moment. But perhaps there is a God, and neither
Voltaire nor the metaphysicians have any need to invent Him. The
metaphysicians never saw that an avowed disbelief in God does not prove
the non-existence of God, but just the opposite; it is a surer sign of
faith than ever belief is. Unfortunate metaphysicians! They might have
found their greatest consolation here, and fists and moral indignation
and other forms of chastisement to which they have been driven might
have been spared us.


42

_Practical advice_.--People who read much must always keep it in mind
that life is one thing, literature another. Not that authors invariably
lie. I declare that there are writers who rarely and most reluctantly
lie. But one must know how to read, and that isn't easy. Out of a
hundred book-readers ninety-nine have no idea what they are reading
about. It is a common belief, for example, that any writer who sings of
suffering must be ready at all times to open his arms to the weary and
heavy-laden. This is what his readers feel when they read his books.
Then when they approach him with their woes, and find that he runs away
without looking back at them, they are filled with indignation and talk
of the discrepancy between word and deed. Whereas the fact is, the
singer has more than enough woes of his own, and he sings them because
he can't get rid of them. _L'uccello canto, nella gabbia, non di gioia
ma di rabbia_, says the Italian proverb: "The bird sings in the cage,
not from joy but from rage." It is impossible to love sufferers,
particularly hopeless sufferers, and whoever says otherwise is a
deliberate liar. "Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest." But you remember what the Jews said about
Him: "He speaks as one having authority!" And if Jesus had been unable,
or _had not possessed the right_, to answer this sceptical taunt, He
would have had to renounce His words. We common mortals have neither
divine powers nor divine rights, we can only love our neighbours whilst
they still have hope, and any pretence of going beyond this is empty
swagger. Ask him who sings of suffering for nothing but his songs.
Rather think of alleviating his burden than of requiring alleviation
from him. Surely not for ever should we ask any poet to sob and look
upon tears. I will end with another Italian saying: _Non e un si triste
cane che non meni la coda_. ... "No dog so wretched but he wags his
tail sometimes."


43

If a patient fulfils all the orders of a sensible doctor, we say
he behaves wisely. If he wantonly neglects his treatment, we say
he acts stupidly. If a healthy person wished to inoculate himself
with some dangerous disease--say phthisis--we should say he was mad,
and forcibly restrain him. To such an extent are we convinced that
disease is evil, health good. Well--on what is our conviction based?
At a glance the question seems absurd. But then at a glance people
would absolutely refuse to doubt the fixity of the earth, at a glance
an ordinary person would giggle if he was shown the problem of the
relation between the real world and the ideal. Who knows what would
seem amenable to discussion to the ordinary person? The philosopher
has no right to appeal to the ordinary person. The philosopher must
doubt and doubt and doubt, and question when nobody questions, and
risk making a laughing-stock of himself. If common sense were enough
to settle all problems, we should have known everything long age. So
that--why do we value health more than sickness? Or even further--which
is better, health or sickness. If we will drop the utilitarian point
of view--and all are agreed that this has no place in philosophy--then
we shall see at once that we have no grounds whatever for preferring
health and sickness. We have invented neither the one nor the other.
We found them both in the world along with us. Why then do we, who
know so little about it, take upon ourselves to judge which are
nature's successes, which her failures? Health is agreeable--sickness
disagreeable. But this consideration is unworthy of a philosopher:
otherwise why be a philosopher, why distinguish oneself from the herd?
The philosopher invented morality, which has at its disposal various
pure ideas that have no relation to empirical life. Then let us go
further. Reason should have a supply of pure ideas also. Let Reason
judge in her own independent way, without conforming to conventional
ideas. When she has no other resort, let her proceed by the method of
negation: everything that common sense asserts, I, Reason, declare
to be false. So--common sense Says sickness is bad, reason therefore
asserts that sickness is the highest boon. Such Reason we should call
autonomous, law-unto-itself. Like a real monarch, it is guided only by
its own will. Let all considerations point in favour of health, Reason
must remain inexorable and keep her stand till we are all brought to
obedience. She must praise suffering, deformity, failure, hopelessness.
At every step she must fight common-sense and utilitarianism, until
mankind is brought under. Is she afraid of rebellion? Must she in the
last issue, like morality, adapt herself to the inclinations of the
mob?


44

_Experience and Science_.--As we are well aware, science does not,
nay cannot, admit experience in all its extent. She throws overboard
an enormous quantity of individual facts, regarding them as the
ballast of our human vessel. She takes note only of such phenomena as
alternate constantly and with a certain regularity. Best of all she
likes those phenomena which can be artificially provoked, when, so
to speak, experiment is possible. She explains the rotation of the
earth and succession of the seasons since a regular recurrence is
observable, and she demonstrates thunder and lightning with a spark
from an electric machine. In a word, in so far as a regular alternation
of phenomena is observable, so far extends the realm of science. But
what about those individual phenomena which do not recur, and which
cannot be artificially provoked? If all men were blind, and one for a
moment recovered his sight and opened his eyes on God's world, science
would reject his evidence. Yet the evidence of one seeing man is worth
that of a million blind. Sudden enlightenments are possible in our
life--even if they endure only for a few seconds. Must they be passed
over in silence because they are not normal and cannot be provoked?--or
treated poetically, as beautiful fictions? Science insists on it. She
declares that no judgments are true except such as can be verified by
all and everyone. She exceeds her bounds. Experience is wider than
scientific experiment, and individual phenomena mean much more to us
than the constantly recurrent.

Science is useful--but she need not pretend to truth. She cannot know
what truth is, she can only accumulate universal laws. Whereas there
are, and always have been, non-scientific ways of searching for truth,
ways which lead, if not to the innermost secrets, yet to the threshold.
These roads, however, we have let fall into ruin whilst we followed
our modern methodologies, so now we dare not even think of them. What
gives us the right to assert that astrologers, alchemists, diviners,
and sorcerers who passed the long nights alone with their thoughts,
wasted their time in vain? As for the philosopher's stone, that was
merely a plausible excuse invented to satisfy the uninitiated. Could
an alchemist dare to confess openly that all his efforts were towards
no useful or utilitarian end? He had to guard against importunate
curiosity and impertinent authority in outsiders. So he lied, now
frightening, now alluring the mob through its cupidity. But certainly
he had his own important work to do: and it had only one fault, that
it was purely personal to him. And about personal matters it is
considered correct to keep silent.... Astonishing fact! As a rule a
man hesitates over trifles. But it does sometimes occur that a moment
arrives when he is filled with unheard-of courage and resolution in his
judgments. He is ready to stand up for his opinions against all the
world, dead or living. Whence such sudden surety, what does it mean?
Rationally we can discover no foundation for it. If a lover has got
into his head that his beloved is the fairest woman on earth, worth
the whole of life to him; if one who has been insulted feels that
his offender is the basest wretch, deserving torture and death; if a
would-be Columbus persuades himself that America is the only goal for
his ambition--who will convince such men that their opinions, shared
by none but themselves, are false or unjustifiable? And for whose
sake will they renounce their tenets? For the sake of objective truth?
that is, for the pleasure of the assurance that all men after them
will repeat their judgment for truth? They don't care. Let Don Quixote
run broadcast with drawn sword, proving the beauty of Dulcinea or the
impending horror of windmills. As a matter of fact, he and the German
philosophers with him have a vague idea, a kind of presentiment, that
their giants are but mill-sails, and that their ideal on the whole is
but a common girl driving swine to pasture. To defy such deadly doubt
they take to the sword or to argument, and do not rest until they have
succeeded in stopping the mouth of everybody. When from all lips they
hear the praise of Dulcinea they say: yes, she is beautiful, and she
never drove pigs. When the world beholds their windmilling exploits
with amazement they are filled with triumph; sheep are not sheep, mills
are not mills, as you might imagine; they are knights and cyclops. This
is called a proven, all-binding, universal truth. The support of the
mob is a necessary condition of the existence of modern philosophy and
its knights of the woful countenance. Scientific philosophy wearies
for a new Cervantes who will put a stop to its paving the way to truth
by dint of argument. All opinions have a right to exist, and if we
speak of privilege, then preference should be given to such as are most
run down to-day; namely, to such opinions as cannot be verified and
which are, for that self-same reason, universal. Once, long ago "man
invented speech in order to express his real relation to the universe."
So he may be heard, even though the relation he wishes to express be
unique, not to verified by any other individual. To attempt to verify
it by observations and experiments is strictly forbidden. If the habit
of "objective verification" has destroyed your native receptivity to
such an extent that your eyes and ears are gone, and you must rely only
on the evidence of instruments or objects not subject to your will,
then, of course, nothing is left you but to stick to the belief that
science is perfect knowledge. But if your eyes live and your ear is
sensitive--throw away instruments and apparatuses, forget methodology
and scientific Don-Quixotism, and try to trust yourself. What harm is
there in not having universal judgments or truths? How will it hurt
you to see sheep as sheep? It is a step forward. You will learn not
to see with everybody's eyes, but to see as none other sees. You will
learn not to meditate, but to conjure up and call forth with words
alien to all but yourself an unknown beauty and an unheard-of power.
Not for nothing, I repeat, did astrologers and alchemists scorn the
experimental method--which, by the way, far from being anything new or
particularly modern, is as old as the hills. Animals experiment, though
they do not compose treatises on inductive logic or pride themselves
on their reasoning powers. A cow who has burnt her mouth in her
trough will come up cautiously next time to feed. Every experimenter
is the same--only he systematises. But animals can often trust to
instinct when experience is lacking. And have we humans got sufficient
experience? Can experience give us what we want most? If so, let
science and craftsmanship serve our everyday need, let even philosophy,
also eager to serve, go on finding universal truths. But beyond craft,
science, and philosophy there is another region of knowledge. Through
all the ages men, each one at his own risk, have sought to penetrate
into this region. Shall we, men of the twentieth century, voluntarily
renounce our supreme powers and rights, and because public opinion
demands it, occupy ourselves exclusively with discovering useful
information? Or, in order not to appear mean or poverty-stricken in
our own eyes, shall we accept in place of the philosopher's stone our
modern metaphysics, which muffles her dread of actuality in postulates,
absolutes, and such-like apparently transcendental paraphernalia?


45

_The Russian Spirit_.--It will easily be admitted that the
distinguishing qualities of Russian literature, and of Russian art in
general, are simplicity, truthfulness, and complete lack of rhetorical
ornament. Whether it be to our credit or to our discredit is not for
me to judge, but one thing seems certain: that our simplicity and
truthfulness are due to our relatively scanty culture. Whilst European
thinkers have for centuries been beating their brains over insoluble
problems, we have only just begun to try our powers. We have no
failures behind us. The fathers of the profoundest Russian writers were
either landowners, dividing their time between extravagant amusement
and State service, or peasants whose drudgery left them no time for
idle curiosity. Such being the case, how can we know whether human
knowledge has any limits? And if we don't know, it seems to us it is
only because we haven't tried to find out. Other people's experience
is not ours. We are not bound by their conclusions. Indeed, what do we
know of the experience of others, save what we gather, very vaguely
and fragmentarily and unreliably, from books? It is natural for us to
believe the best, till the contrary is proved to us. Any attempt to
deprive us of our belief meets with the most energetic resistance.

The most sceptical Russian hides a hope at the bottom of his soul.
Hence our fearlessness of the truth, realistic truth which so stunned
European critics. Realism was invented in the West, established
there as a theory. But in the West, to counteract it, were invented
numberless other palliating theories whose business it was to soften
down the disconsolate conclusions of Realism. There in Europe they
have the _l'être suprême_, the _deus sive natura_, Hegel's absolute,
Kant's postulates, English utilitarianism, progress, humanitarianism,
hundreds of philosophic and sociological theories in which even extreme
realists can so cleverly dish up what they call life, that life, or
realism, ceases to be life or reality altogether.

The Westerner is self-reliant. He knows that if he doesn't help himself
nobody will help him. So he directs all his thoughts to making the
best of his opportunities. A limited time is granted him. If he can't
get to the end of his song within the time-limit, the song must remain
unsung. Fate will not give him one minute's grace for the unbeaten
bars. Therefore as an experienced musician he adapts himself superbly.
Not a second is wasted. The _tempo_ must not drag for an instant,
or he is lost. The _tempo_ is everything, and it exacts facility
and quickness of movement. During a few short beats the artist must
produce many notes, and produce them so as to leave the impression
that he was not hurried, that he had all the time in the world at his
disposal. Moreover, each note must be complete, accomplished, have its
fulness and its value. Native talent alone will not suffice for this.
Experience is necessary, tradition, training, and inherited instinct.
_Carpe diem_--the European has been living up to the motto for two
thousand years. But if we Russians are convinced of anything, it is
that we have time enough and to spare. To count days, much less hours
and minutes--find me the Russian who could demean himself to such a
bourgeois occupation. We look round, we stretch ourselves, we rub our
eyes, we want first of all to decide what we shall do, and how we
shall do it, before we can begin to live in earnest. We don't choose
to decide anyhow, nor at second-hand, from fragments of other people's
information. It must be from our own experience, with our own brains,
that we judge. We admit no traditions. In no literature has there been
such a-determined struggle with tradition as in ours. We have wanted
to re-examine everything, re-state everything. I won't deny that our
courage is drawn from our quite uncultured confidence in our own
powers. Byelinsky, a half-baked undergraduate, deriving his knowledge
of European philosophy at third hand, began a quarrel with the universe
over the long-forgotten victims of Philip II. and the Inquisition.
In that quarrel is the sense and essence of all creative Russian
literature. Dostoevsky, towards his end, raised the same storm and the
same question over the little tear of an unfortunate child.

A Russian believes he can do anything, hence he is afraid of nothing.
He paints life in the gloomiest colours--and were you to ask him: How
can you accept such a life? how can you reconcile yourself with such
horrors of reality as have been described by all your writers, from
Poushkin to Tchekhov? he would answer in the words of Dmitri Karamazov:
_I do not accept life._ This answer seems at first sight absurd. Since
life is here, impossible not to accept it. But there is a sub-meaning
in the reply, a lingering belief in the possibility of a final triumph
over "evil." In the strength of this belief the Russian goes forth to
meet his enemy--he does not hide from him. Our sectarians immolate
themselves. Tolstoyans and votaries of the various sects that crop up
so plentifully in Russia go in among the people, they go, God knows
to what lengths, destroying their own lives and the lives of others.
Writers do not lag behind sectarians. They, too, refuse to be prudent,
to count the cost or the hours. Minutes, seconds, time-beats, all this
is so insignificant as to be invisible to the naked eye. We wish to
draw with a generous hand from fathomless eternity, and all that is
limited we leave to European bourgeoisie. With few exceptions Russian
writers really despise the pettiness of the West. Even those who have
admired Europe most have done so because they failed most completely
to understand her. They did not want to understand her. That is why we
have always taken over European ideas in such fantastic forms. Take
the sixties for example. With its loud ideas of sobriety and modest
outlook, it was a most drunken period. Those who awaited the New
Messiah and the Second Advent read Darwin and dissected frogs. It is
the same to-day. We allow ourselves the greatest luxury that man can
dream of--sincerity, truthfulness--as if we were spiritual Croesuses,
as if we had plenty of everything, could afford to let everything be
seen, ashamed of nothing. But even Croesuses, the greatest sovereigns
of the world, did not consider they had the right to tell the truth at
all times. Even kings have to pretend--think of diplomacy. Whereas,
we think we may speak the truth, and the truth only, that any lie
which obscures our true substance is a crime; since our true substance
is the world's finest treasure, its finest reality.... Tell this
to a European, and it will seem a joke to him, even if he can grasp
it at all. A European uses all his powers of intellect and talent,
all his knowledge and his art for the purpose of concealing his
real self and all that really affects him:--for that the natural is
ugly and repulsive, no one in Europe will dispute for a moment. Not
only the fine arts, but science and philosophy in Europe tell lies
instinctively, by lying they justify their existence. First and last,
a European student presents you with a finished theory. Well, and what
does all the "finish" and the completeness signify? It merely means
that none of our western neighbours will end his speech before the
last reassuring word is said; he will never let nature have the last
word; so he rounds off his synthesis. With him, ornament and rhetoric
is a _sine qua non_ of creative utterance, the only remedy against all
ills. In philosophy reigns theodicy, in science, the law of sequence.
Even Kant could not avoid declamation, even with him the last word is
"moral necessity." Thus there lies before us the choice between the
artistic and accomplished lie of old, cultured Europe, a lie which is
the outcome of a thousand years of hard and bitter effort, and the
artless, sincere simplicity of young, uncultured Russia.

They are nearer the end, we are nearer the beginning. And which is
nearer the truth? And can there be a question of voluntary, free
choice? Probably neither the old age of Europe nor the youth of Russia
can give us the truth we seek. But does such a thing as ultimate truth
exist? Is not the very conception of truth, the very assumption of the
possibility of truth, merely an outcome of our limited experience,
a fruit of limitation? We decide _a priori_ that one thing must be
possible, another impossible, and from our arbitrary assumptions we
proceed to deduce the body of truth. Each one judges in his own way,
according to his powers and the conditions of his existence. The timid,
scared man worries after _order,_ that will give him a day of peace
and quiet, youth dreams of beauty and brilliance, old age doesn't want
to think of anything, having lost the faculty for hope. And so it goes
on, _ad infinitum_. And this is called truth, truths! Every man thinks
that his own experience covers the whole range of life. And, therefore,
the only men who turn out to be at all in the right are empiricists and
positivists. There can be no question of truth once we tear ourselves
away from the actual conditions of life.

Our confident truthfulness, like European rhetoric, turns out to be
"beyond truth and falsehood." The young East and the old West alike
suffer from the restrictions imposed by truth--but the former ignores
the restrictions, whilst the latter adapts itself to them. After all,
it comes to pretty much the same in the end. Is not clever rhetoric
as delightful as truthfulness? Each is equally _life_. Only we find
unendurable a rhetoric which poses as truth, and a truthfulness
which would appear cultured. Such a masquerade would try to make us
believe that truth, which is only _limitedness_, has a real objective
existence. Which is offensive. Until the contrary is proved, we need to
think that only one assertion has or can have any objective reality:
_that nothing on earth is impossible_. Every time somebody wants to
force us to admit that there are other, more limited and limiting
truths, we must resist with every means we can lay hands on. We do not
hesitate even to make use of morality and logic, both of which we have
abused so often. But why not use them!

When a man is at his last resources, he does not care what weapons he
picks up.


46

_Nur für Schwindelfreie_.--To be proper, I ought to finish with a
moral. I ought to say to the reader that in spite of all I have said,
or perhaps _because of_ all I have said--for in conclusions, as you
are aware, "in spite of" is always interchangeable with "because of,"
particularly if the conclusion be drawn from many scattered data--well
then, because of all I have said, hope is not lost. Every destruction
leads to construction, sweet rest follows labour, dawn follows the
darkest hour, and so on and so on and so on--all the banalities with
which a writer reconciles his reader. But it is never too late for
reconciliation, and it is often too early. So why not postpone the
moral for a few years--even a few dozen years, God granting us the
length of life? Why make the inevitable "conclusion" at the end of
every book? I am almost certain that sooner or later I can promise the
reader all his heart desires. But not yet. He may, of course, dispense
with my consolations. What do promises matter, anyhow? especially when
neither reader nor writer can fulfil them. But if there is no escape,
if a writer is finally obliged to admit in everybody's hearing that the
secret desires of poor mankind may yet be realised, let "us at least
give the wretched writer a respite, let him postpone his confession
till old age_--usque ad infinitum_,... Meanwhile our motto "_Nur für
Schwindelfreie._" There are in the Alps narrow, precipitous paths where
only mountaineers may go, who feel no giddiness. Giddy-free! "Only
for the giddy-free," it says on the notice-board. He who is subject
to giddiness takes a broad, safe road, or sits away below and admires
the snowy summits. Is it inevitably necessary to mount up? Beyond the
snow-line are no fat pastures nor goldfields. They say that up there
is to be found the clue to the eternal mystery--but they say so many
things. We can't believe everything. He who is tired of the valleys,
loves climbing, and is not afraid to look down a precipice, and, most
of all, has nothing left in life but the "metaphysical craving," he
will certainly climb to the summits without asking what awaits him
there. He does not fear, he longs for giddiness. But he will hardly
call people after him: he doesn't want just anybody for a companion.
In such a case companions are not wanted at all, much less those
tender-footed ones who are used to every convenience, roads, street
lamps, guide-posts, careful maps which mark every change in the road
ahead. They will not help, only hinder. They will prove superfluous,
heavy ballast, which may not be thrown overboard. Fuss over them,
console them, promise them! Who would be bothered? Is it not better to
go one's way alone, and not only to refrain from enticing others to
follow, but frighten them off as much as possible, exaggerate every
danger and difficulty? In order that conscience may not prick too
hard--we who love high altitudes love a quiet conscience--let us find
a justification for their inactivity. Let us tell them they are the
best, the worthiest of people, really the salt of the earth. Let us
pay them every possible mark of respect. But since they are subject to
giddiness, they had better stay down. The upper Alpine ways, as any
guide will tell you, are _nur für Schwindelfreie_.




