IX.




CHAPTER IX

SUBJECTIVISM[267:1]


[Sidenote: Subjectivism Originally Associated with Relativism and
Scepticism.]

§ 126. When, in the year 1710, Bishop Berkeley maintained the thesis of
empirical idealism, having rediscovered it and announced it with a
justifiable sense of originality, he provoked a kind of critical
judgment that was keenly annoying if not entirely surprising to him. In
refuting the conception of material substance and demonstrating the
dependence of being upon mind, he at once sought, as he did repeatedly
in later years, to establish the world of practical belief, and so to
reconcile metaphysics and common-sense. Yet he found himself hailed as a
fool and a sceptic. In answer to an inquiry concerning the reception of
his book in London, his friend Sir John Percival wrote as follows:

     "I did but name the subject matter of your book of
     _Principles_ to some ingenious friends of mine and they
     immediately treated it with ridicule, at the same time
     refusing to read it, which I have not yet got one to do. A
     physician of my acquaintance undertook to discover your
     person, and argued you must needs be mad, and that you ought
     to take remedies. A bishop pitied you, that a desire of
     starting something new should put you upon such an
     undertaking. Another told me that you are not gone so far as
     another gentleman in town, who asserts not only that there is
     no such thing as Matter, but that we ourselves have no being
     at all."[268:2]

There can be no doubt but that the idea of the dependence of real things
upon their appearance to the individual is a paradox to common-sense. It
is a paradox because it seems to reverse the theoretical instinct
itself, and to define the real in those very terms which disciplined
thought learns to neglect. In the early history of thought the nature of
the thinker himself is recognized as that which is likely to distort
truth rather than that which conditions it. When the wise man, the
devotee of truth, first makes his appearance, his authority is
acknowledged because he has renounced himself. As witness of the
universal being he purges himself of whatever is peculiar to his own
individuality, or even to his human nature. In the aloofness of his
meditation he escapes the cloud of opinion and prejudice that obscures
the vision of the common man. In short, the element of belief dependent
upon the thinker himself is the dross which must be refined away in
order to obtain the pure truth. When, then, in the critical epoch of the
Greek sophists, Protagoras declares that there is no belief that is not
of this character, his philosophy is promptly recognized as scepticism.
Protagoras argues that sense qualities are clearly dependent upon the
actual operations of the senses, and that all knowledge reduces
ultimately to these terms.

     "The senses are variously named hearing, seeing, smelling;
     there is the sense of heat, cold, pleasure, pain, desire,
     fear, and many more which are named, as well as innumerable
     others which have no name; _with each of them there is born an
     object of sense_,--all sorts of colors born with all sorts of
     sight and sounds in like manner with hearing, and other
     objects with the other senses."[269:3]

If the objects are "born with" the senses, it follows that they are born
with and appertain to the individual perceiver.

     "Either show, if you can, that our sensations are not
     relative and individual, or, if you admit that they are
     individual, prove that this does not involve the consequence
     that the appearance becomes, or, if you like to say, is to the
     individual only."[270:4]

The same motif is thus rendered by Walter Pater in the Conclusion of his
"Renaissance":

     "At first sight experience seems to bury us under a flood of
     external objects, pressing upon us with a sharp and
     importunate reality, calling us out of ourselves in a thousand
     forms of action. But when reflexion begins to act upon those
     objects they are dissipated under its influence; the cohesive
     force seems suspended like a trick of magic; each object is
     loosed into a group of impressions--color, odor, texture--in
     the mind of the observer. . . . Experience, already reduced to
     a swarm of impressions, is ringed round for each one of us by
     that thick wall of personality through which no real voice has
     ever pierced on its way to us, or from us to that which we can
     only conjecture to be without. Every one of these impressions
     is the impression of the individual in his isolation, each
     mind keeping as a solitary prisoner its own dream of a world."

The Protagorean generalization is due to the reflection that all
experience is some individual experience, that no subject of discourse
escapes the imputation of belonging to some individual's private
history. The individual must start with his own experiences and ideas,
and he can never get beyond them, for he cannot see outside his own
vision, or even think outside his own mind. The scepticism of this
theory is explicit, and the formulas of Protagoras--the famous "_Man is
the measure of all things_," and the more exact formula, "_The truth is
what appears to each man at each time_"[271:5]--have been the articles
of scepticism throughout the history of thought.

[Sidenote: Phenomenalism and Spiritualism.]

§ 127. There is, therefore, nothing really surprising in the reception
accorded the "new philosophy" of Bishop Berkeley. A sceptical relativism
is the earliest phase of subjectivism, and its avoidance at once becomes
the most urgent problem of any philosophy which proposes to proceed
forth from this principle. And this problem Berkeley meets with great
adroitness and a wise recognition of difficulties. But his sanguine
temperament and speculative interest impel him to what he regards as the
extension of his first principle, the reintroduction of the conception
of substance under the form of spirit, and of the objective order of
nature under the form of the mind of God. In short, there are two
motives at work in him, side by side: the epistemological motive,
restricting reality to perceptions and thoughts, and the
metaphysical-religious motive, leading him eventually to the definition
of reality in terms of perceiving and thinking spirits. And from the
time of Berkeley these two principles, _phenomenalism_ and
_spiritualism_, have remained as distinct and alternating phases of
subjectivism. The former is its critical and dialectical conception, the
latter its constructive and practical conception.

[Sidenote: Phenomenalism as Maintained by Berkeley. The Problem
Inherited from Descartes and Locke.]

§ 128. As _phenomenalism_ has its classic statement and proof in the
writings of Berkeley, we shall do well to return to these. The fact that
this philosopher wished to be regarded as the prophet of common-sense
has already been mentioned. This purpose reveals itself explicitly in
the series of "Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous." The form in which
Berkeley here advances his thesis is further determined by the manner in
which the lines were drawn in his day of thought. The world of
enlightened public opinion was then threefold, consisting of God,
physical nature, and the soul. In the early years of the seventeenth
century Descartes had sharply distinguished between the two
substances--mind, with its attribute of thought; and body, with its
attribute of extension--and divided the finite world between them. God
was regarded as the infinite and sustaining cause of both. Stated in the
terms of epistemology, the object of clear thinking is the physical
cosmos, the subject of clear thinking the immortal soul. The realm of
perception, wherein the mind is subjected to the body, embarrasses the
Cartesian system, and has no clear title to any place in it. And without
attaching cognitive importance to this realm, the system is utterly
dogmatic in its epistemology.[273:6] For what one substance thinks, must
be assumed to be somehow true of another quite independent substance
without any medium of communication. Now between Descartes and Berkeley
appeared the sober and questioning "Essay Concerning Human
Understanding," by John Locke. This is an interesting combination (they
cannot be said to blend) of traditional metaphysics and revolutionary
epistemology. The universe still consists of God, the immortal thinking
soul, and a corporeal nature, the object of its thought. But, except for
certain proofs of God and self, knowledge is entirely reduced to the
perceptual type, to sensations, or ideas directly imparted to the mind
by the objects themselves. To escape dogmatism it is maintained that
the real is what is _observed to be present_. But Locke thinks the
qualities so discovered belong in part to the perceiver and in part to
the substance outside the mind. Color is a case of the former, a
"secondary quality"; and extension a case of the latter, a "primary
quality." And evidently the above empirical test of knowledge is not
equally well met in these two cases. When I see a red object I know that
red exists, for it is observed to be present, and I make no claim for it
beyond the present. But when I note that the red object is square, I am
supposed to know a property that will continue to exist in the object
after I have closed my eyes or turned to something else. Here my claim
exceeds my observation, and the empirical principle adopted at the
outset would seem to be violated. Berkeley develops his philosophy from
this criticism. His refutation of material substance is intended as a
full acceptance of the implications of the new empirical epistemology.
Knowledge is to be all of the perceptual type, where what is known is
directly presented; and, in conformity with this principle, being is to
be restricted to the content of the living pulses of experience.

[Sidenote: The Refutation of Material Substance.]

§ 129. Berkeley, then, beginning with the threefold world of Descartes
and of common-sense, proposes to apply Locke's theory of knowledge to
the discomfiture of corporeal nature. It was a radical doctrine, because
it meant for him and for his contemporaries the denial of all finite
objects outside the mind. But at the same time it meant a restoration of
the homogeneity of experience, the reëstablishment of the qualitative
world of every-day living, and so had its basis of appeal to
common-sense. The encounter between Hylas, the advocate of the
traditional philosophy, and Philonous, who represents the author
himself, begins with an exchange of the charge of innovation.

     _Hyl._ I am glad to find there was nothing in the accounts I
     heard of you.

     _Phil._ Pray, what were those?

     _Hyl._ You were represented, in last night's conversation, as
     one who maintained the most extravagant opinion that ever
     entered into the mind of man, to wit, that there is no such
     thing as _material substance_ in the world.

     _Phil._ That there is no such thing as what _philosophers_
     call _material substance_, I am seriously persuaded: but if I
     were made to see anything absurd or sceptical in this, I
     should then have the same reason to renounce this that I
     imagine I have now to reject the contrary opinion.

     _Hyl._ What! can anything be more fantastical, more repugnant
     to Common-Sense, or a more manifest piece of Scepticism, than
     to believe there is no such thing as _matter_?

     _Phil._ Softly, good Hylas. What if it should prove that you,
     who hold there is, are, by virtue of that opinion, a greater
     sceptic, and maintain more paradoxes and repugnances to
     Common-Sense, than I who believe no such thing?[276:7]

Philonous now proceeds with his case. Beginning by obtaining from Hylas
the admission that pleasure and pain are essentially relative and
subjective, he argues that sensations such as heat, since they are
inseparable from these feelings, must be similarly regarded. And he is
about to annex other qualities in turn to this core of subjectivity,
when Hylas enters a general demurrer:

     "Hold, Philonous, I now see what it was deluded me all this
     time. You asked me whether heat and cold, sweetness and
     bitterness, were not particular sorts of pleasure and pain; to
     which I answered simply that they were. Whereas I should have
     thus distinguished:--those qualities as perceived by us, are
     pleasures or pains; but not as existing in the external
     objects. We must not therefore conclude absolutely, that there
     is no heat in the fire, or sweetness in the sugar, but only
     that heat or sweetness, as perceived by us, are not in the
     fire or sugar."[276:8]

[Sidenote: The Application of the Epistemological Principle.]

§ 130. Here the argument touches upon profound issues. Philonous now
assumes the extreme empirical contention _that knowledge applies only to
its own psychological moment, that its object in no way extends beyond
that individual situation which we call the state of knowing_. The full
import of such an epistemology Berkeley never recognized, but he is
clearly employing it here, and the overthrow of Hylas is inevitable so
long as he does not challenge it or turn it against his opponent. This,
however, as a protagonist of Berkeley's own making, he fails to do, and
he plays into Philonous's hands by admitting that what is known only in
perception must for that reason _consist_ in perception. He frankly owns
"that it is vain to stand out any longer," that "colors, sounds, tastes,
in a word, all those termed _secondary qualities_, have certainly no
existence without the mind."[277:9]

Hylas has now arrived at the distinction between primary and secondary
qualities. "Extension, Figure, Solidity, Gravity, Motion, and Rest" are
the attributes of an external substance which is the cause of
sensations. But the same epistemological principle readily reduces these
also to dependence on mind, for, like the secondary qualities, their
content is given only in perception. Hylas is then driven to defend a
general material substratum, which is the cause of ideas, but to which
none of the definite content of these ideas can be attributed. In short,
he has put all the content of knowledge on the one side, and admitted
its inseparability from the perceiving spirit, and left the being of
things standing empty and forlorn on the other. This amounts, as
Philonous reminds him, to the denial of the reality of the known world.

     "You are therefore, by your principles, forced to deny the
     _reality_ of sensible things; since you made it to consist in
     an absolute existence exterior to the mind. That is to say,
     you are a downright sceptic. So I have gained my point, which
     was to show your principles led to Scepticism."[278:10]

[Sidenote: The Refutation of a Conceived Corporeal World.]

§ 131. Having advanced the direct empiricist argument for phenomenalism,
Berkeley now gives the rationalistic motive an opportunity to express
itself in the queries of Hylas as to whether there be not an "absolute
extension," somehow abstracted by thought from the relativities of
perception. Is there not at least a _conceivable_ world independent of
perception?

The answers of Philonous throw much light upon the Berkeleyan position.
He admits that thought is capable of separating the primary from the
secondary qualities in certain _operations_, but at the same time denies
that this is forming an idea of them as separate.

     "I acknowledge, Hylas, it is not difficult to form general
     propositions and reasonings about those qualities, without
     mentioning any other; and, in this sense, to consider or treat
     of them abstractedly. But, how doth it follow that, because I
     can pronounce the word _motion_ by itself, I can form the idea
     of it in my mind exclusive of body? or, because theorems may
     be made of extension and figures, without any mention of
     _great_ or _small_, or any other sensible mode or quality,
     that therefore it is possible such an abstract idea of
     extension, without any particular size or figure, or sensible
     quality, should be distinctly formed, and apprehended by the
     mind? Mathematicians treat of quantity, without regarding what
     other sensible qualities it is attended with, as being
     altogether indifferent to their demonstrations. But, when
     laying aside the words, they contemplate the bare ideas, I
     believe you will find, they are not the pure abstracted ideas
     of extension."[279:11]

Berkeley denies that we have ideas of pure extension or motion, because,
although we do actually _deal_ with these and find them intelligible, we
can never obtain a state of mind in which they appear as the content. He
applies this psychological test because of his adherence to the general
empirical postulate that knowledge is limited to the individual content
of its own individual states. "It is a universally received maxim," he
says, "that _everything which exists is particular_." Now the truth of
mathematical reckoning is not particular, but is valid wherever the
conditions to which it refers are fulfilled. Mathematical reckoning, if
it is to be particular, must be regarded as a particular act or state of
some thinker. Its truth must then be construed as relative to the
interests of the thinker, as a symbolism which has an instrumental
rather than a purely cognitive value. This conclusion cannot be disputed
short of a radical stand against the general epistemological principle
to which Berkeley is so far true, the principle that the reality which
is known in any state of thinking or perceiving is the state itself.

[Sidenote: The Transition to Spiritualism.]

§ 132. This concludes the purely phenomenalistic strain of Berkeley's
thought. He has taken the immediate apprehension of sensible objects in
a state of mind centring about the pleasure and pain of an individual,
to be the norm of knowledge. He has further maintained that knowledge
cannot escape the particularity of its own states. The result is that
the universe is composed of private perceptions and ideas. Strictly on
the basis of what has preceded, Hylas is justified in regarding this
conclusion as no less sceptical than that to which his own position had
been reduced; for while he had been compelled to admit that the real is
unknowable, Philonous has apparently defined the knowable as relative to
the individual. But the supplementary metaphysics which had hitherto
been kept in the background is now revealed. It is maintained that
though perceptions know no external world, they do nevertheless reveal a
spiritual substance of which they are the states. Although it has
hitherto been argued that the _esse_ of things is in their _percipi_,
this is now replaced by the more fundamental principle that the _esse_
of things is in their _percipere_ or _velle_. The real world consists
not in perceptions, but in perceivers.

[Sidenote: Further Attempts to Maintain Phenomenalism.]

§ 133. Now it is at once evident that the epistemological theory which
has been Berkeley's dialectical weapon in the foregoing argument is no
longer available. And those who have cared more for this theory than for
metaphysical speculation have attempted to stop at this point, and so to
construe phenomenalism as to make it self-sufficient on its own
grounds. Such attempts are so instructive as to make it worth our while
to review them before proceeding with the development of the
spiritualistic motive in subjectivism.

The world is to be regarded as made up of sense-perceptions, ideas, or
phenomena. What is to be accepted as the fundamental category which
gives to all of these terms their subjectivistic significance? So far
there seems to be nothing in view save the principle of relativity. The
type to which these were reduced was that of the peculiar or unsharable
experience best represented by an individual's pleasure and pain. But
relativity will not work as a general principle of being. It consigns
the individual to his private mind, and cannot provide for the validity
of knowledge enough even to maintain itself. Some other course, then,
must be followed. Perception may be given a psycho-physical definition,
which employs physical terms as fundamental;[282:12] but this flagrantly
contradicts the phenomenalistic first principle. Or, reality may be
regarded as so stamped with its marks as to insure the proprietorship of
thought. But this definition of certain objective entities of mind, of
beings attributed to intelligence because of their intrinsic
intelligibility, is inconsistent with empiricism, if indeed it does not
lead eventually to a realism of the Platonic type.[283:13] Finally, and
most commonly, the terms of phenomenalism have been retained after their
original meaning has been suffered to lapse. The "impressions" of Hume,
_e. g._, are the remnant of the Berkeleyan world with the spirit
stricken out. There is no longer any point in calling them impressions,
for they now mean only elements or qualities. As a consequence this
outgrowth of the Berkeleyanism epistemology is at present merging into a
realistic philosophy of experience.[283:14] Any one, then, of these
three may be the last state of one who undertakes to remain exclusively
faithful to the phenomenalistic aspect of Berkeleyanism, embodied in the
principle _esse est percipi_.

[Sidenote: Berkeley's Spiritualism. Immediate Knowledge of the
Perceiver.]

§ 134. Let us now follow the fortunes of the other phase of
subjectivism--that which develops the conception of the perceiver rather
than the perceived. When Berkeley holds that

     "all the choir of heaven and furniture of the Earth, in a
     word, all those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the
     world, have not any subsistence without a Mind,"

his thought has transcended the epistemology with which he overthrew the
conception of material substance, in two directions. For neither mind of
the finite type nor mind of the divine type is perceived. But the first
of these may yet be regarded as a direct empirical datum, even though
sharply distinguished from an object of perception. In the third
dialogue, Philonous thus expounds this new kind of knowledge:

     "I own I have properly no _idea_, either of God or any other
     spirit; for these being active, cannot be represented by
     things perfectly inert, as our ideas are. I do nevertheless
     know that I, who am a spirit or thinking substance, exist as
     certainly as I know my ideas exist. Farther, I know what I
     mean by the terms _I_ and _myself_; and I know this
     immediately or intuitively, though I do not perceive it as I
     perceive a triangle, a color, or a sound."[284:15]

The knowledge here provided for may be regarded as empirical because
the reality in question is an individual present in the moment of the
knowledge. Particular acts of perception are said directly to reveal not
only perceptual objects, but perceiving subjects. And the conception of
spiritual substance, once accredited, may then be extended to account
for social relations and to fill in the nature of God. The latter
extension, in so far as it attributes such further predicates as
universality and infinity, implies still a third epistemology, and
threatens to pass over into rationalism. But the knowledge of one's
fellow-men may, it is claimed, be regarded as immediate, like the
knowledge of one's self. Perceptual and volitional activity has a sense
for itself and also a sense for other like activity. The self is both
self-conscious and socially conscious in an immediate experience of the
same type.

[Sidenote: Schopenhauer's Spiritualism, or Voluntarism. Immediate
Knowledge of the Will.]

§ 135. But this general spiritualistic conception is developed with less
singleness of purpose in Berkeley than among the _voluntarists_ and
_panpsychists_ who spring from Schopenhauer, the orientalist, pessimist,
and mystic among the German Kantians of the early nineteenth century.
His great book, "Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung," opens with the
phenomenalistic contention that "the world is my idea." It soon appears,
however, that the "my" is more profoundly significant than the "idea."
Nature is my creation, due to the working within me of certain fixed
principles of thought, such as space, time, and causality. But nature,
just because it is my creation, is less than me: is but a manifestation
of the true being for which I must look _within_ myself. But this inner
self cannot be made an object of thought, for that would be only to
create another term of nature. The will itself, from which such creation
springs, is "that which is most immediate" in one's consciousness, and
"makes itself known in a direct manner in its particular acts." The term
_will_ is used by Schopenhauer as a general term covering the whole
dynamics of life, instinct and desire, as well as volition. It is that
sense of life-preserving and life-enhancing appetency which is the
conscious accompaniment of struggle. With its aid the inwardness of the
whole world may now be apprehended.

     "Whoever has now gained from all these expositions a knowledge
     _in abstracto_, and therefore clear and certain, of what
     everyone knows directly _in concreto_, _i. e._, as feeling, a
     knowledge that his will is the real inner nature of his
     phenomenal being, . . . and that his will is that which is
     most immediate in his consciousness, . . . will find that of
     itself it affords him the key to the knowledge of the inmost
     being of the whole of nature; for he now transfers it to all
     those phenomena which are not given to him, like his own
     phenomenal existence, both in direct and indirect knowledge,
     but only in the latter, thus merely one-sidedly as _idea_
     alone."[287:16]

The heart of reality is thus known by an "intuitive interpretation,"
which begins at home in the individual's own heart.

[Sidenote: Panpsychism.]

§ 136. The panpsychist follows the same course of reflection. There is
an outwardness and an inwardness of nature, corresponding to the
knower's body on the one hand, and his feeling or will on the other.
With this principle in hand one may pass down the whole scale of being
and discover no breach of continuity. Such an interpretation of nature
has been well set forth by a contemporary writer, who quotes the
following from the botanist, C. v. Naegeli:

     "Sensation is clearly connected with the reflex actions of
     higher animals. We are obliged to concede it to the other
     animals also, and we have no grounds for denying it to plants
     and inorganic bodies. The sensation arouses in us a condition
     of comfort and discomfort. In general, the feeling of
     pleasure arises when the natural impulses are satisfied, the
     feeling of pain when they are not satisfied. Since all
     material processes are composed of movements of molecules and
     elementary atoms, pleasure and pain must have their seat in
     these particles. . . . Thus the same mental thread runs
     through all material phenomena. The human mind is nothing but
     the highest development on our earth of the mental processes
     which universally animate and move nature."[288:17]

According to panpsychism, then, physical nature is the manifestation of
an _appetency or bare consciousness generalized from the thinker's
awareness of his most intimate self_. Such appetency or bare
consciousness is the essential or substantial state of that which
appears as physical nature.

[Sidenote: The Inherent Difficulty in Spiritualism. No Provision for
Objective Knowledge.]

§ 137. We must now turn to the efforts which this doctrine has made to
maintain itself against the sceptical trend of its own epistemology. For
precisely as in the case of phenomenalism its dialectical principle
threatens to be self-destructive. Immediate presence is still the test
of knowledge. But does not immediate presence connote relativity and
inadequacy, at best; an initial phase of knowledge that must be
supplemented and corrected before objective reality and valid truth are
apprehended? Does not the individuality of the individual thinker
connote the very maximum of error? Indeed, spiritualism would seem to
have exceeded even Protagoreanism itself, and to have passed from
scepticism to deliberate nihilism. The object of knowledge is no longer
even, as with the phenomenalist, the thinker's thought, but only his
_thinking_. And if the thinker's thought is relative to him, then the
thinker's act of thinking is the very vanishing-point of relativity, the
negative term of a negating relation. How is a real, a self-subsistent
world to be composed of such? Impelled by a half-conscious realization
of the hopelessness of this situation, the exponent of spiritualism has
sought to universalize his conception; to define an _absolute or
ultimate spirit_ other than the individual thinker, though known in and
through him. But it is clear that this development of spiritualism, like
all of the speculative procedure of subjectivism, threatens to exceed
the scope of the original principle of knowledge. There is a strong
presumption against the possibility of introducing a knowledge of God by
the way of the particular presentations of an individual consciousness.

[Sidenote: Schopenhauer's Attempt to Universalize Subjectivism.
Mysticism.]

§ 138. Schopenhauer must be credited with a genuine effort to accept the
metaphysical consequences of his epistemology. His epistemology, as we
have seen, defined knowledge as centripetal. The object of real
knowledge is identical with the subject of knowledge. If I am to know
the universal will, therefore, I must in knowing become that will. And
this Schopenhauer maintains. The innermost heart of the individual into
which he may retreat, even from his private will, is--the universal. But
there is another way of arriving at the same knowledge. In contemplation
I may become absorbed in principles and laws, rather than be diverted by
the particular spacial and temporal objects, until (and this is
peculiarly true of the æsthetic experience) my interest no longer
distinguishes itself, but coincides with truth. In other words, abstract
thinking and pure willing are not opposite extremes, but adjacent points
on the deeper or transcendent circle of experience. One may reach this
part of the circle by moving in either of two directions that at the
start are directly opposite: by turning in upon the subject or by
utterly giving one's self up to the object. Reality obtains no
definition by this means. Philosophy, for Schopenhauer, is rather a
programme for realizing the state in which I will the universal and know
the universal will. The final theory of knowledge, then, is mysticism,
reality directly apprehended in a supreme and incommunicable experience,
direct and vivid, like perception, and at the same time universal, like
thought. But the empiricism with which Schopenhauer began, the appeal to
a familiar experience of self as will, has meanwhile been forgotten. The
idea as object of my perception, and the will as its subject were in the
beginning regarded as common and verifiable items of experience. But
who, save the occasional philosopher, knows a universal will? Nor have
attempts to avoid mysticism, while retaining Schopenhauer's first
principle, been successful. Certain voluntarists and panpsychists have
attempted to do without the universal will, and define the world solely
in terms of the many individual wills. But, as Schopenhauer himself
pointed out, individual wills cannot be distinguished except in terms of
something other than will, such as space and time. The same is true if
for will there be substituted inner feeling or consciousness. Within
this category individuals can be distinguished only as points of view,
which to be comparable at all must contain common objects, or be
defined in terms of a system of relations like that of the physical
world or that of an ethical community. The conception of pure will or
pure feeling inevitably attaches to itself that of an undivided unity,
if for no other reason because there is no ground for distinction. And
such a unity, a will or consciousness that is no particular act or idea,
can be known only in the unique experience which mysticism provides.

[Sidenote: Objective Spiritualism.]

§ 139. The way of Schopenhauer is the way of one who adheres to the
belief that what the thinker knows must always be a part of himself, his
state or his activity. From this point of view the important element of
being, its very essence or substance, is not any definable nature but an
immediate relation to the knower. The consequence is that the universe
in the last analysis can only be defined as a supreme state or activity
into which the individual's consciousness may develop. Spiritualism has,
however, other interests, interests which may be quite independent of
epistemology. It is speculatively interested in a kind of being which it
defines as spiritual, and in terms of which it proposes to define the
universe. Such procedure is radically different from the
epistemological criticism which led Berkeley to maintain that the
_esse_ of objects is in their _percipi_, or Schopenhauer to maintain
that "the world is my idea," or that led both of these philosophers to
find a deeper reality in immediately intuited self-activity. For now it
is proposed to _understand_ spirit, discover its properties, and to
acknowledge it only where these properties appear. I may now know spirit
as an object; which in its properties, to be sure, is quite different
from matter, but which like matter is capable of subsisting quite
independently of my knowledge. This is a metaphysical spiritualism quite
distinct from epistemological spiritualism, and by no means easily made
consistent therewith. Indeed, it exhibits an almost irrepressible
tendency to overstep the bounds both of empiricism and subjectivism, an
historical connection with which alone justifies its introduction in the
present chapter.

[Sidenote: Berkeley's Conception of God as Cause, Goodness and Order.]

§ 140. To return again to the instructive example of Bishop Berkeley, we
find him proving God from the evidence of him in experience, or the need
of him to support the claims of experience.

     "But, whatever power I may have over my own thoughts, I find
     the ideas actually perceived by Sense have not a like
     dependence on _my_ will. When in broad daylight I open my
     eyes, it is not in my power to choose whether I shall see or
     no, or to determine what particular objects shall present
     themselves to my view: and so likewise as to the hearing and
     other senses; the ideas imprinted on them are not creatures of
     _my_ will. There is therefore some other Will or Spirit that
     produces them.

     The ideas of Sense are more strong, lively, and distinct than
     those of the Imagination; they have likewise a steadiness,
     order, and coherence, and are not excited at random, as those
     which are the effects of human wills often are, but in a
     regular train or series--the admirable connection whereof
     sufficiently testifies the wisdom and benevolence of its
     Author. Now the set rules, or established methods, wherein the
     Mind we depend on excites in us the ideas of Sense, are called
     _the laws of nature_."[294:18]

Of the attributes of experience here in question, independence or
"steadiness" is not regarded as _prima facie_ evidence of spirit, but
rather as an aspect of experience for which some cause is necessary. But
it is assumed that the power to "produce," with which such a cause must
be endowed, is the peculiar prerogative of spirit, and that this cause
gives further evidence of its spiritual nature, of its eminently
spiritual nature, in the orderliness and the goodness of its effects.

     "The force that produces, the intellect that orders, the
     goodness that perfects all things is the Supreme
     Being."[294:19]

That spirit is possessed of causal efficacy, Berkeley has in an earlier
passage proved by a direct appeal to the individual's sense of power.

     "I find I can excite ideas in my mind at pleasure, and vary
     and shift the scene as oft as I think fit. It is no more than
     _willing_, and straightway this or that idea arises in my
     fancy; and by the same power it is obliterated and makes way
     for another. This making and unmaking of ideas doth very
     properly denominate the mind active. Thus much is certain and
     grounded on experience: but when we talk of unthinking agents,
     or of exciting ideas exclusive of volition, we only amuse
     ourselves with words."[295:20]

Although Berkeley is here in general agreement with a very considerable
variety of philosophical views, it will be readily observed that this
doctrine tends to lapse into mysticism whenever it is retained in its
purity. Berkeley himself admitted that there was no "idea" of such
power. And philosophers will as a rule either obtain an idea
corresponding to a term or amend the term--always excepting the mystical
appeal to an inarticulate and indefinable experience. Hence pure power
revealed in an ineffable immediate experience tends to give place to
kinds of power to which some definite meaning may be attached. The
energy of physics, defined by measurable quantitative equivalence, is a
case in point. The idealistic trend is in another direction, power
coming to signify ethical or logical connection. Similarly, in the later
philosophy of Berkeley himself, God is known by the nature of his
activity rather than by the fact of his activity; and we are said "to
account for a thing, when we show that it is so best." God's power, in
short, becomes indistinguishable from his universality attended with the
attributes of goodness and orderliness. But this means that the analogy
of the human spirit, conscious of its own activity, is no longer the
basis of the argument. By the divine will is now meant ethical
principles, rather than the "here am I willing" of the empirical
consciousness. Similarly the divine mind is defined in terms of logical
principles, such as coherence and order, rather than in terms of the
"here am I thinking" of the finite knower himself. But enough has been
said to make it plain that this is no longer the stand-point of
empirio-idealism. Indeed, in his last philosophical writing, the
"Siris," Berkeley is so far removed from the principles of knowledge
which made him at once the disciple and the critic of Locke, as to
pronounce himself the devotee of Platonism and the prophet of
transcendentalism. The former strain appears in his conclusion that
"the _principles_ of science are neither objects of sense nor
imagination; and that intellect and reason are alone the sure guides to
truth."[297:21] His transcendentalism appears in his belief that such
principles, participating in the vital unity of the Individual Purpose,
constitute the meaning and so the substantial essence of the universe.

[Sidenote: The General Tendency of Subjectivism to Transcend Itself.]

§ 141. Such then are the various paths which lead from subjectivism to
other types of philosophy, demonstrating the peculiar aptitude of the
former for departing from its first principle. Beginning with the
relativity of all knowable reality to the individual knower, it
undertakes to conceive reality in one or the other of the terms of this
relation, as particular state of knowledge or as individual subject of
knowledge. But these terms develop an intrinsic nature of their own, and
become respectively _empirical datum_, and _logical_ or _ethical
principle_. In either case the subjectivistic principle of knowledge has
been abandoned. Those whose speculative interest in a definable
objective world has been less strong than their attachment to this
principle, have either accepted the imputation of scepticism, or had
recourse to the radical epistemological doctrine of mysticism.

[Sidenote: Ethical Theories. Relativism.]

§ 142. Since the essence of subjectivism is epistemological rather than
metaphysical, its practical and religious implications are various. The
ethical theories which are corollary to the tendencies expounded above,
range from extreme egoism to a mystical universalism. The close
connection between the former and relativism is evident, and the form of
egoism most consistent with epistemological relativism is to be found
among those same Sophists who first maintained this latter doctrine. If
we may believe Plato, the Sophists sought to create for their individual
pupils an _appearance_ of good. In the "Theaetetus," Socrates is
represented as speaking thus on behalf of Protagoras:

     "And I am far from saying that wisdom and the wise man have no
     existence; but I say that the wise man is he who makes the
     evils which are and appear to a man, into goods which are and
     appear to him. . . . I say that they (the wise men) are the
     physicians of the human body, and the husbandmen of
     plants--for the husbandmen also take away the evil and
     disordered sensations of plants, and infuse into them good and
     healthy sensations as well as true ones; and the wise and good
     rhetoricians make the good instead of the evil seem just to
     states; for whatever appears to be just and fair to a state,
     while sanctioned by a state, is just and fair to it; but the
     teacher of wisdom causes the good to take the place of the
     evil, both in appearance and in reality."[299:22]

As truth is indistinguishable from the appearance of truth to the
individual, so good is indistinguishable from a particular seeming good.
The supreme moral value according to this plan of life is the agreeable
feeling tone of that dream world to which the individual is forever
consigned. The possible perfection of an experience which is "reduced to
a swarm of impressions," and "ringed round" for each one of us by a
"thick wall of personality" has been brilliantly depicted in the passage
already quoted from Walter Pater, in whom the naturalistic and
subjectivistic motives unite.[299:23] If all my experience is strictly
my own, then my good must likewise be my own. And if all of my
experience is valid only in its instants of immediacy, then my best good
must likewise consist in some "exquisite passion," or stirring of the
senses.

[Sidenote: Pessimism and Self-denial.]

§ 143. But for Schopenhauer the internal world opens out into the
boundless and unfathomable sea of the universal will. If I retire from
the world upon my own private feelings, I am still short of the true
life, for I am asserting myself against the world. I should seek a sense
of unison with a world whose deeper heart-beats I may learn to feel and
adopt as the rhythm of my own. The folly of willing for one's private
self is the ground of Schopenhauer's pessimism.

     "All _willing_ arises from want, therefore from deficiency,
     and therefore from suffering. The satisfaction of a wish ends
     it; yet for one wish that is satisfied there remain at least
     ten which are denied. Further, the desire lasts long, the
     demands are infinite; the satisfaction is short and scantily
     measured out. But even the final satisfaction is itself only
     apparent; every satisfied wish at once makes room for a new
     one, both are illusions; the one is known to be so, the other
     not yet. No attained object of desire can give lasting
     satisfaction, but merely a fleeting gratification; it is like
     the alms thrown to the beggar, that keeps him alive to-day
     that his misery may be prolonged till the morrow. . . . The
     subject of willing is thus constantly stretched on the
     revolving wheel of Ixion, pours water into the sieve of the
     Danaids, is the ever-longing Tantalus."[300:24]

The escape from this torture and self-deception is possible through the
same mystical experience, the same blending with the universe that
conditions knowledge.

[Sidenote: The Ethics of Welfare.]

§ 144. But though pleasant dreaming be the most consistent practical
sequel to a subjectivistic epistemology, its _individualism_ presents
another basis for life with quite different possibilities of emphasis.
It may develop into an aggressive egoism of the type represented by the
sophist Thrasymachus, in his proclamation that "might is right, justice
the interest of the stronger."[301:25] But more commonly it is tempered
by a conception of social interest, and serves as the champion of action
against contemplation. The gospel of action is always individualistic.
It requires of the individual a sense of his independence, and of the
real virtue of his initiative. Hence those voluntarists who emphasize
the many individual wills and decline to reduce them, after the manner
of Schopenhauer, to a universal, may be said to afford a direct
justification of it. It is true that this practical realism threatens
the tenability of an epistemological idealism, but the two have been
united, and because of their common emphasis upon the individual such
procedure is not entirely inconsequential. Friedrich Paulsen, whose
panpsychism has already been cited, is an excellent case in point. The
only good, he maintains, is "welfare," the fulfilment of those natural
desires which both distinguish the individual and signify his
continuity with all grades of being.

     "The goal at which the will aims does not consist in a maximum
     of pleasurable feelings, but in the normal exercise of the
     vital functions for which the species is predisposed. In the
     case of man the mode of life is on the whole determined by the
     nature of the historical unity from which the individual
     evolves as a member. Here the objective content of life, after
     which the will strives, also enters into consciousness with
     the progressive evolution of presentation; the type of life
     becomes a conscious ideal of life."[302:26]

Here, contrary to the teaching of Schopenhauer, the good consists in
individual attainment, the extension and fulfilment of the _distinct_
interests that arise from the common fund of nature. To be and to do to
the uttermost, to realize the maximum from nature's investment in one's
special capacities and powers--this is indeed the first principle of a
morality of action.

[Sidenote: The Ethical Community.]

§ 145. But a type of ethics still further removed from the initial
relativism has been adopted and more or less successfully assimilated by
subjectivistic philosophies. Accepting Berkeley's spirits, with their
indefinite capacities, and likewise the stability of the ideal
principles that underlie a God-administered world, and morality becomes
the obedience which the individual renders to the law. The individual,
free to act in his own right, coöperates with the purposes of the
general spiritual community, whose laws are worthy of obedience though
not coercive. The recognition of such a spiritual citizenship, entailing
opportunities, duties, and obligations, rather than thraldom, partakes
of the truth as well as the inadequacy of common-sense.

[Sidenote: The Religion of Mysticism.]

§ 146. As for religion, at least two distinct practical appreciations of
the universe have been historically associated with this chapter in
philosophy. The one of these is the mysticism of Schopenhauer, the
religious sequel to a universalistic voluntarism. Schopenhauer's ethics,
his very philosophy, is religion. For the good and the true are alike
attainable only through identification with the Absolute Will. This
consummation of life, transcending practical and theoretical
differences, engulfing and effacing all qualities and all values, is
like the Nirvâna of the Orient--a positive ideal only for one who has
appraised the apparent world at its real value.

     "Rather do we freely acknowledge that what remains after the
     entire abolition of will is for all those who are still full
     of will certainly nothing; but, conversely, to those in whom
     the will has turned and has denied itself, this our world,
     which is so real, with all it's suns and milky-ways--is
     nothing."[304:27]

[Sidenote: The Religion of Individual Coöperation with God.]

§ 147. From the union of the two motives of voluntarism and
individualism springs another and a more familiar type of religion, that
of coöperative spiritual endeavor. In the religion of Schopenhauer the
soul must utterly lose itself for the sake of peace; here the soul must
persist in its own being and activity for the sake of the progressive
goodness of the world. For Schopenhauer God is the universal solution,
in which all motions cease and all differences disappear; here God is
the General of moral forces. The deeper and more significant universe is

     "a society of rational agents, acting under the eye of
     Providence, concurring in one design to promote the common
     benefit of the whole, and conforming their actions to the
     established laws and order of the Divine parental wisdom:
     wherein each particular agent shall not consider himself
     apart, but as the member of a great City, whose author and
     founder is God: in which the civil laws are no other than the
     rules of virtue and the duties of religion: and where
     everyone's true interest is combined with his duty."[304:28]

But so uncompromising an optimism is not essential to this religion.
Its distinction lies rather in its acceptance of the manifest plurality
of souls, and its appeal to the faith that is engendered by
service.[305:29] As William James has said:

     "Even God's being is sacred from ours. To coöperate with his
     creation by the best and rightest response seems all he wants
     of us. In such coöperation with his purposes, not in any
     chimerical speculative conquest of him, not in any theoretical
     drinking of him up, must lie the real meaning of our
     destiny."[305:30]


FOOTNOTES:

[267:1] PRELIMINARY NOTE. By _Subjectivism_ is meant that system of
philosophy which construes the universe in accordance with the
epistemological principle that _all knowledge is of its own states or
activities_. In so far as subjectivism reduces reality to _states of
knowledge_, such as _perceptions_ or _ideas_, it is _phenomenalism_. In
so far as it reduces reality to a more _internal active principle_ such
as _spirit_ or _will_, it is _spiritualism_.

[268:2] Berkeley: _Complete Works_, Vol. I, p. 352. Fraser's edition.

[269:3] Plato: _Theaetetus_, 156. Translation by Jowett. The italics are
mine.

[270:4] Plato: _Op. cit._, 166.

[271:5] ἀληθὲς ὃ ἑκάστῳ ἑκάστοτε δοκεῖ.

[273:6] For another issue out of this situation, cf. §§ 185-187.

[276:7] Berkeley: _Op. cit._, Vol. I, pp. 380-381.

[276:8] _Ibid._, p. 389.

[277:9] _Ibid._, p. 397.

[278:10] _Ibid._, p. 418.

[279:11] _Ibid._, pp. 403-404.

[282:12] Cf. Pearson: _Grammar of Science_, Chap. II. See above, § 118.

[283:13] See Chap. XI. Cf. also § 140.

[283:14] The same may be said of the "permanent possibilities of
sensation," proposed by J. S. Mill. Such possibilities outside of actual
perception are either nothing or things such as they are known to be
_in_ perception. In either case they are not perceptions.

In Ernst Mach's _Analysis of Sensations_, the reader will find an
interesting transition from sensationalism to realism through the
substitution of the term _Bestandtheil_ for _Empfindung_. (See
Translation by Williams, pp. 18-20.) See below, § 207.

[284:15] Berkeley: _Op. cit._, p. 447.

[287:16] Schopenhauer: _The World as Will and Idea_. Translation by
Haldane and Kemp, Vol. I, p. 141.

[288:17] Quoted from Naegeli: _Die Mechanisch-physiologische Theorie der
Abstammungslehre_, by Friedrich Paulsen, in his _Introduction to
Philosophy_. Translation by Thilly, p. 103.

[294:18] Berkeley: _Op. cit._, p. 273.

[294:19] _Op. cit._, Vol. I, pp. 272-273.

[295:20] _Op. cit._, Vol. III, p. 278.

[297:21] _Op. cit._, Vol. III, p. 249.

[299:22] Plato: _Theaetetus_, 167. Translation by Jowett.

[299:23] See § 121.

[300:24] Schopenhauer: _Op. cit._ Translation by Haldane and Kemp, Vol.
I, pp. 253-254.

[301:25] See Plato: _Republic_, Bk. I, 338.

[302:26] Paulsen: _Op. cit._, p. 423.

[304:27] Schopenhauer: _Op. cit._ Translation by Haldane and Kemp, p.
532.

[304:28] Berkeley: _Op. cit._, Vol. II, p. 138.

[305:29] For an interesting characterization of this type of religion,
cf. Royce: _Spirit of Modern Philosophy_, p. 46.

[305:30] James: _The Will to Believe_, p. 141.




