CHAPTER IV

THE PHILOSOPHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF RELIGION


[Sidenote: Résumé of Psychology of Religion.]

§ 28. It has been maintained that religion is closely analogous to one's
belief in the disposition toward one's self of men or communities. In
the case of religion this disposition is attributed to the more or less
vaguely conceived residual environment that is recognized as lying
outside of the more familiar natural and social relations. After the
rise of science this residual environment tends to be conceived as a
unity which is ultimate or fundamental, but for the religious
consciousness it is more commonly regarded as a general source of
influence practically worthy of consideration. Such a belief, like all
belief, is vitally manifested, with such emphasis upon action, feeling,
or intellection as temperament and mood may determine.

[Sidenote: Religion Means to be True.]

§ 29. But if the psychology of belief is the proper starting-point for a
description of the religious experience, it is none the less suggestive
of the fact that religion, just because it _is_ belief, is not wholly a
matter for psychology. For religion _means to be true_, and thus submits
itself to valuation as a case of knowledge. The psychological study of
religion is misleading when accepted as a substitute for philosophical
criticism. The religious man takes his religion not as a narcotic, but
as an enlightenment. Its subjective worth is due at any rate in part to
the supposition of its objective worth. As in any case of insight, that
which warms the heart must have satisfied the mind. The religious
experience purports to be the part of wisdom, and to afford only such
happiness as increasing wisdom would confirm. And the charm of truth
cannot survive its truthfulness. Hence, though religion may be
described, it cannot be justified, from the stand-point of therapeutics.
Were such the case it would be the real problem of religious leaders to
find a drug capable of giving a constantly pleasant tone to their
patient's experience.[83:1] There would be no difference between priests
and physicians who make a specialty of nervous diseases, except that the
former would aim at a more fundamental and perpetual suggestion of
serenity. Now no man wants to be even a blessed fool. He does not want
to dwell constantly in a fictitious world, even if it be after his own
heart. He may from the cynical point of view actually do so, but if he
be religious he thinks it is reality, and is satisfied only in so far as
he thinks so. He regards the man who has said in his heart that there is
no God as the fool, and not because he may have to suffer for it, but
because he is cognitively blind to the real nature of things. Piety, on
the other hand, he regards as the standard experience, the most
veracious life. Hence, it is not an accident that religion has had its
creeds and its controversies, its wars with science and its appeals to
philosophy. The history of these affairs shows that religion commonly
fails to understand the scope of its own demand for truth; but they have
issued from the deep conviction that one's religion is, implicitly, at
least, in the field of truth; that there are theoretical judgments whose
truth would justify or contradict it.

This general fact being admitted, there remains the task to which the
present discussion addresses itself, that of defining the kind of
_theoretical judgment_ implied in religion, and the relation to this
central cognitive stem of its efflorescences of myth, theology, and
ritual. It is impossible to separate the stem and the efflorescence, or
to determine the precise spot at which destruction of the tissue would
prove fatal to the plant, but it is possible to obtain some idea of the
relative vitality of the parts.

[Sidenote: Religion Means to be Practically True. God is a Disposition
from which Consequences May Rationally be Expected.]

§ 30. The difficulty of reaching a definite statement in this matter is
due to the fact that the truth in which any religious experience centres
is a practical and not a scientific truth. A practical truth does not
commit itself to any single scientific statement, and can often survive
the overthrow of that scientific statement in which at any given time it
has found expression. In other words, an indefinite number of scientific
truths are compatible with a single practical truth. An instance of this
is the consistency with my expectation of the alternation of day and
night, of either the Ptolemaic or Copernican formulation of the solar
system. Now expectation that the sun will rise to-morrow is an excellent
analogue of my religious belief. Celestial mechanics is as relevant to
the one as metaphysics to the other. Neither is overthrown until a
central practical judgment is discredited, and either could remain true
through a very considerable alteration of logical definition; but
neither is on this account exempt from theoretical responsibility. In so
far as religion deliberately enters the field of science, and defines
its formularies with the historical or metaphysical method, this
difficulty does not, of course, exist. Grant that the years of
Methuselah's life, or the precise place and manner of the temptation of
Jesus, or the definition of Christ in the terms of the Athanasian Creed,
are constitutive of Christianity, and the survival of that religion will
be determined by the solution of ordinary problems of historical or
metaphysical research. But the Christian will very properly claim that
his religion is only externally and accidentally related to such
propositions, since they are never or very rarely intended in his
experience. As religious he is occupied with Christ as his saviour or
with God as his protector and judge. The history of Jesus or the
metaphysics of God essentially concern him only in so far as they may or
may not invalidate this relationship. He cares only for the power and
disposition of the divine, and these are affected by history and
metaphysics only in so far as he has definitely put them to such proof.

For my religion is my sense of a practical situation, and only when
that has been proved to be folly has my religion become untrue. My God
is my practical faith, my plan of salvation. My religion is overthrown
if I am convinced that I have misconceived the situation and mistaken
what I should do to be saved. The conception of God is very simple
practically, and very complex theoretically, a fact that confirms its
practical genesis. My conception of God contains _an idea of my own
interests_, _an idea of the disposition of the universe toward my
interests_, and _some working plan for the reconciliation of these two
terms_. These three elements form a practical unity, but each is capable
of emphasis, and a religion may be transformed through the modification
of any one of them. It appears, then, as has always been somewhat
vaguely recognized, that the truth of religion is ethical as well as
metaphysical or scientific. My religion will be altered by a change in
my conception of what constitutes my real interest, a change in my
conception of the fundamental causes of reality, or a change in my
conception of the manner in which my will may or may not affect these
causes. God is neither an entity nor an ideal, but always a relation of
entity to ideal: _reality regarded from the stand-point of its
favorableness or unfavorableness to human life, and prescribing for the
latter the propriety of a certain attitude_.

[Sidenote: Historical Examples of Religious Truth and Error. The
Religion of Baal.]

§ 31. The range of historical examples is limitless, but certain of
these are especially calculated to emphasize the application of a
criterion to religion. Such is the case with Elijah's encounter with the
prophets of Baal, as narrated in the Old Testament.

     "And Elijah came near unto all the people, and said, How long
     halt ye between two opinions? If Yahweh be God, follow him:
     but if Baal, then follow him. . . . And call ye on the name of
     your god, and I will call on the name of Yahweh: and the God
     that answereth by fire, let him be God. . . . And Elijah said
     unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for
     yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on
     the name of your god, but put no fire under. And they took the
     bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called
     on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O
     Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that
     answered. . . . And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah
     mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he
     is musing, or he is gone aside, or he is in a journey, or
     peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked. And they cried
     aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and
     lances, till the blood gushed out upon them. . . . But there
     was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that
     regarded."[88:2]

The religion of the followers of Baal here consists in a belief in the
practical virtue of a mode of address and form of ritual associated with
the traditions and customs of a certain social group. The prophets of
this cult agree to regard the experiment proposed by Elijah as a crucial
test, and that which is disproved from its failure is a plan of action.
These prophets relied upon the presence of a certain motivity, from
which a definite response could be evoked by an appeal which they were
peculiarly able to make; but though "they prophesied until the time of
the offering of the evening oblation," there was none that regarded.

[Sidenote: Greek Religion.]

§ 32. An equally familiar and more instructive example is the refutation
of the Greek national religion by Lucretius. The conception of life
which Lucretius finds unwarranted is best depicted in Homer. There we
hear of a society composed of gods and men. Though the gods, on the one
hand, have their own history, their affairs are never sharply sundered
from those of men, who, on the other hand, must constantly reckon with
them, gauge their attitude, and seek their favor by paying tribute to
their individual humors and preferences. In the Ninth Book of the
"Iliad," Phoenix addresses himself to the recalcitrant Achilles as
follows:

                         "It fits not one that moves
     The hearts of all, to live unmov'd, and succor hates for loves.
     The Gods themselves are flexible; whose virtues, honors, pow'rs,
     Are more than thine, yet they will bend their breasts as we bend
         ours.
     Perfumes, benign devotions, savors of offerings burn'd,
     And holy rites, the engines are with which their hearts are turn'd,
     By men that pray to them."[90:3]

Here is a general recognition of that which makes sacrifice rational. It
is because he conceives this presupposition to be mistaken, that
Lucretius declares the practices and fears which are founded upon it to
be folly. It is the same with all that is practically based upon the
expectation of a life beyond the grave. The correction of the popular
religion is due in his opinion to that true view of the world taught by
Epicurus, whose memory Lucretius thus invokes at the opening of the
Third Book of the "De Rerum Natura":

     "Thee, who first wast able amid such thick darkness to raise
     on high so bright a beacon and shed a light on the true
     interests of life, thee I follow, glory of the Greek race,
     and plant now my footsteps firmly fixed in thy imprinted
     marks. . . . For soon as thy philosophy issuing from a
     godlike intellect has begun with loud voice, to proclaim the
     nature of things, the terrors of the mind are dispelled, the
     walls of the world part asunder, I see things in operation
     throughout the whole void: the divinity of the gods is
     revealed and their tranquil abodes which neither winds do
     shake nor clouds drench with rains nor snow congealed by sharp
     frost harms with hoary fall: an ever cloudless ether
     o'ercanopies them, and they laugh with light shed largely
     round. Nature too supplies all their wants and nothing ever
     impairs their peace of mind. But on the other hand the
     Acherusian quarters[91:4] are nowhere to be seen, though earth
     is no bar to all things being descried, which are in operation
     underneath our feet throughout the void."[91:5]

In another passage, after describing the Phrygian worship of Cybele, he
comments as follows:

     "All which, well and beautifully as it is set forth and told,
     is yet widely removed from true reason. For the nature of gods
     must ever in itself of necessity enjoy immortality together
     with supreme repose, far removed and withdrawn from our
     concerns; since exempt from every pain, exempt from all
     dangers, strong in its own resources, not wanting aught of us,
     it is neither gained by favors nor moved by anger. . . . The
     earth however is at all time without feeling, and because it
     receives into it the first-beginnings of many things, it
     brings them forth in many ways into the light of the
     sun."[91:6]

If the teaching of Epicurus be true it is evident that those who
offered hecatombs with the idea that they were thereby mitigating anger,
or securing special dispensation, were playing the fool. They were
appealing to a fictitious motivity, one not grounded in "the nature of
things." To one for whom the walls of the world had parted asunder, such
a procedure was no longer possible; though he might choose to "call the
sea Neptune" and reverence the earth as "mother of the gods."[92:7]

[Sidenote: Judaism and Christianity.]

§ 33. The history of religion contains no more impressive and dramatic
chapter than that which records the development of the religion of the
Jews. Passing over its obscure beginnings in the primitive Semitic cult,
we find this religion first clearly defined as tribal self-interest
sanctioned by Yahweh.[92:8] God's interest in his chosen people
determines the prosperity of him who practices the social virtues.

     "The name of Yahweh is a strong tower: the righteous runneth
     into it, and is safe."

     "He that is steadfast in righteousness shall attain unto
     life."

     "To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to Yahweh than
     sacrifice."[93:9]

But in time it is evident to the believer that his experience does not
bear out this expectation. Neither as a Jew nor as a righteous man does
he prosper more than his neighbor. He comes, therefore, to distrust the
virtue of his wisdom.

     "Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light
     excelleth darkness. The wise man's eyes are in his head, and
     the fool walketh in darkness: and yet I perceived that one
     event happeneth to them all. Then said I in my heart, As it
     happeneth to the fool, so will it happen even to me; and why
     was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also
     was vanity. For of the wise man, even as of the fool, there is
     no remembrance forever; seeing that in the days to come all
     will have been already forgotten. And how doth the wise man
     die even as the fool! So I hated life; because the work that
     is wrought under the sun was grievous unto me: for all is
     vanity and a striving after wind."[93:10]

It is evident that he who expects the favor of fortune in return for
his observance of precept is mistaken. The "work that is wrought under
the sun" makes no special provision for him during his lifetime. Unless
the cry of vanity is to be the last word there must be a
reinterpretation of the promise of God. This appears in the new ideal of
patient submission, and the chastened faith that expects only the love
of God. And those whom God loves He will not forsake. They will come to
their own, if not here, then beyond, according to His inscrutable but
unswerving plan.

     "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a
     contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise."

     "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth
     eternity, whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy
     place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
     to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
     the contrite ones."[94:11]

In this faith Judaism merges into Christianity.[94:12] In the whole
course of this evolution God is regarded as the friend of his people,
but his people learn to find a new significance in his friendship. That
which is altered is the conduct which that friendship requires and the
expectation which it determines. The practical ideal which the
relationship sanctions, changes gradually from that of prudence to that
of goodness for its own sake. God, once an instrument relevant to human
temporal welfare, has come to be an object of disinterested service.

No such transformation as this was absolutely realized during the period
covered by the writings of the Old Testament, nor has it even yet been
realized in the development of Christianity. But the evolution of both
Judaism and Christianity has taken this direction. The criterion of this
evolution is manifestly both ethical and metaphysical. A Christian avows
that he rates purity of character above worldly prosperity, so that the
former cannot properly be prized for the sake of the latter.
Furthermore, he shares more or less unconsciously such philosophical and
scientific opinions as deny truth to the conception of special
interferences and dispensations from a supernatural agency. Therefore he
looks for no fire from heaven to consume his sacrifice. But his religion
is nevertheless a practical expectation. He believes that God is good,
and that God loves him and sustains him. He believes that there obtains
between himself, in so far as good, and the universe _sub specie
eternitatis_, a real sympathy and reciprocal reenforcement. He believes
that he secures through the profoundly potent forces of the universe
that which he regards as of most worth; and that somewhat is added to
these forces by virtue of his consecration. The God of the Christians
cannot be defined short of some such account as this, inclusive of an
ideal, an attitude, and an expectation. In other words the God of the
Christians is to be known only in terms of the Christlike outlook upon
life, in which the disciple is taught to emulate the master. When moral
and intellectual development shall have discredited either its scale of
values, or its conviction that cosmical events are in the end determined
in accordance with that scale of values, then Christianity must either
be transformed, or be untenable for the wise man. If we have conceived
the essence of Christianity too broadly or vaguely, it does not much
matter for our present purposes. Its essence is, at any rate, some such
inwardness of life resolving ideality and reality into one, and drawing
upon objective truth only to the extent required for the confirming of
that relation.

[Sidenote: The Cognitive Factor in Religion.]

§ 34. We conclude, then, our attempt to emphasize the cognitive factor
in religion, with the thesis that every religion centres in a practical
secret of the universe. _To be religious is to believe that a certain
correlation of forces, moral and factual, is in reality operative, and
that it determines the propriety and effectiveness of a certain type of
living. Whatever demonstrates the futility, vanity, or self-deception of
this living, discredits the religion. And, per contra, except as they
define or refute such practical truth, religion is not essentially
concerned with theoretical judgments._

[Sidenote: The Place of Imagination in Religion.]

§ 35. But neither religion nor any other human interest consists in
essentials. Such a practical conviction as that which has been defined
inevitably flowers into a marvelous complexity, and taps for its
nourishment every spontaneity of human nature. If it be said that only
the practical conviction is essential, this is not the same as to say
that all else is superfluous. There may be no single utterance that my
religion could not have spared, and yet were I to be altogether dumb my
religion would, indeed, be as nothing. For if I believe, I accept a
presence in my world, which as I live will figure in my dreams, or in my
thoughts, or in my habits. And each of these expressions of myself will
have a truth if it do but bear out my practical acceptance of that
presence. The language of religion, like that of daily life, is not the
language of science except it take it upon itself to be so. There is
scarcely a sentence which I utter in my daily intercourse with men which
is not guilty of transgressions against the canons of accurate and
definite thinking. Yet if I deceive neither myself nor another, I am
held to be truthful, even though my language deal with chance and
accident, material purposes and spiritual causes, and though I vow that
the sun smiles or the moon lets down her hair into the sea. Science is a
special interest in the discovery of unequivocal and fixed conceptions,
and employs its terms with an unalterable connotation. But no such
algebra of thought is indispensable to life or conversation, and its
lack is no proof of error. Such is the case also with that eminently
living affair, religion. I may if I choose, and I will if my reasoning
powers be at all awakened, be a theologian. But theology, like science,
is a special intellectual spontaneity. St. Thomas, the master
theologian, did not glide unwittingly from prayer into the _quæstiones_
of the "Summa Theologiæ," but turned to them as to a fresh adventure.
Theology is inevitable, because humanly speaking adventure is
inevitable. For man, with his intellectual spontaneity, every object is
a problem; and did he not seek sooner or later to define salvation,
there would be good reason to believe that he did not practically reckon
with any. But this is _similarly_ and _independently_ true of the
imagination, the most familiar means with which man clothes and vivifies
his convictions, the exuberance with which he plays about them and
delights to confess them. The imagination of religion, contributing what
Matthew Arnold called its "poetry and eloquence," does not submit itself
to such canons as are binding upon theology or science, but exists and
flourishes in its own right.

The indispensableness to religion of the imagination is due to that
faculty's power of realizing what is not perceptually present. Religion
is not interested in the apparent, but in the secret essence or the
transcendent universal. And yet this interest is a practical one.
Imagination may introduce one into the vivid presence of the secret or
the transcendent. It is evident that the religious imagination here
coincides with poetry. For it is at least one of the interests of poetry
to cultivate and satisfy a sense for the universal; to obtain an
immediate experience or appreciation that shall have the vividness
without the particularism of ordinary perception. And where a poet
elects so to view the world, we allow him as a poet the privilege, and
judge him by the standards to which he submits himself. That upon which
we pass judgment is the _fitness of his expression_. This expression is
not, except in the case of the theoretical mystic, regarded as
constituting the most valid form of the idea, but is appreciated
expressly for its fulfilment of the condition of immediacy. The same
sort of critical attitude is in order with the fruits of the religious
imagination. These may or may not fulfil enough of the requirements of
that art to be properly denominated poetry; but like poetry they are the
translation of ideas into a specific language. They must not, therefore,
be judged as though they claimed to excel in point of validity, but only
in point of consistency with the context of that language. And _the
language of religion is the language of the practical life_. Such
translation is as essential to an idea that is to enter into the
religious experience, as translation into terms of immediacy is
essential to an idea that is to enter into the appreciative
consciousness of the poet. No object can find a place in my religion
until it is conjoined with my purposes and hopes; until it is taken for
granted and acted upon, like the love of my friends, or the courses of
the stars, or the stretches of the sea.

[Sidenote: The Special Functions of the Religious Imagination.]

§ 36. The religious imagination, then, is to be understood and justified
as that which brings the objects of religion within the range of living.
The central religious object, as has been seen, is an _attitude_ of the
residuum or totality of things. To be religious one must have a sense
for the _presence of an attitude_, like his sense for the presence of
his human fellows, with all the added appreciation that is proper in the
case of an object that is unique in its mystery or in its majesty. It
follows that the religious imagination fulfils its function in so far as
it provides the object of religion with properties similar to those
which lend vividness and reality to the normal social relations.

The presence of one's fellows is in part the perceptual experience of
their bodies. To this there corresponds in religion some extraordinary
or subtle appearance. The gods may in visions or dreams be met with in
their own proper embodiments; or, as is more common, they may be
regarded as present for practical purposes: in some inanimate object,
as in the case of the fetish; in some animal species, as in the case of
the totem; in some place, as in the case of the shrine; or even in some
human being, as in the case of the inspired prophet and miracle worker.
In more refined and highly developed religions the medium of God's
presence is less specific. He is perceived with

                         "--a sense sublime
     Of something far more deeply interfused,
     Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
     And the round ocean and the living air,
     And the blue sky, and in the mind of man."

God is here found in an interpretation of the common and the natural,
rather than in any individual and peculiar embodiment. And here the
poet's appreciation, if not his art, is peculiarly indispensable.

But, furthermore, his fellows are inmates of "the household of man" in
that he knows their history. They belong to the temporal context of
actions and events. Similarly, the gods must be historical. The sacred
traditions or books of religion are largely occupied with this history.
The more individual and anthropomorphic the gods, the more local and
episodic will be the account of their affairs. In the higher religions
the acts of God are few and momentous, such as creation or special
providence; or they are identical with the events of nature and human
history when these are _construed_ as divine. To find God in this latter
way requires an interpretation of the course of events in terms of some
moral consistency, a faith that sees some purpose in their evident
destination.

There is still another and a more significant way in which men recognize
one another: the way of address and conversation. And men have
invariably held a similar intercourse with their gods. To this category
belong communion and prayer, with all their varieties of expression. I
have no god until I address him. This will be the most direct evidence
of what is at least from my point of view a social relation. There can
be no general definition of the form which this address will take. There
may be as many special languages, as many attitudes, and as much
playfulness and subtlety of symbolism as in human intercourse. But, on
the other hand, there are certain utterances that are peculiarly
appropriate to religion. In so far as he regards his object as endowed
with both power and goodness the worshipper will use the language of
adoration; and the sense of his dependence will speak in terms of
consecration and thanksgiving.

     "O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee:
      My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee,
      In a dry and weary land, where no water is.
      So have I looked upon thee in the sanctuary,
      To see thy power and thy glory.
      For thy loving-kindness is better than life;
      My lips shall praise thee."

These are expressions of a hopeful faith; but, on the other hand, God
may be addressed in terms of hatred and distrust.

     "Who is most wretched in this dolorous place?
      I think myself; yet I would rather be
      My miserable self than He, than He
      Who formed such creatures to his own disgrace.

     "The vilest thing must be less vile than Thou
      From whom it had its being, God and Lord!
      Creator of all woe and sin! abhorred,
      Malignant and implacable."[104:13]

In either case there may be an indefinite degree of hyperbole. The
language of love and hate, of confidence and despair, is not the
language of description. In this train of the religious consciousness
there is occasion for whatever eloquence man can feel, and whatever
rhetorical luxuriance he can utter.

[Sidenote: The Relation between Imagination and Truth in Religion.]

§ 37. Such considerations as these serve to account for the exercise and
certain of the fruits of the religious imagination, and to designate the
general criterion governing its propriety. But _how is one to determine
the boundary between the imaginative and the cognitive_? It is commonly
agreed that what religion says and does is not all intended literally.
But when is expression of religion only poetry and eloquence, and when
is it matter of conviction? If we revert again to the cognitive aspect
of religion, it is evident that there is but one test to apply:
_whatever either fortifies or misleads the will is literal conviction_.
This test cannot be applied absolutely, because it can properly be
applied only to the intention of an individual experience. However I may
express my religion, that which I express, is, we have seen, an
expectation. The degree to which I literally mean what I say is then the
degree to which it determines my expectations. Whatever adds no item to
these expectations, but only recognizes and vitalizes them, is pure
imagination. But it follows that it is entirely impossible from direct
inspection to define any given _expression_ of religious experience as
myth, or to define the degree to which it is myth. It submits to such
distinctions only when viewed from the stand-point of the concrete
religious experience which it expresses. Any such given expression could
easily be all imagination to one, and all conviction to another.
Consider the passage which follows:

     "And I saw the heaven opened; and behold, a white horse, and
     he that sat thereon, called Faithful and True; and in
     righteousness he doth judge and make war. And his eyes are a
     flame of fire, and upon his head are many diadems; and he hath
     a name written, which no one knoweth but he himself. And he is
     arrayed in a garment sprinkled with blood: and his name is
     called The Word of God."[106:14]

Is this all rhapsody, or is it in part true report? There is evidently
no answer to the question so conceived. But if it were to express my own
religious feeling it would have some specific proportion of literal and
metaphorical significance, according to the degree to which its detail
contributes different practical values to me. It might then be my
guide-book to the heavens, or only my testimony to the dignity and
mystery of the function of Christ.

The development of religion bears in a very important way upon this last
problem. The factor of imagination has undoubtedly come to have a more
clearly recognized role in religion. There can be no doubt that what we
now call myths were once beliefs, and that what we now call poetry was
once history. If we go back sufficiently far we come to a time when the
literal and the metaphorical were scarcely distinguishable, and this
because science had not emerged from the early animistic extension of
social relations. Men _meant_ to address their gods as they addressed
their fellows, and expected them to hear and respond, as they looked for
such reactions within the narrower circle of ordinary intercourse. The
advance of science has brought into vogue a description of nature that
inhibits such expectations. The result has been that men, continuing to
use the same terms, essentially expressive as they are of a practical
relationship, have come to regard them as only a general expression of
their attitude. The differences of content that are in excess of factors
of expectation remain as poetry and myth. On the other hand, it is
equally possible, if not equally common, for that which was once
imagined to come to be believed. Such a transformation is, perhaps,
normally the case when the inspired utterance passes from its author to
the cult. The prophets and sweet singers are likely to possess an
exuberance of imagination not appreciated by their followers; and for
this reason almost certainly misunderstood. For these reasons it is
manifestly absurd to fasten the name of myth or the name of creed upon
any religious utterance whatsoever, unless it be so regarded from the
stand-point of the personal religion which it originally expressed, or
unless one means by so doing to define it as an expression of his own
religion. He who defines "the myth of creation," or "the poetical story
of Samson," as parts of the pre-Christian Judaic religion, exhibits a
total loss of historical sense. The distinction between cognition and
fancy does not exist among objects, but only in the _intending_
experience; hence, for me to attach my own distinction to any individual
case of belief, viewed apart from the believer, is an utterly confusing
projection of my own personality into the field of my study.

[Sidenote: The Philosophy Implied in Religion and in Religions.]

§ 38. Only after such considerations as these are we qualified to attack
that much-vexed question as to whether religion deals invariably with a
personal god. It is often assumed in discussion of this question that
"personal god," as well as "god," is a distinct and familiar kind of
entity, like a dragon or centaur; its existence alone being
problematical. This is doubly false to the religious employment of such
an object. If it be true that in religion we mean by God a practical
interpretation of the world, _whatsoever be its nature_, then the
personality of God must be a derivative of the attitude, and not of the
nature of the world. Given the practical outlook upon life, there is no
definable world that cannot be construed under the form of God. My god
is my world practically recognized in respect of its fundamental or
ultimate attitude to my ideals. In the sense, then, conveyed by this
term _attitude_ my god will invariably possess the characters of
personality. But the degree to which these characters will coincide with
the characters which I assign to human persons, or the terms of any
logical conception of personality, cannot be absolutely defined.
Anthropomorphisms may be imagination or they may be literal conviction.
This will depend, as above maintained, upon the degree to which they
determine my expectations. Suppose the world to be theoretically
conceived as governed by laws that are indifferent to all human
interests. The practical expression of this conception appears in the
naturalism of Lucretius, or Diogenes, or Omar Khayyam. Living in the
vivid presence of an indifferent world, I may picture my gods as leading
their own lives in some remote realm which is inaccessible to my
petitions, or as regarding me with sinister and contemptuous cruelty. In
the latter case I may shrink and cower, or return them contempt for
contempt. I mean this literally only if I look for consequences
following directly from the emotional coloring which I have bestowed
upon them. It may well be that I mean merely to regard myself _sub
specie eternitatis_, in which case I am _personifying_ in the sense of
free imagination. In the religion of enlightenment the divine attitude
tends to belong to the poetry and eloquence of religion rather than to
its cognitive intent. This is true even of optimistic and idealistic
religion. The love and providence of God are less commonly supposed to
warrant an expectation of special and arbitrary favors, and have come
more and more to mean the play of my own feeling about the general
central conviction of the favorableness of the cosmos to my deeper or
moral concerns. But the factor of personality cannot possibly be
entirely eliminated, for the religious consciousness _creates_ a social
relationship between man and the universe. Such an interpretation of
life is not a case of the pathetic fallacy, unless it incorrectly
_reckons with_ the inner feeling which it attributes to the universe. It
is an obvious practical truth that the total or residual environment is
significant for life. Grant this and you make rational a recognition of
that significance, or a more or less constant sense of coincidence or
conflict with cosmical forces. Permit this consciousness to stand, and
you make some expression of it inevitable. Such an expression may,
furthermore, with perfect propriety and in fulfilment of human nature,
set forth and transfigure this central belief until it may enter into
the context of immediacy.

Thus any conception of the universe whatsoever may afford a basis for
religion. But there is no religion that does not virtually make a more
definite claim upon the nature of things, and this entirely
independently of its theology, or explicit attempt to define itself.
Every religion, even in the very living of it, is naturalistic, or
dualistic, or pluralistic, or optimistic, or idealistic, or pessimistic.
And there is in the realm of truth that which justifies or refutes these
definite practical ways of construing the universe. But no historical
religion is ever so vague even as this in its philosophical
implications. Indeed, we shall always be brought eventually to the
inner meaning of some individual religious experience, where no general
criticism can be certainly valid.

There is, then, a place in religion for that which is not directly
answerable to philosophical or scientific standards. But there is
always, on the other hand, an element of hope which conceives the nature
of the world, and means to be grounded in reality. In respect of that
element, philosophy is indispensable to religion. The meaning of
religion is, in fact, the central problem of philosophy. There is a
virtue in religion like that which Emerson ascribes to poetry. "The poet
is in the right attitude; he is believing; the philosopher, after some
struggle, having only reasons for believing." But whatever may be said
to the disparagement of its dialectic, philosophy is the justification
of religion, and the criticism of religions. To it must be assigned the
task of so refining positive religion as to contribute to the perpetual
establishment of true religion. And to philosophy, with religion,
belongs the task of holding fast to the idea of the universe. There is
no religion except before you begin, or after you have rested from, your
philosophical speculation. But in the universe these interests have a
common object. As philosophy is the articulation and vindication of
religion, so is religion the realization of philosophy. In philosophy
thought is brought up to the elevation of life, and in religion
philosophy, as the sum of wisdom, enters into life.


FOOTNOTES:

[83:1] As Plato interprets the scepticism of Protagoras to mean that one
state of mind cannot be more _true_ than another, but only _better_ or
worse. Cf. _Theætetus_, 167.

[88:2] Quoted with some omissions from _I Kings_, 18:21-29. The Hebrew
term _Yahweh_, the name of the national deity, has been substituted for
the English translation, "the Lord."

[90:3] _Iliad_, Book IX, lines 467 _sq._ Translation by Chapman.

[91:4] The supposed abode of departed spirits.

[91:5] Lucretius: _De Rerum Natura_, Book III, lines 1 _sq._ Translated
by Munro.

[91:6] _Ibid._, Book II, lines 644 _sq._

[92:7] It would be interesting to compare the equally famous criticism
of Greek religion in Plato's _Republic_, Book II, 377 _sq._

[92:8] Cf. W. Robertson Smith's admirable account of the Semitic
religions:

"What is requisite to religion is a practical acquaintance with the
rules on which the deity acts and on which he expects his worshippers to
frame their conduct--what in II Kings, 17:26 is called the 'manner,' or
rather the 'customary law' (_mishpat_), of the god of the land. This is
true even of the religion of Israel. When the prophets speak of the
knowledge of God, they always mean a practical knowledge of the laws and
principles of His government in Israel, and a summary expression for
religion as a whole is 'the knowledge and fear of Jehovah,' _i. e._, the
knowledge of what Jehovah prescribes, combined with a reverent
obedience." _The Religion of the Semites_, p. 23.

[93:9] _Proverbs_, 18:10; 11:19; 21:3.

[93:10] _Ecclesiastes_, 2:13 _sq._

[94:11] _Psalms_, 51:17; _Isaiah_, 57:15.

[94:12] In this discussion of Judaism I am much indebted to Matthew
Arnold's _Literature and Dogma_, especially Chapters I and II.

[104:13] James Thomson: _The City of Dreadful Night_. Quoted by James,
in _The Will to Believe, etc._, p. 45.

[106:14] _Revelation_, 19:11-13.




